
The Labour hopefuls to become mayors of Greater Manchester, the West Midlands 
and Liverpool are “committed to bringing social justice to the areas they hope 
to represent”,Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>
 has said, as voting is set to close in the elections to select each candidate.

The creation of elected mayors is the most controversial condition of a series 
of devolution arrangements agreed by former chancellorGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> and a series of “metro” 
regions, including the West Midlands, Greater Manchester, the Liverpool and 
Sheffield city regions, the Tees Valley, the north-east, and Greater 
Lincolnshire.

Andy Burnham: ‘I am ready to leave Westminster and devote myself to Manchester’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/31/andy-burnham-ready-to-leave-westminster-mayor-manchester-interview>
Voting to select the Labour candidates to run for three of the newly created 
positions closes at noon on Friday. The results will be announced on Tuesday 
and Wednesday next week. All three regions areLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> strongholds, meaning that the 
party’s selected candidates for the roles will be odds-on favourites to win the 
elections on 4 May 2017.

“We have eight great candidates vying to lead some of the greatest cities in 
our country,” Corbyn said. “Whoever wins selections in Birmingham,Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> and Liverpool, I know we will have 
strong Labour candidates committed to bringing social justice to the areas they 
hope to represent.”

The shadow home secretary, Andy Burnham, is the most high-profile candidate 
seeking his party’s nomination for one of the new positions. He declared his 
candidacy for mayor of Manchesterin May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-to-stand-for-mayor-of-greater-manchester>
, warning that Labour risked being eclipsed in the north of England if the 
party failed to take devolution seriously. If he becomes mayor, Burnham will 
stand down as MP for Leigh and trigger a byelection, as well as resigning from 
the shadow cabinet.

To be eligible, voters must live in the relevant city region and have been a 
member of the Labour party before 19 July 2015, a rule that has excluded a high 
proportion of the party’s new, largely Corbyn-supporting membership, which has 
increased to 515,000 since the Labour leader was elected. The vote is conducted 
using the alternative vote system and votes are cast by post and online.

The West Midlands combined authority includes Birmingham, Coventry, Dudley, 
Sandwell, Solihull, Walsall and Wolverhampton and has a population of about 4 
million.

 The new mayor will have responsibility for transport, adult skills and 
planning, and will oversee a £1.1bn, 30-year investment fund.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Flabour-mayoral-hopefuls-committed-to-social-justice-says-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc02ef925051ae07d6a7566bb4ec0393397603633%2F0_239_7095_4258%2F7095.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20mayoral%20hopefuls%20'committed%20to%20social%20justice'%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Flabour-mayoral-hopefuls-committed-to-social-justice-says-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20mayoral%20hopefuls%20%27committed%20to%20social%20justice%27%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Flabour-mayoral-hopefuls-committed-to-social-justice-says-jeremy-corbyn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc02ef925051ae07d6a7566bb4ec0393397603633%2F0_239_7095_4258%2F7095.jpg>
 Birmingham is one of the areas that will vote to have an elected mayor as part 
of George Osborne’s northern powerhouse plan. Photograph: Images of Birmingham 
Premium/Alamy Stock Photo 
The mayor of the Greater Manchester city region – an area with a population of 
3.5 million that covers Bolton, Bury, Manchester, Oldham, Rochdale, Salford, 
Stockport, Tameside, Trafford and Wigan – will have control over a catalogue of 
public services, a £900m, 30-year investment fund and a £6bn health and social 
care budget.

The Liverpool city region has a population of 1.5 million and covers five 
Merseyside councils – Knowsley, Liverpool, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral – and 
Halton in Cheshire. The area’s new mayor will oversee transport, planning and 
post-16 education, as well as a £900m, 30-year investment fund.

At first it looked as if the race to be Labour’s mayoral candidate in Greater 
Manchester was for the region’s police and crime commissioner and former 
Manchester Central MP, Tony Lloyd, to lose. Ivan Lewis, MP for Bury South and a 
government minister under Blair and Brown, entered the competition shortly 
after Lloydin February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/18/ivan-lewis-announces-greater-manchester-mayoral-bid>
, but unlike Lloyd – who is currently also serving as interim mayor – Lewis 
does not benefit from such high-name recognition outside his own constituency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Flabour-mayoral-hopefuls-committed-to-social-justice-says-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40f77652b767a1da704d6d45ee8532c457e18800%2F1601_0_2085_2608%2F2085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20mayoral%20hopefuls%20'committed%20to%20social%20justice'%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Flabour-mayoral-hopefuls-committed-to-social-justice-says-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20mayoral%20hopefuls%20%27committed%20to%20social%20justice%27%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Flabour-mayoral-hopefuls-committed-to-social-justice-says-jeremy-corbyn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40f77652b767a1da704d6d45ee8532c457e18800%2F1601_0_2085_2608%2F2085.jpg>
 Mayor of Liverpool Joe Anderson Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA Wire 
Burnham’s announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-to-stand-for-mayor-of-greater-manchester>
 that he would stand to be Labour’s candidate gave the race in Greater 
Manchester a new national profile and increased the sense of unpredictability. 
The shadow home secretary irritated local politicians when he said the metro 
mayor role was a “cabinet-level job requiring cabinet-level experience”.

Like Greater Manchester, the race in Liverpool started with a prominent local 
government figure as the favourite when Joe Anderson, the current mayor, 
declared he would run. He has criticised Westminster politicians for standing 
for the nominations, describingBurnham’s comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/01/liverpools-mayor-ignorant-insensitive-andy-burnham>
 as “ignorant and insensitive” and “disrespectful to every local government 
leader who has worked hard for their area”.

Elected mayors could be as remote from the public as Whitehall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jun/15/elected-mayors-whitehall-devolution-deals>
Steve Rotheram, MP for Liverpool Walton and Corbyn’s private parliamentary 
secretary, was the second to announce he would stand for the Liverpool city 
region nomination. The former bricklayer and lord mayor of Liverpool has won 
fans locally with his prominent role in the Hillsborough justice campaign.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Flabour-mayoral-hopefuls-committed-to-social-justice-says-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2632711b8400fafbf4e261d70749952f56695165%2F367_62_3970_2382%2F3970.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20mayoral%20hopefuls%20'committed%20to%20social%20justice'%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Flabour-mayoral-hopefuls-committed-to-social-justice-says-jeremy-corbyn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20mayoral%20hopefuls%20%27committed%20to%20social%20justice%27%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Flabour-mayoral-hopefuls-committed-to-social-justice-says-jeremy-corbyn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2632711b8400fafbf4e261d70749952f56695165%2F367_62_3970_2382%2F3970.jpg>
 Luciana Berger, MP for Liverpool Wavertree, is standing against incumbent Joe 
Anderson Photograph: Martin Godwin/the Guardian 
When Luciana Berger, MP for Liverpool Wavertree and a former shadow minister 
for mental health,declared she was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/luciana-berger-liverpool-mayor-should-be-global-ambassador-for-city-says-labour-hopeful>
 entering the race against Anderson and Rotheram in May, she became the second 
member of the shadow cabinet in a month to announce their intention to stand. 
She is both the youngest and the only woman standing to be Labour’s candidate 
for the new positions.

In the West Midlands, it initially looked as though the region’s MEP and the 
former Labour MP for Birmingham Erdington, Siôn Simon, could bethe only 
candidate. 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/midlands-news/labour-facing-one-horse-race-11433923>
 The former minister in Gordon Brown’s government is still the favourite, 
having campaigned to be mayor of Birmingham before the job was scrapped in a 
2012 referendum, but he is now standing against Steve Bedser, a former 
Birmingham city councillor and businessman.

While there has been no independent polling in any of the races, some campaign 
teams have anonymously released their own polling data to the media, often 
showing contradictory results. Polling conducted by two of the three campaign 
teams in the Greater Manchester race andpassed to ITV news 
<http://www.itv.com/news/granada/2016-07-28/exclusive-polls-suggest-burnham-ahead-of-rivals-in-race-to-become-mayor/>
 suggested that Burnham was set to win the contest, with Lloyd in second place 
and Lewis coming third.

Polling from the three campaign teams in the Liverpool race that was released 
toITV 
<http://www.itv.com/news/granada/2016-07-25/exclusive-polls-suggest-no-runaway-leader-in-race-to-become-labour-metro-mayor-candidate/>
 shows no clear leader, with a large percentage of voters undecided. Anderson 
comes out on top in two, and a close second in a third. Rotheram leads one poll 
but finishes last behind Berger in another, and Berger comes second in two 
polls, and third in another.

• This article was amended on 9 August 2016. The original said the West 
Midlands city regionhas a population of about 5.7 million. The West Midlands 
combined authority actually has a population of about 4 million. This has been 
corrected.
 