
Despite devoting most of his campaigning to crucial marginal seats in New 
South Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> and 
Queensland, Labor leader Bill Shorten may pick up only two – Brisbane’s Petrie 
and Rockhampton’s Capricornia – according to the Galaxy Research poll conducted 
for News Corp newspapers.


The ALP needs a swing of 4% to win the extra 21 seats it needs to form 
government.

Too many variables and too many disaffected but narrow Coalition win likely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/25/too-many-variables-and-too-many-disaffected-but-narrow-coalition-win-likely>
Bill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> is 
campaigning back in Queensland on Saturday, starting in Townsville where he 
will announce his “positive plans for Queensland”.

He’ll later head to Brisbane, where on Sunday he will front a second Labor 
party campaign launch – almost at the same time as the prime minister will do 
his in Sydney.

Turnbull is campaigning in Sydney on Saturday, spending time in his own 
electorate of Wentworth, in the city’s east.

But he will probably face more questions of the impact on Australia of the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/24/australian-election-2016-liberals-sailing-close-to-the-wind-with-donations-politics-live>
 vote to leave the European Union. Many commentators say the concerns over 
Brexit will benefit Turnbull, especially on his message of economic stability.

On Friday Turnbull linked the issue to the election, saying Australia needed a 
“stable majority coalition government” to withstand global headwinds and 
challenges.

Shorten said Australia could withstand any fallout from Brexit, just as the 
Rudd government saw the nation through the global financial crisis.

Rallies in support of same-sex marriage will be held in several cities around 
the country on Saturday, and Turnbull’s support of a plebiscite will again come 
in focus.

Turnbull, who supports legalising same-sex marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/28/malcolm-turnbull-predicts-marriage-equality-plebiscite-will-be-carried>
, will likely come under pressure again, especially following reports 
conservative coalition MPs may stymie the ultimate vote in the parliament.

Fairfax media on Saturday reported there was a push to give conservative MPs 
and senators express permission to vote against reform if their individual 
electorates had voted in a majority for “no” in the plebiscite scheduled for 
after the election.

However, attorney-general George Brandis denied the reports.

“That report is false. There have been no ‘backroom talks between 
attorney-general George Brandis and disgruntled conservative MPs’ and there is 
no such understanding,” he said.

Turnbull told the ABC’s 7.30 Report on Friday night he had no doubt the 
legislation would pass parliament, despite MPs and senators being given a free 
vote on the matter.

Meanwhile, former PM Paul Keating will attend a rally alongside Labor 
frontbencherAnthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> in his 
inner-Sydney seat of Grayndler.

The Greens have Albanese’s seat in their sights.
 