
Labor will move in short order from a choreographed show of unity at its first 
caucus meeting since the election to an internal rumble about frontbench spots 
to be allocated in the next parliament.


Labor MPs will gather in Canberra on Friday for a caucus meeting that will 
effectively installBill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> as the Labor leader.

Party rules require nominations for the party leadership to be opened for a 
week, but Shorten will be the only candidate for the position.

Election 2016: Bob Katter promises to support Coalition in hung parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/election-2016-bob-katter-promises-to-support-coalition-in-hung-parliament>
Anthony Albanese, who took several days earlier this week to rule out 
challenging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/04/anthony-albanese-rules-out-challenging-bill-shorten-for-labor-leadership>
 Shorten for the leadership, is expected to move a motion of support for 
Shorten, seconded by Labor’s deputy leader, Tanya Plibersek.

Shorten has this week been touring the country thanking voters after Labor’s 
stronger than expected showing at the recent election.

But behind the scenes positioning is already under way for a new cut of the 
Labor frontbench once the final count is concluded by the Australian Electoral 
Commission.

The process has not yet moved to the sharp end, because the balance between 
frontbench spots allocated to MPs from the right and left factions will be 
contingent on the final fall of the seats.

The left faction for some time has pushed for an additional frontbench spot, a 
move that potentially places a question mark over the future of Andrew Leigh, 
who is not factionally aligned.

Some in the left are also displeased with Kim Carr, the veteran Victorian 
senator, who is one of Shorten’s strongest supporters in the caucus – but it is 
unclear how forcefully the displeasure will manifest itself once factional 
convenors get together after the final results are known.


Shorten, in Perth on Thursday, said, regardless of the eventual election 
result, Labor would fight in the new parliament for its policy agenda but also 
work collaboratively with crossbenchers.

Live Australian election results: track the votes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/jul/02/live-australian-election-results-track-the-votes>
He said Labor would approach the next term unified, unlike the Coalition, 
which this week has indulged in public recriminations about the election result.

“The count goes on nationally, we understand that, but what is very important 
to recognise here is that regardless of the outcome, Labor will fight in the 
parliament for our positive platform of standing up for Australian jobs, making 
sure Perth has the best possible public transport infrastructure, making sure 
the schools of WA are well funded and, of course, protecting Medicare from the 
harsh and unreasonable cuts of the Turnbull Liberal party,” Shorten said.

“We are doing all of these things and what we are also going to do to make the 
45th parliament work is we will reach out and work with the independents and 
the crossbenchers in the parliament,” Shorten said.

“Mr Turnbull has got himself in a little bit of a bind here. Having called the 
election partly to get rid of independents and crossbenchers out of the 
parliament, he now has to go back on bended knee and say: ‘I didn’t really mean 
that, can I please work with you?’”
 