
Labour has demanded an investigation into whether a second defence minister 
breached ministerial rules in his dealings with Liam Fox's self-styled adviser
Adam Werritty <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>.

John Mann, the MP who first raised questions about Werritty's role at the 
heart of government, haswritten to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/interactive/2011/oct/26/john-mann-letter-philip-mawer>
 the independent adviser on ministerial interests to demand an inquiry into 
whether junior defence ministerGerald Howarth 
<http://www.mod.uk/DefenceInternet/AboutDefence/People/Ministers/MinisterForInternationalSecurityStrategy.htm>
 also breached the ministerial code.

The Guardian revealed on Tuesday that Howarth, the minister in charge of 
defence exports,met one of the backers of the fund set up to support the jetset 
lifestyle of Werrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/25/defence-minister-met-firm-funding-werritty>
. Howarth, met a representative of IRG Ltd, which is one of six organisations 
named as funding Pargav, the company set up to pay for Werritty's first class 
flights to meet up with Fox overseas.

No civil servants were present at any of the meeting in the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> on 27 September this year 
â€“ an apparent breach of the ministerial code. Howarth has met Werritty three 
times since last year's election.

"An investigation by you should look at the case of Gerald Howarth MP, 
minister for international defence strategy and relations, to establish whether 
there has been a breach of the ministerial code, following revelations in 
today's Guardian newspaper," Mann wrote in his letter to Sir Philip Mawer,
available in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/interactive/2011/oct/26/john-mann-letter-philip-mawer>
. "Your investigation should also seek to confirm once and for all that no 
other breaches have occurred in relation to the activities of Adam Werritty or 
other unofficial advisers within government."

Mann said the government has "repeatedly stonewalled" questions about the full 
extent of Werritty's influence at the heart of government, and asked that Mawer 
now "investigate this matter fully".

"It is your role to 'provide an independent check and source of advice to 
government ministers on the handling of their private interests, in order to 
avoid conflict between those interests and their ministerial responsibilities'. 
The prime minister is at present preventing you from undertaking your vital and 
necessary duties," Mann said.

He said last week's report by Sir Gus O'Donnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/17/fox-breached-ministerial-code>
, the cabinet secretary, into the Werritty affair was "clearly inadequate and 
insufficient". "This will be a matter of concern to parliament and indeed the 
public who will want confidence in public servants."

Mann claims that Howarth may have breached two sections of the ministerial 
code. Section 5.2 relating to ministers ensuring they listen to the advice of 
civil servants, and section 7.1 that "ministers must ensure that no conflict 
arises" between their public duties and private interests.

Howarth's meeting with Werritty took place on the suggestion of Fox, who 
resigned as defence secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/14/liam-fox-final-straw-was-money-trail>
 earlier this month after revelations about his working relationship with his 
best friend and former flatmate, who was not an official adviser.

An MoD spokesman said: "For the meeting in question, which preceded and is 
included in the cabinet secretary's report, Gerald Howarth did not believe an 
official was required. Mr Howarth informed his office after the meeting had 
taken place. No substantive issues were raised, no confidential information was 
disclosed and there was no follow-up to the meeting."
 