
Labor’s left caucus has convened a special meeting to try and head off a bout 
of vicious infighting that has erupted publicly in the wake of Bill Shorten’s 
decision to back controversial lawyer Kimberley Kitching for a Victorian Senate 
vacancy.


The left on Monday night met in Canberra to thrash out escalating tensions 
between elements of the Victorian faction aligned with the veteran powerbroker 
Kim Carr and other state members.

The meeting was triggered by a public declaration on Monday 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/labor-senator-gavin-marshall-declares-war-on-frontbench-colleagues-flags-preselection-challenges-20161016-gs3q8w.html>
 from the Victorian Labor senator Gavin Marshall – a senator closely aligned 
with Carr – that he intended to back a preselection challenge to fellow 
leftwinger, the member for Scullin, Andrew Giles.

Bill Shorten ally Kimberley Kitching to replace Stephen Conroy in Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bill-shorten-ally-kimberley-kitching-to-replace-stephen-conroy-in-senate>
Marshall told Fairfax Media Giles “was a very bad fit for Scullin as the Labor 
member and there is a mood for change in the branch”. He also put a question 
mark over Catherine King, the shadow health minister.

The Marshall outburst has enraged colleagues, and brings to a head tensions 
that first came to the surface, publicly at least, whenthe majority of the left 
faction moved against Carr earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/13/push-to-dump-kim-carr-from-labor-frontbench-in-favour-of-linda-burney>
 in an effort to have him dumped from the frontbench.

The Carr group – which has split from the national left – feels Giles and 
other Victorian leftwingers are aligned withAnthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> and the left 
power structure in New South Wales, and have displayed disloyalty both to the 
faction and to the Labor leader.

Marshall recently lost the support of the majority of the faction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/29/gavin-marshall-pulls-out-of-race-for-senate-role-after-shorten-intervenes>
 to maintain his position of Senate deputy president in the new parliament.Carr 
ultimately remained on the frontbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/22/kim-carr-to-remain-on-expanded-labor-frontbench-after-right-factions-backing>
 after an intervention from the right faction at Shorten’s behest.

Shorten had to expand the Labor ministry to accommodate Carr’s desire to 
remain in the shadow cabinet. But Marshall stood aside as deputy Senate 
president after Shorten prevailed upon him not to contest the role.

While there have been acrimonious relations in the Victorian left for some 
months, the whole Victorian branch of the ALP has been in turmoil since late 
last week when it became clear that Shortenwas backing his close friend and 
long-time political ally Kimberley Kitching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bill-shorten-ally-kimberley-kitching-to-replace-stephen-conroy-in-senate>
 to replace the retiring rightwing Labor powerbroker Stephen Conroy in the 
Senate.

Conroy, alongside Carr, have been Shorten’s praetorian guard since the 
Victorian rightwinger saw off Anthony Albanese for the Labor leadership in 2013.

Factional fanfare rears its head again within Labor and Liberal parties | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/factional-fanfare-on-the-boil-again-within-labor-and-liberal-parties>
Conroy’s abrupt departure from politics, has, according to several Labor 
sources, prompted Shorten to back in Kitching as his replacement, at least in 
parton the basis she can deliver him numbers from the Health Services Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/factional-fanfare-on-the-boil-again-within-labor-and-liberal-parties>
, helping to consolidate his personal power within the Labor party.

Several senior figures attempted to warn the federal Labor leader off backing 
Kitching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bill-shorten-and-richard-marles-backing-rival-candidates-for-senate-vacancy>
 – a lawyer, who is married to Andrew Landeryou, formerly a combative political 
blogger – on the basis the decision would be nuclear in the Victorian branch, 
and stir up tensions between the left and right factions.

Some Labor figures have questioned whether Kitching’s selection puts a 
question mark over the stability agreement between the left and the right 
factions inVictoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> which 
has underpinned Shorten’s leadership.
 