
The shadow home secretary, Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, has urged the government to 
“confirm without delay” reports that it will launch a public inquiry into 
alleged police brutality at the 1984 Orgreave miners’ picket.

It was reported on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/15/orgreave-miners-strike-inquiry-will-go-ahead>
 that the home secretary, Amber Rudd, was set to appoint a lawyer to carry out 
a review of material relating to the so-called Battle of Orgreave, in which 
around 6,000 officers allegedly used excessive force to suppress a strike at a 
coking works in South Yorkshire.

A source told the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/inquiry-into-police-over-1980s-clash-with-miners-fns6rhkpw>
 that Rudd wanted to push ahead with an investigation that would deliver 
answers that were both “complete and timely”, but did not want “something that 
could drag on for years”.

A delegation from the Orgreave Truth and Justice Campaign (OTJC) met Rudd on 
Tuesday to urge her to launch an inquiry. A Home Office source said they did 
not comment on private meetings but it was correct that the home secretary had 
told the campaigners she would make her decision “over the next few weeks and 
certainly by the end of October”.

Orgreave inquiry calls grow after damning Hillsborough verdict for police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/orgreave-inquiry-calls-grow-after-damning-hillsborough-verdict-for-south-yorkshire-police>
Burnham welcomed the reports and said it was clear that the government had 
listened to what the campaigners were saying. “But it is disappointing that it 
has emerged through an anonymous briefing to a newspaper,” he said. “If it is 
true, the home secretary must confirm it without delay.

“It is also essential that the campaigners are consulted on the membership of 
any panel and its terms of reference. The home secretary is to be congratulated 
for having the courage to continue the progress of shining a light on past 
injustice. We won’t fully restore public trust in the police until there is a 
true reckoning about the past.”

A Home Office source said Rudd was actively considering the issue but no 
decisions had been made and the form that any inquiry would take had not been 
agreed.

Chris Peace, a Labour councillor for Gleadless Valley and a campaigner with 
the OTJC, said they welcomed any kind of investigation but it had to be 
“thorough and credible”. “It’s got to be done properly, with the right degree 
of independence,” she said. “It needs to be a proper examination and not be 
tokenistic.”

On 18 June 1984 around 6,000 officers, many in riot gear, are alleged to have 
used excessive force to suppress pickets at a British Steel Corporation (BSC) 
coking plant in Orgreave.

A former police officer, Mike Freeman, has said publicly 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/orgreave-operational-orders-were-wrong-former-officer>
 that officers were ordered to write statements for arrests they had not made. 
A total of 95 miners were charged following the clashes at the plant but their 
trial collapsed.

South Yorkshire police referred itself to the IPCC in 2012 over allegations 
that officers colluded to write court statements. The watchdog later said the 
passage of timeprevented a formal investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/12/ipcc-will-not-investigate-orgreave-police-action-during-miners-strike>
, but there was some evidence to support the claims that senior police 
exaggerated the use of violence by striking miners.

In May, Theresa May’s former chief of staff Nick Timothy strongly endorsed 
calls for an inquiry into the Orgreave clash, saying the public needed to know 
whether the police had planned an unlawful mass assault on striking miners.

In an article written for ConservativeHome 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thecolumnists/2016/05/nick-timothy-as-with-hillsborough-we-must-get-to-the-bottom-of-what-happened-at-orgreave.html>
, Timothy, who was one of May’s most senior advisers while she was home 
secretary, rejected calls to “let sleeping dogs lie” in relation to the events 
more than 30 years ago.

He argued that the inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster had shown that 
“sleeping dogs in SouthYorkshire <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire>
 lied and lied and lied again, not just about their own conduct but about the 
victims and other football supporters”.
 