
Labour’s divisions will become irreconcilable and the damage to the party 
terminal if it enters another year of bitter infighting after Jeremy Corbyn’s 
likely re-election, a senior shadow cabinet member has warned.


The result of the Labour leadership contest between Corbyn and his challenger, 
Owen Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith>, is expected at 
11.45am on Saturday, with insiders suggesting Corbyn could secure 65% of the 
vote.

Andy Burnham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> said that 
Corbyn had been treated appallingly when he was elected to the leadership last 
year, facing no honeymoon but instead a “sulphurous” first meeting of the 
party’s Westminster politicians.

“I’ve never seen in 15 years [as an MP] a Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader treated like that; it was 
disrespectful,” the shadow home secretary told the Guardian, adding that if 
Corbyn renewed his mandate he would have earned the right to lead “without 
interruptions, noises off and undermining”.


Labour’s candidate to become the mayor of Greater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
 said that if Corbyn won,then MPs should “serve on Corbyn’s frontbench and do 
so in the right spirit” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/22/labour-mp-prepare-coexist-jeremy-corbyn-leadership-backbench>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fandy-burnham-jeremy-corbyns-labour-leadership-call-for-unity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0c79f944ba3be196b082ed6dacc8a0fcccc457c%2F0_351_5644_3387%2F5644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20faces%20terminal%20damage%20if%20fighting%20goes%20on%2C%20warns%20Andy%20%20Burnham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fandy-burnham-jeremy-corbyns-labour-leadership-call-for-unity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20faces%20terminal%20damage%20if%20fighting%20goes%20on%2C%20warns%20Andy%20%20Burnham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fandy-burnham-jeremy-corbyns-labour-leadership-call-for-unity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0c79f944ba3be196b082ed6dacc8a0fcccc457c%2F0_351_5644_3387%2F5644.jpg>
 Andy Burnham said that Labour would only be able to heal if there were serious 
concessions from the leader as well. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
But Burnham, who remained neutral during the leadership race, said Labour 
would only be able to heal if there were serious concessions from the leader as 
well.

He said the “quid pro quo” should be for Corbyn to stamp out all talk of 
deselections of MPs or councillors by any supporters, to take a zero-tolerance 
approach to abuse and to sign up to a deadline at which the Labour party would 
take stock of progress with the public, when it could readdress issues 
including those around the leadership.

In a message to Labour supporters, Corbyn reached out to those who backed his 
rival, saying there was a duty on everyone to “unite, cherish and build our 
movement”.

He said: “We must win the next general election so that Labour can rebuild and 
transform Britain – so that no one and no community is left behind. We can and 
must do that together.

The Guardian view on the Labour leadership: wanted – tolerance and compromise 
| Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/the-guardian-view-on-the-labour-leadership-wanted-tolerance-and-compromise>
“That includes those who have voted, volunteered and campaigned for Owen 
Smith. This summer, we have had a debate about the future of Labour and the 
future of Britain. It has been robust, and at times difficult, but it has been 
overwhelmingly respectful in tone.

“Together, we are making history – we have made Labour the biggest 
left-of-centre party in Europe and gained support from people we lost decades 
ago. As I’ve said throughout this campaign, this isn’t, and has never been, 
about me; it’s about all of us.”

Burnham called on Corbyn to agree to shadow cabinet elections amid a clamour 
from MPs that they would offer people a dignified way back to the shadow 
cabinet and help him to fill the rest of his frontbench team.


Following mass resignations during the summer, more than 50 shadow ministerial 
posts remain unfilled, with a number of people doing two jobs or more.

Labour’s national executive committee will address the possibility of a deal 
between Corbyn and his MPs at a special meeting on Saturday night, on the eve 
of the party’s conference in Liverpool.

But the Guardian understands that there have been no formal talks about such 
reconciliation and the leader is not ready to do a deal with the parliamentary 
Labour party over how he puts together his frontbench team.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-second-coming-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Corbyn%3A%20the%20second%20coming%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-second-coming-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Corbyn%3A%20the%20second%20coming%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-second-coming-video&media=>
Jeremy Corbyn: the second coming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/22/jeremy-corbyn-labour-leadership-second-coming-video>
. 
Sources suggested that there were politicians ready to come back with or 
without elections and that some frontbench posts were not necessary so the 
total number could be reduced. However, they suggested that Corbyn was not 
closed to a compromise and that some sort of deal could be struck at a later 
date.

The introduction of shadow cabinet elections is understood to be likely to 
attract certain high-profile MPs back to the frontbench, with names such as 
Lucy Powell and Keir Starmer being suggested.

But other Labour MPs opposed to Corbyn suggested that his victory would simply 
be “groundhog day” for them as they expect the leader to continue in the same 
style as he has done over the past year. Some are considering other ways to 
serve the party from the backbenches.

Chris Leslie, the former shadow chancellor, said he hoped backbench MPs would 
start to organise themselves more effectively.


“I hope that the parliamentary Labour party will look at constructive ways of 
thinking about sensible policy-making that is not simply reliant on the 
frontbench,” Leslie said.

“We have got a duty to defend some really basic principles – like reform of 
society through parliamentary democracy – and we mustn’t be afraid to hold 
whoever becomes leader to account for them.”

Others are understood to be considering forming thinktanks to draw up ways in 
which Labour could react to the Brexit vote, which threw up mass alienation 
among the party’s traditional voters across the north and are believed to be 
attracting funding from donors.

One leading rebel MP predicted that while some shadow ministers might drift 
back to Corbyn’s team, there could be a couple more resignations from the 
frontbench. “Some people are really fed up and want out but may have been 
waiting until after the leadership election to go,” he said.

Another MP said: “I don’t think many colleagues will go back to the
shadow cabinet of their own volition.” 

Some high-profile figures have warned that unity will be difficult to secure 
and that MPs are likely to face the threat of deselection. In an interview to 
be published in the Fabian review, Lord Kinnock warned “the strife can’t be 
concluded”.

Labour’s former leader added: “I say that with no threat and much regret. The 
inability ofJeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> 
to select a convincing shadow cabinet shows he is not fit to lead the Labour 
party.

“Those who will not serve are people who, in all conscience, cannot support a 
leadership that lacks all credibility. There will then be threats, some veiled, 
some not, against those MPs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fandy-burnham-jeremy-corbyns-labour-leadership-call-for-unity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2ed0f8cb469dc9345b38876c924705693d363d3%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Labour%20faces%20terminal%20damage%20if%20fighting%20goes%20on%2C%20warns%20Andy%20%20Burnham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fandy-burnham-jeremy-corbyns-labour-leadership-call-for-unity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Labour%20faces%20terminal%20damage%20if%20fighting%20goes%20on%2C%20warns%20Andy%20%20Burnham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fandy-burnham-jeremy-corbyns-labour-leadership-call-for-unity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2ed0f8cb469dc9345b38876c924705693d363d3%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Lord Kinnock: ‘Those who will not serve are people who, in all conscience, 
cannot support a leadership that lacks all credibility.’ Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson for the Guardian 
Kinnock said the likely Corbyn victory would be the will of existing members 
and newcomers, with only a small number of ultra-leftists. He said thatMomentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum>, the pro-Corbyn group that has 
helped to organise his re-election campaign, was much more influential than 
Militant, the group proscribed by Labour in the 1980s, had been.

But Kinnock argued: “When [Momentum] people are presented with doorstep 
arguments, they will realise that they need a credible leader.”

Burnham said Corbyn had been treated unfairly last summer when he was elected 
party leader. The MP, who was beaten in that leadership election, said he had 
been bruised and was licking his wounds but was “taken aback by the immediate 
hostility” towards the new leader.

He said this election had seen Labour “trapped in a battle of tit for tat, 
which is all the while turning the public off and away from us”, with a 
depressing debate that has been embarrassing at times.

“We cannot afford another year like the one we’ve just had, otherwise the 
differences may well become irreconcilable and the damage terminal. The war of 
attrition can’t carry on.

“The message has to be that everyone has to take a look at themselves in terms 
of how they are going to contribute going forward, turn the page and basically 
start a new chapter, and the focus has to turn from internal consideration to 
external.”

Burnham said the winner would have earned the right to a period of time when 
they were left to get their message across. “If I’m being honest, if I look 
back, it didn’t happen after 2015 – there was no honeymoon.”

But he added that there should be a deadline for Labour to take another look 
at its position, including the leadership question, if it failed to make 
progress in electability.


“Through mediation via trade union colleagues and the NEC and others, we need 
to agree on a point of time where there will be a stock-take of where we are up 
to,” said Burnham, who added that one suggestion made during last year’s 
leadership race had been to hold an annual review.
 