
It was all smiles, thunderous applause and backslapping as Labor MPs gathered 
for their first caucus meeting since the election – but behind the scenes there 
had been a sharp tussle over the wording of motion moved byAnthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> congratulating 
Bill Shorten.


Caucus rules controlling the conduct of leadership ballots specify that 
nominations need to be open for a week when the position is spilled, which now 
happens automatically after the election.

There was a view from the leader that the process should be conducted as 
quickly as possible given he was the only candidate, but that push was resisted 
by Albanese and some other colleagues, who argued that the rules needed to be 
followed.

In the end, Albanese moved a motion on Friday that congratulated Shorten on 
the “outstanding” outcome of the election campaign, congratulated Labor’s many 
volunteers who contributed to Labor’s formidable field campaign, and authorised 
Shorten on Labor’s behalf to negotiate with parliamentary crossbenchers “whilst 
not departing from the caucus rules”.

Australian election count: everything that could possibly happen now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/08/australian-election-count-everything-that-could-possibly-happen-now>
The explicit reference to the caucus rules means the nominations will remain 
open for the period specified by the rules, which is seven days.

The tussle over the motion is a proxy battle for lingering tensions between 
Shorten’s group and Albanese that have played out since the final week of the 
election campaign, where the New South Wales right faction appeared to be 
positioning to back Albanese in the event he ran for the Labor leadership.

Albanese, the prominent NSW leftwinger, took days to rule out challenging 
Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/04/anthony-albanese-rules-out-challenging-bill-shorten-for-labor-leadership>
 for the Labor leadership.

The party’s factional power brokers are also positioning ahead of the 
allocation of frontbench positions in the new shadow ministry, a process that 
will play out once the election count concludes.

Shorten conceded on Friday during the special caucus meeting that the Coalition
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> is likely to “scrape 
over the line” to form government but predicted Australians would be back at 
the polls within a year owing to Malcolm Turnbull’s lack of authority.

The opposition leader trumpeted Labor’s achievement of the second-biggest 
swing against a first-term government in Australian history and said “after the 
longest campaign in 50 years, this could well be one of the shortest 
parliaments in 50 years”.


He noted that the cabinet minister Christopher Pyne had said on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/08/christopher-pyne-declares-coalition-victory-as-count-nears-possible-majority>
 that the Coalition had won the election.

“It’s likely in coming days that the Liberals will scrape over the line but 
the combination of a PM with no authority, a government with no direction and a
Liberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> at war 
with itself will see Australians back at the polls within the year,” Shorten 
predicted.

“We will fight for our positive plans in the 45th parliament, we will respect 
the judgment of the people … but we will be campaign-ready from this day 
onwards.”

Shorten criticised Malcolm Turnbull for his “extraordinary outburst in those 
early hours of Sunday morning” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/malcolm-turnbull-says-coalition-can-form-majority-despite-dramatic-losses-australian-election>
, characterising his speech as an attempt to “blame the Australian people … for 
their disastrous campaign, for their out-of-touch values”.

The prime minister had accused Labor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> of running “some of 
the most systematic, well-funded lies ever peddled in Australia” for its 
campaign claim that the Coalition was planning to privatise Medicare.

“The Liberals think that a massive swing against them was a matter of 
perception alone, that somehow there weren’t enough negative Liberal TV ads and 
everything would have been right,” Shorten said.

“But Saturday cannot be put down by our opponents to a failure of 
communication alone. It wasn’t that the Liberals didn’t talk about Medicare, it 
was what they were doing to Medicare.”

Live Australian election results: track the votes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/jul/02/live-australian-election-results-track-the-votes>
Shorten signalled a clear intention to maintain the strategy of attacking the 
government over health cuts. “Until they change their policies, nothing will 
change,” he said.

On Friday the Coalition looked to have won 74 seats. Pyne claimed victory on 
the basis the Coalition was “very likely” to win three more: Herbert, 
Capricornia and Flynn.


At the caucus meeting, Shorten welcomed 26 newly elected Labor MPs and 
senators to great applause and paid tribute to Linda Burney, the first 
Indigenous woman elected to the House of Representatives.

He acknowledged Labor’s candidate Des Hardman in the still-undeclared seat of 
Forde, expressed a “very good feeling” that Anne Aly would win in Cowan, and 
said everyone had their “fingers crossed” for candidates in Capricornia, 
Hindmarsh and Herbert.
 