
Labour will announce its candidates for the mayoral elections in Greater 
Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> and the West 
Midlands after party members in the two areas voted for their preferred 
candidate.

The shadow home secretary, Andy Burnham, declared that he was running 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-to-stand-for-mayor-of-greater-manchester>
 to be Labour’s candidate in Greater Manchester in May. If he won the mayoral 
race, Burnham would eventually stand down as MP for Leigh, triggering a 
byelection, and resign from the shadow cabinet.

Voting to select the party’s candidates to run in Greater Manchester, the West 
Midlands and the Liverpool city region closed at noon on Friday. The results in 
GreaterManchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> and the West 
Midlands will be announced on Tuesday, and the result in the Liverpool city 
region will be announced on Wednesday.

All three regions are Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
strongholds, meaning that the party’s selected candidates for the roles will be 
odds-on favourites to win the elections on 4 May 2017.

The creation of elected mayors is a condition of a series of devolution 
arrangements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/03/the-guardian-view-on-english-devolution-grab-the-chance>
 agreed by the former chancellor George Osborne and a series of “metro” 
regions, including the West Midlands, Greater Manchester, the Liverpool and 
Sheffield city regions, the Tees Valley, the north-east, and Greater 
Lincolnshire.

Burnham is standing against Greater Manchester’s police and crime commissioner 
and the interim mayor, Tony Lloyd, and the MP for Bury South, Ivan Lewis, who 
was a government minister under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown.

The mayor of Greater Manchester, a city region with a population of 3.5 
million, which covers Bolton, Bury, Manchester, Oldham, Rochdale, Salford, 
Stockport, Tameside, Trafford and Wigan, will have control over a portfolio of 
public services, a £900m 30-year investment fund and will sit on a board that 
oversees a devolved £6bn health and social care budget.

In the West Midlands, the region’s MEP and the former Labour MP for Birmingham 
Erdington, Siôn Simon, is the favourite to win, having campaigned for the city 
to have an elected mayor before an unsuccessful referendum on the proposal in 
2012. Simon, a former minister in Brown’s government, is standing against Steve 
Bedser, a formerBirmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> city 
councillor and local businessman.

The West Midlands combined authority includes Birmingham, Coventry, Dudley, 
Sandwell, Solihull, Walsall and Wolverhampton, and has a population of about 4 
million. The new mayor will have responsibility for transport, adult skills and 
planning, and will oversee a £1.1bn, 30-year investment fund.

To be eligible to vote for their preferred candidate, Labour members were 
required to live in the relevant city region and have been a member of the 
party before 19 July 2015, a rule that has excluded a high proportion of the 
party’s new membership, many of whom are likely to be supportive of the Labour 
leader, Jeremy Corbyn. The poll was conducted using the alternative vote 
system, and votes were cast by post and online.

While there has been no independent polling in any of the races, surveys 
conducted by two of the three campaign teams in Greater Manchester and passed 
to ITV news suggest thatBurnham will win 
<http://www.itv.com/news/granada/2016-07-28/exclusive-polls-suggest-burnham-ahead-of-rivals-in-race-to-become-mayor/>
 the contest, with Lloyd in second place and Lewis third.

 