
Senior Labor frontbencher Jenny Macklin has has accused the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> of planning another 
round of welfare cuts after social services minister Christian Porter’s recent 
criticism of supplementary payments for Newstart recipients.

Porter, who last week flagged plans to reform the social security system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/20/coalition-to-reveal-plan-to-tackle-welfare-dependence-across-generations>
, released figures on the numbers of recipients receiving other supplementary 
payments.

But social services shadow minister, Jenny Macklin, accused him of preparing 
for more cuts. She said the Newstart allowance was very low and the 
supplementary payments were very small and not luxuries.

The reality of our welfare system doesn't look good on a tabloid front page | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/25/welfare-bludgers-on-tabloid-front-pages-dont-pass-reality-test>
The fortnightly rate for the Newstart allowance 
<https://www.humanservices.gov.au/customer/services/centrelink/newstart-allowance>
 is now $528.70 for singles and $477.40 each for couples.

The supplementary payments include rent assistance, family tax benefits and 
allowances for carers, remote area, telephone, pensioner education and literacy 
and numeracy assistance.

“Mr Porter is manipulating the numbers to suit his own political argument,” 
Macklin said. “Christian Porter knows that many of these supplementary payments 
are very small. Rent assistance is designed to cover the cost of housing and 
family tax benefits is designed to help with the cost of raising children – 
these aren’t luxury payments.

“This is really all about the Turnbull government laying the groundwork for 
another round of cruel cuts to vulnerable Australians, just like the 2014 
budget.”

According to government figures, as of March 2016 there were about 768,000 
Newstart allowance recipients. Of these:

 * about 75% received Newstart plus the energy supplement and two or more 
other supplementary payments;

 * about 20% received Newstart plus the energy supplement and one other 
supplementary payment;

 * about 5% received Newstart allowance plus the energy supplement.

The government figures also claim around 20% of Newstart recipients reported 
earnings in the last fortnight and more than half of Newstart recipients 
reported other income in the last fortnight such as “rental income, interest 
and dividends”.

Porter has said of the 5% of Newstart recipients who receive the energy 
supplement and no other supplement, around 96% leave Newstart allowance within 
six months, “indicating that they are very motivated to find work as soon as 
possible”.

Before the election, Labor promised an independent review into the adequacy of 
the Newstart allowance but has not committed to raising the payment.

On Sunday, Porter said calls by the Australian Council of Social Services 
(Acoss) to increase the rate of Newstart lacked “imagination”.

But the Acoss chief executive, Cassandra Goldie, said the social security 
system was there to provide income required during unemployment.

She said on official figures, which count people as employed with an hour a 
week of paid work, there was one job for every four people who are out of work.


“Once you consider people who say they are not getting enough work, the figure 
is one job for every 10 people,” Goldie told Sky News.

She said Porter’s decision to fund the $96m Try, Test, Learn Fund 
<https://www.dss.gov.au/about-the-department/publications-articles/corporate-publications/budget-and-additional-estimates-statements/budget-2016/try-test-and-learn-fund>
 in the last budget was “a drop in the ocean” to replace the $1.5bn cut from 
community support services since 2014, much of which was focused on early 
intervention for job seekers.

Goldie rejected the idea that welfare recipients were passive when it came to 
taking income support payments.

“If you are receiving the employment payment, you are obliged to apply for one 
job a day in order to receive income support,” she said.

“You’ve got to get out 20 job applications in a fortnight as well as attending 
all sorts of interviews with employment services … there is a huge amount of 
compliance. We need to ensure people who are locked out of paid work are not 
falling into destitution.

The question isn't which services to privatise but whether to privatise | 
Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/24/the-question-isnt-which-services-to-privatise-but-whether-to-privatise>
Supplementary payments include:

 * Family tax benefit: maximum rate $182.84 (max rate of FTB part A per 
fortnight per child aged 0-12) 
 * Pharmaceutical allowance: $6.20 a fortnight 
 * Rent assistance: max payment $130.60 fortnight 
 * Telephone allowance: basic rate (single or couple combined) $28.20 (amount 
a quarter) 
 * Carer allowance: $123.50 a fortnight when providing care for a person 16 
years or over.

 * Approved program of work supplement – $20.80 a fortnight. 
 * Remote area allowance: single $18.20 a fortnight 
 * Language literacy and numeracy supplement: $20.80 a fortnight. 
 * Mobility allowance: $20.80 a fortnight. 
 * Pensioner education supplement (plans to abolish): $62.40 a fortnight.  