
Labor has seized on an admission by the attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, that the solicitor 
general provided advice on the “original draft” of a new terrorism bill to open 
a new front in its interrogation of the relationship between Australia’s first 
and second law officers, and query the constitutionality of national security 
proposals.

Mark Dreyfus <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mark-dreyfus>, the 
shadow attorney general, wrote to Brandis to establish whether the solicitor 
general, Justin Gleeson, had provided advice about the criminal code amendment 
(high risk terrorist offenders) bill 2016.

The proposed legislation amends the criminal code to establish a scheme for 
the continuing detention of high-risk terrorist offenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/detaining-high-risk-terrorism-offenders-after-jail-term-ends-violates-human-rights>
who are considered by a judge in civil proceedings to present an unacceptable 
risk to the community at the conclusion of their custodial sentence.

Turnbull rebukes Labor over citizenship questions, saying 'get on Australia's 
team'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/17/turnbull-rebukes-labor-over-citizenship-questions-saying-get-on-australias-team>
In his reply to Dreyfus, Brandis said the government was satisfied of the 
constitutionality of the continuing detention proposal, and said the solicitor 
general provided advice on the original draft of the bill.

“The government received advice on the original draft of the bill, including 
from the solicitor general,” Brandis said in the letter.

The attorney general said subsequent amendments to the bill had taken into 
account views expressed by Gleeson “as well as feedback from the states and 
territories”.

In the letter Brandis advised Dreyfus to desist from “gratuitous and 
inaccurate” political statements and “stop playing politics with this issue”.

Dreyfus said this wasn’t good enough. “Hidden in this letter is the 
astonishing admission that the solicitor general, Justin Gleeson, has not been 
given the opportunity to advise on the final version of the [bill].

“This is the exact situation that Mr Gleeson has been concerned about since 
his letter to the attorney general in November last year, and which led to the 
misrepresentation of his advice on the citizenship bill,” Dreyfus said.

“Senator Brandis is not learning from his mistakes. Mr Gleeson cannot be said 
to have advised on a bill if he was only shown an initial draft, not the final 
version introduced to parliament which is currently before the parliamentary 
joint committee on intelligence and security.”

Gleeson in a recent submission to a Senate committee said he wasn’t consulted 
on the final version of the citizenship revocation proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/05/solicitor-general-says-he-was-not-fully-consulted-on-revoking-citizenship-or-marriage-equality>
 – which contradicts a suggestion from Brandis to parliament’s intelligence and 
security committee that Gleeson had advised the government was package was 
soundly based.

On Monday the prime minister attempted to shut down questions from Dreyfus  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/17/turnbull-rebukes-labor-over-citizenship-questions-saying-get-on-australias-team>
about the validity of another tranche of terrorism law reform, the government’s 
citizenship revocation laws, by borrowing a locution from the Abbott era and 
advising Dreyfus to “get on Australia’s team”.

Detaining high-risk terrorism offenders after jail term ends 'violates human 
rights'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/detaining-high-risk-terrorism-offenders-after-jail-term-ends-violates-human-rights>
Turnbull moved to shut down the line of questioning from Dreyfus by first 
mocking and minimising the dispute between Australia’s first and second law 
officers as a “disturbance in the bar common room” – then suggesting the shadow 
attorney general was being unpatriotic in his line of questioning.

“What the shadow attorney general is now doing is taking his feud with the 
attorney general into an area where he is putting our national security at 
risk,” Turnbull told parliament on Monday.

The prime minister said Dreyfus needed to “get over these petty personal 
animosities and get on our team, get on Australia’s team, to ensure that we 
have the right legislation”.
 