
Lancashire author Andrew Michael Hurley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/11/andrew-michael-hurley-there-is-no-place-more-terrifying-than-your-own-mind>
, the Costa award-winning novelist, has warned that “once libraries are closed 
down that’s it, they don’t come back”, after Lancashire county council 
confirmed it was set to go ahead with plans to close more than 20 local 
libraries.

The council proposed reducing its library network from 73 to 44 branches in May
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-lancashire-36233716>, in response to 
government cuts to its budget. After a consultation to which it received more 
than 7,000 responses,it recommended in a report on Friday 
<http://www.lancashiretelegraph.co.uk/news/14710093.Anger_as_Lancashire_County_Council_announce_20_libraries_face_the_axe_over_cash/>
 that while a few libraries were facing a reprieve, more than 20 others would 
still be closed. The report goes to the council’s cabineton 8 September 
<http://council.lancashire.gov.uk/documents/s94856/Coveringreport%2026%20Aug.pdf>
.

It will be those who have least who will be the most impoverished and 
disempowered when libraries are closed.
Andrew Michael Hurley 
“It all seemed horribly inevitable, unfortunately,” said Hurley, winner of the 
Costa first novel award and the British book awards book of the year prize for 
his debut novel The Loney. “The real tragedy is that once libraries are closed 
down that’s it, they don’t come back. It’s just so sad that those who hold the 
purse-strings cannot see how valuable they are, how a library can be a vital 
place in any and every community. And as with all cuts to public services, it 
will be those who have least who will be the most impoverished and disempowered 
when libraries are closed.”

Adele Bamber, a campaigner for Save Coppull Library, which is proposed to 
become a “satellite library” – a unstaffed service sharing space in a council 
building – said that locals were “devastated that Lancashire county council 
feel the need to close down or reduce the service from our libraries”.

“According to CILIP <http://www.cilip.org.uk/>, less than 1% of [the 
council’s] budget is actually spent on these services. Turning Coppull Library 
into a satellite library, an Aldi with books in essence, will ensure the 
service isn’t used by the people who need it the most,” said Bamber. The 
council defines a satellite library as “an unstaffed library facility within a 
shared county council building”, attended by a member of staff once a week “for 
a limited time”.

“Vital social and life skills are taught in our library. The internet doesn’t 
care like a librarian does, children do not read ebooks, and a youth group 
masquerading as a library is not what is needed in our community,” Bamber said.

The Public Libraries <https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> and Museums 
Act of 1964 requires councils to provide the public with a comprehensive and 
efficient public library service. In its report, Lancashire county council says 
it is confident that while its proposals “involve the closure of a significant 
proportion of static libraries, the library offer overall will in fact not be 
diminished and will continue to exceed the minimum level of service required to 
provide a ‘comprehensive and efficient’ service”.

It said that the changes it has suggested, which include the development of 
independent community libraries, are not a “quick fix” or “short-sighted cost 
savings, rather they are a measured response to a pressing financial 
imperative”.

Library use in England fell dramatically over last decade, figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/16/library-use-in-england-fell-dramatically-over-last-decade-figures-show>
“The financial pressures that the council faces are unprecedented and more 
than ever those pressures mean that cost-effective solutions must be identified 
to be able to finance a ‘comprehensive and efficient’ library service,” says 
the report. “There is no easy, off the shelf solution which will allow the 
service to continue in its current form without having to achieve savings … The 
library service as a whole, as described in the report, taking account of the 
continued use of mobile libraries, ‘satellites’, the home library service and 
virtual library service, with a greater emphasis on a digital offer, will 
ensure that a sustainable 21st century library service can continue to be 
delivered.”

“Our aim is to find a solution that still gives everyone in Lancashire good 
access to good services, despite the pressures on the council’s budget,” said 
county councillor David Borrow, deputy leader of Lancashire county council and 
portfolio holder for finance. “We’d like to thank everyone who took the time to 
respond to the consultation – their feedback has been invaluable in helping to 
shape the final proposals and the cabinet will be giving the report careful 
consideration.”
 