
The Lancet today finally retracted the paper  
<http://press.thelancet.com/wakefieldretraction.pdf>that sparked a crisis in 
MMR vaccination across the UK, following the General Medical Council's decision 
that its lead author, Andrew Wakefield, had been dishonest.

The medical journal's editor, Richard Horton, told the Guardian today that he 
realised as soon as he read the GMC findings that the paper, published in 
February 1998, had to be retracted. "It was utterly clear, without any 
ambiguity at all, that the statements in the paper were utterly false," he 
said. "I feel I was deceived."

Many in the scientific and medical community have been pressing for the paper, 
linking theMMR <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> (measles, mumps and 
rubella) jab to bowel disease and autism, to be quashed. But Horton said he did 
not have the evidence to do so before the end of the GMC investigation last 
Thursday.

In 2004, when concerns were first raised about the conduct of the study, the 
Lancet asked the Royal Free hospital, where Wakefield and his fellow authors 
worked, to investigate. But Professor Humphrey Hodgson, then vice-dean of the 
Royal Free and University College school of medicine, wrote to the journal to 
say it had found no problems. "We are entirely satisfied that the 
investigations performed on children reported in the Lancet paper had been 
subjected to appropriate and rigorous ethical scrutiny," he said at that time.

The GMC last week disagreed. Children had been subjected to invasive 
procedures that were not warranted, a disciplinary panel ruled. They had 
undergone lumbar punctures and other tests solely for research purposes and 
without valid ethical approval.

Wakefield "was dishonest", said Horton. "He deceived the journal." The Lancet 
had done what it could to establish that the research was valid, by having it 
peer-reviewed. But there is a limit, he said, to what peer-review can ascertain.

"Peer review is the best system we have got for checking accuracy and 
acceptability of work, but unless we went into the lab or examined every case 
record, we can't ever finally rule out some element of misconduct. The entire 
system depends upon trust. Most of the time we think it works well, but there 
will be a few instances – and when they happen they are huge instances – where 
the whole thing falls apart."

When journals have suspicions of fraud or misconduct, they have to refer them 
to the institution employing the scientists. "We rely on the processes within 
institutions to investigate allegations of fraud, and if they are found to be 
wanting, that is extremely disappointing," he said.

Dr Michael Fitzpatrick, author of books on the MMR scare, said the retraction 
was "good news – only 10 years too late".
 