
Hats off to Shane Warne <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/shane-warne>, a 
mesmeric leg-spinner with the ability to stupefy batsmen the world over by a 
combination of his immense natural talent and skill in out-thinking his 
opponents on the pitch (Sport, January 5). Who can ever forget the "ball of the 
century" that Warne produced at Old Trafford 13 years ago (I had the privilege 
to be there to see it), when, with his first Ashes delivery, he clean-bowled 
Mike Gatting? It's sad that we will never see the finest and hardest spinner of 
the ball in action again. That he can bowl the whole range of leg-spin, 
flippers, and googlies is a tribute to his genius. His craft and spin are 
dangerous on any pitch. In his hands, the cricket ball becomes an incredible 
gymnast: it spins at right angles, skids like a stone on a pond's surface, 
changes direction after an initial curl, or drops sharply to leave the bemused 
batsman groping at thin air.

For decades, bowling attacks were spearheaded by fast bowlers like Malcolm 
Marshall, Denis Lillie and Michael Holding. Then in walked Warne and proved the 
game could be just as stimulating with slow bowling, its guile bringing just as 
much excitement. Warne's retirement from cricket leaves a void in the game that 
may never be filled.
Dr Kailash Chand
Ashton-under-Lyne, Lancs

Well done Shane Warne for pointing out the absurdity of the MBEs showered on 
England's cricketers for a one-off victory against Australia. If ever our 
nation showed its lack of real sporting ambition it was this award - backed up 
by the equally embarrassing celebratory stamps.
Paul Baker
Sutton Coldfield, West Midlands
 