
Roy Hodgson <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-hodgson> has described 
leaving Ashley Cole out of his World Cup squad as "one of the hardest decisions 
of my career," after breaking the news in a telephone call that prompted the 
defender to announce his retirement from international football.

Cole informed the England <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> 
manager he had no intention of going on the standby list after losing his place 
to the 18-year-old Luke Shaw in a 23-man squad that will also feature Ross 
Barkley instead of Michael Carrick, placing a heavy emphasis on younger players.

Cole's 107 caps put him fifth in England's all-time appearances list but 
Hodgson told the 33-year-old he was preparing a squad that also had the 2016 
European Championship in mind and planned to use Leighton Baines as his 
first-choice left-back, with Shaw in reserve because of his outstanding 
performances for Southampton.

"I got the call from Roy and agree the England team should be about the young 
players," Cole said. "I think it best I retire from [the] England team now. We 
have a great manager and team and I wish them only success. I will be 
supporting them like a true fan. Thanks to everyone for everything. Baines and 
Shaw are great players, [as] proved this season, and are the future of this 
country. It was a pleasure to get 107 caps."

Hodgson described Cole as "an incredible competitor for England" and will 
fully explain his decision when the squad is announced at 2pm on Monday.

"Among many difficult decisions I've had to make for my squad, not selecting 
Ashley was one of the hardest," Hodgson said. "To amass over a century of caps 
is a truly staggering achievement and he deserves enormous credit for the 
desire and brilliance which has shone through over the years he has represented 
his country. There are few players who can be considered among the very best in 
the world, but Ashley in his prime was the best left-back without question."

Hodgson added: "The most important factor was speaking to Ashley prior to the 
announcement. He deserved to hear it directly from me and he took the news with 
huge grace. In two years working with him he has shown nothing but relentless 
professionalism, and a great hunger to play for England. He is someone I have 
the utmost respect for and I wished him all the best. He, in turn, wished the 
team well this summer. Of course I must respect his decision to retire, he has 
been one of England's finest players, but I want to look to the future. It has 
been one of the hardest decisions of my career."

Hodgson was prepared for Cole to decline his place on the standby list and is 
expected to bring in Jon Flanagan, rather than Kieran Gibbs, to fill the void, 
on the basis that he can operate on either flank. Flanagan would become the 
sixth Liverpool player after Steven Gerrard, Raheem Sterling, Daniel Sturridge, 
Jordan Henderson and Glen Johnson among the 30.

Hodgson was at Southampton to watch the 1-1 draw with Manchester United and 
Shaw excelled again. However, it is also apparent Hodgson's mind was made up a 
few months ago, as Cole was increasingly marginalised at Chelsea. Shaw will be 
joined by Adam Lallana and Rickie Lambert among Southampton's contingent.

Jack Wilshere <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jack-wilshere> will also 
be included after returning from a nine-week lay-off in Arsenal's 2-0 win at 
Norwich on Sunday. Wilshere came through his comeback from a broken foot with 
no problems and Ars√®ne Wenger said: "The World Cup is one month away, that's 
plenty of time. It just shows you he has no problem to be available."

The Arsenal manager also reported that Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain is close to 
returning to full training and in contention for Saturday's FA Cup final 
against Hull City. "The news is good. He should re-integrate into our squad for 
normal training. He is available to Roy and I wouldn't be surprised if he is 
picked."

Hodgson's ring-around to his various players also included trying to get hold 
of Andy Carroll only to find the West Ham striker had already left for an 
end-of-season holiday. Carroll, nonetheless, is expected to be on the standby 
list and John Stones has also emerged as a contender after his performances for 
Everton over the second half of the season.
 