
Opera North <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera-north> was today still 
holding out hope (optimistically, it has to be said) that a resolution could be 
found in the row over the community opera it commissioned from Lee Hall.

To recap, on Monday the Guardian broke the story of Hall's battle with Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> North, Bay primary school in 
Bridlington and East Riding council, over a character in a work due to be 
performed in a fortnight. Writing in G2, Hall gave a firsthand account of how 
he had been asked to excise references to the main character being gay. "The 
request seemed to come from an entirely different era," he said.

The response has been huge, not least on Twitter. Comedian Chris Addison 
tweeted, "This is as sad as it is disgraceful", while Northern Stage'sErica 
Whyman <http://www.entrust.co.uk/page.asp?id=166>called it "horrifyingly 
stupid".In the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/opinion/commentators/terence-blacker/terence-blacker-liberals-at-their-most-cowardly-2307039.html>
, Terence Blacker, the writer of both children's and adult books, called it a 
"scandal" and accused Opera North of behaving "spinelessly".Jeannette Winterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jeanettewinterson> wrote in the Times : 
"No one wants to be seen as homophobic, but it is hard to read this as anything 
else."

Richard Mantle, Opera North's general director, who sent Hall and composer 
Harvey Brough notice of cancellation from his Blackberry on Friday night after 
a performance of Das Rheingold, went on Radio 4's Front Row to say that they 
were "powerless" in the face of trenchant objections from the school to lines 
in the opera.

It is, without doubt, a mess and because we can't read minds, we will never 
really know if homophobia has been at play here. Perhaps it's a wake-up call to 
all of us who are gay and celebrate how things have improved, what great 
strides have been taken. Are we there yet? Clearly not.
 