
As we prepare to celebrate the third anniversary of the Lehman Brothers 
bankruptcy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers> and the 
ensuing financial crisis, it's a good time to assess the situation and ask what 
has changed. The answer is not encouraging.

Very little has changed about either the realities on the ground or the 
intellectual debate on economic issues in the last three years. The 
"too-big-to-fail" banks are bigger than ever as a result of crisis induced 
mergers. Financial industry profits now exceed their pre-crisis share of 
corporate profits, and executive pay and bonuses are again at their bubble 
peaks.

None of the executives who pushed and packaged fraudulent mortgages has gone 
to jail. Even those who have faced civil actions, likeCountrywide's Angelo 
Mozilo 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/10/15/AR2010101502219.html>
, have almost certainly still come out ahead after making large payments to 
settle suits.

And all the top policy people who guided us to this economic disaster are 
still doing just fine. When former Fed ChairmanAlan Greenspan isn't collecting 
his seven-figure salary from Pimco 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2007/05/16/us-pimco-greenspan-idUSN1546703720070516>
, the country's largest bond fund, he is sharing his wisdom with the world on 
the Sunday morning talk shows.

More importantly, little of their perceived wisdom has been questioned. 
Central banks around the world are still targeting 2% inflation as their main, 
if not only, policy goal. They are acting as though nothing in the world has 
happened that might cause us to question this policy.

In some ways, this is an incredible turn of events. However, it also should 
have been entirely predictable. The same people who controlled the key levers 
of power before the collapse continued to control them after the collapse. They 
created an official story and ensured that people heard little else.

In this official story, the cause of the economic downturn was the financial 
crisis. This, in turn, was caused by the proliferation of complex financial 
instruments, which, it turns out, in retrospect no one fully understood. In 
this view, it was just bad luck that overtook Greenspan, Bernanke and the rest. 
They may have been overly optimistic about self-regulation in financial 
markets, but no one could have known that anything like the financial tsunami 
following Lehman could happen.

In fact, in the official story we are supposed to be thankful that we did not 
get a second Great Depression. While this prospect is absurd on its face (the 
first Great Depression was the result of 10 years of failed policy, not just 
the mistakes made at its onset), those in positions of power and responsibility 
repeat this line endlessly.

It is quite disturbing that the high-flyers in the financial industry and 
their supporters in the policy world can wreck the economy and ruin tens of 
millions of lives, yet still maintain their control over policy and suffer 
almost no consequences themselves. But why would we expect anything else?

All the Greenspan sycophants in the media and the policy world 
<http://www.amazon.com/Maestro-Greenspans-Fed-American-Boom/dp/0743204123#reader_0743204123>
 were not going to own up to the fact that they had been worshipping a guy who 
was clueless about the fundamentals of the economy. Therefore, they had every 
reason in the world to perpetuate the "unpredictable disaster" story.

The same applies to the economics profession. After all, the Greenspan gospel 
had been widely embraced by central bankers and central banker wannabes 
everywhere. The Federal Reserve devoted its 2005 gathering of the world's 
central bankers and top economists toa Greenspan retrospective 
<http://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/escp-2005.cfm>. They 
debated whether Greenspan was thegreatest central banker of all-time (pdf) 
<http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2005/pdf/Blinder-Reis2005.pdf>. 
This gang had an enormous investment in the Greenspan line.

Neither the highly credentialed economists, nor the economics and business 
reporters at top news outlets, could say that the guy they had revered had 
problems with basic arithmetic. And – let's be really really clear – hehad 
problems with basic arithmetic.

It took nothing more than third-grade arithmetic to recognise a housing bubble 
that had grown hugely out of line with the fundamentals of the housing market. 
There was no explanation that passed the laugh test for the fact that house 
prices had diverged sharply from their long-term trend, and from rents – 
creating a housing bubble that peaked at more than $8tn. This wasrecognisable 
at least as early as 2002 
<http://www.cepr.net/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=405>.

And, it was easy to see that this bubble was driving the economy, both by 
pushing construction to record levels as a share of GDP and leading to a 
consumption boom that depressed the saving rate to zero. There was nothing in 
the Fed's bag of tricks that could replace the 8% of GDP (that was, $1.2tn) of 
bubble-driven demand that the economy stood to lose when the housing bubble 
burst.

Therefore, this disaster was 100% predictable to those who knew arithmetic; 
the only question was the timing and the exact nature of the process. But the 
post crisis story has been told almost entirely by the people responsible for 
the crisis. And they certainly had no intention of owning up to the fact they 
almost completely lack the ability to think for themselves.

This meant highlighting the financial crisis and the complexity of credit 
default swaps, collaterised debt obligations and other complex financial 
instruments – and burying the simple story of the housing bubble. Until 
progressives have enough power impose the simple laws of arithmetic on economic 
debates, we will not be able to make headway in influencing policy. 
Unfortunately, arithmetic is every bit as far removed from economics today as 
it was beforeLehman Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers> went down.
 