
Earlier this month, I took part in a fascinating discussion about Shakespeare 
<http://www.bl.uk/events/is-shakespeare-always-political> with Glenda Jackson 
at the British Library. One point that emerged strongly was that his plays are 
not static objects but endlessly adaptable, and that the actor is confronted 
with an infinity of choices. So I thought I’d look at five key Shakespearean 
speeches and see how various actors have handled them. I stress that there is 
no right or wrong – simply a wealth of differences.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fadrian-lester-hamlet-to-be-or-not-to-be-shakespeare-solos-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adrian%20Lester%20as%20Hamlet%3A%20%E2%80%98To%20be%20or%20not%20to%20be%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fadrian-lester-hamlet-to-be-or-not-to-be-shakespeare-solos-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adrian%20Lester%20as%20Hamlet%3A%20%E2%80%98To%20be%20or%20not%20to%20be%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fadrian-lester-hamlet-to-be-or-not-to-be-shakespeare-solos-video&media=>
Adrian Lester as Hamlet: ‘To be or not to be’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/feb/01/adrian-lester-hamlet-to-be-or-not-to-be-shakespeare-solos-video>
“To be or not to be” – Hamlet 

Every actor brings his or her individual character to the speech. Much hinges 
also on whether the speech is delivered to a camera or projected to 1,000 live 
spectators. One thing strikes me as crucial: there must be a spirit of active 
intellectual inquiry. That is whyLaurence Olivier in his 1948 film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ks-NbCHUns> has one of his rare misfires. The 
lines are intoned with what Kenneth Tynan called “mellow flatness” over a 
sustained closeup.Adrian Lester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/01/leading-actors-film-new-shakespeare-solos-series-for-the-guardian>
,in his version for the Guardian’s Shakespeare Solos series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/01/shakespeare-solos-watch-the-first-six-films>
, is far more successful at engaging with the camera and registering the 
speech’s tonal shifts. But two readings by actors who could hardly be further 
apart have always stuck in my mind. One is by John Gielgud, whoin his Ages of 
Man recital 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7quW2wU3oEM&list=PLWX1hfU1FFvp-IY7E6skAYEpDpasSFrhH&index=14>
 unforgettably stresses the way the dread of something after death “puzzles the 
will”, as if existence itself were unfathomable. The other is byNicol Williamson
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/26/nicol-williamson>, who in a 
1960s Roundhouse production in London delivered the same speech with a 
sardonic, rasping disgust. It’s a classic case of two actors from opposite 
traditions ransacking their brains for answers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fayesha-dharker-titania-midsummer-nights-dream-shakespeare-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ayesha%20Dharker%20as%20Shakespeare%E2%80%99s%20Titania%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20forgeries%20of%20jealousy%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fayesha-dharker-titania-midsummer-nights-dream-shakespeare-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ayesha%20Dharker%20as%20Shakespeare%E2%80%99s%20Titania%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20forgeries%20of%20jealousy%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fayesha-dharker-titania-midsummer-nights-dream-shakespeare-video&media=>
Ayesha Dharker as Shakespeare’s Titania: ‘The forgeries of jealousy’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/feb/01/ayesha-dharker-titania-midsummer-nights-dream-shakespeare-video>
“These are the forgeries of jealousy” – Titania 

What is Titania actually saying in this great speech? That immortals’ rows 
have mortal consequences? That between them, Oberon and Titania have caused 
climate change and destroyed the rhythm of the seasons? Ayesha Dharker, in her 
Shakespeare Solo, adopts a note of poignant regret and infinite sadness: she 
turns the speech into a moving lament for mankind’s fate. She doesn’t, of 
course, have an Oberon standing opposite her,as Fiona Hampton does in Trevor 
Nunn’s production at Ipswich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/21/a-midsummer-nights-dream-review-trevor-nunn-colonial-india>
. But it is revealing to hear Hampton adopting a radically different tone of 
inflamed anger as she itemises each aspect of rural ruin and fiercely tells 
Oberon: “This same progeny of evils comes from our debate.” Again, two actors 
come at the same speech from wildly different angles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Factors-key-shakespeare-speeches-laurence-olivier-sophie-okonedo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1172a4a134753bb4c32e5be03ccbb166c964da53%2F0_96_4075_2445%2F4075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lend%20us%20your%20ears%3A%20how%20actors%20have%20handled%20key%20Shakespearean%20speeches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Factors-key-shakespeare-speeches-laurence-olivier-sophie-okonedo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lend%20us%20your%20ears%3A%20how%20actors%20have%20handled%20key%20Shakespearean%20speeches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Factors-key-shakespeare-speeches-laurence-olivier-sophie-okonedo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1172a4a134753bb4c32e5be03ccbb166c964da53%2F0_96_4075_2445%2F4075.jpg>
 Benedict Cumberbatch as Richard III in The Hollow Crown. Photograph: Robert 
Viglasky/BBC/Carnival Film & Television 
“Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds!” – Richard III 

Everyone loves “now is the winter of our discontent”. Alec McCowen told me 
recently that when Olivier performed it on stage, he used to do slightly camp, 
sidelong glances into the wings like the comedian Sid Field. But Richard’s 
soliloquy the night before battle is far more astonishing. He wakes from a 
dream to engage in the first piece of prolonged self-analysis you find in 
Shakespeare. (“Is there a murderer here? No. Yes, I am.”) I’ve never forgotten 
the highly intellectualJohn Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2011/aug/11/john-wood-actor> at 
the National in 1979 speaking the lines in a hectic whisper, as if he were 
simultaneously patient and psychiatrist.Benedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/may/21/benedict-cumberbatch-the-hollow-crown-richard-iii>
, in the BBC Hollow Crown production, was more like a man in the grip of a 
visceral terror. Yet another route is taken byRalph Fiennes at the Almeida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2016/jun/09/ralph-fiennes-richard-iii-almeida-theatre-video>
, suggesting an iron figure who has ruthlessly pursued power coming to terms 
with the barrenness of a life without love.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Factors-key-shakespeare-speeches-laurence-olivier-sophie-okonedo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a8e1c8bfab274bbcd386e0f24ea89af8598222b%2F0_226_3168_1900%2F3168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lend%20us%20your%20ears%3A%20how%20actors%20have%20handled%20key%20Shakespearean%20speeches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Factors-key-shakespeare-speeches-laurence-olivier-sophie-okonedo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lend%20us%20your%20ears%3A%20how%20actors%20have%20handled%20key%20Shakespearean%20speeches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Factors-key-shakespeare-speeches-laurence-olivier-sophie-okonedo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a8e1c8bfab274bbcd386e0f24ea89af8598222b%2F0_226_3168_1900%2F3168.jpg>
 Peggy Ashcroft, right, as Queen Margaret in The Wars of the Roses at 
Stratford. Photograph: Express Newspapers/Getty Images 
“Come, make him stand upon this molehill here” – Queen Margaret 

This is the famous scene in Henry VI, Part Three, when Margaret (“she-wolf of 
France”) holds the Duke of York captive, places a paper crown on his head and 
daubs his face in the blood of his dead child before stabbing him. It’s a 
speech that calls on all the passions, but there are different ways of 
approaching it. In the BBC Hollow Crown series,Sophie Okonedo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/may/14/hollow-crown-shakespeare-swordplay-punch>
 was filled with fiery bloodlust. YetPeggy Ashcroft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/09/great-performances-peggy-ashcroft-the-wars-of-the-roses>
 who played Margaret in the RSC 1963 production of Wars of the Roses – newly 
released on DVD – once told me something fascinating. She said Peter Hall wrote 
her a note pointing out that, in this scene, York has the power and Margaret is 
the weak one. In other words, there is an edge of hysteria behind her savagery. 
Okonedo gave us, wonderfully, the sound and fury; Ashcroft unforgettably 
suggested the madness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Factors-key-shakespeare-speeches-laurence-olivier-sophie-okonedo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F569fea54b3b2c2acc07e95fac802a9667468b367%2F0_366_2898_1737%2F2898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lend%20us%20your%20ears%3A%20how%20actors%20have%20handled%20key%20Shakespearean%20speeches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Factors-key-shakespeare-speeches-laurence-olivier-sophie-okonedo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lend%20us%20your%20ears%3A%20how%20actors%20have%20handled%20key%20Shakespearean%20speeches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Factors-key-shakespeare-speeches-laurence-olivier-sophie-okonedo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F569fea54b3b2c2acc07e95fac802a9667468b367%2F0_366_2898_1737%2F2898.jpg>
 Laurence Olivier as Macbeth with Vivien Leigh as Lady Macbeth. Photograph: 
Bettmann Archive 
“Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow” – Macbeth


Again, each actor finds his own way into the character and this climactic 
speech. Ian McKellen once brilliantly analysed the theatrical metaphor that 
sustains it,Patrick Stewart gave us Macbeth as a Stalinesque psychopath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/sep/27/theatre4>, Antony Sher’s hero 
was a valiant soldier in the final stages of disintegration. But only Olivier, 
having earlier discovered a malignant irony in Macbeth, showed us the death of 
a soul. There was a sublime melancholy in Olivier’s delivery of this great 
speech that I have rarely heard matched in the theatre – one that intensified 
his earlier rendering of “my way of life is fallen into the sere, the yellow 
leaf” when we were confronted, as in Richard III, by the hollowness of an 
existence without love or friendship.

 