
A late goal by Leonardo Bonucci earned the Serie A leaders Juventus a 1-0 away 
victory against Olympique Lyon in theirEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> quarter-final first 
leg on Thursday night. The defender struck in the 85th minute, applying a 
powerful finish after a scramble for the ball inside the Lyon penalty area.

Bonucci said afterwards: "In the first half we struggled to find enough spaces 
to play our football while after the break we didn't risk anything other than 
on set pieces.Lyon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> ran very hard in 
the first half but in the second we were able to bring home a very important 
victory."

Carlos Tevez, the top scorer in Serie A after his move to Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> from Manchester City, should 
have put his team in front as early as the sixth minute, but he headed wide to 
extend a European goal drought that stretches back to April 2009.

At the other end the former Sunderland and Fulham player Steed Malbranque had 
a good chance for Lyon but his effort was saved by Gianluigi Buffon and Jimmy 
Briand spurned an excellent opportunity, firing over from close range.

Valencia's chances of reaching the semi-finals look remote after they went 
down 3-0 againstBasel in Switzerland, the game played behind closed doors at St 
Jakob-Park as punishment for the trouble among home fans which caused the 
second leg of their 2-1 aggregate victory over Salzburg in the last round to be 
suspended for 13 minutes.

Basel <https://www.theguardian.com/football/basel> have never reached a major 
European final and looked eager to change that as two goals from Matías Delgado 
put them in charge of the tie.

The Argentinian midfielder, in his second spell at the club, was allowed too 
much space to fire home from 20 yards into the bottom left corner to give Basel 
the lead after 34 minutes. Four minutes laterValencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> failed to track Delgado and he 
stabbed in Valentin Stocker's superb defence-bisecting cross from the left.

Stocker added the third in stoppage time, racing from the halfway line before 
unleashing a powerful drive.

The Portuguese league leaders Benfica, who beat Tottenham in the previous 
round, have the upper hand againstAZ Alkmaar after beating them 1-0 away. 
Eduardo Salvio scored the only goal after 48 minutes with a smart volleyed 
finish after the AZ goalkeeper Esteban Alvarado had palmed out a shot from 
Óscar Cardozo.

Porto put shaky league form behind them to take a 1-0 lead over Sevilla, 
Eliaquim Mangala scoring with a fine header in the 31st minute.Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto> will be without the defensive 
midfielder Fernando for the second leg in Spain, after he was sent off for two 
late yellow-card offences.
 