
There are small people in my family; I read Margaret Wise Brown's classic 
children's picture bookGoodnight Moon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9yu_g5x3ZoQ> a lot at the moment. I am a 
science fiction fan, and regardless of the increasingly bad sequels,Frank 
Herbert's Dune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/apr/09/frank-herbert-dune-hugo-award-winner>
 occupies a position near the top of my favourite SF reads, the image of that 
sand-covered planet and its giant worms never failing to transport me. My 
heartfelt thanks, then, to theQuill & Quire blog 
<http://www.quillandquire.com/quillblog/> in Canada for alerting me this 
morning to a children's book mash-up which I can't believe I haven't seen 
before, it feels so made for me: Goodnight Dune.

Take a look: it is sheer genius <http://goodnightdune.com/index.html> from 
Julia Yu. The picture of "a cow jumping over the moon" becomes "Shai-hulud 
bursting out of the dune", the pair of mittens becomes a pair of gom-jabbar and 
the young mouse is a young muad'Dib.

Wise Brown's "old lady whispering hush" – anyone else ever found her vaguely 
creepy? - is transformed into a "bene-gesserit witch whispering 'they tried and 
died'" who is far creepier, all amid pictures which wonderfully mimic Clement 
Hurd's.

Goodnight Moon seems prone to this kind of treatment – there was a Goodnight 
iPad which published a few years back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/20/goodnight-ipad-rewrites-bedtime-story>
, replacing Wise Brown's gently old-fashioned ending with "Goodnight remotes 
and Netflix streams, Androids, apps and glowing screens, goodnight MacBook Air, 
goodnight gadgets everywhere."

I think I prefer Yu's, though. There are too many bowls of mush in my life 
these days, and not enough devil worms. Goodnight Dune is a much-needed 
corrective, and I'd buy it if I could. I can't, so I'll comfort myself with 
imagining the SF-ification of some other children's picture book classics. Yu 
writes that she was inspired bythis College Humor post 
<http://www.collegehumor.com/post/6362893/five-sci-fi-childrens-books>, which 
includes The Very Deadly Bounty Hunter, a la caterpillar, and Oh, the Times and 
Places You'll Go! by Dr Who, instead of Seuss.

How about The Cat in the High Castle? Or Where the Wildlings Are? Although Dr 
Seuss and Maurice Sendak can be mind-bending enough, I guess, without 
additional Philip K Dick or George RR Martin … Over to you. Please delight the 
mind of this sleep-addled, SF-loving mother.
 