
Next time you are bored at a bus stop try my favourite pastime: a game called 
jeans versus joggers. In recent years the trouser conversation has been about 
skinny jeans. Peak skinny jean was reached last summer with Topman's spray-on 
range, but if you look at young men, grey marl is hammering indigo denim. In 
fact, this might be the first generation of men whose default casual trouser is 
not jeans.
 Bottega Veneta A/W 14 show. Photograph: Victor Virgile/Gamma-Rapho via Getty 
Images 
Jogging bottoms have comfort on their side: they fit loosely, are soft and 
have elasticated waistbands. They don't need ironing or turn-ups and can be 
worn with trainers, Generation Jogger's go-to shoe. There is something 
rebellious about their slouchy nonchalance, though this can tip easily into 
scruffiness.

Sportswear has been the most influential trend in men's fashion recently. 
Whether from rising London stars such asChristopher Shannon 
<http://www.christophershannon.co.uk/> - who excels at witty fashion with urban 
bite - orKim Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jan/16/kim-jones-louis-vuitton-autumn-winter-collection-paris>
 atLouis Vuitton,  <http://uk.louisvuitton.com/eng-gb/homepage>who has proved 
that to look modern, luxury fashion must mix cutting-edge tailoring with 
tech-look fabrics and sporty shapes. New York designers such asAlexander Wang 
<http://www.alexanderwang.com/gb> have developed labels out of sportswear; 
brands such as buzz labelHood By Air <http://www.hoodbyair.com/> appeal to a 
switched-on crowd.

The haute fashion tracksuit bottom has been a trend for a few seasons – let's 
be honest, anything jazzy in the south of a male wardrobe is noticeable. Think 
of the hoo-ha about Thom Browne's ankle-grazing suits, a curveball fashion hit 
in the mid-noughties. The fashion jogger as a micro-trend got traction when 
brands such asMarc Jacobs <http://www.marcjacobs.com/>, Emporio Armani 
<http://www.armani.com/gb/emporioarmani> and Versace <http://www.versace.com/> 
started to appear with a tracksuit trouser-style gathered and cuffed hem. This 
season,Christopher Kane 
<http://www.kering.com/en/brands/luxury/christopher-kane> is among the 
influential designers backing printed tracksuits; on the high street,Topman 
<http://www.topman.com/?geoip=home> has noted a surge in sales of the fashion 
jogger, and now sells printed and biker styles.

I bought a pair from American Apparel <http://store.americanapparel.co.uk/> a 
few years ago during the loungewear boom and they are a favourite – with an old 
cashmere jumper or T-shirt, they signal downtime. Luxury brands have tapped in:
Maison Martin Margiela <http://www.maisonmartinmargiela.com/> offers cotton 
track pants;Dolce & Gabbana <http://www.dolcegabbana.com/>'s cotton and 
cashmere have a pyjama quality, so aside from nipping out to buy milk, I can't 
imagine wearing them in public. Perhaps that is about to change.

On the autumn/winter 2014 catwalk at Bottega Veneta 
<http://www.bottegaveneta.com/gb>, models wore jogging trousers with 
elasticated waists; shirts were often tucked in to show this, and the best 
versions, cut with more shaping in the crotch than regular joggers for some 
very welcome support, were worn with an elegant suit jacket. By making the 
jogger a key message, designer Tomas Maier made sportswear feel sophisticated. 
These trousers will set you back about £500. So if you need to justify the 
purchase, you'll be glad to hear the jogger will rule the trouser department in 
2015, too.

Simon Chilvers is men's style director at Matchesfashion.com
 