
"What is freedom of expression? Without the freedom to offend, it ceases to 
exist."

So argued the novelist Salman Rushdie at the height of the controversy over 
his book, the Satanic Verses. And – as I have admitted previously onCif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/inayatbunglawala> – I think he was right.

Well, how strong our own commitment to freedom of expression is will shortly 
be put to an interesting test. Almost five years after they announced their 
disbandment, the controversial publicity-seeking – and frankly loathsome — 
Muslim group,al-Muhajiroun 
<http://islam4uk.com/current-affairs/uk-news/46-uk/298--newsflash-al-muhajiroun-to-be-re-launched>
, have announced that they are to be relaunched.

In the years between 1996 and 2004, under the leadership of Omar Bakri 
Mohammed, the repulsive antics of al-Muhajiroun featured regularly on the front 
pages of our tabloids. Whether it was holding up placards proclaiming that the 
flag ofIslam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> would one day be flying 
above 10 Downing Street or organising a meeting to celebrate the achievements 
of the "Magnificent 19" hijackers behind the 9/11 atrocities, it seemed that 
the small band of Muhajiroun supporters lived for the limelight and revelled in 
their notoriety and being openly provocative.

The group was disbanded by Bakri in 2004 and soon after Bakri himself left the 
UK and moved to Lebanon where he still resides. As for the Muhajiroun remnants, 
they formed new off-shoots including theSaviour Sect 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/uk/article552594.ece> and al-Ghurabaa 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al_Ghurabaa>. In 2005, following the 7/7 
bombings, the government announced the banning of al-Muhajiroun and its 
offshoots.

As if to demonstrate the ineffectiveness of the new legislation, the very same 
activists behind al-Muhajiroun and its offshoots promptly resurfaced under 
different identities and went back to their speciality: getting people's backs 
up and generally doing their damnedest to poison relations between Muslims and 
the rest of society.

In my experience, the overwhelming majority of UK Muslims are deeply 
embarrassed and ashamed of the Muhajiroun followers who invariably tended to be 
unemployed layabouts and local bullies. If the Muhajiroun followers had not 
been Muslims, they would almost certainly have been football hooligans. But 
holding up offensive placards and organising meetings with inflammatory titles 
is not exactly against the law.

A couple of months back I wrote about how the followers of al-Muhajiroun had 
succeeded in their polarising antics once again with their now infamous little
protest in Luton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/mar/11/protest-islam-mujahiroun-luton>
 at the welcoming home parade of soldiers from the East Anglian Regiment. The 
incident generated a colossal amount of national media coverage which seemed 
bizarre and quite out of proportion when you think that less than 20 Muhajiroun 
supporters were actually involved – and this in a town with over 25,000 
Muslims. Not long after that an Islamic Centre in Luton wasfirebombed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/may/08/muslim-mosque-attack-extremists>
 after they began receiving a series of ugly threatening messages of the "how 
dare you insult our troops – you will pay for this" variety.

I interviewed Farasat Latif from the Islamic Centre in Luton while researching 
a Cif piece about the incident and he was understandably upset and angry, not 
just with whoever had carried out the arson attack but also with the actions of 
the Muhajiroun supporters, which he believed had contributed to considerably 
worsening the climate for Muslims in Luton and had been a gift for the likes of 
the far right.

Since then we have witnessed a "March for England" organised in Luton 
ostensibly in support of the East Anglian Regiment but which quickly descended 
into rioting and cases of assault on Muslim individuals and businesses.

So it was not altogether surprising to read reports over the weekend that 
worshipers from the Islamic Centre in Luton had taken direct action themselves 
to prevent the Muhajiroun supporters from holding their regular stall in 
Luton's Bury Park area (known locally as Curry Park) and inciting further 
trouble. TheDaily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1189577/Muslim-extremists-anti-war-protest-driven-members-community.html>
 and theSun 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/campaigns/our_boys/2455792/Muslims-drive-off-protestors.html>
 both provided supportive coverage, which is just a bit nauseating given the 
enormous amount of free publicity both papers have given to al-Muhajiroun over 
the years.

The response of the worshippers from the Islamic Centre is surely 
understandable given the circumstances, but did they do the right thing in 
taking matters into their own hands and forcing al-Muhajiroun off the streets? 
On the one hand, I ardently wish that the al-Muhajiroun lot would just stop 
stirring up mischief and generally being such morons. However, it is surely a 
matter for the police to decide whether the activities of al-Muhajiroun are 
lawful or not and to take action accordingly.

Is it not more in keeping with our ideals to allow al-Muhajiroun to give vent 
to their odious views and expose their ideas to the ridicule they deserve? The 
only people who should be taking the Muhajiroun activists seriously are the 
police and the security services who should be ready to haul them before the 
courts if they cross the line from simply voicing offensive opinion to actually 
inciting violence and race hatred. A number of Muhajiroun supporters have 
indeed now been successfully prosecuted in recent years.

That seems to be a more prudent approach to dealing with them than declaring 
futile bans on organisations or encouraging a kind of vigilantism to deal with 
those whose views and opinions we find thoroughly distasteful.
 