
Arts and humanities <https://www.theguardian.com/education/artsandhumanities> 
departments in universities are under siege. Public expenditure on culture is 
increasingly scrutinised and there has been a move towards a more instrumental 
view of education.

When people defend the study of arts and humanities, they usually talk about 
the fact that they can improve students' employment prospects or career 
development.

The recent Research Excellence Framework established new criteria 
<http://www.ref.ac.uk/panels/assessmentcriteriaandleveldefinitions/> requiring 
evidence of economic, social and cultural impact beyond academia. Perhaps 
inevitably, this has led to a tendency to exaggerate potential benefits.

It is increasingly rare for people to defend them based on their intrinsic 
value.

Humanities are not essential to democracy

However, defending the arts and humanities in terms that sidestep their 
intrinsic value and their unique qualities creates a hostage to fortune. The 
arts and humanities cannot claim to be essential to democracy, economic success 
and social wellbeing. Most people do perfectly well without direct engagement 
with culture.

But it is the intrinsic value of the arts and humanities that keeps us coming 
back to them. For many of us, the human desire for knowledge, stimulation, 
understanding, pleasure and enlightenment is fed by our engagement with the 
arts, literature, history or philosophy.

We enjoy examining in depth something that is worthy of our time and judgement 
and rewards concentration and application.

The arts and humanities are special because they investigate, excavate, 
create, critique, and celebrate the many achievements, ideas and values of our 
human world. At their most challenging, they grapple with the problem of the 
human condition.

But when we come to talk about this – to articulate the intrinsic value of 
something to us, and potentially to others – we get embarrassed, anxious about 
seeming elitist.

However, university humanities departments have made efforts to make sure they 
no longer smack of elitism, setting up courses to cater for students who do not 
want to spend their time studying Victorian novels, romantic poetry, 
Renaissance sculpture, medieval history, or Aristotelian philosophy.

Researchers are becoming adept at writing research grant applications that 
demonstrate how their work has social or economic relevance and potential 
impact.

No one is intrinsically incapable of enjoying art, literature, music or 
philosophy, and a traditional purpose of education has been to help them to do 
that.

Arts and humanities expand our horizons

Evidence from the huge range of publications that come out of universities 
every year shows how much arts and humanities expand our horizons and challenge 
our preconceptions.

Recent examples that I enjoyed include philosopher John Armstrong's In Search 
of Civilization: Remaking a Tarnished Idea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jun/28/search-civilization-john-armstrong-review>
, which offers a refreshing defence of the idea of civilisation, and Helen 
Small'sThe value of the humanities 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=nb_sb_noss_1?url=search-alias%3Daps&field-keywords=The%20Value%20of%20Humanities>
, which provides an exploration for the reasons we study humanities within an 
historical context.

In a year when we commemorate the first world war, Kate McLoughlin's book 
Authoring war 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Authoring-War-Literary-Representation-Iliad/dp/1107623634/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1400601976&sr=8-1&keywords=authoring+war>
 shows how the literary form is uniquely "sensitive to the fragmenting effects 
that war has on individual lives, communities, the body, and the environment". 
While Prue Shaw'sReading Dante 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Reading-Dante-From-Here-Eternity/dp/0871407426/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1400601996&sr=8-1&keywords=reading+dante>
 brings Dante's Inferno alive for the modern reader.

Without arts and humanities departments in universities many of these books 
wouldn't exist. Such departments afford an important sphere of freedom in which 
students and academics can delve into the past, re-evaluate assumptions, 
grapple with difficult and complex ideas developed and expressed by artists, 
writers and thinkers, and challenge existing orthodoxies.

The arts and humanities embrace much of human life, and study in them filters 
into society, feeding our desire for knowledge and understanding, encouraging 
us to rethink our own ideas and assumptions. At their best they can engage us 
in a continuous search to understand the human condition.

Wendy Earle is knowledge exchange manager at Birkbeck. Follow her on Twitter 
@wearliegig <https://twitter.com/wearliegig>. 

Join the Higher Education Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. 
 