
The old man pauses while searching among the black beach stones for a point 
for his walking stick. It's slippery, fresh blood and freezing arctic waters 
washing over them. Amid the young men, cutting and heaving and slicing and 
pulling, it's the serenity of this nonagenarian that captures my attention. The 
face of tranquillity belying wrinkling years of wisdom. While one eye darts 
beneath thick glasses to check his balance, he surveys the community all around 
him. And nods approval; all is good and as it should be inIttoqqortoormiit 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ittoqqortoormiit>.

I'm standing on freezing Walrus Bay. A hunter's wife tells me these are the 
first whales the community has killed in six years. The community has walked 
out to the secluded bay to lend a hand and watch the age-old practices of 
flensing and carving. All that will remain of two minke whales, six and 10 
metres, will be 10 equal piles of skin, blubber, ribs, fins and great, 
geometric blocks of deep-red meat. Ten piles represent 10 hunters and their 
extended families. Nothing will be wasted. Even the giant back bones will be 
dragged to where huskies, tied up for the short summer, will fight each other 
for their share.

As the butchering continues, with family members loading meat and blubber into 
giant plastic bags, the old man sits on one of the bigger rocks at the base of 
the steep scree slopes hemming the bay. He's the elder. He's seen the old ways 
erode, but some stay the same and he likes that.

Ittoqqortoormiit is one of the northernmost settlements on the largely 
depopulated east coast. Its 400Inuit <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inuit> 
people, ancestors of the Thule migration from Arctic North America, are one of 
Greenland's last hunter societies.

As the chilling polar stream bears down, I join the throng by the whales. A 
boy offers a slice of thick skin, cut with his pocketknife. I taste its salty 
crunch. I revere the creature, and I know its life force is serving to these 
lovers of theArctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic>. Later, I'll 
sample my own small whale fillets and discover, when seared on a hot skillet, 
there's first the oily sheen of lipids on the palate, then a lean, sharp 
flavour akin to kangaroo.

I see the old man in the back of a pickup truck. Surrounded by family and huge 
bags of whale meat, blubber and the odd rib bone, he's serene. The gods of east
Greenland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greenland> have been kind and all 
is as it should be in Ittoqqortoormiit.

Every week Guardian Weekly <https://www.theguardian.com/weekly> publishes a '
Letter from <https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/letter-from>' one of its 
readers from around the world. We welcome submissions â€“ they should focus on 
giving our readers a clear sense of a place and its people. Please send them to
weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com <mailto:weekly.letter.from@theguardian.com>
 