
Richard Temple writes: Adrian Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/adrian-mitchell> (obituary, 22 December) was 
the resident writer at Billericay school, an Essex comprehensive, from 1978 
until 1980. It was an unprecedented appointment but he made a huge success of 
it and, to general delight, stayed for a second year after the initial contract 
had expired.

Adrian inspired all around him: a play written by the children with his help 
reached its d√©nouement with a victory by the school's football team in the 
mythical Inter-Galactic Cup. He used his influence to bring poets such as Roger 
McGough and Ted Hughes to Billericay to give readings. It was an exciting time 
with Adrian the epicentre of creativity: he left a flourishing legacy, 
epitomised by the local writers' workshop, which he founded and continued to 
inspire long after his departure.

Dennis Gould writes: As I sat in the Gare du Nord station, Paris, reading 
Adrian Mitchell's obituary, shocked, I thought countries such as Chile or the 
Czech Republic would have given a man of Adrian's stature a day of mourning. 
His work was almost consistently ignored in England because of his Blakean 
simplicity and Shelley-like political ideas.

He was a rare inspiration to his generation. From the 1950s to the last days 
he shared his knowledge and experience with fellow writers and wider public. He 
bowled over the Glastonbury festival audience in 2004 with his book The Shadow 
Knows, Poems 2000-2004. I had the pleasure of introducing him to the audience. 
Only Christopher Logue and Michael Horovitz remain of that group of poets 
committed to a non-nuclear, non-military society inspired by Blake and Shelley, 
rather than shameful invasions of far-distant countries.
 