
Former defence secretary Liam Fox has turned down an opportunity to return to 
the government as a Foreign Office minister, more than two years after he 
resigned over a controversy about his unofficial adviser and friendAdam Werritty
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>.

The senior Tory rightwinger said he was "honoured" to have been offered the 
post byDavid Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>.

However, in a slightly ominous sign for the prime minister, Fox said he would 
rather be free to speak up from the backbench on the issues of the economy, 
immigration andEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as these 
are what matter most to him and his constituents.

"I do not want to be distracted from what needs to be said on these matters at 
such an important time politically and look forward to discussing them from the 
backbenches in the lead-up to the general election," he added in a statement 
published on hiswebsite 
<http://www.liamfox.co.uk/news/liam-foxs-statement-prime-ministers-reshuffle>.

It is thought Fox had been looking for a return to cabinet, potentially as 
foreign secretary, but this role went toPhilip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/15/philip-hammond-eurosceptic-foreign-secretary>
, the man who replaced him as defence secretary in October 2011.

In his resignation letter to Cameron at the time, Fox said he had "mistakenly 
allowed" personal and professional responsibilities to be "blurred".

Werrity, Fox's former flatmate, had no official role at the Ministry of 
Defence or formal security clearance, but he was present with the defence 
secretary on 18 foreign trips and had business cards suggesting he was an 
adviser. Questions were raised about who funded Werrity's trips, his business 
activities, and his level of access to official meetings.

The Conservative leadership would have valued having Fox back in the 
ministerial fold as he is a Eurosceptic credited with being able to speak to 
the grassroots who may be tempted by Ukip. From the backbenches, Fox has called 
for "totemic" tax cuts if theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> are going to win the 
election next year.

He has also been outspoken on Europe, saying: "If the choice is between the 
current trajectory towards ever-closer union and leaving, then I would choose 
to leave, albeit reluctantly."
 