
Sir Gus O'Donnell's report into Liam Fox's "blurred" relationship with Adam 
Werritty <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>, leaves several 
important questions unanswered:

1: Did Werritty benefit financially from his close relationship with Fox?

The report says Fox did not benefit financially from the relationship. But it 
has not answered whether Werritty profited from Fox allowing foreign leaders 
and businessmen to assume that Werritty was his official adviser.

2: Why did payments by companies and individuals enable Werritty to fly first 
class and stay at some of the world's most exclusive hotels? And did they 
benefit from Werritty's closeness to Fox?

The O'Donnell report has named all of the donors to Werritty's Pargav Ltd 
company. We already knew about four: Jon Moulton, a Tory donor and private 
equity tycoon who bought Reader's Digest; Good Governance Group (G3), a private 
investigations company staffed by former MI6 officers; Tamares, an investment 
company owned by Tory donor Poju Zabludowicz; and Michael Lewis, the boss of 
Oceana Investors and a former chairman of Bicom, an organisation that lobbies 
on behalf of Israel.

The report added two new funders Mick "the miner" Davis, the boss of Xstrata, 
the FTSE 100 mining company and chair of the trustees of the Jewish Leadership 
Council. The other funder was named as IRG ltd.

3: Did Fox solicit Tory donors and businessmen to pay money into Pargav to 
help support Werritty?

Moulton has said Fox requested that he pay money to Pargav. Moulton paid 
Â£35,000 to Pargav in February. Moulton says Fox asked him for the funds both 
verbally and via email. He is said to have forwarded the email to O'Donnell. 
Did Fox also solicit funding from the other companies and individuals that 
funded Pargav?

4: Which other ministers met Werritty, and when?

O'Donnell confirmed that Werritty met defence ministers Gerald Howarth and 
Lord Astor. Labour has demanded the publication of a full list of all of 
Werritty's ministerial meetings.

William Hague, foreign secretary, has said it is likely that Werritty has met 
some other ministers. "I think you will find that contacts with other ministers 
apart from Fox with Mr Werritty would be very slight," he said on Sunday.

Hague has said he has not met Werritty since becoming foreign secretary 
despite featuring on the advisory board of Fox and Werritty's Atlantic Bridge 
charity. Hague has spoken at Atlantic Bridge events, and the US arm of the 
charity has hosted a book signing for him in New York.

The report says Gerald Howarth, parliamentary under secretary of state of 
international security strategy, "met Mr Werritty twice at social events and 
one official meeting at the suggestion of Dr Fox". How Howarth and Astor 
introduced to Werritty, and were they aware that he was not an official adviser?

5: When did Fox first learn that Werritty was handing out business cards 
embossed with the Commons portcullis logo that described him as an 'adviser to 
Rt Hon Liam Fox MP'? Did Fox tell him to stop using the cards, or just adapt 
the wording?

6: Has Werritty met senior civil servants? How often, and were they aware that 
he was not an official adviser?

The MoD's list of meetings shows Fox and Werritty met with Ursula Brennan, the 
MoD's permanent secretary, on 13 June. This is just four days before Fox and 
Werritty's highly controversial meeting with Harvey Boulter in Dubai.

Did Brennan question why Werritty sat in on that meeting? Was Brennan aware 
that Werritty was not one of her department's officials? If so why did she meet 
him?

7: Who has Werritty met while representing Fox?

8: Was the Atlantic Bridge charity, which was primarily funded by hedge-fund 
boss Michael Hintze and a powerful US rightwing business organisation, set up 
primarily to fund Werritty's trips to meet up with Fox overseas?

The O'Donnell's report did not examine the Atlantic Bridge, which was shut 
down last month following a Charity Commission investigation. Pargav was 
created just days before the commission ordered that the Atlantic Bridge cease 
all its operations.

9: Why was Fox with Werritty in Dubai for four days at taxpayers' expense when 
he only carried out two official engagements?
 