
Conservative MP Liam Fox is suing the Dubai businessman who helped reveal the 
former defence secretary's unusual working relationship withAdam Werritty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>.

Fox, who resigned as defence secretary a year ago following the revelations 
that Werritty posed as his official adviser, has filed a defamation claim 
against Harvey Boulter.

The lawsuit, filed at the high court and seen by the Guardian, claims Boulter 
"gravely injured" Fox's reputation and "exposed him to public scandal, contempt 
and odium" in an interview he gave to Sky News at the height of scandal last 
autumn. It claims that Boulter implied Fox "reprehensibly and dishonourably"
failed to tell the truth about what took place during a business meeting on the 
41st floor of a five-star hotel in Dubai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/07/liam-fox-adviser-meeting-dubai>
.

In the interview, which is available to view online 
<http://news.sky.com/story/898791/fox-and-werritty-to-be-court-witnesses>, 
Boulter told Sky he was planning on "calling Dr Liam Fox and his pal Adam 
Werritty to give evidence in some of these ongoing legal disputes so they can 
tell the truth and so we can debunk these baseless allegations against me".

"I hope when they get there they can put their hand on the bible and tell the 
truth â€“ and I suspect they will be forced to come if they do not do it 
willingly."

The legal claim states: "The publication of the said words has gravely injured 
the reputation of the claimant [Fox], has exposed him to public scandal, 
contempt, and odium and has caused him considerable embarrassment and distress."

The legal action comes as Fox has begun to make his voice heard on the 
political battlefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/sep/11/conservative-party-margaret-thatcher-liam-fox>
 and has been spoken of as a potential Tory party leader.

A lawyer for Fox declined to provide any further details, and was unable to 
provide any comment from Fox.

Boulter's lawyers have filed for the case to be struck out on the basis of no 
case to answer. Boulter declined to comment on Tuesday night.

Separately, City of London police have confirmed they are still investigating 
allegations of fraud surrounding Werritty, Fox's best man and former flatmate, 
who handed out business cards falsely describing him as one of Fox's official 
advisers.

A lawyer who represents Werritty failed to respond to requests for comment.
 