
Sunday was the first time in 2016 that I was happy to be wrong about an 
important election. While I had predicted both the UK referendum and the US 
presidential elections to be close, I had not expected Brexit or Donald Trump 
to win. I did expectNorbert Hofer to win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
 the re-run of the Austrian presidential elections, however, and was happily 
surprised at Alexander Van der Bellen’s quite comfortable victory.

Whatever the reasons for Hofer’s defeat – his speculation about an Öxit or 
Nigel Farage’s support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/liberals-can-reclaim-patriotism-austrian-president-elect-alexander-van-der-bellen>
 of him – the results give us a chance to put the rise of rightwing populism 
into perspective and, more importantly, to try to change the increasingly 
self-defeating narrative surrounding it.

It’s important first to acknowledge that Hofer achieved the best result of any 
populist radical right candidate in an established European democracy. His 
46.2% of the national vote is significantly above the best electoral result of 
his own party, the Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ), which had already achieved a 
stunning 26.9% in the 1999 parliamentary elections.

It is also well above the current FPÖ support in the polls (roughly 35%) and 
the highest results of any populist radical right party in an established 
European democracy: 29.4% for the Swiss People’s party (SVP) in 2015. In short, 
this is no time for complacency. One battle is won but the war over liberal 
democracy is still very much on.

Within the new reality of an embattled liberal democracy, it is important to 
note that a populist radical right candidate has still not won a true electoral 
majority in any established democracy in the postwar era. Even Trump was, by 
American standards, handsomely defeated by Hillary Clinton in the popular vote. 
At the latest countClinton received more than 2 million 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/clinton-trump-latest-2016-election-results-popular-vote-tally-has-president-elect-way-2451745>
 votes than Trump, which means she beat him by 2%. That is almost five times 
bigger than the margin with which Al Gore lost the presidency in the highly 
contested elections of 2000.

Austria’s quiet Green victory, trading in the politics of hope not fear | 
Molly Scott Cato
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/austria-green-victory-president-elect-alexander-van-der-bellen>
The first important lesson to learn from this is that (angry) white men are 
not the voice of the people. After almost every election in which a populist 
radical right candidate or party does well, the media adopts an essentially 
populist frame in which “the political establishment” is claimed to be “out of 
touch” with “the people”. These (real) people are almost exclusively the core 
support base of the populist radical right – that is (nativist) white 
working-class men.

But the fact of the matter is that white working-class men are only a small 
minority of the electorate – even of the electorates of the more successful 
populist radical right parties. In fact, in most European countries white men 
are a minority of the population – and increasingly of the working class too. 
The fact that white men are still portrayed as the voice of the people says a 
lot about the media and punditry, which continue to be dominated by (older) 
white men.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fvan-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Van%20der%20Bellen%3A%20Austria%20vote%20a%20signal%20of%20hope%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fvan-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Van%20der%20Bellen%3A%20Austria%20vote%20a%20signal%20of%20hope%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fvan-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video&media=>
Van der Bellen: Austria vote a signal of hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/van-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video>
But not only are nativist white men not the voice of the people, in both the 
Austrian and US presidential elections the majority of the voters supported 
candidates with an explicitly inclusive and positive socio-cultural message. 
Neither Clinton nor Van der Bellen pandered to the populist radical right by 
adopting nativist-light policies or rhetoric. They stood for a differentAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> and America, inclusive and 
tolerant. And the majority of the people voted for that programme. Despite 
years of Islamophobic and xenophobic messages from much of the media, and the 
new political correctness that talks of a “failed multiculturalism”.

Rather than seeing Clinton and Van der Bellen as anomalies, blips in an 
inevitable trend towards populist radical right dominance, liberal democratic 
parties and politicians of all persuasions should learn lessons from their 
successes.

Similarly the continued popularity and power of Germany’s chancellor, Angela 
Merkel, despite the now dominant media narrative of “an embattled leader”, 
shows that a pro-refugee policy can be successfully defended, even when you 
almost stand alone.

Copying populist messages may work for one or two elections, if that, but will 
inflict lasting damage on liberal democracy in the long run. The vast majority 
of the people are looking for convincing and consistent policies that address 
the realities of today’s challenges in an inclusive and positive way.

Austria defeated the far-right Norbert Hofer – finally, some hope for Europe | 
Julia Ebner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/defeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe>
Populist radical right parties will remain a political reality for years, if 
not decades to come, particularly in the countries where they were already 
successful before the recent economic and refugees crises, but their core 
support is relatively limited. Liberal democratic parties should not sacrifice 
the interests and values of the majority of the people to endear themselves to 
the radical right. This hardly ever works anyway. As Jean-Marie Le Pen noted 
many decades ago: the people prefer the original over the copy. They will 
mainly take the pandering of liberal democratic parties as evidence that the 
illiberal democratic parties were right all along and that “the establishment” 
only acts when pressured by a strong populist radical right.

The past two years have been a catalyst of a longer ongoing transformation of 
western societies and politics. At the electoral level these have been the 
decrease in support for liberal democratic parties, the growing support for 
populist parties, and the (sometimes sharp) decrease in turnout. The coming 
years don’t simply have to be a continuation of this. But in order to prevent 
it, liberal democrats must learn the right lessons from the past – which, 
incidentally, are not those of the populist radical right ones. This starts by 
putting the rise of the far right in proper perspective, and by creating an 
inspiring, rather than a defeatist, narrative.
 