
The New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> Liberal party has 
backed down in a dispute against the NSW Electoral Commission and will now be 
eligible for $4.3m in public funding, after it finally revealed the source of 
donations that it had earlier failed to disclose.

But it will not receive $586,992 of that figure because of that amount in 
unlawful donations that it accepted during the 2010 and 2011 disclosure period.

In March, the NSW Electoral Commission ruled that several donations breached 
state electoral laws and refused to pay the Liberals $4.4m in public funding it 
sought until the party gave details of the donors.

Unless Australia reforms political donations, the trust deficit will grow | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/23/australia-must-reform-political-donations-trust-deficit>
The Liberal party’s lawyers had earlier flagged that the party would appeal to 
the supreme court if the commission ruled against it but appeared to have 
backed down and made the relevant disclosures.

A statement from the NSW Electoral Commission chairman, Keith Mason, 
<http://www.elections.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/224363/22_September_2016_-_Liberal_Party_of_Australia_NSW_Division_.pdf>
 released on Thursday said the party had now amended all of its donation 
disclosures and that it had now complied with their directions. As a result, 
the public funding withheld from the party could now be released to it.

The decision is likely to relieve some of the financial pressures placed on the
Liberal party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> as a 
result of the July 2016 federal election. But the party will not receive the 
$586,992 that the electoral commission considered to be unlawful donations.

Mason said: “On 19 September 2016, the NSW Liberal party submitted an amended 
declaration, which included disclosure of a number of reportable donations 
previously undisclosed.”

He said that “officers of the party have taken steps to ensure that the party 
made full and proper disclosure of political donations for the relevant period”.

But Mason’s statement said the commission did not seek “double recovery”, a 
process where it could recover twice the funds. Mason said this decision was 
based on a number of factors, “including difficulties of proof in some 
instances, likely additional Limitation Act hurdles and the belief that the 
public interest has been best served by the action taken, its resolution and 
the importance of being able to provide prompt educative guidance to the public 
and all political parties”.

Part of the decision to withhold funding was linked to disclosures by the Free 
Enterprise Foundation. The Free Enterprise Foundation is one of a number of 
associated entities of the Liberal party that receives political donations from 
donors, which is in turn passed on the NSW Liberal party. This process meant 
that the identity of some donors could be concealed.

The commission’s inquiry drew on the Icac investigations that it said found 
there were “significant breaches” of donation laws, and found that it should 
have declared a series of donations from the source of those who provided them 
to the Free Enterprise Foundation. It gave the party an opportunity to amend 
its declaration in February 2016 but it did not do so.

The findings drew scrutiny from Labor, which had previously raised Arthur 
Sinodinos’ role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/26/sinodinos-and-icac-corruption-may-have-been-going-on-under-his-nose-but-ignorance-is-bliss>
 as the state party’s finance director and treasurer at the time.

New correspondence released by the commission shows that the Liberal party 
amended its disclosures on 26 May 2016 surrounding the Free Enterprise 
Foundation.

Liberal party has done 'wrong thing' in $4.4m donations scandal, says Mike 
Baird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/24/nsw-electoral-commission-withholds-44m-from-liberals-over-donations-scandal>
But two remaining donations were in issue until September 2016. Icac had also 
heard evidence that suggested a donation of $100,000 received from Vincent 
Heufel was actually donated by Mambare Pty Ltd. It also heard that a donation 
of $10,000 from Harmony Hill Pty Ltd was actually donated by Jeff McCloy.

A declaration in September 2016 from the new NSW Liberal party agent Bruce 
Walton, who was not the party agent at the time the donations were made, said 
that he “accepts that inconsistencies exist between the donations that were 
made”. But Walton said he “is not in a position to resolve these 
inconsistencies.”


Mason also provided a separate statement 
<http://www.elections.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/224364/22_September_2016_-_NSWEC_recovers_AU$10,000_from_former_MP_Andrew_Cornwell_.pdf>
 where the commission said it had recovered an “unlawful donation” received by 
the former MP Andrew Cornwell.

“On 2 August 2016 the NSWEC issued a letter of demand to Dr Andrew Cornwell,” 
Mason said. “This action was taken on the grounds that Dr Cornwell had accepted 
an unlawful political donation from a prohibited donor.

“The letter of demand required payment of the AU$10,000 unlawful donation to 
the state of NSW by 23 August 2016. On 14 September 2016, Dr Andrew Cornwell 
paid AU$10,000 to the NSWEC in response to its demand without admissions as to 
the nature of the AU$10,000 donation.”
 