
Ihaab Boussefi's two goals were not enough to send Libya through to the 
quarter-finals at theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> despite a 2-1 win over 
Senegal on Sunday.

Boussefi struck in the fifth and 84th minutes to give Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/libya> victory at the Estadio de Bata but 
Zambia's 1-0 win over the co-hosts Equatorial Guinea in Group A's other game in 
Malabo – which was played at the same time – saw the Zambians progress.

The striker's double did give Libya their first victory at the Cup of Nations 
in 30 years, however, and the country's first win in the competition on foreign 
soil.

Libya reached the final of the African Cup at home in 1982, then had two 
defeats and a draw at their only other appearance six years ago.

Boussefi's early goal raised hopes of an unlikely quarter-final place for 
Libya, who needed a win combined with a defeat for Zambia to have any chance. 
He finished neatly after being set up by Ahmed Sa'ad.

Deme Ndiaye equalised with a glancing header from a corner in the 11th minute 
forSenegal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal>, who were playing for 
pride alone after defeats in their opening two games.

Boussefi claimed a late winner with a sweetly struck volley six minutes from 
time but Zambia progressed as group winners ahead of Equatorial Guinea, who had 
already qualified.

The Libyans still go home with a win from a tournament they were never 
expected to reach after they emerged from chaos and civil war at home during 
the qualifying competition to make the finals.

For Senegal it was a third straight defeat at the tournament and a humiliating 
end to their Cup of Nations after being tipped as possible contenders. They 
lost all three games by 2-1 to exit the tournament without a point for the 
first time in their history.
 