
In 2015, universities in England will be able to recruit as many students as 
they like. But a new report looking at what happened in Australia when that
policy <http://www.guprod.gnl/higher-education-network/policy> was rolled out 
in 2012 warns that it’s naive to think uncapping student places will be a 
simple process in the UK – especially if the sector suffers further cuts after 
the election next year.

The report 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/2014/08/07/hepi-publishes-detailed-study-removing-student-number-controls-australia-mean-england/>
, published by theHigher Education <http://www.hepi.ac.uk> Policy Institute 
(Hepi) <>, draws a contrast between the decades taken to prepare the ground for 
a demand-driven system in Australia and the speed with which the decision was 
taken in England.

Nick Hillman, director of Hepi, says: “Removing student number controls is a 
logical conclusion of the liberalisation of higher education that has taken 
place in England under the coalition. In effect, undergraduates hold vouchers 
worth £9,000 and universities are expected to fight much harder to recruit them.

“But the policy of removing student number caps was put together quickly and 
remains fuzzy,” he says.

“There are uncanny parallels between the English and Australian higher 
education systems. And, when Australia followed a similar path, the results 
were unexpected. More students enrolled than were predicted, the costs 
spiralled, and there have been knock-on consequences for the whole higher 
education debate.”

Hillman says there are strong arguments for giving applicants and universities 
more freedom to find the best possible match. But if England’s policy is to be 
a success, he adds, it needs to be based on an analysis of the positive and 
negative lessons in the Australian experience.

“A free-for-all approach may be attractive in principle but, as Australia 
shows only too clearly, it is by no means plain sailing,” says Pam Tatlow, 
chief executive of the university think-tank million+. She is concerned that a 
deregulation of student numbers in England will leave ministers without any 
means to promote initiatives in the national interest.

How does it work in Australia?

• The policy was officially introduced in 2012, but universities started to 
recruit more students from 2009 – before the legislation came in.

• It applies to bachelor courses at public universities, except in medicine. 
It excludes non-university higher education providers, sub-bachelor courses 
(such as diplomas) and postgraduate degrees.

What were the perceived benefits?

Competition was intended to encourage innovation and promote better teaching, 
thus improving thestudent experience 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/higher-education-network/student-experience>.

Did this happen?

An Australian review panel found that quality of teaching had not been 
affected. However the removal of constraints on student numbers did create the 
opportunity for a growth in online and off-campus learning. Previously, unless 
universities were awarded new places through the bureaucratic allocation 
system, new online courses required reducing student places in on-campus 
courses.

Five things England can learn from the Australian experience

1) Costs were bigger than expected

When the cap on student numbers was lifted, it triggered big increases in 
higher education spending. The following year, the government announced it was 
to makecuts to the higher education sector 
<http://http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/BudgetReview201314/HigherEducation>
 – universities would have to contend with 2% cuts in 2014 and 1.25% in 2015.
 Source: Department of Education portfolio budget statements, various years 
2) Student numbers increased across the board

Enrolment grew across all socioeconomic groups, among country- and 
city-dwellers, for all types of university and in the vast majority of 
disciplines. From 2012 to 2013 – the first two years of the policy – student 
numbers increased by more than 5%.

3) Increase in students with low prior attainment provoked concerns over 
quality

The Group of Eight (Go8) – a lobby group representing Australia’s leading 
research universities – raised concerns about the quality of student intake, 
when the number of low-performing applicants increased. Research suggests they 
will continue to rise.


Australia ranks students academically in relation to their cohort - according 
them each an Atar score (Australian tertiary admission rank). Despite few 
school-leavers with low Atar scores enrolling at university, the Go8 has called 
for its members to impose a minimum Atar of 60, thereby excluding all but the 
top third of school-leavers.

Research shows that around half of students enrolling with below 60 Atar are 
likely to complete their qualification. The G08 proposal would deprive these 
students of a potentially life-transforming educational opportunity that could 
open up better employment options and new social networks, says Andrew Norton, 
co-author of the report and programme director on higher education at the 
Grattan Institute, an independent think tank.

So what are the alternatives for low-performing students? The report says one 
strategy is for them to start out at a pathway college, which offers higher 
education diploma courses based on the first year of a university degree 
course. Research shows that students who have been to pathway colleges tend to 
do better at university than would have been expected given their school 
results.

The only snag is that these colleges teach sub-bachelor degrees, which fall 
outside the new policy, limiting their scope for expansion.

4) The system opens up opportunities for alternative providers

Removing curbs opens up the market to the possibility of a wide range of 
higher education providers. At the moment, only publicly funded universities 
are covered by the legislation. But work is being done to allow non-university 
higher education providers to enter the system. 


Those who oppose the extension of the system are concerned about issues of 
quality in the non-university sector, but to date there’s no research to 
support these fears. A stronger line of criticism is that the regulator may not 
be able to cope.

5) The removal of number controls must be linked to tuition fee levels

The report suggests that with the sort of demand-driven system already in 
place in Australia, there should be a broader range of fees than has thus far 
been allowed in England.

The cap for full-time undergraduate fees for home /EU students at English 
universities was raised from £3,000 to £9,000 in 2012. When announcing this 
back in 2010, ministers said the maximum £9,000 would be “exceptional”.


However, because the number of student places was firmly fixed, there was no 
real market, and universities could get away with charging the maximum, which 
most of them did.Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> 
still rolled up in large numbers and there was a somewhat higher income for 
educating each student than under the old system.
In Australia, places are deregulated and now fees are set to be too. So there 
will be more freedom for fees to find their natural level – at least in theory. 
Hillman says this is because universities will find it harder to recruit 
students than in the past as there is more competition. England could find 
itself in the same situation.

Fee deregulation however brings with it new policy and political problems, 
including more student debt. What’shappened to England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/22/guardian-view-sell-off-student-debt>
 is a warning to Australia, says Norton.

With Australia’s top eight universities pushing for higher fees and fewer 
students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/30/australias-top-eight-universities-push-for-higher-fees-fewer-students>
, it will be interesting to see how these two policies play out alongside each 
other, as well as the impact they’ll have on the sector, student application 
rates and social mobility.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. 
 