
I'm interested in Lily Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/lilyallen>. 
Not in her music, I'm afraid, or in most of the other aspects of the life and 
career that have made her into a sort of national treasure at the age of 24. 
But if the singer of Smile and The Fear is the shape of cricket supporters to 
come, then bring on multitudes.

She likes Test cricket, basically. She doesn't care for Twenty20, one-day 
cricket or coloured uniforms. What she likes about the five-day game, she said 
in a Test Match Special lunchtime interview on Saturday, is the way its slower 
rhythms form a counterpoint to her own somewhat hectic life.

She likes Flintoff and Onions and Broad and she also thinks the England team 
should be wearing shirts and flannels and sweaters with a bit more cream in 
them, rather than the sort of shocking white adopted this season as a result of 
some marketing man's brainwave ("A bit football" is her verdict on that).

She's interested in the traditions and the arcana, such as the umpires' 
signals and what the extras are made up of. Honestly, you'd think she was 
trying to jump the waiting list for MCC membership.

The shock of seeing a Rolling Stone at Lord's subsided many years ago, but 
Lily Allen is something else again. Although the 2009 Ashes series was 
compelling enough to flourish quite happily without PR gimmicks, her presence 
at The Oval, apparently prompted by sheer enthusiasm rather than a pop star's 
need to promote something, provided an indication that Test cricket's future is 
not a matter of an inevitable slow fade into the shadow cast by the Indian 
Premier League.

As a product of the digital age, she might not be expected to treasure cricket 
for its infinite range of nuances, such as the way that umpires need to be able 
to hear the sounds of ball on wood or pad in order to make their judgements. 
But that's exactly what she told Jonathan Agnew. "I like the beauty of the 
game," she added, "the whites against the green, the pace of it, and the fact 
that you're allowed to drink in the stand, which you can't do at football."

It probably helps that she has childhood memories of being dragged along to 
watch her father playing in pub teams. "The boys played and the girls made 
sandwiches," she remembered. Even if she showed no interest in the game at the 
time, something of its qualities may have permeated a deeper layer of 
consciousness, to be awakened a little later in life.

She tweeted about the Ashes to her million-plus followers ("More than Bumble," 
she told Agnew with a giggle). Here's one: "Broad is a genius. And he doesn't 
have a beer gut." And another: "Collingwood is dull. He'll probably still be 
batting when I'm back here at The Oval on Saturday, having scored no runs." 
She'll be on the selection panel by Christmas.

In a time of economic recession, the news for cricket is encouraging, from the 
confirmation that a team is more likely to win when led by a man who is good at 
captaincy to the England women's inspiring victory in this year's World Cup, 
and from the literary success of Joseph O'Neill's Netherland, set among 
cricketers in New York, to rising participation figures exemplified by the 
discovery last week that my old village club, which struggled 30 years ago to 
put out three teams on a Saturday and one on a Sunday, now has five flourishing 
age-group sides playing in leagues from under-nine to under-17, drawn from a 
colts division more than 70 strong.

And by showing that victory over the old enemy can be achieved amid a slightly 
less frenetic atmosphere than the one surrounding the series four years ago, 
the 2009 Ashes reaffirmed not cricket's place in the national life but its 
idiosyncratic role as a force for good. Lily Allen, watching all that and 
identifying the good bits, is on to something.

Hard times can follow those great expectations

It was disappointing to see the Observer's news pages giving prominence to a 
story on Sunday with the headline "Ashes could earn 'next Flintoff' millions", 
as if that were the most important measure of Stuart Broad's success. A few 
days earlier, the Times reported the view of "marketing experts" that Jessica 
Ennis's heptathlon success in Berlin will be "worth millions".

Have we learnt nothing from experience, and in particular that, most recently, 
of certain British medal-winners in Beijing? It was the Observer's own sports 
magazine, after all, which published a long feature last month devoted to the 
complaints of Vicky Pendleton and others about the non-appearance of the 
monetary rewards they had been led to expect â€“ by precisely the kind of stories 
now being so mindlessly recycled.

Wheel of fortune is spinning Hamilton's way

When the satin sheet came off the 2009 McLaren formula one car in January, 
there were gasps from those in attendance. Shorn of the aerodynamic bits and 
pieces banned by the new regulations, the silver-grey machine was without doubt 
the prettiest ever produced by the team. Like a Futurist sculpture, the MP4-24 
seemed to be going at 100mph even when stationary on a plinth. And if it looked 
right, surely it must be fast. What a relief, then, that after half a season of 
plodding around at the tail of the field, causing Lewis Hamilton no end of 
frustration, the simple measure of taking a centimetre or two out of its 
wheelbase has allowed its true potential to be revealed at last.

Mourinho could lose out on Milan catwalk

Welcome back to Serie A, now featured on ESPN. This Saturday's Milan derby 
promises to be of particular interest, pitting not just Samuel Eto'o against 
Ronaldinho but Jose Mourinho against Leonardo, a star of the BBC's 2006 World 
Cup coverage and perhaps the only coach in football capable of scooping all the 
points from the Portuguese narcissist in a bella figura contest.

Looking forward to Owen showing duel control 

That was a lovely finish by Michael Owen on Saturday. But I'm still interested 
to see what happens the next time he finds himself one-on-one with a goalkeeper.
 