
 Footballer Lionel Messi <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lionel-messi> 
has been accused by activists of endorsing a central African “dictatorship” 
that has failed to halt the ritual murder of children.

The Barcelona striker and children’s rights advocate visited Gabon last month 
to take part in a ceremony at one of the venues for the 2017Africa Cup of 
Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>.

The US-based Human Rights Foundation said that Messi “displayed enthusiastic 
support 
<http://humanrightsfoundation.org/news/hrf-condemns-lionel-messis-hypocritical-celebration-of-gabons-dictator-00449>
” for Ali Bongo, who was elected president of Gabon in 2009 in polls that 
triggered days of rioting and opposition complaints of fraud. He succeeded his 
father Omar Bongo, who had a tight grip on power in the oil-rich state from 
1967 until his death nearly 42 years later.

Thor Halvorssen, president of the HRF, said: “In providing PR services to 
Gabon’s Bongo family, Lionel Messi has seriously undermined the credibility of 
his own charitable foundation.” Messi serves as aUnicef <http://www.unicef.org/>
 ambassador to promote youth education. Halvorssen claimed that, by taking part 
in the trip, the footballer had “endorsed a kleptocratic regime that refuses to 
investigate the ritual murder of children in Gabon”.

Gabon denies paying Barcelona’s Lionel Messi £2.5m for Ali Bongo visit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/22/lionel-messi-gabon-barcelona-ali-bongo>
Bongo’s government has been criticised for doing little to prevent ritual 
killings of children 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/03/26/us-gabon-killings-idUSBRE92P0SF20130326>
 whose lips, tongues, genitals and other organs are removed for their supposed 
supernatural powers.

Gabon and Messi have denied reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/22/lionel-messi-gabon-barcelona-ali-bongo>
 that the soccer star was paid €3.5m (£2.5m) by the Bongo family for the visit, 
which was broadcast on state television and used, according to the HRF, as 
“internal propaganda”. Messi helped lay one of the first stones for a planned 
40,000-capacity stadium in the second biggest city, Port-Gentil and was 
criticised by an opposition party for turning up in denim shorts and a T-shirt.

The 28-year-old Argentinian also visited a state-owned hospital and the 
opening of a restaurant owned by Bongo’s family, where the president said: 
“When I was in Barcelona a few years ago, I met Messi who had told me that he 
would come to visit me in Libreville. It’s a promise he made me. He is a man of 
honour who just kept his word.”

The HRF alleges that the Bongo family have used the former French colony as 
their “feudal state” for decades, systematically looting its vast natural 
resources, oil wealth and rainforests. The family deny this. About a third of 
Gabon’s population of 1.5 million still lives in poverty but the World Bank 
categorises it as an upper-middle income country with a gross national income 
per capita of more than $10,000 (£6,400).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Flionel-messi-accused-of-undermining-childrens-rights-work-with-gabon-visit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5786674eb1f8fc37dc7255fd3c35662cf5e909%2F0_49_3094_1856%2F3094.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lionel%20Messi%20accused%20of%20undermining%20children's%20rights%20work%20with%20Gabon%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Flionel-messi-accused-of-undermining-childrens-rights-work-with-gabon-visit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lionel%20Messi%20accused%20of%20undermining%20children%27s%20rights%20work%20with%20Gabon%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Flionel-messi-accused-of-undermining-childrens-rights-work-with-gabon-visit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5786674eb1f8fc37dc7255fd3c35662cf5e909%2F0_49_3094_1856%2F3094.jpg>
 Lionel Messi (centre) is given a tour around the construction site of the 
Port-Gentil stadium. Photograph: Steve Jordan/AFP/Getty Images 
The HRF has previously drawn attention to celebrity missteps including 
Hollywood actorHilary Swank attending a lavish concert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/13/hilary-swank-regrets-chechen-party>
 for Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov and Erykah Badu’s helicopter visit to 
Swaziland, where she sang for the country’s absolute monarch.

Gabon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabon> denies that it is a 
dictatorship. In an interview in Libreville last year, Bongo, who sent his son 
to the independent boarding school Eton in the UK, told the Guardian: “Gabon is 
a very democratic state. You should spend a little more time here and read the 
press. You will see how I am being treated, myself and my government, 
authorities and officials by the press. Total liberty and freedom of speech, 
sometimes even going too far.”

He added: “No, democracy really is not an issue here and truthfully most of 
the Gabonese people will not tell you that it is an issue. Of course, if you 
are a member of the opposition and you are looking for argument, you will 
always come with that, but I haven’t imprisoned one opposition leader yet for 
having insulted me or whatever. Some newspapers have run into some problems 
because [they] appeal to violence but other than that no, it really is not an 
issue here.”

In January, Jean Ping, the head of an opposition coalition in Gabon, claimed 
that his house had been attacked 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/gabon-opposition-leader-charged-torture/2600146.html>
 by at least 200 people, including one armed with a poisoned knife and sent by 
one of Bongo’s advisers. The government denied the accusation. Ping was 
subsequently charged with imprisoning and torturing people who had attacked his 
home.

Marc Ona, a Gabonese environmental activist and government critic, said: “The 
cost of Messi’s visit to Gabon – which is just one of many trips organised by 
the Bongos to whitewash their global image – would pay for the construction of 
more than 400 classrooms in my country, where most students are forced to sit 
on the floor.”

A spokesperson for Bongo said: “Firstly, the Republic of Gabon did not pay or 
ever intended to remunerate Mr Messi for his recent trip to Gabon. We were glad 
to welcome him on our soil one-and-a-half years prior to the next edition of 
the African Cup of Nations.


“As a result the statement published by HFR is extremely surprising and 
truthfully disappointing. However, in this unfortunate instance, prior to 
reaching hasty conclusions, we suggest HRF registers as a NGO in Gabon as 
thousand others have done and to refer to the latest rating of the Mo Ibrahim 
Good Governance index: in fact, Gabon stands first regionally. And also look 
into the last human development index which concludes the same.”
 