
I think pop music has given up on me. Well, more accurately, I’ve given up on 
pop music. Try as I might to keep up with what’s happening on musty old 
terrestrial radio or what’s racking up views on YouTube, I’d rather listen to 
something that came out before I started growing hair in my ears. In short, I’m 
old and can’t be bothered to be cool anymore. I’m too busy trying to pay my 
mortgage and keep my dog from chewing up my wife’s bras to really engage with 
pop music in any meaningful way.

Musical.ly, the craze turning pop fans into stars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/04/musical-ly-lip-synch-video-app-turns-pop-fans-into-stars>
That’s why Musical.ly, a new lip-synching app which often features stars like 
Ariana Grande, has me so perplexed. Part of the thrill seems to be mouthing 
along to Sia or Twenty-one Pilots while riding a bicycle through a snowstorm, 
then uploading a video of the whole sordid affair so people can give you 
feedback on your ability to not sing. It’s hugely popular with teenagers and 
preteens (AKA children), with the majority of the app’s 100 million users 
falling into that demographic.

They’re all over the app, too, with some becoming stars in their own right. 
It’s all harmless, unless you watch 10 of them in a row and start to feel as 
though you’ve stumbled onto the world’s worst slumber party. I tested the app 
out for a day and I only intermittently had a sensation resembling fun. Fair 
warning: I’m 32 and performed most of my public acts of extreme embarrassment 
in the confines of my home, occasionally while eating.

It’s simple to record and upload a video. There’s a yellow button in the 
bottom row of the screen that takes you to a menu in which you can choose to 
pick a song, shoot the video first and add music later, or upload a 
pre-recorded video from your library. My first thought was to secretly film my 
neighbors bending over to pick up stray leaves from their yard, then add the
Curb Your Enthusiasm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/curb-your-enthusiasm> theme and 
upload my masterpiece, but I have to break the bad news that the Curb theme is 
not available. Had it allowed me to secretly troll my fellow citizens with 
impunity, I would have rated it five stars.

Part of the thrill seems to be mouthing along to Sia or Twenty-one Pilots 
while riding a bicycle through a snowstorm

The first song I chose to lip-synch was Closer by the Chainsmokers 
<https://www.musical.ly/v/MzI4NzExNTgwNTMwNDM5MDM1NzQwMTY.html>, featuring 
Halsey. I’ve never heard this song in my life and you can see I mouthed along 
quite poorly. The best I could come up with for flair was bobbing my head ever 
so slightly and making sure Sky News was on in the background.

I’m getting random words of support from accounts that seem very clearly to be 
bots designed to encourage you to keep using Musical.ly, lest you realize your 
rubbish lip-synching is a terrible waste of time. “Pure Track Star,” says 
xohayle.88. “Beautiful tunes,” says lex.e_f1. Yungnoe66 tells me that my work 
is “top quality”. I was happy to believe these were real fans until xuanpham53 
said a video of me weeping for humanity to the strains ofDo the Bartman by Bart 
Simpson <https://www.musical.ly/v/MzM0MjExNTgwNTk2MTAwMzYxOTUzMjg.html> was 
“incredibly good”. Sorry, I buried the lede here, didn’t I? Yes, Do the Bartman 
is available. What a stroke of luck.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmusically-lip-sync-battle-24-hours-app%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2af151edd4acb3fff338d30eb339dbbca1ebd5de%2F134_226_3213_1928%2F3213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lip-synch%20battling%3A%20what's%20it%20like%20to%20spend%2024%20hours%20on%20Musical.ly%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmusically-lip-sync-battle-24-hours-app%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lip-synch%20battling%3A%20what%27s%20it%20like%20to%20spend%2024%20hours%20on%20Musical.ly%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmusically-lip-sync-battle-24-hours-app%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2af151edd4acb3fff338d30eb339dbbca1ebd5de%2F134_226_3213_1928%2F3213.jpg>
 Musical.ly Youth: the Chainsmokers. Photograph: Martin Rickett/PA 
In order to get real fans to tell me I’m incredibly good, I needed props to 
really make my Musical.ly videos engaging. The only props I have in my house 
are delicious pita chips, which I slammed while mouthing along toBroccoli by 
D.R.A.M. and Lil Yachty 
<https://www.musical.ly/v/MzI5MjExNTgwNTMzMTY2Njc1NDc2NDg.html>, a song I not 
only know, but love. Look, I’m 32, not 82. While I thought this was my finest 
work yet, I received no likes and one lousy comment: magconbri2053 said “top” 
with a heart next to it. How impersonal.

In order to salvage my self-esteem, I uploaded the video to Instagram, which 
Musical.ly allows you to do after you’ve posted, which is one of the ways in 
which the app has grown in popularity. The ability to share your work across 
multiple platforms, while each video sports an unobtrusive watermark, is 
valuable free advertising.


I thought I’d go on a field trip and record in the bathroom for my next track. 
I chose another song I’d never listened to in my life:I Took a Pill in Ibiza by 
Mike Posner <https://www.musical.ly/v/MzIwOTExNTgwNTYwMzIzOTU1MDE1NzA.html>. 
Even a mere 10 seconds of this song makes me want to set fire to the recording 
studio it was created in, or better yet, go back in time and prevent humanity 
from inventing musical instruments. In the clip, I have to avoid catching a 
reflection of my bald spot in the bathroom mirror. This is not for me.


Even a mere 10 seconds of this song makes me want to set fire to the recording 
studio it was creating in

I have heard Heathens by Twenty-one Pilots 
<https://www.musical.ly/v/MzI0NTExNTgwNTQ2MzIyNTI5MTk4MDg.html>, since I saw 
the movie Suicide Squad, which features the song in its soundtrack. I decided 
to do this lying down on my couch, making love to the camera. The final product 
looks more like the last known photo of a washed-up NBA player. I promise 
myself I’ll do better next time. I’m going to choose a song I know the lyrics 
to:Angels by Robbie Williams 
<https://www.musical.ly/v/MzIyOTExNTgwNTY3MDI5MzQ3MDAwMzI.html>.

Robbie Williams: Heavy Entertainment Show review – a lurching mess of styles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/03/robbie-williams-heavy-entertainment-show-album-review>
My God, it finally all came together. My enthusiasm for the music, an angelic 
beam of light gracefully teasing my face as I spun around in my desk chair, and 
my ability to actually keep up with the lyrics. My only regret is that I didn’t 
get to belt out the chorus. The library ofRobbie Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams> tracks is far from 
comprehensive, but after wading through music people like sincerely, it was 
nice to find something a bit shit to sink my teeth into.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtwsRXryJDmQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtwsRXryJDmQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtwsRXryJDmQ&media=>
It’s the same reason why people love karaoke, besides that you can get drunk 
and make an ass of yourself in public. Songs that are corny, ironic, dated, 
simplistic, or just plain bad are some of the best karaoke songs to perform. 
Sure, a Beyoncé track like Single Ladies might get the party started, but what 
keeps it going is the guy that digs upYou’re the Best Around 
<https://www.musical.ly/v/MzMwNjExNTgzNjU3NjcwMzY1MDIwMTY.html> from the Karate 
Kid soundtrack and busts out a high kick during the chorus that splits his 
pants at the crotch.

Yes, Musical.ly has You’re the Best Around. It also has the Ghostbusters 
theme, dialogue from The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, and a dubiously 
named comedy category featuring such appalling dreck as a young woman reading 
Kanye West quotes in a baby voice. This is what will keep me coming back long 
after the only hair I have left on my head is the stuff in my ears. Such 
curiosities and abject horrors are universal, no matter what age you are. Deep 
down, we all want to embarrass ourselves – a sadomasochistic impulse that fuels 
the aforementioned karaoke bars, the drunken late-night tweet, video apps like 
Musical.ly and the dearly departed Vine, andAnthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner>. Life’s too dull to go 
through it being respectable, I suppose. Thanks to the modern miracle of the 
smartphone, we can shame ourselves with the push of a button.
 