
Ah 2016, you keep throwing those curve balls – especially at women. It was bad 
enough that Bono was namedGlamour magazine’s “woman of the year” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/02/bono-wins-at-a-woman-of-the-year-event-its-not-even-an-original-stunt>
, but this week you surpassed yourself, as fictional women were fired and hired 
for real-life roles.

On Tuesday, Wonder Woman was dropped  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/wonder-woman-un-ambassador-gender-equality>
as UN ambassador for empowering women and girls. No sooner had she swapped her 
corset and pants for a onesie and Uggs than BBC Radio 4’s Woman’s Hour put 
Twitter in a spin with a Power List (aka PR campaign) that placedBridget Jones 
sixth in a list of the seven most powerful women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/dec/14/womans-hour-power-list-bridget-jones-margaret-thatcher-germaine-greer>
 of the past 70 years.

JK Rowling and Angela Merkel must be wondering what a girl has to do to get 
noticed round here. Resort to anAlohomora spell 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_spells_in_Harry_Potter>? Become a man? 
Go home, 2016: you’re drunk.

It did, however, make me wonder which fictional characters had exerted power 
on my own life. Here is my list, who is on yours?

Hermione Granger in Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone by JK Rowling

Strange to think that as Bridget banged on about which pants made her look 
thin, Rowling’s heroine had donned an invisibility cloak to fight alongside the 
boy wizard. (It was she who first discovered that the Alohomora spell could 
open doors.) Brave, studious, self-confident and with a fierce sense of social 
justice, Hermione is the kind of kid I suspect Theresa May would like to be – 
and that invisibility cloak would come in useful when snubbed by the EU supper 
club.

Lyra Belacqua in the His Dark Materials by Philip Pullman

Pullman’s Lyra has the courage and ferocity of an ambush of tigers. And while 
Bridget Jones has worn as well as a pair of bumsters, Lyra remains as fresh as 
when she first scrambled across the roofs of Oxford. Combining curiosity, 
stubbornness and loyalty with impetuousness and a sense of adventure, Lyra is a 
modern heroine for modern women. And the ability to open up an alternative 
universe, into which those of us reeling after 2016 can escape, would be 
welcome before Inauguration Day.

 Celie in The Color Purple by Alice Walker

Walker’s heroine may seem an odd choice for a list about power, but she 
defines what it means. Raped, traded and abused, Celie’s resilience leads her 
to emotional and spiritual triumph. She opened a window, not only on to the 
oppression of women and black women in particular, but also on to how the 
friendship of women is a strength greater than anything a man can throw at you. 
I finished this book while waiting for a train in Euston station and wept. That 
moment has resonated throughout the years since.

 Lisbeth Salander in The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo by Stieg Larsson

A feminist avenging angel, you wouldn’t invite the withdrawn and sociopathic 
Salander to dinner, but you’d sure as hell want her on your side. Her 
world-class hacking skills would come in handy, too, when dealing with Russian 
hackers’ attempts to throw an election in favour of a self-confessed sex pest. 
Larsson said his inspiration for Salander came from wondering about what Pippi 
Longstocking would be like as an adult. Like Pippi, Salandar’s power lies in 
her refusal to play nice.

 Little My in the Moomin series by Tove Jansson

Jansson’s heroine didn’t appear until book four, The Exploits of Moompappa, 
but when she did her vitality, bloody-mindedness and sheer cheek hit me like a 
train. Aged six, I wanted to be her, a feeling that hasn’t changed over the 
years. Little My has shown women how to argue using a combination of arch 
humour, logic and emotion. She’sJess Philipps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jess-phillips> riding down a banister. 
She is also why I shall spend part of this weekend in her company at the 
Southbank Centre, at thefirst major UK exhibition dedicated to the Moomins. 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/119314-southbank-centres-adventures-moominland-explore-moomins-through-life-201617>
 