
Pete Evans, the Australian celebrity chef, has identified a new enemy in 
modern life: sunscreen. Despiteoverwhelming scientific advice and evidence to 
the contrary 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-07-11/pete-evans-says-sunscreen-is-poisonous/7585050>
, the paleo evangelist and the man who brought usbaby bone broth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/16/paleo-isnt-a-fad-diet-its-an-ideology>
 (considered by the medical establishment as unsafe for child consumption), 
says sunscreen is a “recipe for disaster.”


He wrote: <https://www.facebook.com/paleochefpeteevans/> “The silly thing is 
people put on normal chemical sunscreen then lay out in the sun for hours on 
end and think that they are safe because they have covered themselves in 
poisonous chemicals which is a recipe for disaster as we are witnessing these 
days.”

He later denied advising people against wearing sunscreen 
<http://www.smh.com.au/lifestyle/celebrity/celebrity-news/im-just-trying-to-share-the-truth-pete-evans-defends-sunscreen-comments-20160711-gq32z6.html#ixzz4E5m8FKfJ>
 but said that it was “smart to actually question what we are rubbing on our 
kids’ faces and bodies?”

Western middle-class fondness for rejecting modern life and getting back to 
nature is, it seems, unstoppable. Most of us are now familiar with the paleo 
diet, #cleaneating, superfoods, farmers markets and locally sourced produce. We 
know backyard goat and chicken runs are soaring in popularity and vegetable 
patches are turning up in the most unlikely places: on balconies, sides of 
buildings and rooftops. Which may seem rather harmless.

Kale: 'the disgusting new frontier of major league eating'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/10/kale-eating-competition-buffalo-disgusting-food>
Then there’s raw milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/12/raw-milk-what-is-it-is-it-safe-is-it-legal>
,natural methods to beat cancer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/03/what-do-doctors-say-to-alternative-therapists-when-a-patient-dies-nothing-we-never-talk>
and anti-vaccination campaigns, the harms of which are well documented, but 
that come from the same desire to “get back to nature” in what amounts to “a 
selective denial of modernity” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/16/paleo-isnt-a-fad-diet-its-an-ideology>
, according to my colleague Jason Wilson.

It seems, in 2016, to be moving in the right direction you have to be going 
backwards.

It’s got me thinking: what next? If we’re to continue to take cues from our 
ancestors, I’ve come up with six other potential wellness trends. Live 
authentically! Live until you’re 37!

Home dentistry

Chemicals placed in your mouth and drugs used to knock you out while dentists 
remove your teeth are toxins that can lodge in your cells and tissues, 
sometimes for years.

Avoid these toxins with DIY Dentistry™.

Like our ancestors, we are built to withstand short bursts of pain that might 
occur if you remove your teeth at home. After all, early man did not have 
anaesthetic, or dentists.

 Tried and tested methods of home dentistry include the door slam method – in 
which a string is tied around the tooth at one end and a door handle at another 
– or simply the use of pliers to extract the tooth. A friend or neighbour can 
assist with this procedure if the tooth is hard to reach. There may be some 
blood. But this procedure is 100% chemical free.

For more minor toothaches that don’t require tooth removal, chewing on cloves 
is a natural painkiller <http://namastenutritionist.com/cloves/>. Cotton wool 
soaked in clove oil and shoved in the back of your mouth is also effective – 
and this is not just a painkiller but also a home remedy to help treat 
premature ejaculation!

For other procedures – such as chipped teeth – use a nail file to even out 
your mouth.DIY filling sets 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3070824/Ouch-shocking-rise-DIY-dentistry-Sales-fillings-kits-soaring-theres-painful-price.html>
 are already available in some countries.

And why not reconsider your use of toothpaste. Toothpaste is a relatively 
modern invention from Big Pharma. Twigs or a lump of coal, rubbed on teeth, is 
a healthy, toxin-free alternative.

Barefoot commuting, or Urban Re-Wilding

Our ancestors kept fit and healthy by walking for days to hunt and gather 
berries. If they wore FitBits back then, they would have covered around 60,000 
steps a day. People get fat and sick because they no longer walk the same 
distances as primitive man.

Barefoot commuting mimics the experience of our ancestors by ditching the 
train, bus, tram, ferry and car to set off (in the dark if need be) to traverse 
your way across the city to your modern hunting ground – the workplace.

Think of it as Urban Re-Wilding, walking across your city without shoes to 
reach a place of safety and shelter.

What do doctors say to 'alternative therapists' when a patient dies? Nothing. 
We never talk | Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/03/what-do-doctors-say-to-alternative-therapists-when-a-patient-dies-nothing-we-never-talk>
Feel the hard and uneven gravel of the shoulder of unpaved road, the thrum and 
vibration of the highway, the harsh underfoot detritus of the city street. Your 
feet will harden and create a natural “shoe” or tough bit of skin that won’t 
feel the gravel or the glass.

You may have to get up at 3am to do the four-hour walk from your home to your 
office but you will connect with yourself and the environment in a way that 
echoes the experience of primitive man.

Campfire story-telling meetings

Have you noticed that in your average workplace meeting people sit around a 
conference room looking bored or anxious, not really connecting with what’s 
being said? Tribes traditionally gathered around a fire and in the warm glow 
they told stories, shared experiences and passed on valuable cultural knowledge.

A workplace campfire can bring back that ancient spirit of communion, 
community, connection and belonging. Find a space in your office that can 
accommodate a fire pit, disable smoke alarms and send your colleagues out to 
gather wood. Light, stoke and feed it as you sit in circular formation around 
the flame. Your monthly meeting about workplace performance issues and the 
budget overspend will feel like a special, timeless moment, particularly if the 
meeting is conducted in verse, song or dance.

Laundry by rocks


Not only is doing your laundry on rocks more energy efficient, you’re also 
giving your upper body, especially your abs and biceps, a really great workout.

Take your dirty clothes and a bar of soap to your nearest river or beach, find 
stones that are a mixture of sharp and jagged and round and smooth, then dip 
your dirty clothes in water, rub the soap over your clothes, dip in water again 
then beat your clothes against the rocks vigorously until the slapping motion 
has taken the dirt out. Then dip again in the water to remove soap. A wooden 
board can also be incorporated into this technique. In addition to cleaning 
your clothes, it’s also a handy way to act out any agitation or anger you may 
be feeling. Ancient women loved doing the laundry this way, as it was a good 
way of expelling negative emotions.

Do six reps each side with each piece of clothing then lay the clothes on the 
rocks to dry. You’ll find your clothes will smell of the ocean and your jeans 
will be authentically distressed.

Paleo isn't a fad diet, it's an ideology that selectively denies the modern 
world | Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/16/paleo-isnt-a-fad-diet-its-an-ideology>
Getting wasted, Bacchanalian style

There’s nothing wrong with getting wasted, as long as you don’t put toxic 
chemicals in your body which then get trapped in your cells and lead to 
inflammation. Do as ancient man did when he wanted to get happy – and go out 
into your nearest jungle or forest and look for hallucinogenic mushrooms or 
make your own organic wine from handpicked berries. Remember to eat anything up 
to 15 minutes after you have picked it or killed it – after that it is dead 
food, and you don’t want that in your body (#cleaneating).

When you are out of it in the forest, we recommend you get in touch with your 
inner beast like our ancestors did in Rome 200BC. Their forest parties put our 
modern-day celebrations to shame. According to an overview of ancient 
Bacchanalias, “new celebrations and initiations featured wine-fuelled violence 
and violent sexual promiscuity, in which the screams of the abused were drowned 
out by the din of drums and cymbals. Those who resisted or betrayed the cult 
were disposed of”.

Mum n’ Dad Tinder, aka arranged marriage

There was no divorce in ancient times so they must have been doing something 
right. Speak to your parents and ask them to find someone in the village to be 
your spouse. Yes, your parents may be 70 and not live in a village – but for a 
millennium parents have acted as “Tinder”, selecting appropriate partners for 
their offspring. They will find the right mate for you. If in doubt, marry your 
cousin.

Brigid Delaney is writing a book on the wellness industry 
 