
The news that Liverpool Everyman 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/liverpool-everyman-returns-to-rep-after-25-years/>
 plans totrial a resident acting company model 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/whats-on/whats-on-news/liverpool-everyman-resident-actors-company-11208344>
 sounds like a very good move, particularly to those with long memories who 
recall theglory days of the Everyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/13/liverpool-everyman-theatre-roger-mcgough-jonathan-pryce-alison-steadman>
 when actors including Julie Walters, Jonathan Pryce, Alison Steadman and 
others were part of the resident Everyman companyin the 70s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/06/jonathan-pryce-everyman-theatre-liverpool>
.

Of course what’s been suggested for Liverpool in 2017 is not by any means a 
return to the producing model that served Liverpool’s creativity so well 40 
years ago. Nor is it the older style weekly or bi-weekly repertory system so 
beloved as a useful training ground by older actors, including Judi Dench and 
Ian McKellen, who fear thatacting is in decline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/nov/20/repertory-theatre-ian-mckellen>
.

Those days are long gone and won’t return, both for financial reasons and 
because the process of making theatre today is so far removed from the diet of 
script-based, text-heavy plays on which that old rep system was based.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fliverpool-everyman-resident-actors-local-heroes-gemma-bodinetz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84c9e7c80a03c28f94d9b007b8cb11ecc61fefe2%2F5_612_4660_2796%2F4660.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%20Everyman's%20resident%20actors%20could%20become%20local%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fliverpool-everyman-resident-actors-local-heroes-gemma-bodinetz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%20Everyman%27s%20resident%20actors%20could%20become%20local%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fliverpool-everyman-resident-actors-local-heroes-gemma-bodinetz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84c9e7c80a03c28f94d9b007b8cb11ecc61fefe2%2F5_612_4660_2796%2F4660.jpg>
 As You Like It at the Liverpool Everyman in 1967. Photograph: 
ANL/Rex/Shutterstock 
The Theatre by the Lake <http://www.theatrebythelake.com/> in Keswick and 
Frinton’s summer rep seasons can still operate using an old-style rep system 
largely because it is staging plays that have already been tried and tested 
elsewhere. As the Lyric’sSecret Theatre ensemble discovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/feb/18/secret-theatre-lyric>
, it is far more time-consuming and exposing to create work as an ensemble when 
that includes not just actors but also writers and directors, and designers who 
are all equal creative partners in the process.

What artistic director Gemma Bodinetz 
<http://www.everymanplayhouse.com/about-us/artistic-and-executive-directors> is 
proposing in Liverpool is something different still: not a return to old-style 
rep but something far more suited to the remit of a 21st-century regional 
theatre, a group of diverse, multi-skilled actors with a 50:50 gender split who 
will be deeply involved in the community activities of the theatre.Something 
similar went on <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/sep/27/artsfeatures> 
at the Mercury in Colchester about 15 years ago and it not only brought an 
audience back into the then-ailing theatre, it also made a real and lasting 
connection between the town and the building. If the actors leading the young 
company that your teenagers attend are also the same actors who you regularly 
see on stage and in the local supermarket, you feel a connection to them and 
are much more likely to want to see them on stage.

Will the decline of rep kill British acting?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/nov/20/repertory-theatre-ian-mckellen>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fliverpool-everyman-resident-actors-local-heroes-gemma-bodinetz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d80e2510861a16008f9d4e239ba24cb1b1145a4%2F0_243_2453_1471%2F2453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%20Everyman's%20resident%20actors%20could%20become%20local%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fliverpool-everyman-resident-actors-local-heroes-gemma-bodinetz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%20Everyman%27s%20resident%20actors%20could%20become%20local%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fliverpool-everyman-resident-actors-local-heroes-gemma-bodinetz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d80e2510861a16008f9d4e239ba24cb1b1145a4%2F0_243_2453_1471%2F2453.jpg>
 Gemma Bodinetz, artistic director of the Liverpool Everyman and Playhouse. 
Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
One of the reasons that audiences like star casting is not necessary that they 
think stars are better actors, it’s simply a question of familiarity. Because 
they’ve seen Kit Harington inGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/21/how-to-win-game-of-thrones-historian-army-strategy-re-enactor>
 or at the movies, they feel they know him and are willing to take a risk on 
seeing him in a 400-year-old play calledDoctor Faustus 
<http://kitharington.com/category/theatre/dr-faustus/>, which they might 
otherwise see as a challenging option. But if the actors in your resident 
company become local heroes who are deeply embedded in community issues, it can 
only help to createenduring links 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/may/27/theatre-risk-takers-funding-cuts>
 between the theatre and the people it serves.

It’s a bold move by Liverpool’s bold regime, and I suspect that other regional 
theatres with ambitions of reimagining their roles in the 21st century will be 
looking with interest to see how things develop over the first season, and 
whether it continues.
 