
On the final leg of this mini tour from the north of Scotland to the south of 
England I figured I'd find myself a real local issue.

After the sour apathy in Newcastle and the contented apathy in Cheltenham, 
surely the people in St Budeaux, Plymouth, must be more politically engaged? 
Their city, after all, is planning to build an incinerator in the middle of 
their neighbourhood.

It's raining. If Wick, in Scotland, was seeking new purpose after the 
depletion of fishing stocks, and Newcastle was still reeling from the collapse 
of its industrial base, then Plymouth is finding its way after a naval retreat. 
One way is to get paid by other cities to burn their rubbish. It will bring 
fumes and lots of trucks to the area, as well as some jobs.

For the taxi driver taking me from the train station to St Budeaux the main 
issue is drug-related crime.

"You learn to recognise them at once," he says of heroin addicts. "The mood 
swings are really difficult. They can just explode. Don't ever get into an 
argument with them, is what I say."

And when they run off without paying? "What are you going to do? Chase after 
him and discover around the corner that 10 of his friends are waiting for you?"

St Budeaux has plenty of council housing. No expensive coffee shops here. In 
the tattoo parlour a now familiar pattern unfolds when the man behind the 
counter breaks out in compassionate laughter.

"E-lec-tions? I don't vote. Can't be bothered." The incinerator is great, he 
says.

Grinning, his mate adds: "We use lots of needles. They must be incinerated. It 
will bring jobs. Keeps people from loitering."

There is no pub to be seen, but there are people waiting for buses. A male in 
his late teens says he treats politics like the weather: a given. He is a 
carpenter, living with his mum on the estate further up. The hosepipe ban made 
him angry, he says, pointing at the rain.

Then, finally, after five days on the campaign trail, someone doesn't laugh. 
He is a muscular, fit-looking Englishman in his late 50s who owns the local 
angling shop.

"I am voting in every election. Always have." I share my excitement at finding 
a democrat. "Not voting means you gave up the fight. That's not English. It's 
not in our race."

A customer enters the shop. The man pulls out a tray of live worms, scoops 
them up with his hands and wraps them in a paper, the Guardian in fact. Just as 
I am about to tell him I'm here for the Guardian, he says: "If it made any 
difference, I'd vote for the British National party. But they are so small, 
that's throwing away your vote. So I vote Tory."

He hates Labour for "making it impossible to hire any more. They raised the 
minimum wage, maternity leave, sick leaveâ€¦ I used to take an apprentice in and 
hire help for the shop. I can no longer afford that."

The incinerator leaves him cold. "It's mostly Lithuanians and Poles and 
Romanians living there anyway. Let them have their own little Chernobyl up 
there, for all I care."

Won't he vote Ukip, the anti-EU party that seems to have a reasonably strong 
base here and is calling for a referendum on the incinerator? His face 
contorts: "You're from Holland, you say? I have been there. It's a nice 
country, self-content and self-contained. You won't hear anything negative 
about Holland, and you won't hear anything negative. Ukip wants to turn the UK 
into another Holland."
 