
It promised to be the biggest and best Paralympics in history, and today there 
were the figures to prove it. The London 2012Paralympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics> have sold more tickets, made 
more money and have been broadcast to more people around the world than any 
other previous event, according to organisers.

The games have exceeded expectations on all fronts – with the standout figure 
being the sale of 2.7m tickets, 900,000 more than were sold in Beijing,Locog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-organising-committee-olympic-paralympic-games>
 has announced. Ticket sales were originally expected to raise £35m towards the 
cost of the combined Games, but have now raised £45m, although ticket sales 
from the Olympics raised closer to £550m.

Locog chief executive Paul Deighton said the budget of the Paralympics was 
combined with the Olympics, but if relative costs were taken into consideration 
the Paralympics had broken even. "After making certain assumptions, the 
Paralympic Games more than washes its face," he said.

The fact that tickets were "highly affordable" – half of the tickets on sale 
cost £10 or less, while 95% were less than £50 – had created a unique 
atmosphere in the Olympic park and Paralympic venues.

"If you look at the demographic in the park, it's great to see families come 
in big groups and have a wonderful day out," he said. "[It] has resulted in 
extraordinary atmospheres, the park has been wonderful, Excel has been 
wonderful.".

There were originally 2.5m tickets on sale, but an additional 100,000 park day 
tickets had been released, while 100,000 tickets set aside for contingency 
reasons were also made available.

More than £80m had been raised in sponsorship during both the Olympics and the 
Paralympics – sponsors sold the two events as a package for the first time at 
London 2012. High-profile advertising campaigns for companies such as 
Sainsbury's and BT were turning many Paralympic stars into household names, he 
added.

Comprehensive broadcast deals in more than 100 countries had made a historic 
difference, added Deighton, who is set to become a peer and minister for 
economic delivery in the government. "We are very happy with broadcasting. It 
is clearly being shown to more people in more countries and in all the major 
territories," he said. An "innovative" deal with YouTube meant that the Games 
could be accessed around the world, and he praisedChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> – who bought the UK rights for a 
record £9m – for its coverage.

"The deal with Channel 4 was record-breaking and we have been delighted with 
their use of talent and the combination of presenters we know and love and some 
presenters that came from their own search."

Xavier Gonzalez, CEO of the International Paralympic Committee, said that the 
London Paralympics had marked an attitude shift in the way the Games were 
covered. "Basicallythe victory of Alan Oliveira 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2012/sep/03/paralympics-2012-alan-oliveira-oscar-pistorius>
 [in the mens T44 200m, in which he beat favourite Oscar Pistorius] knocked out 
all the football coverage in Brazil, and I'm sure you can understand that's a 
pretty big deal," he said.

"We have also seen the media changing, focusing more on the athleticism of the 
athletes and the competition; a lot more athletes are being portrayed and 
becoming more popular."

But the challenge now was to make sure that the progress made in London would 
continue. "It is critical for us that between now and Rio that momentum 
continues," he said. "I would like to thank Locog for the most commercially 
successful games and I am sure these are a benchmark that we will build towards 
Rio and beyond."
 