
A pop-up exhibition of new portraits of women by the renowned American 
photographerAnnie Leibovitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/annie-leibovitz> will open in London 
in January, and travel around the world throughout 2016 to places including 
Tokyo, Hong Kong, Singapore, Mexico, Istanbul and New York.

The exhibition, the largest touring show mounted by the financial services 
company UBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2009/aug/25/corporate-art-collections>
, will be open to the public for free, but the undisclosed venues will not be 
in museums or art galleries: the sites are being chosen, the organisers say, 
“for the possibilities they offer for original and unexpected encounters”.

The portraits, which Leibovitz is still working on, build on one of her most 
famous projects –Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/oct/16/weekend7.weekend1> – an 
exhibition and book of portraits created 15 years ago incollaboration with the 
author <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/oct/22/photography> Susan 
Sontag. The two women hada long relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/oct/07/photography.art> until 
Sontag’s death in 2004, and Leibovitz documented her last months in tender 
portraits.

Leibovitz says she wants the new portraits to reflect the changes in the roles 
of women today. The works will become part of the extensiveUBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ubs> contemporary art collection.

Designated a “living legend” by the Library of Congress, Leibovitz has been 
one of the most celebrated and collected photographers since her portraits – 
often witty and highly theatrical – first began appearing in Rolling Stone in 
the early 1970s.

Her career has often been marked by controversy. The BBC had to apologise in 
2007 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/6294472.stm>after a documentary 
was edited so that it appeared to show the Queen stalking out of a photoshoot 
with Leibovitz after a disagreement over whether she should wear her tiara or 
not.

In 2008 she photographed Miley Cyrus for Vanity Fair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/apr/29/pressandpublishing.filmnews>, 
with the then 15-year-old actor and singer apparently naked apart from a 
bedsheet. Cyrus, better known now for her much more revealing Wrecking Ball 
video, later said the photographs embarrassed her. Leibovitz described the 
image as “a simple, classic portrait, shot with very little make-up”.
 