
Tuesday 7 August

Golds up for grabs 20

The big contest

There's no bigger rivalry than the sibling variety and that will play out when 
Alistair Brownlee meets his younger brother, Jonathan, in the men's triathlon. 
Team GB'scontroversial selection of "domestiques" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jun/08/london-2012-triathlon-olympics> 
– specialists in a particular field tasked with helping the leading athletes – 
failed to secure a medal for Helen Jenkins in the women's competition and hopes 
will be even higher in the men's, where 24-year-old Alistair is European and 
world champion, and 22-year-old Jonny finished 2011 ranked second behind his 
older brother. Despite talk of rivalry, the Brownlees actually get on well and 
often work together – until the run, at least. Their bid for a silver-and-gold 
double will be assisted by another domestique,Stuart Hayes, 33, who is strong 
in the swim and bike legs. If the Brownlees stumble, expect a big inquest into 
picking domestiques over the three best individuals.

Men's triathlon, Hyde Park, 11.30am

Grudge match

"Game on, baby! 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/sport/london-games/pearson-rival-dawn-harper-signals-tactical-change/story-e6frgdg6-1226439915157>
" saidDawn Harper, defending Olympic champion, of the 100m hurdles final and 
her showdown with AustralianSally Pearson. "I don't focus on one competitor 
because as soon as you focus on that one person they get seventh and you get 
eighth," said the American while talking at length about the hot favourite for 
the gold – Pearson, who has lost just one race in the past year and clocked the 
fourth fastest time in history to win the world title in Daegu, South Korea. 
Harper predicts Pearson will have a great start but says she is a very good 
finisher. But she's not focusing on her competitors, oh no.

Women's 100m hurdles, final, 9pm

The Brit to watch

After Greg Rutherford's gold in the long jump, Robbie Grabarz will seek to 
become the first Brit ever to win gold in the high jump. Grabarz looked good in 
qualifying: he was the only jumper to clear each height to 2.29m at the first 
attempt. The unknown 25-year-old from St Neots has quickly risen to number 
three in the world and says his pre-competition preparations consist ofa beer 
and 24 hours' sleep 
<http://www.cambridge-news.co.uk/Sport/Robbie-Grabarz-planning-to-relax-ahead-of-final-05082012.htm>
. If he wins gold expect that to become 24 beers and a sleep.

Men's high jump final, 7pm

The big question

When will the Australian sports minister wear a union flag T-shirt and row a 
length of Eton Dorney 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/olympics/9428795/London-2012-Olympics-sports-minister-Hugh-Robertson-will-have-to-sport-an-Australian-shirt-if-he-loses-bet.html>
? Senator Kate Lundy and Britain's sports minister, Hugh Robertson, had a bet 
over whether Britain or Australia would finish higher in the medal table. With 
the swimming over and the Aussies currently languishing behind the likes of 
Belarus, Kazakhstan and – oh the shame – the Kiwis, Robertson's bet looks safe 
already.

World record watch

Everyone keeps saying how fast the Olympic Stadium track is and yet the world 
records have not yet exactly tumbled. The men's 1500m final might just deliver: 
reigning Olympic and world championAsbel Kiprop will need to go out harder than 
he did in qualifying, where Algerian runnerTaoufik Makhloufi sped past him, but 
the Kenyan will be supported by countrymenSilas Kiplagat and Nixon Chepseba. 
Kiprop won't say who will finish first butpredicts the Olympic record will be 
broken 
<http://www.supersport.com/athletics/international/news/120725/Well_break_the_Games_1_500m_record>
. Cool conditions and little wind might help.

Weather

A bit dull. Mostly cloudy with highs of 18C and a 20% chance of rain.
 