
Young people who have spent most of their lives in the UK but find themselves 
ineligible for a student loan due to their immigration status are calling on 
universities to create scholarships to allow them to continue their education.

Campaigners estimate that thousands of high-achieving students, who arrived as 
children in the UK and have been through primary, secondary and sixth form 
education in the country, discover at the last moment that they are unable to 
go to university.

Despite getting excellent results at A-level and being offered places at the 
best universities, when they apply for student loans they find they do not 
qualify because of their immigration status, and without the loan cannot take 
up their university offer.

The problem is evident in London where the population is diverse and 
educational achievement high, particularly among those from disadvantaged 
communities. However, the charityJust for Kids Law 
<http://www.justforkidslaw.org/> says the issue affects young people across the 
country.


The new campaign, called Young, Gifted and Blocked 
<http://www.justforkidslaw.org/let-us-learn/let-us-learn-blog-let-us-learn/young-gifted-blocked>
, comes at a time of intense debate about access to higher education. The 
government wants universities to extend access and increase diversity among 
home students; at the same time it is planning to introduce majornew 
restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
 on international students hoping to study in the UK.

The move is based on claims that many international students break the terms 
of their visa and stay on in the UK after their studies are finished. According 
toa report in the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/ministers-hide-report-on-migrant-numbers-dv8dbj7cz>
 on Thursday, however, a study has estimated that only 1% of international 
students fail to leave after their course ends.

The Home Office said the contents of the report were inaccurate. “There is no 
secret report and we do not recognise the 1% figure,” a spokesperson said. “We 
are continuing to analyse the data collected since exit checks were introduced 
to ensure that it is statistically robust.”

Meanwhile, the Young, Gifted and Blocked campaign is being launched with a 
video <http:// https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BumdwKTbyZQ>and a letter – 
signed by more than 100 of those caught in educational limbo – which is being 
sent to vice-chancellors of the capital’s leading universities, urging them to 
create scholarships and bursaries to fund these students’ studies.


The letter reads: “We are writing to ask you to help long-standing migrants 
like us continue our studies. By doing so, you will also be helping your 
university ensure it is able to recruit talented and diverse young people, who 
are often under represented in further education.

“Many of us come from families where we would be the first members to go to 
university; all of us believe passionately in the importance of obtaining a 
degree, and are keen to have the opportunity to pursue our educational and 
career ambitions.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Flong-standing-migrants-call-on-universities-to-help-them-with-access%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d4a10dbefaf69c175373192b13399107b80c448%2F174_0_5220_3132%2F5220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Long-term%20immigrants%20call%20on%20universities%20to%20help%20them%20with%20access&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Flong-standing-migrants-call-on-universities-to-help-them-with-access%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Long-term%20immigrants%20call%20on%20universities%20to%20help%20them%20with%20access&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Flong-standing-migrants-call-on-universities-to-help-them-with-access%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d4a10dbefaf69c175373192b13399107b80c448%2F174_0_5220_3132%2F5220.jpg>
 Agnes Harding wants to become the first black British astronaut but can’t get 
a student loan. Photograph: None 
Among the signatories are would-be doctors, scientists, and lawyers. Agnes 
Harding from Dagenham, east London, is also a signatory. She wants to become 
the first black British astronaut. The 18-year-old had hoped to study physics 
at Manchester University – she got three As at A-level and received offers from 
four Russell Group universities – but she was unable to go because she was not 
entitled to a student loan.

She was born in Gambia and arrived in the UK when she was four with her 
mother. She has been living here ever since. “I was not really aware of my 
immigration status before this,” Hardin said.

“I’ve always seen myself as British. I spent four years in Gambia – I don’t 
remember anything from there. This has been my entire life, my home. Being told 
I’m different was horrible. It redefined what I thought of myself.”

Just for Kids Law founder and director, Shauneen Lambe, said the charity had 
been contacted by more than 600 young people who, having done well at school, 
wanted to take up hard-won university places but found their way blocked.


“They have been to school here and lived in the UK most of their lives. Yet, 
when it comes to going to university, they are treated as overseas students - 
they cannot get a student loan, and can be charged international fees by 
universities, which are often two or three times the £9,000 a year paid by 
other students.

“There are very few other funding options available to young people in this 
situation. We don’t think that, as a country, we can afford to let so much 
talent and ambition go to waste.”

The issue was at the centre of a supreme court hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/21/supreme-court-challenge-student-loan-rules-immigrants>
 last year which resulted in new guidelines, but campaigners say many young 
people from a migrant background are still missing out. To qualify for a 
government loan, students from migrant backgrounds must be able to prove that 
they have lived in the UK for at least half their life and that they have had 
“lawful ordinary residence” for a minimum of three years.

The only way to become “lawfully ordinarily resident” is by being granted 
limited or indefinite leave to remain by the Home Office, which can be a long 
and complicated process. After that, they face a three-year wait before being 
eligible for a student loan and before automatically qualifying for home 
student fees. Many young people from migrant backgrounds and their families do 
not realise until it is too late.

King’s College London has already established two sanctuary scholarships  
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/study/undergraduate/fees-and-funding/student-funding/scholarships-and-bursaries/scholarships/sanctuary-scholarship.aspx>
offering full tuition fee support and help with living costs to assist students 
who have sought sanctuary in the UK. Arkam Babar, 20, who has born in Pakistan, 
has just started a geography degree thanks to the scholarship and is hoping 
other universities will make similar funding available to others.

 “Before I was awarded the scholarship by King’s College London, I had little 
hope of being able to study, which was devastating as my family has always 
placed a strong emphasis on education,” he said.

“The King’s scholarship has transformed my situation. I only hope that more 
young people get the chance that I have been given to pursue their educational 
dreams.”
 