
A quick round-up of some of the things I would have posted if I had not been 
away for two weeks...

Ofcom rules for Bahari against Press TV 

Maziar Bahari rightly won his Ofcom case against Iran's state-run British news 
outletPress TV <http://www.presstv.ir/>. The regulator decided the TV network 
was responsible for a serious breach of UK broadcasting rules.

It has taken a long time to reach the decision (I reported on Bahari's 
complaint in June last year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/greenslade/2010/jun/09/ofcom-tv-news>). 

Even so, Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> has yet to announce 
its penalty for Press TV, which screened an interview with Bahari while the
Newsweek journalist was being held in a Tehran jail.

He had been arrested while covering the Iranian presidential election in 2009 
and was held for 118 days.

You can read the lengthy Ofcom judgment in pdf format <>. It concludes by 
saying that it will "consider whether this case warrants the imposition of a 
sanction."

Let's hope it doesn't take a further 12 months to make up its mind on that. 
For more on Ofcom, see the final section of this posting.

'Drop Fox News' campaign launched

I note that Media Matters for America  <http://mediamatters.org/> has launched 
aDrop Fox campaign <http://dropfox.com/>. 

The organisation wants advertisers to stop funding Rupert Murdoch's 
controversial cable network,Fox News. 

It argues: "For too long Fox News <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fox-news> 
has smeared, attacked, distorted and deliberately misinformed with impunity. 
The time for accountability is now. It's time for advertisers to drop Fox until 
Fox becomes a responsible news network."

So it has published a draft letter <http://dropfox.com/action/dropfox/> for 
its readers to send to the network's advertisers. It says:

"By advertising on Fox News, you are supporting a political operation 
disguised as a media outlet with an extensive history of deliberate 
misinformation, reckless vitriol, race-baiting, anti-LGBT 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LGBT> bigotry and smears against the Latino 
community.

Keeping your ad dollars off the network is the only way to protect your brand 
from being associated with Fox News' deplorable conduct.

I respectfully request that you rethink your company's sponsorship of Fox 
News' destructive rhetoric and deliberate misinformation."

New York Times sorry for errors - in 1899

The New York Times decided it is never too late to apologise. So, on 23 May, 
it carrieda correction to an obituary published in 1899 
<http://cityroom.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/05/23/getting-the-story-of-a-mans-life-right-at-last/?smid=tw-nytimes>
 and got so carried away with the idea, it also apologised for a mistake in a 
divorce case article in 1922.

In researching the 1899 errors, the paper's writer discovered an interesting 
tale about Lieutenant Milton (not Melton) K. Schwenk of Schwenksville (not 
Schwenkville), Pennsylvania (not Georgia).

Murdoch's Australian reconciliation plan

News Limited <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/News_Limited>, Murdoch's Australian 
company, is launching a "reconciliation action plan" (RAP) in order to boost 
the life chances of indigenous Australians.

In announcing the initiative, News chairman and chief executive John Hartigan 
said: "I believe that closing the 11-year gap between the life expectancy of 
indigenous and non-indigenous Australians is one of the most important 
challenges facing Australia."

The group has teamed up with the government body known as Reconciliation 
Australia 
<http://www.reconciliation.org.au/home/reconciliation-action-plans/what-is-a-rap->
.

As part of its plan, News will send editorial staff to indigenous communities 
to increase the understanding in its newsrooms of the challenges facing 
aboriginal Australians.

"We will also introduce cultural awareness training to our business," said 
Hartigan.

I am delighted to see that Hartigan has appointed my former colleague and 
friend,Anne Fussell, to oversee the implementation of the RAP. She combines 
compassion with a no-nonsense hard-headedness.

Syria detains medical aid worker

Amjad Baiazy, a 29-year-old City University graduate and Syrian citizen who 
lives in Britain,was arrested at Damascus airport on 12 May 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/may/26/syrians-indifferent-injustice>
 as he was returning to the UK.

Amnesty International has reported he is being held incommunicado. Biaizy has 
worked withMédecins Sans Frontières <http://www.msf.org.uk/> for many years, 
helping to build bridges of understanding between youth in Syria and elsewhere 
in the Middle East.

He is being held in one of Syria's most notorious detention centres. I have 
signedthis petition <http://www.thepetitionsite.com/3/free-amjad-baiazy/>, and 
I sincerely hope others do too.

Politkovskaya murder arrest
 Anna Politkovskaya murdered in 2006. Photograph: Jens Schlueter/AFP/Getty 
Images 
A Chechen man, Rustam Makhmudov, has been arrested and charged with the 2006 
murder of Russian journalistAnna Politkovskaya, reported the Moscow Times 
<http://www.themoscowtimes.com/news/article/politkovskaya-murder-suspect-charged/438093.html>
.

Makhmudov's two brothers are among three men accused of playing minor roles in 
the killing, as lookout and getaway driver. The third suspect — a former Moscow 
police officer — was accused of supplying the murder weapons.

A jury found them not guilty in 2009, but the supreme court overruled the 
acquittal and sent the case back to prosecutors.

Newsquest journalists vote for strike

Journalists working for Newsquest/Gannett in South London have voted 
overwhelmingly to take strike action. 
<http://www.nuj.org.uk/innerPagenuj.html?docid=2107> 

Of the 23 returns to the National Union of Journalists' strike ballot, there 
were 22 votes in favour of a strike and 23 votes in favour of industrial action 
short of strike.

The company has announced job cuts at the Croydon Guardian and the affiliated 
Guardian titles in Elmbridge, Epsom, Kingston, Streatham, Sutton, Wandsworth 
and Wimbledon, plus theSurrey Comet.

The NUJ's head of publishing, Barry Fitzpatrick, said: "Newsquest is in danger 
of ruining a group of professionally-produced newspapers, despite their 
importance to the community."

And an NUJ negotiator, Jenny Lennox, said: "The company claims these decisions 
are being made amid 'worsening trading conditions', but the reality is that
Newsquest <https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsquest> continues to rake in 
vast profits. In 2009 the company recorded an operating profit of £71.7m."

Regulating Richard Desmond...

Peter Preston came up with a left-field plan to ensure that newspapers owned by
Richard Desmond are regulated despite his having withdrawn them from the Press 
Complaints Commission.

"Here comes a new Communications Act," he wrote in The Observer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2011/may/29/pcc-press-freedom>, "and how about 
a timely new paragraph to go with it?

"Media companies owning both television stations and newspapers shall observe 
regulatory balance between Ofcom for broadcasting and the PCC for newspaper 
publishing. If, for any reason, they should choose to leave the PCC, then Ofcom 
shall be instructed to regulate both elements."

Thank you, and goodnight, Richard Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond>.

Mail titles taken to task - again

And yesterday, the ever-vigilant Tabloid Watch, gave the Mail titles a 
going-over in two searing posts. In one,The 'toothless' regulator 
<http://tabloid-watch.blogspot.com/2011/06/toothless-regulator.html>, it 
pointed to theDaily's Mail's attack on Saturday on the "pathetic" broadcasting 
regulatorOfcom 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-1394167/X-Factor-raunch-row-Pathetic-Ofcom-vulnerable-young.html>
 and then contrasted its actions and penalties with those of thePress 
Complaints Commission.

But it was the posting headlined Mail on Sunday attacks BBC for word they 
didn't actually broadcast 
<http://tabloid-watch.blogspot.com/2011/06/mail-on-sunday-attacks-bbc-for-word.html>
 that was really superb.

It began by dissecting the MoS splash, BBC boss: Obscene joke is a 'delight' 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1394382/Obscene-joke-delight-BBC-executives-rule-offensive-word-English-language-good-joke-radio-6-30pm.html>
. It concerned a one-liner toldlast October by the inimitable Sandi Toksvig 
during an episode of Radio 4's The News Quiz.

She had observed that "it's the Tories who have put the 'n' into cuts."

Evidently, this joke - which I recall having received a big laugh from the 
studio audience - upset at least one person.

Step forward Colin Harrow, the 68-year-old former Mirror Group managing editor 
and one-time journalism tutor for MGN in Plymouth.

Harrow, now an artist of some local note in Cumbria 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/cumbria/content/articles/2008/10/01/artists_colin_harrow_feature.shtml>
, complained to the BBC and it would appear that, having failed to get 
satisfaction, he passed on the correspondence to the Mail on Sunday.

I'm surprised at Colin's humour bypass - I remember him having a well 
developed sense of fun - but I bet that even he was astonished by the Mail on 
Sunday's disproportionate treatment of the tale. A splash!

Anyway, back to Tabloid Watch's posting. It goes on to poke fun at the MoS for 
urging readers to complain to the supposedly "pathetic" Ofcom.

Then it lists various examples of the way in which Mail titles have 
procrastinated while dealing with complaints fromMichael Parkinson (here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/mar/03/michael-parkinson-daily-mail>) and 
Juliet Shaw (here 
<http://nosleeptilbrooklands.blogspot.com/2011/01/true-story-of-daily-mail-lies-guest.html>
 andhere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/greenslade/2011/feb/01/dailymail-medialaw>) and
Sophie Dahl (here 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/story.asp?sectioncode=1&storycode=45401&c=1>) and
Richard Wilson (here 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/the-lay-scientist/2010/sep/27/asbestos-press-watchdog-pcc>
), and aboutRichard Littlejohn (here 
<http://tabloid-watch.blogspot.com/2009/10/littlejohn-unreservedly-apologises-for.html>
).

Hats off to Tabloid Watch for that, and now it's down to daily blogging 
business once more...
 