
Neil Hannon's soaring score for Bristol Old Vic's beguiling production of 
Swallows and Amazons was almost the star of the show for me last night. But the 
music was ever so slightly upstaged for me by my vantage point. I was sitting 
amid the extraordinary decor high up "in the gods", or Gallery, of the Georgian 
theatre where the company is based. While I had a pretty good view of the 
diverting action on the stage, my eye was drawn to the beautiful gilded ceiling 
and to the sign that proclaimed, half apologetically, half proudly, that these 
were the original 18th-century bench seats. Certainly one of the people I 
watched the show with was convinced he had once sat on exactly the same 
upholstery about 30 years previously when he was at school.

This theatre is now up for a major refurbishment after all the sturm und drang 
of the last four or five years. Money has been secured – from Arts Council 
England and the city council – as, most happily, have the services of new 
artistic director Tom Morris, who comes to Bristol from the NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> and before that, the Battersea Arts 
Centre. The place is now primed for success, but just like for the jolly crew 
of Swallow in Arthur Ransome's story, who appear to have hatched the perfect 
plan for capturing the Amazon, it takes a fair wind as well as hard rowing to 
get there. While I don't want to see the astonishing history of this auditorium 
stripped away, even with a rescue deal struck, the Old Vic still needs £1.5m 
more to reach a safe harbour and become all it needs to be to serve the area. 
If it does get the funds, this could be a wonderful flowering at the economic 
moment when a thriving creative heart is going to be crucial to the atmosphere 
of the whole city.
 