
His Twitter nemesis Piers Morgan tried – and failed – to conquer America. Now 
it seems Lord Sugar wants to have a go at making it over the Atlantic.

The 68-year-old said he “would like the challenge” of hosting the US version 
of his hit BBC reality show The Apprentice.

The NBC programme is looking for a new mogul after Donald Trump quit to launch 
 
<http://money.cnn.com/2015/06/29/media/donald-trump-nbc-ends-relationship/index.html>
his presidential bid in June.

Mexican TV networks denounce Donald Trump as 'racist' and 'offensive'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/30/donald-trump-mexico-tv-carlos-slim-televisa>
NBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/nbc> subsequently cut all ties with 
Trump – who also produced the Miss USA and Miss Universe pageants – when he 
made a string of comments in which he characterised Mexican immigrants as drug 
dealers and rapists.

Responding on Twitter to suggestions he would be the “perfect replacement”, 
Lord Sugar appeared to throw his hat into the ring, saying: “I would like the 
challenge”.
Lord Sugar (@Lord_Sugar) 
.@AndrewBloch <https://twitter.com/AndrewBloch> RT:With Trump not doing The 
Apprentice USA anymore,@Lord_Sugar <https://twitter.com/Lord_Sugar> would 
makeperfect replacement......I would like the challenge
 <https://twitter.com/Lord_Sugar/status/616159388278095872> July 1, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Lord_Sugar/status/616159388278095872> 
Although he is known in the UK for his colourful language and blunt manner, 
the British peer may strike US viewers as relatively tame compared with his 
American counterpart.

Trump – who likes to refer to himself as “the Donald” – said NBC was “weak” 
and “foolish” for firing him and threatened to sue the broadcaster for axing 
Miss USA and Miss Universe.

There is little love lost between the two business moguls.

In 2012, they were embroiled in a Twitter spat after Trump called Lord Sugar 
“dopey” and told him: “Without my show you’d be nothing”.

In return, Sugar told him to “shut up” and said the American had “a charisma 
bypass”.

The Apprentice launched in the US in 2004, a year before the first series of 
the BBC version. As ratings tailed off the format was changed to admit 
celebrity contestants only. The latest series of Celebrity Apprentice aired in 
January and February this year.

According to some reports in the US, NBC may consider replacing Trump with an 
ethnic minority host. Others have speculated the job may go to his daughter 
Ivanka.

It is not the first time Lord Sugar has revealed his ambitions to make it in 
America.

The Amstrad founder once claimed he could have been as influential as 
Microsoft boss Bill Gates if he had crossed the Atlantic earlier in his career, 
saying: “People said that had I moved to America in the mid-80s I’d have gone 
on to rule the world.” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/money/city-news/alan-sugar-moved-america-id-3183318>
 