 In his later years Mark Tennyson, who has died aged 86, would say that his 
most nervous wartime moment came after the Dunkirk evacuation in 1940, when, as 
a naval officer, he was taken by his mother to lunch with Winston Churchill. 
Guests included a British general, a French admiral and Lord Louis Mountbatten. 
After lunch, Churchill asked for quiet while "Mark tells us all about his 
experiences".
When the second world war broke out, Mark was serving in the West Indies. 
After posting to HMS Vanquisher, he was involved in the Dunkirk operation; from 
May 26 until June 4 1940 the destroyer criss-crossed the Channel continuously. 
Later that year, he became commander of an air-sea rescue gunboat, tasked to 
pick up downed Battle of Britain pilots off the south coast.

By 1942 he was a lieutenant and second-in-command of the destroyer HMS 
Bicester, escorting convoys to Malta. The ship was constantly attacked; during 
one crossing Mark plunged from the deck in an attempt to rescue a seaman swept 
overboard. For attending to an unexploded bomb which had pierced the Bicester's 
deck he was awarded a DSC. By October 1944 Mark was serving on HMS Tuscan; he 
was mentioned in dispatches for his involvement in the sinking of two German 
torpedo boats in the Gulf of Salonica.

The great-grandson of the poet Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Mark was born in London. 
He joined the navy after attending the Royal Naval Cadet College at Dartmouth. 
From 1946 to 1948 he was flag lieutenant to the C-in-C, Mediterranean fleet. He 
was made commander in 1953 and served on training ships until, in 1957, he 
transferred to the Admiralty, from where he retired in 1960. He was 
subsequently an executive of Rowntree Mackintosh and Joseph Terry & Sons.

Mark and his wife, Deline Celeste, whom he married in 1964, lived at Foston 
Hall, Yorkshire, before retiring to her native South Africa in 1983. In 1991 he 
succeeded as Commander, the Lord Tennyson, the fifth baron. He remained in Cape 
Town after Deline's death in 1995.

Gracious and gentle, Mark was patron of the Tennyson Society; until his health 
failed, he came regularly to the poet's annual wreath-laying commemoration in 
Westminster Abbey. A member of White's Club for more than 60 years, he enjoyed 
the Royal Automobile Club, where he stayed when in England.

Â· Has someone you know died since May who should feature in Other lives? 
Please send contributions of up to 500 words, a picture and your telephone 
number to: Other lives, Obituaries, The Guardian, 119 Farringdon Road, London 
EC1R 3ER, emailother.lives @theguardian.com <mailto:other.lives 
@theguardian.com>.
 