
Lord Sugar was paid £500,000 to chair YouView 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/youview>, the much delayed internet-based TV 
service backed by the BBC, as staff costs soared to well over £3m.

YouView – a joint venture between the BBC, ITV, BT, Channel 4, Channel 5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive>, Arqiva and TalkTalk – paid 
Sugar £500,000 for the year to the end of March 2012, according to its latest 
financial filing at Companies House.

The payout handed to Sugar, who was appointed at the behest of shareholder 
Richard Desmondin March 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/04/youview-television?INTCMP=SRCH> 
as the venture missed its launch deadlines, dwarfs that of his predecessor Kip 
Meek, who was paid £97,000for less than eight months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jan/10/youview-spent-20m?INTCMP=SRCH> 
in the role of chairman.

The payment to Sugar, who has amassed a fortune estimated to be worth about 
£800maccording to the Sunday Times Rich List 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/public/richlist/article1027882.ece>, 
partly fuelled a tripling of YouView's total salary bill.

Total wages and social security costs for YouView's average employee base of 
29 in 2012 was £3.25m – an average of £112,206 per staff member.

The Companies House filing shows that, in the previous financial year, YouView 
employed an average of 15 staff and incurred a wage bill of £1.1m – an average 
of £73,333 per employee. The 2011 filing is for nine months of operations.

YouView received £32.6m from shareholders in the year to the end of March 2012.

The partners, who each own 14.3% of the venture, have pledged to invest £115m 
between them, covering development, launch and the first four years of 
operation.

Sugar presided over the much-delayed launch of YouView in July last year 
<http:>, more than 18 months after initial business plan projections of early 
2011. He said that the longer-than-expected development period meant the 
partners have already spent £70m between them.

YouView launched a £10m TV and press campaign in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/sep/21/gary-barlow-benedict-cumberbatch-youview?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

A YouView spokeswoman said: "Lord Sugar joined YouView as chairman in March 
2011 and he has subsequently spearheaded YouView's successful entry to market, 
which is generating encouraging results for the company. Lord Sugar's 
remuneration is approved by all seven shareholder companies and as a 
non-executive director, he does not hold shares in YouView or receive any other 
incentives."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 