
George Weidenfeld, Lord Weidenfeld, who has died aged 96, belonged to that 
remarkable group of Jewish refugees who transformed postwar British publishing 
into an exciting, dynamic industry. He was pre-eminent among his fellow 
publishers, both in the range of his interests and activism, and in his 
capacity for international networking, building bridges across Europe and 
beyond. Most recently he launched theWeidenfeld Fund <http://weidenfeldfund.org>
, which, among other things, has provided money to rescue embattled Christians 
from Syria.

His exceptionally large circle of friends and acquaintances extended from 
politics to the arts, academia and business. Mention the name George to any of 
the hundreds of people listed in his autobiography, and almost always they 
would recognise it as a reference to the portly, inventive and always 
compelling Weidenfeld. But his quest for recognition and standing among the 
elites was never an end in itself. It was also a tool for identifying authors 
and book themes – and in the latter stages of his life, his many friends 
enabled him to bring together a wide range of influential personalities to 
address major issues confronting western society in the 21st century.

It helped that he had a brilliant mind, an elephantine memory and the 
character of a true cosmopolitan – at home in London and Jerusalem, in New York 
and Bonn and latterly Berlin, Vienna, Rome and wherever else his interests, his 
business or his friends happened to take him. Here was a complex, multifaceted 
man of ideas, a perceptive publisher and skilled entrepreneur who spawned an 
impressive array of remarkable books; a notable host who promoted searching 
discussion of world affairs; a committed Zionist as well as a convinced 
European who worked hard for reconciliation between Jews and Germans, and for 
common goals between Europeans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Flord-weidenfeld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e2633a8af21a9d3bdd67914a8c05726911337aa%2F0_115_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lord%20Weidenfeld%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Flord-weidenfeld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lord%20Weidenfeld%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Flord-weidenfeld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e2633a8af21a9d3bdd67914a8c05726911337aa%2F0_115_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Friede Springer, left, Lord Weidenfeld and the German chancellor Angela Merkel 
attending the annual new year reception at the publishing group Axel Springer 
in Berlin in 2008. Photograph: Sean Gallup/Getty Images 
Weidenfeld was born in Vienna into a middle-class Jewish family of modest 
means. His parents, Max and Rosa, were not orthodox, but instilled in their son 
a lasting understanding of and pride in being a Jew. His father, who came from 
Poland, would have preferred an academic life. But the need to provide for his 
family persuaded him to join his brother’s insurance business. George was an 
only child. His parents had little of the gregariousness that the boy displayed 
in later life, and until he was 10 years old he led a rather lonely existence. 
But he remembered it as a happy childhood, not least because he was introduced 
to opera almost as soon as he could walk.

As a schoolboy at the Piaristengym nasium, in Vienna, a city where political 
extremism and antisemitism had found fertile ground, George was initially drawn 
to socialism, but it was Zionism that soon became the main focus of his teenage 
activities. It remained as a lifelong commitment to Israel. A few months before 
the Anschluss, Hitler’s annexation of Austria in 1938, George entered Vienna 
University as a law student and had also enrolled in the Konsular-Akademie 
(diplomatic academy), whereKurt Waldheim 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2007/jun/15/guardianobituaries.austria>, later 
to become UN secretary general and president of Austria, was a fellow student.

After the Anschluss, Jews were no longer allowed to attend lectures but were 
permitted to sit for examinations. It was his friend Waldheim who enabled 
George to continue his studies. He made secret visits to the Weidenfeld home, 
at some risk, and lent George his lecture notes. Weidenfeld never forgot this 
act of friendship, repaying the debt 47 years later by publishing Waldheim’s 
memoirs. He subsequently refused to brand his erstwhile university friend a war 
criminal – despite the fact that Waldheim was shown to have lied about his 
second world war service with the German Wehrmacht – putting him at odds with 
theWorld Jewish Congress <http://www.worldjewishcongress.org/en> as well as 
with some of his Jewish friends.

Weidenfeld’s father was arrested almost immediately after the Anschluss. His 
son, however, secured an entry visa to Britain in the summer of 1938, and with 
the help of Quakers managed to bring his parents to the UK before the outbreak 
of the war. They settled near Stroud, Gloucestershire, where his father 
returned to his first love, teaching Greek and Latin. George supported them for 
the rest of their lives. Though hard up himself, Weidenfeld led a charmed life 
almost from the moment of his arrival in London. He met leading British Jews at 
Woburn House, the headquarters of the British organisation for the relief of 
refugees, and was soon being invited to the Hampstead homes of Jewish 
intellectuals.

In 1939 Weidenfeld joined the BBC’s Overseas Service – the wartime forerunner 
of theBBC World Service <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-world-service> – 
and became part of the galaxy of intellectuals broadcasting into enemy 
territory. Working as a news commentator on European affairs, he interviewed 
many prominent wartime figures, including Charles de Gaulle and the 
Czechoslovakian politician Edvard Beneš. Among his BBC colleagues were George 
Orwell and Richard Crossman. In 1943-44 he also wrote a weekly foreign affairs 
column for the News Chronicle.

When the war was over, good fortune again played into Weidenfeld’s hands. With 
friends, he started up a magazine called Contact, which was designed as an 
outlet for smallish books. A dog-eared, much-rejected manuscript,New Deal for 
Coal <http://www.amazon.co.uk/New-Deal-Coal-Harold-Wilson/dp/B0006D9X9K>, by a 
young civil service statistician, Harold Wilson, turned up on their desk. They 
accepted it, paying Wilson a £50 advance. It must have been among the most 
rewarding advances that Weidenfeld ever made. The book became a surprise 
success. It vaulted the eventual prime minister on to the political ladder, 
sealed Weidenfeld’s vocation as a publisher, created a strong bond between 
Wilson and Weidenfeld and gave the latter a passport to the highest reaches of 
Labour governments, eventually leading to his peerage. He was included in 
Wilson’s resignation honours list in 1976, having been knighted seven years 
earlier.

Weidenfeld’s association with Nigel Nicolson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/sep/24/guardianobituaries.books> began 
soon after the war, and in 1949 they launchedWeidenfeld & Nicolson 
<https://www.orionbooks.co.uk/Weidenfeld-and-Nicolson/Index.page> with a 
reception at Brown’s hotel in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jun/28/george-weidenfeld-nicholson-publishing>
, attended by Peter Ustinov, Crossman, John Sparrow, Somerset Maugham and the 
businessman Marcus Sieff: invitations to parties given in Weidenfeld’s London 
home came to be greatly prized. Weidenfeld and Nicolson were an odd couple – 
the one an Austrian refugee and the other an establishment figure with a 
conservative, if somewhat unconventional, background. But the two complemented 
each other, collaborated easily and established a deep friendship.

Later in 1949 Weidenfeld took a year’s leave of absence from the fledgling 
publishing house to become chef de cabinet toChaim Weizmann 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Chaim-Weizmann>, who had become Israel’s 
first head of state. His principal task was to keep Weizmann informed about 
world affairs and their bearing on Israel. He cherished his sabbatical, 
expanding his range of friends among prominent politicians and diplomats both 
inside and outside Israel – including David Ben-Gurion and Moshe Dayan, whose 
books and biographies he came to publish later.

On his return to London, Weidenfeld took full charge of his firm. The staid 
British publishing establishment was not over-enthused by the brash newcomer. 
But he soldiered on – not least because of support from the Sieff family, which 
was reinforced by his marriage in 1952 to Jane Sieff. Their only child, Laura, 
was born in 1953. However, they divorced in 1955.

One of Weidenfeld’s great strengths was the gift of spotting the commercial 
possibilities of authors whose work others might have considered too abstract 
or academic. For example, he signed upEric Hobsbawm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/01/eric-hobsbawm> before other 
publishers grasped that this radical historian had appeal for a much wider 
readership. The first breakthrough for Weidenfeld & Nicolson came in 1953, when 
they publishedIsaiah Berlin <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/24540.stm>’s The 
Hedgehog and the Fox, an intellectual landmark. At about the same timeMarshal 
Tito <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Josip-Broz-Tito>’s memoirs became the 
firm’s first bestseller.

The decision to publish Vladimir Nabokov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/vladimirnabokov>’s Lolita in the UK in 1959 
catapulted the firm from the literary pages to the front pages, and made a 
villain or a hero – depending on one’s point of view – of Weidenfeld. Until 
literally moments before publication of the book in Britain, he did not know 
whether his firm would be prosecuted under the obscenity laws. The authorities 
decided against prosecution – a landmark decision that paved the way for Lady 
Chatterley’s Lover the following year. Lolita sold well and confirmed the 
publisher’s daring reputation.

Weidenfeld acted swiftly when, in the late 1960s, he was offered the 
manuscript of James Watson’sThe Double Helix 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Double-Helix-James-Watson/dp/075382843X>. It was 
one of his greatest coups as this authoritative account of scientific discovery 
became a world bestseller. Weidenfeld also spotted the wider potential of 
Victor Klemperer’s diaries of the day-to-day existence of a Jew in Nazi 
Germany, successful in Germany but unnoticed internationally: the first of 
three volumes in English appeared in 1998.

The number of memoirs, biographies and autobiographies of leading political 
figures that he secured were legion: Konrad Adenauer, De Gaulle, Henry 
Kissinger, Benito Mussolini, Wilson, Golda Meir and Shimon Peres. Among the 
bestselling authors in his portfolio were Edna O’Brien,Saul Bellow  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/apr/07/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
and Antonia Fraser. Indeed, when Weidenfeld & Nicolson was first founded, 
Fraser was one of its original editorial assistants. She was soon encouraged by 
Weidenfeld to write, became a star author and remained a close friend. An early 
editorial adviser was Sonia Orwell, widow of George.

A turbulent affair with the novelist and socialite Barbara Skelton 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-barbara-skelton-1316869.html>
 culminated in her divorce from the writer Cyril Connolly and marriage to 
Weidenfeld in 1956. It was a mismatch, divorce followed in 1961, and Skelton 
later wrote a vindictive account of the relationship. In 1966 Weidenfeld met 
and marriedSandra Payson Meyer 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2004/07/25/arts/sandra-payson-78-influential-arts-patron.html>
, the niece of the American publisherJohn Hay (Jock) Whitney 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1982/02/09/obituaries/john-hay-whitney-dies-at-77-publisher-led-in-many-fields.html?pagewanted=all>
. They divorced amicably after 10 years.

In the mid-70s Weidenfeld met Ann Getty. This encounter led to new ventures: 
ambitious international symposiums on literature and music, and above all to 
the purchase of the American Grove Press in 1985 and the decision to set up a 
Weidenfeld & Nicolson imprint in the US. But the US venture did not work out 
well. Getty pulled out and the Grove Press was sold.

The Getty investment in Weidenfeld & Nicolson, however, was maintained until 
1991, when Weidenfeld sold the firm to the publisher Anthony Cheetham, who 
renamed it Orion. The deal enabled Weidenfeld more time to pursue his wide 
range of interests. He retained an office at Orion as non-executive chairman 
and continued in that role in the affairs of the publishing house after Orion 
was bought by Hachette. He also joined the boards of several other companies. 
He became consultant to the influentialBertelsmann Foundation 
<http://www.bfna.org/> (a German research and publishing organisation), and was 
chairman of the board of governors ofBen-Gurion University 
<http://in.bgu.ac.il/en/Pages/default.aspx>, a governor of Tel Aviv University 
and of the Weizmann Institute, all in Israel. The setting up in 2007 of the
Weidenfeld scholarship scheme 
<http://www.ox.ac.uk/admissions/graduate/fees-and-funding/fees-funding-and-scholarship-search/weidenfeld-hoffmann-scholarships-and-leadership-programme/oxford-weidenfeld-and-hoffmann-scholarships-and-leadership-programme>
, in conjunction with Oxford University and designed to complement the Rhodes 
scholarship scheme, gave him great satisfaction and a sense of fulfilment.In 
2010 he established visiting professorships in humanities at Oxford and 
Cambridge universities 
<http://www.crassh.cam.ac.uk/programmes/humanitas-visiting-professorships>, and 
went on to support the creation of professorships in Israel studies at Oxford 
and Sussex.

Weidenfeld focused much of his energies on the promotion of better 
understanding between Britain, France and Germany. To this end, in 1996, along 
with a small group of friends, including the German chancellor, Helmut Kohl, he 
created another vehicle for international discourse. It was theClub of Three 
<http://www.strategicdialogue.org/programmes/europe-in-the-world/the-club-of-three/>
, designed to promote unofficial confidential exchanges between decision-makers 
and opinion-formers in those three countries. The annual plenary meetings 
proved so successful that the club began to organise special sessions on issues 
such as defence, intelligence and demography. More recently they have focused 
on Europe’s relations with the wider world, especially China and Turkey.

After 9/11, Weidenfeld applied a similar format to his Ameurus project 
<http://www.strategicdialogue.org/programmes/europe-in-the-world/ameurus>, 
setting up conferences covering both politics and the arts with participants 
from US, Russia and a wide spectrum of European countries. These activities led 
in 2006 to the establishment of theInstitute for Strategic Dialogue 
<http://www.strategicdialogue.org/>, with Weidenfeld as its president. The ISD 
was conceived as an activist, non-governmental body able to create networks and 
strategy groups and work with global leaders in tackling political, social and 
cultural challenges. Its activities have shifted to counter-terrorism and the 
fight against Islamist radicalisation, with a host of government and social 
media partners. Aninternational prize for Arabic fiction 
<http://www.arabicfiction.org/> was launched in 2007 in association with the 
Booker Prize Foundation and the support of the Abu Dhabi-based Emirates 
Foundation. Weidenfeld was also personally involved in initiatives to counter 
anti-semitism and actions against Israel.

For Weidenfeld, work and social life formed a seamless whole. He relished all 
his connections and his demanding social life, never lost his deep affection 
for Austria, and created exceptionally strong links withGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. In Britain though, which had been 
his main home since 1938, he never felt fully accepted by the establishment. “I 
was with the English but not of the English,” he once remarked. Such doubts 
vanished with the 2011 New Year honours list, when he was appointed GBE.

Following on from his friendship with Kohl, he befriended Angela Merkel well 
before she came to political prominence, and when she became chancellor, 
Weidenfeld became a trusted counsellor. Merkel took a close interest in the 
Weidenfeld Institute, especially in its work on Islam and on the new frontiers 
of Europe.

Over the years Weidenfeld was awarded several German and Austrian honours. But 
he became even more prominent in Germany after developing a close association 
with the Springer press – above all with its chief executive,Mathias Döpfner 
<http://www.axelspringer.de/en/artikel/Curriculum-Vitae-Dr.-Mathias-Doepfner_40431.html>
. He was a household name in Germany as a regular columnist in two of the 
Springer newspapers, Die Welt and Welt am Sonntag. Germany was virtually a 
second home.

Weidenfeld also maintained strong links to Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, whose security remained a paramount 
preoccupation. Instinctively, he judged governments around the world in terms 
of their commitment to this. He strongly supported intervention in Iraq and 
considered it essential to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons. 
Latterly he urged western military intervention in Syria.

He found his greatest happiness in his marriage to Annabelle Whitestone, who 
became, as he wrote, his “ideal wife” in 1992. That happiness was reinforced by 
his close contact with Laura and his four grandchildren. All survive him.

• Arthur George Weidenfeld, Lord Weidenfeld, publisher, born 13 September 
1919; died 20 January 2016

• This article was amended on 20 January 2016. The fund that Lord Weidenfeld 
set up was not the Weidenfeld Safe Havens Fund, but the Weidenfeld Fund. This 
distributes money to various charities, including the Barnabas Fund, which runs
Operation Safe Havens 
<https://barnabasfund.org/appeals/Operation-Safe-Havens-Rescuing-Christians-in-Danger>
.
 