
A poem written by a 17-year-old Douglas Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/douglasadams>, in which the Hitchhiker's 
Guide author manages to successfully pull off rhyming "futile" with "mute, 
while", and "exhausted" with "of course did", has been discovered in a cupboard 
at his old school.

Archivist Stacey Harmer was digging through piles of documents at Brentwood 
school <http://www.brentwoodschool.co.uk/> last week when she came across a 
series of books featuring poems written as part of the initiation to the 
upper-sixth's literary society, Candlesticks. Noting that the poems, written 
between 1950 and 1983, spanned the period during which Adams attended the 
school, she managed to track down the late author's effort.

Written in January 1970, when Adams would have been 17, the poem is entitled 
"A Dissertation on the task of writing a poem on a candle and an account of 
some of the difficulties thereto pertaining", and stretches to two pages. "For 
nights I sat musing / And musing ... and musing / Whilst burning the midnight 
oil; / My scratchings seemed futile / My muse seemed quite mute, while / My 
work proved to be barren toil," writes the schoolboy who would go on to become 
one of the UK's most loved authors. "I puzzled and thought and wrestled and 
fought / 'Till my midnight oil was exhausted, / So I furthered my writing by 
dim candle lighting, / And found, to my joy, this of course did / The trick."

Tragedy lies ahead for the poet, however: "That which had ignited my literary 
passion, / Was about to ignite what my passion had fashion'd," he mourns. "And 
- oh! - all was lost in a great conflagration / And I just sat there and said 
'Hell and damnation'."

Harmer said that the long-running Candlesticks society would only allow pupils 
to join if they wrote, and read aloud, a poem on the subject of a candle, which 
was then found to be sufficiently good by current members of the literary 
group. "The school at the time had various different cliques or societies," she 
said. "At Candlesticks, which admitted only a select few, they would get 
together and read plays. In order to join you had to write a poem on the theme 
of a candle, and read it aloud, and if they liked it you were allowed in."

Adams's attempt was "deemed good enough", she said, describing the author's 
entry as "a really good poem - quite witty".

Harmer also uncovered a poem by Adams's fellow pupil Griff Rhys Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/griff-rhys-jones>, "The Candle (A 
Lament)", in which the comedian writes regretfully of how "There was a time 
when Candle Light / Was pristine, pure and clean and bright", but how now, "Oh! 
Awful sight! / We turn to cold electric light."

"Candlesticks was a group of boys who would come together and read plays, that 
was the point,"Rhys Jones told local paper 
<http://www.brentwoodgazette.co.uk/Lost-poems-Griff-Rhys-Jones-Douglas-Adams/story-20823862-detail/story.html>
 the Brentwood Gazette, admitting he had quite forgotten his own poem.

"There were only around 10 of us but we rather considered ourselves quite 
clever boys. Douglas was at the preparatory as well and even as a junior 
schoolboy he was given a lot of stars for his creative writing, he always used 
to talk about that," said Rhys Jones.

Adams died in May 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/may/15/guardianobituaries.books>, aged 
49, leaving behind him works including The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy. 
Fans mark his passing every year with theinternational Towel Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/quiz/2012/may/25/towel-day-quiz-hitchhikers-guide>
, when they carry towels in honour of the Hitchhiker's Guide's assertion that 
the item is "about the most massively useful thing an interstellar hitchhiker 
can have".
 Douglas Adams: school archivist says future writer's poem is 'quite witty'. 
Photograph: Sue Adler for the Observer 
"A Dissertation on the task of writing a poem on a candle and an account of 
some of the difficulties thereto pertaining"

by Douglas Adams, January 1970

I resisted temptation for this declamation
 To reach out to literary height
 For high aspiration in such an oration
 Would seem quite remarkably trite:
 So I thought something pithy and succinct and clever
 Was exactly the right thing to write.

For nights I sat musing
 And musing ... and musing
 Whilst burning the midnight oil;
 My scratchings seemed futile
 My muse seemed quite mute, while
 My work proved to be barren toil.

I puzzled and thought and wrestled and fought
 'Till my midnight oil was exhausted,
 So I furthered my writing by dim candle lighting,
 And found, to my joy, this of course did
 The trick, for I flowered,
 My work - candle-powered â€“
 Was inspired, both witty and slick.

Pithy and polished, my writing demolished
 Much paper, as I beguiled
 Myself with some punning,
 (My word play was stunning,)
 I wrote with the wit of a Wilde.

At length it was finished, the candle diminished,
 I pondered and let my pride burn
 At the great acclamation, the standing ovation
 Its first public reading would earn.

But lost in the rapture of anticipation
 And thinking how great was my brilliant creation
 I quite failed to note as I gazed into space
 That incendiary things were about to take place:
 That which had ignited my literary passion,
 Was about to ignite what my passion had fashion'd.

And - oh! - all was lost in a great conflagration
 And I just sat there and said 'Hell and damnation',
 For the rest of the night and the following day.
 (My muse in the meantime had flitted away
 Alarmed, no doubt, at the ornamentation
 My language acquired with increased consternation.

So unhaply the fruits of my priceless endeavour
 Are lost to the literary world forever.
 For now I offer this poem instead,
 Which explains in itself why the other's unsaid.
 