
The best comedy doesn't just make you laugh in the moment, it depth-charges 
its way into how you see the world. Aroutine by Louis CK, who hosted Saturday 
Night Live 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/03/29/louis-ck-snl-monologue_n_5057239.html>
 last weekend, has been having that effect on me, slow-burning its way into my 
subconscious.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5HbYScltf1c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5HbYScltf1c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F5HbYScltf1c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch Louis CK's routine here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5HbYScltf1c>

CK performed a version of this routine at the O2 last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/21/louis-ck-review>. In this clip, 
he's on Conan O'Brien's chat show, explaining why he won't let his children use 
mobile phones. The routine is thrilling in this context, because it plays 
against the shiny-happy-people conventions of TV light entertainment. It's 
about sadness. It's about, inCK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/louis-ck>'s words, "letting the 
sadness come. Stand in the way of it, and let it hit you like a truck." We use 
smartphones, he says, like juju against existential dread. He describes himself 
sitting in his car, feeling a wave of "forever empty" coming over him and 
reaching for his phone, to fend it off. "I'm getting sad. I gotta get the phone 
and write 'hi!' to, like, 50 people…"

The script wouldn't read much like comedy. There are few jokes. It's all about 
CK's attitude. Look at his snort of amusement at the sensation of onrushing 
dread. "Oh no, here it comes" – laugh – "I'm alone." It's exciting enough to 
watch someone use a chatshow to talk about the hollowness of existence – the 
very thing (you might say) that chatshows are poorly designed to obscure. See 
how uncomfortable O'Brien looks, and how relieved he is to return to his glib 
comfort zone in theBruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> bit. It's more exciting – 
provocative, odd, freeing – to see CK laugh at sadness, not in denial of how 
bad it feels, but in celebration of the fact that it's part of real, unmediated 
life.

"And that's why I don't want to get a phone for my kids," he concludes – these 
intense hits of melancholy being more deeply felt than anything that happens on 
a handheld screen.

Other comics could come up with this – plenty talk about the baleful effects 
of technology. But few go this deep, and are this unflinching in the face of 
the bad things in life – the things comedy only occasionally addresses, and 
then circuitously or effortfully, with noise or gloss. This skit, by contrast, 
is Zen. CK isn't selfish or over-dramatising – he doesn't think the sadness is 
specific to him, he knows it's just "being a person, right?" And so humour 
emerges, at the arbitrariness of it all, at the joke of our supposed 
rationalism and self-control, and at the disparity between "satisfaction with 
your products" and the infinite mysteries of the human condition.

What's delicious is CK's cheerful matter-of-factness about all this, as he 
audaciously assumes that we're all adults, so why would we pretend life is 
otherwise? (And anyway, to laugh about it together is to sort-of triumph over 
it, right?) This lack of prissiness extends to the peripheral detail: comics 
today are more conventionally at the mercy of their technophile kids, whereas 
CK makes not the slightest apology for his I'm-the-boss parenting.

Now I'm thinking about this routine whenever I twitchily reach for my iPhone, 
to check who's @'ed me on Twitter, or what spam's arrived in my inbox since 
five minutes ago. I knew that was a bad habit; nowLouis CK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/louis-ck> has helped shape my sense 
of how bad, and why. And next time I feel an onrush of "forever empty", I might 
find room amid the existential panic for a slight smile, that I'm alive enough 
to be experiencing it, and daft enough to think texting, like, 50 people, is in 
any way a productive alternative.

Three to see


Alan Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/26/alan-davies-my-family-values>
In 2012, he returned to standup after 10 years away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/aug/13/alan-davies-edinburgh-comedy-review>
. The bug has clearly bitten again, as Davies now returns with a touring show, 
Little Victories, about parenthood and, he says, "the daily battles that come 
with it".
• Friday 4 April, Lighthouse, Poole 
<http://www.lighthousepoole.co.uk/alan-davies-little-victories-tour-2014> (0844 
406 8666); then touring.

One Night Stanshall
Tribute night to the late Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bonzo_Dog_Doo-Dah_Band> eccentric Vivian Stanshall
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/nov/29/old-music-bozo-dog-intro-outro>
, featuring a complete performance of his spoken-word comedy recordingSir Henry 
at Rawlinson End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/oct/28/previews.theguide>, and with a 
cast including theRutles' Neil Innes <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neil_Innes> 
and Michael Gove's favourite rapperMr B the Gentleman Rhymer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/25/michael-gove-chap-hop-favourite-genre-mr-b>
.
• Bloomsbury Theatre <http://www.thebloomsbury.com/event/run/1870>, London 
(020-3108 1000) Tuesday 8 April.

Ursula Burns
"A stilt-walking harpist who won an Irish comedy award by accident 
<http://thejohnfleming.wordpress.com/tag/ursula-burns/>," as one critic 
described Ursula Burns at Edinburgh last year. The musical comic went on to 
secure a Malcolm Hardee award nomination – usually a sign that something 
interesting's happening – and now she has three dates in her native Belfast.
• Lyric Theatre, Belfast 
<http://www.lyrictheatre.co.uk/whats-on/specific/whats-on/i-do-it-for-the-money>
 (028-9038 1081) 10-12 April.
 