
The question that was posed to Louis van Gaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/louis-van-gaal> at the press conference 
earlier in the season seemed innocuous enough. The subject was Wesley Sneijder, 
who Van Gaal had recalled to the Holland team and the manager was asked what he 
would do if the midfielder did the business in the World Cup qualifier against 
Estonia.

Van Gaal was in the throes of a characteristically passionate answer when he 
suddenly threw out his arms and bellowed into the microphone thathe would 
celebrate like this <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e2LSoNYMAtY>. It was one 
of those moments that took you aback and there were slightly nervous laughs 
from the floor. But nobody ought really to have been surprised because this, 
after all, is Van Gaal; the king of zaniness and over-the-top outpourings, not 
to mention latent hostility towards the media.

The incident made a mark in Holland; there were the obligatory house music 
remixes on YouTube and, in many ways, it provided a snapshot of the borderline 
craziness of the 62-year-old national team manager who is, by some distance, 
the most colourful and controversial character in Dutch football.

He is also the most in demand. Tottenham Hotspur have made overtures towards 
him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/23/louis-van-gaal-tottenham-manager-world-cup-holland>
 and Manchester Unitedhave him under consideration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/apr/21/david-moyes-manchester-united-manager-five-contenders>
 to become the permanent successor to David Moyes,who they sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/apr/22/david-moyes-sacked-manchester-united>
 on Tuesday morning. Van Gaal is likely to have other options as he approaches 
the end of his contract with Holland – he becomes a free agent after the World 
Cup finals in Brazil – and he could be in a position to play some of them off 
against others.

The sense that he has been waiting for the Moyes Out development at Old 
Trafford has not endeared him at Tottenham. Hemet with them last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/22/tottenham-tim-sherwood-daniel-levy-manager-southampton>
 before they appointed Tim Sherwood as André Villas-Boas's successor and he has 
remainedprominent in their thoughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/apr/12/tottenham-hotspur-spurs-louis-van-gaal-manager>
 as they prepare to make another change in the summer.

Van Gaal has made no secret of his desire to manage in the Premier League and 
he is also quite clear about where he sees his standing in the game. Having 
previously managed Ajax, Barcelona andBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/apr/10/louis-van-gaal-bayern-munich>
, he believes that he is a part of the very elite. If it were a choice between 
Manchester United and Tottenham, he would choose the former, and the knowledge 
of this might explain why some employees at White Hart Lane had started to 
pooh-pooh the idea of Van Gaal coming to them even before Moyes' dismissal.

Van Gaal is the subject of endless fascination and scrutiny, particularly in 
Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland>, where a book about the 
complexities of his character was published last month. In 'O, Louis', the 
journalist Hugo Borst examines what makes Van Gaal such a special and unique 
person, why he is always fighting and, essentially, how he tiptoes the line 
between madness and genius.

Consider some of the ego-centric stories – most infamously, the pants-down 
motivational speech in the Bayern dressing-room, which feels apocryphal but is 
true – and the line appears blurred, to say the least.

In that scene, the angry Van Gaal disrobed in an attempt to make a point about 
why he substituted players, although confusion reigned. Luca Toni, Bayern's 
striker at the time, thought Van Gaal was suggesting ‚ "he had the balls" to 
drop anyone, yet the manager actually wanted to say that any substitutions were 
not for his ego but the sake of the team.

Van Gaal might be extreme in word and deed but his appeal has always been 
located in his tactical knowledge. His analysis is notoriously detailed and 
accurate and he sets up his teams both to playattractive passing football and 
to win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/feb/16/leander-schaerlaeckens-eredivisie-dutch-football>
. He was influenced by Holland's total football of the 1970s, when he was a 
young midfielder making his way in the game but his managerial CV is embossed 
by trophies.

His time in charge of Ajax, between 1991-97, was his most glorious 
<http://observer.theguardian.com/osm/story/0,,708220,00.html>, with three 
Eredivisie titles (including an unbeaten league season in 1995); the Uefa Cup 
in 1992 and the Champions League in 1995. He became a knight of the Dutch 
realm. He also won La Liga with Barcelona in 1998 and 1999; one more Eredivisie
with unfancied AZ Alkmaar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/20/eredivisie-az-alkmaar-dutch-football>
 in 2009 and the Bundesliga with Bayern in 2010.

Van Gaal wins players' respect through his vision and know-how, but he also 
works hard to build strong relationships; to be connected with them on a 
personal level. Players past and present talk of how he remembers their wives' 
birthdays and the names of their children while Van Gaal has described himself 
as a "relationships coach".

His methods have tended to work the best with young players or older ones who 
have remained open-minded and hungry. Van Gaal has struggled at times with 
those that have achieved star status and become more cynical. An example came 
in the qualifying campaign for the 2002 World Cup, in his first spell as the 
Holland manager, when he took over a squad that featured many of the players 
from his Champions League-winning Ajax team.

Back then, the likes of Frank and Ronald De Boer, Clarence Seedorf, Edgar 
Davids and Patrick Kluivert were determined to make their names and they 
responded to Van Gaal. Years on and with reputations established, the 
relationship was not so productive. Egos collided. Holland missed out on Japan 
and South Korea.

Control is fundamental to Van Gaal and there are invariably problems when he 
feels that his authority over technical matters has been questioned. They flare 
regularly with the press. He once told a journalist: "Am I so smart or are you 
so stupid?" which has proved to be one of his most famous quotes, although 
disagreements with club colleagues have pockmarked his career.

It was perhaps inevitable that he would clash with Uli Hoeness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/mar/07/bayern-munich-louis-van-gaal-bundesliga>
 and Karl-Heinz Rummenigge at Bayern; football men who were, nominally, on the 
administrative side but who have strong opinions about the team. "Van Gaal's 
failure is clearly in his attitude," Rummenigge said after Van Gaal had left in 
2011. "If that mentality is customary – as it is with Felix Magath – you have 
to have success. If it fails, you lose your friends."

Van Gaal endured friction at Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> with Rivaldo, the Brazil 
forward while, during his spell as Ajax's technical director in 2004, he 
clashed with the manager, Ronald Koeman. During a training camp in Portugal, 
Van Gaal took a chair for himself and placed it on the side of the pitch and, 
arms folded, he would watch all of Koeman's sessions from it. It is not 
difficult to imagine how Van Gaal might have reacted had the roles been 
reversed.

At Alkmaar, after a difficult season in 2007-08, when the team finished 11th 
out of 18, Van Gaal had wanted to quit. Many of the squad lacked hunger and his 
methods were not working. But a few key players urged him to stay and shape the 
team as he wanted for the following season. He did so, dropping the difficult 
players, imposing his mentality and winning the title by 11 points.

When Van Gaal can manage in his way, with his control and with players that he 
rates, the results can be impressive. He almost went toManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> in 2002 only for Sir 
Alex Ferguson to reverse his decision to retire. The fireworks have long come 
as standard.
 