
Directors: Rob Epstein <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0258531/?ref_=tt_ov_dr> and 
Jeffrey Friedman <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0295243/?ref_=tt_ov_dr>
Entertainment grade: B+
History grade: C+

Linda Boreman, credited as Linda Lovelace, was the star of 1972 porn film Deep 
Throat. Later in life, she became a prominent figure in the anti-pornography 
movement.

Structure
 Lovelace Photograph: Allstar/Millennium Films/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Lovelace is a film in two parts. In the first, a young, naive and compliant 
Linda (Amanda Seyfried) falls in love with shady Chuck Traynor (Peter 
Sarsgaard), stars in Deep Throat and achieves fame in a whirl of kitschy 70s 
glamour. Then the film flips back to the beginning and starts filling in the 
nasty bits it left out the first time round. This is a clever way to handle 
Boreman's own take on events. Like Katie Price, she published four 
autobiographies. (Pricehas announced her fifth 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/news/at-the-tender-age-of-35-katie-price-is-to-release-her-fifth-autobiography-8665426.html>
, which would put her on a par with Julius Caesar – though historians think 
Caesar actually wrote two of his himself).

Evidence
 Lovelace Photograph: Dale Robinette 
The first two Lovelace books, published in the 70s, were lascivious tales of 
her adventures as a "superfreak". The second two, in the 80s, told a much 
darker story of her being raped, beaten, prostituted and forced into 
pornography at gunpoint by Traynor. At the time, and perhaps still now, many 
have found it difficult to accept Boreman's apparently changed story. Yet it's 
clear from even the most cursory reading – or even not reading and just looking 
at the pictures – that the earlier autobiographies were intended as 
fantasy-pornography rather than strictly documentary material. Both Boreman and 
Traynor stated that Traynor wrote the first; Boreman said her later boyfriend
David Winters <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Winters_%28choreographer%29>, 
who isn't in the film, wrote the second.

Boreman faced much greater opposition to bring the third, Ordeal, to the 
public. She tried 33 publishers before she found one who would accept it, and 
they obliged her – as shown in the film – to pass an extensive lie-detector 
test on its contents. She stuck by its claims for the rest of her life. This 
makes Ordeal substantially more credible as a piece of historical evidence than 
the first two books, though it is so upsetting some readers may wish it wasn't.

Pornography
 Lovelace Photograph: Dale Robinette 
The film captures the spirit of Boreman's later books, but it could be accused 
of tidying things up. Some of these tidyings are reasonable: presenting 
Boreman's harrowing account of appearing under coercion in a bestiality porn 
film called Dogarama to a mainstream audience would be, to say the least, 
challenging. More questionable is its construction of a conventional 
fall-from-grace narrative. Lovelace shows Linda being drawn step by step into 
ever worse things by Chuck, culminating in him selling her to five men for a 
gang bang after the Deep Throat premiere. The real Boreman and Traynor both 
agreed this did happen (though Boreman said it was rape, while Traynor claimed 
she "wanted to do it"), but it took place right at the beginning of their 
relationship – before their marriage, before Deep Throat, before fame.

Effectively, the story as told in Ordeal flows the other way from the film. 
Boreman's relationship with Traynor began as complete hell, and – though it did 
not improve – her increasing celebrity gradually allowed her more independence. 
Interestingly, it was porn stardom that gave her the chance to escape. As she 
put it, Deep Throat was "at once a low point and a salvation".

People
 Lovelace Photograph: Dale Robinette 
Without exception, the performances in Lovelace are brilliant – especially the 
principals, as well as Robert Patrick and an unrecognisable Sharon Stone as 
Linda's ice-cold parents. Seyfried gives presence to a role that could have 
been flimsy. Off camera, Linda Lovelace was a deeply damaged person stuck in a 
really terrible relationship. After years of abuse, no one knew who the real 
Linda was – perhaps including her.

Politics
 Lovelace Photograph: Dale Robinette 
Some critics have taken issue 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/08/07/lovelace_the_troubled_porn_star_who_changed_history/>
 with the fact that the film ends before Boreman's involvement in the 
anti-pornography movement, alongside feminists Gloria Steinem, Susan 
Brownmiller, Andrea Dworkin and Catharine MacKinnon. BothSteinem and MacKinnon 
advised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/shortcuts/2013/aug/26/lovelace-movie-gloria-steinem-catherine-mackinnon>
 on the film.Demi Moore was originally cast 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/demi-moore-gloria-steinem-linda-lovelace-277291>
 as Steinem, then replaced by Sarah Jessica Parker, but her scenes didn't make 
it to the final cut. That story isn't straightforward, either. Boremanlater 
complained 
<http://flavorwire.com/408543/the-post-lovelace-story-of-linda-lovelace> that 
some feminists used her for their own gain, though she remained friendly with 
Dworkin and MacKinnon.

Verdict

A valiant attempt to make a fair and emotionally truthful biopic of Linda 
Lovelace – though the woman herself remains unknowable.

More from the Reel history series

• Reel history on Fair Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/21/http-www-theguardian-com-film-2013-aug-21-naomi-watts-fair-game-wmds>
• Reel history on The Enigma of Kasper Hauser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/aug/15/enigma-kasper-hauser-werner-herzog>
• Reel history on Land of the Pharaohs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/aug/06/land-of-the-pharaohs-reel-history>
 