
She was young, spirited and rich. It was the 1970s and Kris McDivitt seemed to 
come straight from California central casting; the glamorous ski-racing 
daughter of an oil-industry man who made her fortune as the first CEO of what 
was to become the billion-dollar outdoor clothing company Patagonia.

And then in 1993, aged 43, Kris McDivitt unexpectedly fell in love with Doug 
Tompkins, the adventure-junkie rock-climber and deep green environmentalist who 
had co-founded not one but two giant outdoor-clothing companies, North Face and 
Esprit.

They married (she changed her surname) and the eco-power couple cashed in 
their shares and uprooted from California to live the wilderness dream in the 
real Patagonia where they went off-grid, flying between homes in the forests 
and mountains of Chile andArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>.

Doug Tompkins: life and death of the ecological visionary behind North Face
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/13/douglas-tompkins-co-founder-north-face-chile-conservation>
Doug Tompkins had made $150m from the sale of Esprit alone, and Kris had made 
millions running Patagonia for 20 years. The idea was for each of them to set 
up a large conservation charity, combine their fortunes and buy up – and then 
restore – millions of acres of threatened wilderness.

Patagonia had it all: ancient forest, wetland, soaring mountain, fjords, 
coast, glaciers and active volcanoes. Their plan, says McDivitt Tompkins, 
talking during a trip to London, was to buy and restore as much land as they 
could, improve and protect it, and then return it to people as public, national 
parks.

So they bought 2.2m acres. But then, nearly a year ago, the remarkable love 
story of the world’s two wealthiest private conservation philanthropists 
abruptly stalled. After nearly 24 years’ of working together to own and protect 
more land than any other individuals in history and having together spent an 
estimated $375m, Doug died in a kayaking accident inChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile>, leaving Kris with mountain, forest 
and steppe, but utterly bereft.

“His last trip? Compared with everything else he had done this was a 
cake-walk,” she says. Doug had been on a five-day kayaking trip on General 
Carrera Lake in the heart of the Andes mountains with Patagonia founder and 
owner Yvon Chouinard and other experienced kayakers. On the third day, the wind 
kicked up, the his two-man canoe capsized 300 metres from the lake shore and 
Tompkins was pitched into near-freezing water with 6ft waves. A helicopter 
eventually plucked him out and rushed him to hospital 75 miles away, but he 
died of hypothermia. “It took me five hours to get there,” says McDivitt 
Tompkins quietly.

“Going to Chile was a leap of faith. I retired at 43, I fell in love. I 
dreamed of going to Patagonia and living there. Doug brought the possibility to 
my mind – it was his idea to go. When I first moved down there, he was 
preparing to buy land for conservation. That was 1993. There was no internet, 
no [mobile] phones.

Her loss is immense, she says. “I was, I am, madly in love with him until the 
day he died. Every day of our lives. He made a 300-page book of our life 
together, thousands of pictures and letters. That life is over. Or not. I have 
had a charmed life, but I miss him so.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fhow-two-clothing-tycoons-saved-patagonia-doug-tomkins-kris-mcdivitt-tomkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b4c5e639aa9c178cf44ae1eb8b6a8edb28cf514%2F0_63_4042_2425%2F4042.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%2C%20death%20and%20rewilding%20%E2%80%93%20how%20two%20clothing%20tycoons%20saved%20Patagonia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fhow-two-clothing-tycoons-saved-patagonia-doug-tomkins-kris-mcdivitt-tomkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%2C%20death%20and%20rewilding%20%E2%80%93%20how%20two%20clothing%20tycoons%20saved%20Patagonia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fhow-two-clothing-tycoons-saved-patagonia-doug-tomkins-kris-mcdivitt-tomkins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b4c5e639aa9c178cf44ae1eb8b6a8edb28cf514%2F0_63_4042_2425%2F4042.jpg>
 Kris with Douglas in 2009. Photograph: Daniel Garcia/AFP/Getty Images 
It shows, but Conservacion Patagonica 
<http://www.conservacionpatagonica.org/home.htm> and Conservation Land Trust 
<http://www.theconservationlandtrust.org/>, the two organisations the couple 
founded and which McDivitt Tompkins now runs, have been busy since the 
accident, and the work to restore and give back the land is now nearly complete.

Within a year, five new national parks in some of the wildest and most 
dramatic lands of Chile and Argentina will have been created, and three more 
will have been greatly expanded. With the two governments chipping in more 
land, more than 10m acres (over 15 times the size of the Lake Distric) will 
have been protected from logging, ranching, mining, hydro schemes and 
industrial development. “In a sense we were growing national parks,” she says. 
“They are like children.”

McDivitt Tompkins and her team these days are welcomed by the presidents of 
Chile and Argentina, but when the gringo couple first went to Latin America, 
their motives were questioned. “We were opposed for four years. We were ‘the 
couple who cut Chile in half’. They said we were setting up a nuclear-waste 
dump or a new Jewish state,” she says.

Leftwing nationalists accused them of American imperialism and 
neo-colonialism, rightwingers of wanting to steal Chile’s fresh water and of 
setting up a green-conservation cartel aimed to stop development. When they 
became one of Chile’s largest landowners, there were fears for national 
security.

“In Santiago, I was assured that Doug Tompkins was a CIA agent,” said Peruvian 
Nobel prize-winning writer Mario Vargas Llosa 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/spiegel/eco-friend-or-national-foe-a-gringo-buys-south-america-one-ranch-at-a-time-a-379264.html>
, who visited them. Chile threatened to strip the couple of their land holdings 
but when the threats of massive hydro dams, mines, and deforestation became 
clearer, people began to better understand their motives.

“The land we had bought first was owned by Chileans, mostly absent landlords. 
We bought farms and restored them. They ranged from Patagonian grasslands to 
forests and mountains. It was always the plan to give it back. We gave the last 
of the Argentina land back on 23 September,” she says.

They applied the skills they used to build their business empires. “We just 
rolled up our sleeves and did it. There is nothing we wanted to do that we 
didn’t. That’s not to say there’s not more to do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fhow-two-clothing-tycoons-saved-patagonia-doug-tomkins-kris-mcdivitt-tomkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a5e955f35746d5f307ab1f4e54dc121b16a3f52%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Love%2C%20death%20and%20rewilding%20%E2%80%93%20how%20two%20clothing%20tycoons%20saved%20Patagonia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fhow-two-clothing-tycoons-saved-patagonia-doug-tomkins-kris-mcdivitt-tomkins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Love%2C%20death%20and%20rewilding%20%E2%80%93%20how%20two%20clothing%20tycoons%20saved%20Patagonia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fhow-two-clothing-tycoons-saved-patagonia-doug-tomkins-kris-mcdivitt-tomkins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a5e955f35746d5f307ab1f4e54dc121b16a3f52%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 A herd of guanacos - related to the llamas – in souther Chile in the region 
the couple created Patagonia National Park Photograph: Melanie Stetson 
Freeman/Christian Science Monitor/Getty Images 
“If we hadn’t bought the land? Then the grasslands of Patagonia would not have 
begun to heal themselves, the rainforests would have been logged. We look at 
conservation as offering an economic development. I say we are not taking land 
out of production but bringing in something else. We employ hundreds of people 
and instead of kids leaving the area, there’s a reason for them to stay. 
There’s an economy they can plug into.”

Her model for conservation in the Patagonia region has been the US 
national-park system with its emphasis on tourism, walking trails, camping 
grounds and places to stay. But the conservation brief has expanded to 
returning animals to areas where they were hunted out. This brings her into 
conflict with farmers, fishermen and others.

“Rewilding is now a term used to bring back species. It’s tough. There is 
opposition from people; there may not be enough prey for the animals who are 
reintroduced. It is complex. We are now rewilding in northern Argentina and 
have brought back species such as giant anteaters, white-collared peccaries and 
the pampas deer. If you don’t have wildlife in these places, people will not 
visit. Landscape without wildlife is just scenery.”

The world is in poor shape, she says. “Can any system cope with the vast 
numbers of people we have? With huge population numbers ... it’s a perfect 
storm. I think it will take some kind of crisis before we are forced to take 
action as humans. It’s already a crisis. If people don’t call it a crisis now 
what are they waiting for?”

At heart, McDivitt Tompkins may still be the no-nonsense CEO, and is still a 
board member at the Patagonia clothing company. “It’s not that politicians 
cannot do anything but they are so focused on themselves that they can’t do the 
right thing. People need to get out of bed every day and have to do something 
that is not to do with them but to fight for something they love and identify 
with.

“We don’t have the luxury of being complacent. So, no more getting up in the 
morning and reading the Guardian and calling it a day. You have to act at the 
end of the day; you have to do something.”

“It’s not about money. There is just no excuse for doing nothing. Abdication 
is not a possibility. Whoever you are, wherever your interest lies, whatever 
you’ve fallen in love with, you get out of bed every morning and you do 
something. You act, you step into the fray, and you fight for a human society 
that is in balance with the natural world.

“We have no choice. Otherwise we might as well kiss our beautiful planet 
goodbye. I will be there in Patagonia till the day I die. That’s the idea.”
 