
It was an unremarkable Friday evening in June. I sat across from my road 
manager – the same guy who told me beer tastes better when someone else is 
buying – at a local bar. It’s a bar with no signage that we affectionately call 
“the garden”.

To call it a bar is generous. The garden is, at best, a spot: an unassuming 
gritty place with plastic chairs, almond trees, an inexpensive sound system, a 
kiosk, and most importantly for the clientele, cheap booze. On any given 
evening you will find a random mix of disenchanted elderly men with a distaste 
for sobriety, and young men with a penchant for staying low-key.

Half the people are too intoxicated to care I’m there and the other half give 
me friendly dap, shout a line from one of my songs and keep it moving.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTbZf7kKf-rU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTbZf7kKf-rU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTbZf7kKf-rU&media=>
The sound of young Ghana, Afrobeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/19/the-rise-of-afrobeats>, 
dominates the playlist at the garden, alongside tunes from our regional cousins 
in Nigeria. It wasn’t always so. On this unremarkable Friday I’m reminded of 
this remarkable feat: we have achieved a prolific music scene without a 
formidable production infrastructure, or the presence of big record labels 
which can dole out a recording budget to young artists. Underneath the 
predominantlyAuto-Tuned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/06/auto-tune> vocals are young 
voices that want to be heard.

I have not only felt the restlessness of youth here, simmering and festering, 
I’ve lived it

I understand too well the burning desire to have your voice heard even without 
the backing of a traditional label. About 2005 I had just graduated, with a now 
dusty economics degree and a tonne of musical aspiration but little knowhow. I 
took matters into my own hands. Piece by piece I accumulated second-hand 
recording equipment off Craigslist. My apartment became my studio and in 2007 I 
released my first album, Manifestations, to much acclaim in Minnesota. 
Sometimes creativity is simply making a lot out of a little. I smile so broadly 
when I see my younger compatriots inGhana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana> adopt the same do-it-yourself 
approach.

Truth be told, from quaint Saltpond to big city Accra, creative spaces are 
neither fancy nor spiffy in these parts. Dancefloors are ruled by tunes 
toasting the glamours of life, tunes that are made in small, bedroom-sized 
studios, often with broken-down air conditioners rather than platinum discs 
decorating the walls. Optimists will muse at the irony, cynics will scoff and 
call it a cruel joke. Both factions would have to acknowledge that a lot of 
music is being made, regardless.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIF3BiwQTwhk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIF3BiwQTwhk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIF3BiwQTwhk&media=>
Our parents’ generation often humblebrag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/05/marketing-humblebrag-bigging-up>
 to us about how it was in their day. The plethora of highlife bands, legendary 
club nights at the Ambassador hotel (now the plush Mövenpick hotel), or howAB 
Crentsil and the Sweet Talks <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IF3BiwQTwhk> 
recorded their 1978 record Party Time in Hollywood in Los Angeles. And of 
course they hadOsibisa <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x1QM3_fguB8>, who were 
regulars in the charts, and easily the biggest Ghanaian band of all time. Yes, 
times have changed. They can question our competence but they can’t begrudge us 
our will and zeal to create in a climate where music is regularly consumed but 
there is little support for it financially.

I moved back home three and a half years ago after a 10-year sojourn in 
America. I have not only felt the restlessness of youth here, simmering and 
festering, I’ve lived it. Frequent power cuts alone (unaffectionately called
dumsor) have made music more expensive and frustrating to create. Yet there is 
an increasing cadre of young hopefuls who invest their lives in creative 
ventures.

Take, for instance, the Chale Wote street art festival 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34046391>: a colourful yearly arts 
extravaganza in the heart of Jamestown, a historical neighbourhood along the 
Accra coastline more famous for its boxers. Chale Wote is an edgy, inclusive 
and bold initiative that invites artists out of the periphery and encourages 
young people to unapologetically indulge in homegrown art. Conceived by a pair 
of visionaries, Mantse Aryeequaye and Sionne Neely, Chale Wote has emerged 
despite the absence of a big budget.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fmanifest-ghana-musician-music-art-fashion-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F6%2F1441565445834%2Fbaa8208b-0664-4432-bdd0-038f5957578e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=M.anifest%3A%20Art%20may%20not%20feed%20us%20but%20to%20be%20young%2C%20restless%20and%20creative%20is%20still%20a%20joy%20%7C%20M.anifest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fmanifest-ghana-musician-music-art-fashion-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=M.anifest%3A%20Art%20may%20not%20feed%20us%20but%20to%20be%20young%2C%20restless%20and%20creative%20is%20still%20a%20joy%20%7C%20M.anifest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fmanifest-ghana-musician-music-art-fashion-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F6%2F1441565445834%2Fbaa8208b-0664-4432-bdd0-038f5957578e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Chale Wote street art festival is a colourful yearly arts extravaganza in 
Jamestown, along the Accra coastline. Photograph: Emmanuel Bobbie 
Art is not a luxury, it’s our identity. It’s our message in a time capsule. 
It’s our inspiration to break from the humdrum, to know that we can shatter the 
ceilings of possibility and the frustrations of our daily routines. We’re in 
desperate need of inspiration to develop our homeland. We want more. No – we 
need more. We can no longer just cling on to the glories of the Osibisas, El 
Anatsuis, Ablade Glovers and other greats. We must contribute to shaping the 
look, feel and spiritual essence of our homeland.

Granted, we have some things to sort out. We’re a generation seemingly more 
obsessed with commerce than with art. After all “e be art we go chop?” (loosely 
translated, this pidgin English means, “is it art that will feed us?”). I know 
many young entrepreneurial visual artists, musicians, fashion designers and 
filmmakers who make work on shoestring budgets that is magical and can 
transcend borders.

As I was about to leave the garden my song Forget Dem came on. A group of 
young guys sang along as loud as they could, eager to let me know they 
recognised me. I smiled, appreciative.

I contemplate giving them a peek behind the curtain. If only they knew that 
the song they hear on the radio, which accompanies the music video they see on 
TV, was recorded in a tiny ghetto studio in Tema. Howdumsor rudely interrupted 
our session, how super producer Killbeatz rented a generator in defiance of the 
power gods. But I don’t. After all, when it comes to being an artist in Ghana, 
“nowhere cool” – our way of saying the grass isn’t greener on the other side. 
Still, we power on, fuelled by passion. Oh the joys of being young, restless 
and creative inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. No stopping 
us now.
 