
Making my first record, On How Life Is, was cool because I wasn't expecting 
anything from it. I'd made a record before on Atlantic [Records], and nothing 
happened with it – I ended up getting dropped from the label. So this time 
around, I was on a new label, with a whole bunch of new musicians, and I had no 
expectations at all. That's a really awesome place to be when you make a 
record: there's no disappointment, and everything you do feels like a surprise.
 Macy Gray: On How Life Is Photograph: internet 
It's not the best record I've ever made, but it's really good. I'm a much 
better singer now – that's come with touring, and of course all the drinking 
and smoking has helped, too. But I wouldn't want to change the vocals – they 
suit that record, and where I was at that time. There's a great energy to them; 
you can hear that I'm new to this game. I learned so much in making it: how to 
use mics, how to make things sound right, how to work with other musicians. How 
to make records properly, basically.

The sound we were making was really something new and different – the idea was 
to take an R&B record and make it with live music, so you got R&B mixed with a 
rock'n'roll sensibility. In trying to make that sound work, I learned about the 
importance of always taking my music to another level – to keep pushing 'til 
your music moves you, 'til it really means something.

The only song from the record that I still listen to often is track number 
eight – I've Committed Murder. I still love that song – it's pretty much the 
culmination of all my hopes for that album. But I do have the record on shuffle 
in my car. Sometimes it comes on, and I think: "Oh, now I see what all the fuss 
was about." Back when we made it, I didn't really get why people were so into 
it – I was pleased by its success, but I didn't really understand the reasons. 
Now, I understand – it sounds like nothing else that was around at that time.
 