
Ted Kotcheff, the director of Wake in Fright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/17/wake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff>
, recently told me how he was inspired by what the German philosopher Gottfried 
Leibniz called “petite perceptions”. Before rolling the camera on his 1971 
masterpiece, Kotcheff purchased thousands of dead flies from Sydney university, 
spread them everywhere on set (on top of books, on the ground, on shelves and 
tables), and sprayed the air with a fine dust-like substance.

You can’t see these things on screen but, he argued, they have a psychological 
impact.

Mad Max: Fury Road review – Tom Hardy is a macho Mr Bean in brilliantly pimped 
reboot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/11/mad-max-fury-road-review-tom-hardy>
George Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/film/george-miller> relishes this 
sort of approach to film-making. The dystopian Mad Max universe, with its 
visions of a junkyard future comprised of the flotsam and jetsam of human 
civilisation, is full of recycled commodities: what the director calls “found 
objects repurposed”. And thus the perfect sandbox for Leibnizian alternate 
worlds etched out in small details.

Few viewers of Mad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road> would be aware, for 
instance, that there is a subtle bird theme running through the design and 
makeup of The Valkyrie, a Warrior Woman-esque character played by Megan Gale. 
Fewer still would know an illustration of a bird was carved on to the handle of 
her gun, a stainless steel Winchester rifle. You can’t see it on screen but, 
again, it’s there and in some way makes a difference.

Nobody can say precisely what effect monochrome photography has on petite 
perceptions; the extent to which it makes certain things even harder to notice. 
Especially in the rare instance of a production that was originally in colour. 
And by George (Miller, as the case may be), such re-stylisation throws a 
spanner in works when it comes to contemplating how a film’s visual tone 
informs overall psychological impact.


I was one of many Mad Max super-fans who, over the weekend, returned to see 
Fury Road on the big screen – this time in a rejigged colour-drained Black & 
Chrome edition that is out now on DVD and Blu-ray in a special two-disc set 
(which includes the original version).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmad-max-fury-road-in-black-and-white-a-fascinating-reevaluation-of-a-groundbreaking-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde6c7f8c6848ef27c7fa4c9ba0ef13cf2a174517%2F0_0_1464_2200%2F1464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Max%3A%20Fury%20Road%20in%20black%20and%20white%3A%20a%20fascinating%20re-evaluation%20of%20a%20groundbreaking%20film%20%7C%20Luke%20Buckmaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmad-max-fury-road-in-black-and-white-a-fascinating-reevaluation-of-a-groundbreaking-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Max%3A%20Fury%20Road%20in%20black%20and%20white%3A%20a%20fascinating%20re-evaluation%20of%20a%20groundbreaking%20film%20%7C%20Luke%20Buckmaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmad-max-fury-road-in-black-and-white-a-fascinating-reevaluation-of-a-groundbreaking-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde6c7f8c6848ef27c7fa4c9ba0ef13cf2a174517%2F0_0_1464_2200%2F1464.jpg>
 ‘It feels like the film itself has become nostalgic for the film itself.’ 
Photograph: Jasin Boland/Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc. 
The director has spoken about how he has always wanted to release a Mad Max 
movie in black and white, and considers this the best version. I suspect you’ll 
be hard-pressed to find somebody who agrees with him, given the rousing burnt 
orange look of the original. But it is unquestionably a fascinating way to 
re-evaluate the greatest action film of the new millennium.

On the Fury Road PR circuit Miller observed, with a touch of bemusement, how 
the reception to Fury Road demonstrated a strange compulsion in audiences: that 
they can becomenostalgic for the apocalypse 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/05/14/nostalgic_for_the_apocalypse_george_millers_long_strange_trip_to_mad_max_fury_road/>
.

In a sense Black & Chrome is a weird extension of that thinking. It feels like 
the film itself has become nostalgic for the film itself. Or, as I prefer to 
think of it, that somebody separate from the narrative has got their hands on 
Fury Road and changed the perspective from which we view it.

In real life that person is obviously Miller but it’s more fun to think of 
them as a character linked to this universe. Perhaps somebody older who is 
recalling the story. The misty black-and-white surface is, then, a reflection 
of that. I was reminded of words familiar to Mad Max aficionados: “My life 
fades. The vision dims. All that remains are memories.”

Those are spoken by an elderly person narrating the opening sequence of 1981’s 
Mad Max 2: The Road Warrior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jul/25/mad-max-2-the-road-warrior-hell-for-leather-roadside-anarchy>
, which contains black-and-white graded footage from the original movie, in a 
faux documentary reel. We eventually learn, at the end of the story, that the 
narrator is one of the characters (the Feral Kid) nearing the end of his life. 
The entire film is him replaying memories of his formative years. Of how, “in 
this blighted place, he learned to live again”.

Miller and his production designer, the now-Oscar-winning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/03/mad-max-fury-road-meet-the-aussies-behind-the-wheel-of-furiosas-war-rig>
 Colin Gibson, filled out the universe of Fury Road with the ethos that just 
because the setting is a hell-in-a-handbasket wasteland does not mean it can’t 
have things of beauty. A few of these manifested as pocket-sized doodads in the 
possession of The Keeper of the Seeds (Melissa Jaffer), including a sprig of 
green leaves. That green looked radiant, contrasted against an acid blue night 
sky.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmad-max-fury-road-in-black-and-white-a-fascinating-reevaluation-of-a-groundbreaking-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cd9ee6cf83646342e650d08503049d700c55905%2F0_0_2200_1465%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mad%20Max%3A%20Fury%20Road%20in%20black%20and%20white%3A%20a%20fascinating%20re-evaluation%20of%20a%20groundbreaking%20film%20%7C%20Luke%20Buckmaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmad-max-fury-road-in-black-and-white-a-fascinating-reevaluation-of-a-groundbreaking-film%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mad%20Max%3A%20Fury%20Road%20in%20black%20and%20white%3A%20a%20fascinating%20re-evaluation%20of%20a%20groundbreaking%20film%20%7C%20Luke%20Buckmaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fmad-max-fury-road-in-black-and-white-a-fascinating-reevaluation-of-a-groundbreaking-film%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cd9ee6cf83646342e650d08503049d700c55905%2F0_0_2200_1465%2F2200.jpg>
 Charlize Theron in the ‘Black & Chrome edition’ of Mad Max: Fury Road. 
Photograph: Jasin Boland/Warner Bros. Entertainment, Inc. 
That is, before Miller came and smoked it all away. In Black & Chrome these 
fleeting morsels of beauty have been all but eradicated; there is literally no 
colour left. Same goes, of course, for grander aesthetic things, like the 
mighty mustard brown sand dunes of Namibia, which broke up the landscape like 
bumpy breasts from God. There’s no question the special effects, many of which 
involve fireballs and explosions, have lost a little of their lustre.

And yet, something enthralling and anachronistic has been added to the pot: 
Fury Road now a time capsule for a past that never happened. Miller has swapped 
out the beauty of detail with a broader, all-pervading sense of style, which 
gives us reason to evaluate it anew. As life fades and the vision dims, those 
petite perceptions seem to get smaller and smaller.

• Mad Max: Fury Road – Black & Chrome edition is out now on DVD and Blu-ray
 