
Mad Max: Fury Road director George Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/12/fury-road-director-george-miller-i-wont-do-any-more-mad-max-films>
 has scored a DGA nomination while Steven Spielberg has been snubbed for his 
work on cold-war thriller Bridge of Spies.

Golden Globes 2016: 10 things we learned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/11/golden-globes-2016-10-things-we-learned>
The Directors Guild of America also chose to recognise Oscar frontrunners 
Ridley Scott for The Martian andAlejandro González Iñárritu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu> for The 
Revenant. The remaining nominees included Adam McKay for The Big Short and Tom 
McCarthy for Spotlight.

Other than Spielberg, notable snubs include Todd Haynes for Carol, F Gary Gray 
for Straight Outta Compton and Denis Villeneuve for Sicario.

The nominees are usually a clear sign of who will be nominated for a best 
director Oscar with last year’s winner Alejandro González Iñárritu also going 
on to win the Academy Award. Afterwinning the Golden Globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/10/golden-globe-awards-2016-revenant-leonardo-dicaprio-jennifer-lawrence-brie-larson-ricky-gervais>
, it’s likely that Iñárritu will win again. If so, he would become the first 
director in DGA history to win twice in a row.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthe-revenant-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-leonardo-dicaprio-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F6%2F1452087866730%2FKP_1234901_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Revenant%20director%20Alejandro%20Gonz%C3%A1lez%20I%C3%B1%C3%A1rritu%3A%20'So%20much%20pain%20was%20implanted%20in%20that%20time'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthe-revenant-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-leonardo-dicaprio-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Revenant%20director%20Alejandro%20Gonz%C3%A1lez%20I%C3%B1%C3%A1rritu%3A%20%27So%20much%20pain%20was%20implanted%20in%20that%20time%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthe-revenant-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-leonardo-dicaprio-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F6%2F1452087866730%2FKP_1234901_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Watch The Revenant director Alejandro González Iñárritu video interview 
For the first time, the DGA have also decided to recognise emerging talent in 
a new category that praises the outstanding directorial achievement of a 
first-time feature film director.

The nominees include actor Joel Edgerton for his sleeper hit thriller The 
Gift, Marielle Heller for the acclaimed coming-of-age comedy The Diary of a 
Teenage Girl and Alex Garland for the sci-fi drama Ex Machina. The category has 
also recognised international talent with nods for holocaust drama Son of Saul 
director Laszlo Nemes and Fernando Coimbra for Rio-set kidnap thriller A Wolf 
at the Door.

The winners will be announced on 6 February.
 