
The recent wave of autumn film festivals has ushered in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/21/oscars-2016-frontrunners-toronto-film-festival>
 numerous tasteful prestige dramas angling for Oscar glory, but there’s a snag: 
ask most critics if any of these noble hopefuls is better thanMad Max: Fury Road
(Warner, 15) and you’ll see an awful lot of head-shaking. For George Miller’s 
thrillingly deranged resuscitation of a 30-years-dormant action franchise has a 
breadth of vision and depth of conviction unmatched by any mainstream film so 
far this year. It’s a brazenly oversize spectacle, but rooted in surging, 
primal feeling.

I was nervous that revisiting the film on DVD might dim its effect, but no: if 
the image is less overwhelming on a smaller scale, the pure, purposeful drive 
of its storytelling only comes further to the fore. Beneath the film’s glitter 
storm of visual and sonic activity lies a chase narrative of disarming 
simplicity. The joint there-and-back quest ofTom Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hardy>’s eponymous road warrior and 
Charlize Theron <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlize-theron>’s newly 
unleashed soldier Imperator Furiosa, motivated by elemental needs for water and 
earth, is rousingly romantic without resorting to human romance. There’s been 
much talk of the film’s feminist undertow, but its absolute gender parity is 
what stands out most: rare is the action film in which male and female 
characters are so interdependent. All this, and it has electric guitarists 
riffing aboard charging attack cars. Few films will give us more exhilarating 
muchness this year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO3mf_ewjc7s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO3mf_ewjc7s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO3mf_ewjc7s&media=>
 Official trailer for Aloha. 
Which is not to say that Aloha (Columbia, 12A) doesn’t try. There’s so much 
unsorted business inCameron Crowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cameron-crowe>’s unruly, often 
incomprehensible 
romantic-comedy-turned-mystic-travelogue-turned-military-conspiracy-thriller, 
it’s hardly surprising when it climaxes (don’t ask why) with an attempt to beam 
all recorded sound in human history into space. The latest, arguably most 
interesting misstep in the career of the man who madeAlmost Famous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/85703/almost.famous> and Jerry Maguire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jerry-maguire>, Aloha surfaces on iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/movie/aloha/id996648877?v0=WWW-EUUK-ITSTOP100-MOVIES&l=en&ign-mpt=uo%3D4>
 months aftertanking in the US. I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/29/aloha-cameron-crowe-trashed-critics-release-hawaii-bradley-cooper>
t might be the most A-list Hollywood film ever to take the straight-to-VOD 
route.

It’s hard to believe that a film starring Bradley Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradley-cooper>, Emma Stone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-stone> and Rachel McAdams could skip 
cinemas entirely, but equally hard to believe that a Crowe script could 
mismanage their talents so badly, locking them into a zero-stakes love 
triangle: Cooper is the army contractor in Hawaii on an inscrutable 
satellite-launch mission, Stone is the feisty fighter pilot inexplicably 
assigned to assist him, McAdams the old flame with a suddenly flickering 
marriage. Nothing adds up, and that’s before you toss inBill Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bill-murray> as a space-race billionaire with 
designs on the sky; Crowe is reaching for grand statements here about national, 
spiritual and personal security, but his film seems expressly edited to dodge 
any kind of thematic continuity. The title is a Hawaiian greeting that serves 
as both hello and goodbye; it’s all too apt for a fascinating folly that seems 
to be coming and going at once.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAjBLszpEk0o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAjBLszpEk0o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAjBLszpEk0o&media=>
 Official trailer for Tomorrowland: A World Beyond. 
In a busy week for big thinking on screen, alas, Tomorrowland: A World Beyond 
(Disney, 12) draws the shortest straw. Brad Bird’s family fantasy is an even 
more ambitious, idealistic failure thanAloha, but a much stiffer one, ladling 
its whiz-bang World’s Fair delights with a deadening dollop of philosophy 101: 
even as you’re watching the film, it’s awfully hard to determine what it’s 
about.George Clooney <https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgeclooney> is a 
once-prodigious inventor with access to a futuristic parallel dimension shared 
by a bright spark teen (Britt Robertson); together, they embark on a mission 
to... well, exactly what defies the space constraints of this column. Suffice 
to say a film with a chiding knowledge-is-power message gets considerably 
murkier as it goes along, while the wide-eyed retrofuturism that Bird brought to
The Iron Giant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-iron-giant>and The 
Incredibles <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-incredibles>gradually palls 
in live action.

Sign up to our Film Today email
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/feb/17/sign-up-guardian-film-daily-email>
Unusually, this week’s blockbuster offerings might be more robustly eccentric 
than the small-scale fare, though Rufus Norris’sLondon Road (Spirit, 15) at 
least scores novelty points. An earnest but decidedly uncertain adaptation of
Alecky Blythe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2012/apr/08/alecky-blythe-verbatim-theatre-interview>
’s National Theatre docu-musical on the 2006 Ipswich serial murders, it’s well 
performed – with a singing Tom Hardy cameo miles removed fromMad Max – but 
can’t quite mask a certain sneering complacency to Blythe’s much-vaunted 
verbatim technique. If you want cheerier musical entertainment, there’s an 
underplayingDustin Hoffman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dustinhoffman> as 
a stern children’s choirmaster inThe Choir (Curzon, PG), and an overripe Al 
Pacino as a grizzled rock star seeking offstage purpose in Danny Collins 
(Entertainment One, 15). It’s hard to make great claims for either film, but 
their leading men put them across.

Finally, Good People (Lionsgate, 15) is a proficient but half-hearted pulp 
thriller, set none too convincingly in a south London underworld that envelops 
cash-strapped American property developersJames Franco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/james-franco> and Kate Hudson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/katehudson>. Their suitably tetchy 
performances, particularly Hudson’s, give it some B-movie juice, though landing 
in the same week as Aloha, it’s a glum reminder that Almost Famous was 15 years 
ago.
 