
Madeline Miller was born in Boston and grew up in New York and Philadelphia. 
For the last 10 years she has taught Latin and Ancient Greek to high school 
students. The Song of Achilles, published by Bloomsbury this month, is her 
first novel.

Buy The Song of Achilles at the Guardian bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408816035>

"The classics are back, and with a vengeance. In the past few years there has 
been a Vesuvius-sized explosion of translations, adaptations and re-imaginings 
of the ancient works. For lovers of Latin and Greek literature, it has been hog 
heaven, a chance to revisit the thrilling adventures, beautiful poetry and 
unflinching psychological insights the ancient stories offer us.

"The Greek myths have been close to my heart since childhood, particularly 
Homer's Iliad, yet I never would have considered telling one myself – I simply 
loved the originals too much. But something about Achilles and his beloved 
companion Patroclus's story took hold of my imagination and wouldn't let go. I 
wrote academic papers about the Iliad; I directed plays; it still wasn't 
enough. Then one day I found myself in front of my laptop, typing furiously. 
The words on the screen were Patroclus's, and 10 years later they became The 
Song of Achilles. In celebration of this Latin and Greek revival, here are ten 
of my favorite classical works."

1. The Metamorphoses by Ovid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780140422306/the-metamorphoses>

Ranging from the farcical to the deeply moving, the Metamorphoses presents 
hundreds of myths of transformation, all in Ovid's witty and passionate style. 
Perhaps this is perverse of me, but I particularly enjoy some of Ovid's most 
disturbed heroines, like Myrrha, who falls in love with her father. Ovid 
manages the tricky manoeuvre of awakening our sympathy to the girl's desires 
without diminishing our sense of horror at her actions.

2. Prometheus Bound by Aeschylus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9780715634769/aeschylus-prometheus-bound>

The kind, wise and thoughtful god Prometheus (his name literally means 
forethought) might be considered the first advocate of social justice. He 
defied Zeus's injunctions against aiding humans, daring to steal fire on our 
behalf, teach us the arts of civilisation and show us how to protect ourselves 
from the gods' greed. For this he was punished cruelly: chained to a cliff and 
condemned to have eagles tear out his liver every day for all eternity. 
Aeschylus's Prometheus is a figure of tremendous strength and dignity, who 
gladly suffers for the good he has done. Sadly, we only have the first of the 
trilogy that tells his story.

3. Autobiography of Red by Anne Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780224059732/autobiography-of-red>

Loosely inspired by the myth of Geryon and Heracles, this "novel in verse" 
conjures heart-stoppingly beautiful images on every page. Its deceptively 
simple language has a fiery, unearthly clarity and bone-deep wit: Carson's 
sentences ring out like bells. The story is moving, and its hero, Geryon, a 
little red boy with wings who falls in love with the wrong person, is 
unforgettable. There is no book I have read quite like it.

4. The Iliad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780199536795/the-iliad> and
The Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780140449112/the-odyssey> 
by Homer

Is it cheating to include them both? The first is Homer's action-packed and 
psychologically acute paean to a single man's rage. The second is the 
tumultuous journey of a war veteran struggling to get home to his family. Both 
are bursting with incident, poetry and amazing characters that grab the 
attention. When I began writing my own novel, I found myself constantly having 
to rein in digressions trying to include them all.

5. Troilus and Cressida by William Shakespeare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/stage/9781903436691/troilus-and-cressida>

When I was in college, a friend asked me to direct this "problem play" set 
during the Trojan war. I knew little about Shakespeare at the time, but fell 
quickly in love with this outstanding and challenging play. Its dark comedy and 
bitterly satiric portraits of Homeric heroes have a startlingly modern 
sensibility. Arguably its most famous figure is the scurrilous soldier 
Thersites, who comments with acid precision on the folly he sees around him: 
"Wars and lechery," he sneers. "Nothing else holds fashion."

6. If Not, Winter: Fragments of Sappho translated by Anne Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-criticism/9781844080816/if-not-winter-fragments-of-sappho>

Sappho's gorgeous, gem-like poems limn their subjects in gold. Whether the 
focus is a young woman, an apple on the highest branch or the narrator's 
jealousy, Sappho brings them all to life with sensual, visceral and 
breathtaking beauty. No wonder that Plato called her "the tenth muse".

7. The Bacchae by Euripides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/stage/9780140447262/the-bacchae-and-other-plays>

I have loved this particular tragedy since I first read it as a teenager. 
Pentheus, prince of Thebes, refuses to worship the new god Dionysus, and the 
god takes bloody revenge. What makes the play so gripping is how eminently 
sympathetic Pentheus is: a stubborn, underdog rationalist who stands up to a 
bullying zealot. Haven't we all felt like drawing the line sometimes? In one 
memorable ancient production, Pentheus's head-on-a-spike was played by the real 
life head of Crassus, member of the first triumvirate with Pompey the Great and 
Julius Caesar.

8. Agamemnon by Aeschylus (The Oresteia Trilogy) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/stage/9780199537815/oresteia>

The story of the Greek general's disastrous return home after the Trojan war. 
I have never been a fan of Agamemnon, so I tend to cheer Clytemnestra on as she 
readies the murderous bathtub and axe. What does move me is Cassandra – the 
Trojan princess cursed to tell the truth and never be believed. Now Agamemnon's 
captive, she is doomed to knowledge of her own imminent death at Clytemnestra's 
hands. The famous opening scene, where fire beacons signal to Clytemnestra that 
her husband is returning, surely influenced JRR Tolkien's own use of fire 
beacons in The Return of the King.

9. The Aeneid by Virgil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780713999686/the-aeneid>

Virgil's tale of arms and a man and so much more. A gorgeously crafted piece 
of poetry, a story of adventure, a moral examination of violence and a plea for 
mercy, Virgil's masterful Roman founding myth provokes and haunts long after 
you've finished. The characters are drawn with sympathy and sensitivity, and 
above all total humanity:Virgil <https://www.theguardian.com/books/virgil> 
never shies away from their faults as well as their virtues. I particularly 
love book two, the tale of Troy's fall; its brutal portrait of Achilles' son 
Pyrrhus inspired my own.

10. Philoctetes by Sophocles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/stage/9780140449785/electra-and-other-plays>

The ageing hero Philoctetes, once a companion of Heracles, is bitten by a 
venomous snake on his way to join the Trojan war. The wound festers and the 
other Greeks, fearful of the bad omen, abandon him on an island. For 10 years, 
Philoctetes survives alone, embittered and in physical agony. I first read this 
play when my grandmother's health was failing, and I wept at Philoctetes' 
grief-stricken monologues. His pain at being forgotten by the world and despair 
at his body's weakness could have been my grandmother's own. ButSophocles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sophocles> chooses to close the play with 
hope: reconciliation, and a long-awaited end to the hero's suffering.
 