
When Alfred, Lord Tennyson died in 1892, Marconi was still five years away 
from sending the first radio message across water. Just over a century later, 
anyone in the world with internet access can visit the onlinePoetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> Archive, and with a mouse-click can 
reanimate the voice of Tennyson; rasping, insistent and musical, declaiming his 
famous poem "The Charge of the Light Brigade".

Tennyson's voice has been ringing in my head these past weeks, as I've been 
working on a new adaptation of his Arthurian sequence Idylls of the King for
Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 3. Not just Tennyson's voice, 
but the voices he creates for kings, knights, maidens, fools and churls. This 
is poetry to be read aloud, and this was a poet with a popular voice. When a 
short, early version of the Idylls was first published in 1859, more than 
10,000 copies were sold within the first fortnight. The more I worked on the 
poems, the more I thought of him as a radio poet before the age of radio.

TS Eliot claimed that Tennyson had "the finest ear of any English poet since 
Milton", and the texture of the blank verse (unrhymed lines in iambic 
pentameter) is rich enough to be a soundtrack in itself. At times his narrator 
even offers blank-verse stage directions - "And answer made King Arthur, 
breathing hard . . . " His use of different registers of voice is a gift for 
radio. There are great public speeches, intimate declarations of love, venomous 
arguments, threats, vows, songs and radio's favourite voice: the secret poetry 
of a character's thoughts.

The raw materials for radio drama were all there in abundance, but abundance 
was a major problem. Idylls of the King is nothing if not long. By the time it 
was published in full, in 1872, it brought together the work of nearly 40 
years. The Idylls tells the story - or rather, the interweaving stories - of 
the Arthurian cycle. It begins in crisis, meltdown. Society is on the verge of 
collapse into chaos. Heathens and bandits have torn the land into fiefdoms, and 
wild demonic beasts stalk the forests. The aged Leodogran, King of Cameliard, 
has heard of a young warrior called Arthur, with a burgeoning reputation for 
courage, skill and intelligence. Desperate for a saviour, he sends for Arthur 
and begs him to restore order to the land. Arthur triumphs - with the 
assistance of his friend and follower Lancelot - and is rewarded with the hand 
in marriage of Leodogran's beautiful daughter, Guinevere.

The Idylls end with a return to violence and chaos, culminating in the 
wounding of Arthur in battle. He is borne away by boat to Avalon as a new year 
approaches.

In between, Tennyson tells the stories of Gareth and Lynette, Geraint and 
Enid, Balin and Balan, Merlin and Vivien, Pelleas and Ettarre, and the quest 
for the holy grail.

Radio 3 commissioned a two-hour dramatisation of the Idylls, but even with 
that generous slot, it was clear that substantial cuts would need to be made. 
Whole books from the sequence would have to be left out, and many edits made 
within the remaining books. The only way to make such drastic cuts was to find 
the dramatic heart of this huge and complex work, and to slice away everything 
but that heart. For me, the heart lies in the love triangle involving Arthur, 
Guinevere and Lancelot. It has everything: love, lust, infidelity, jealousy, 
secrecy and betrayal.

Tennyson creates a powerful sexual current between Guinevere and Lancelot, a 
current that threatens to destroy them both. In one passage early in the poem, 
Guinevere tries to explain to Lancelot why she has fallen in love with him, and 
why she cannot truly love her perfect husband the king:

He is all fault who hath no fault 
 at all:
For who loves me must have a 
 touch of earth;
The low sun makes the colour: I 
 am yours.

When Lancelot meets a much younger noblewoman - Elaine - his "touch of earth" 
strikes her too, in spite of his battle scars, and the difference in their ages:

However marred, of more than 
 twice her years,
Seamed with an ancient swordcut 
 on the cheek,
And bruised and bronzed, she 
 lifted up her eyes
And loved him, with that love 
 which was her doom.

Guinevere, hearing that the old warrior Lancelot may finally have found a 
wife, pays lip service to Arthur's hope that Elaine may cure Lancelot's 
loneliness. But as she returns to her chamber she is consumed by jealousy:

She clenched her fingers till they 
 bit the palm,
And shrieked out "Traitor" to the 
 unhearing wall,
Then flashed into wild tears, and 
 rose again,
And moved about her palace, 
 proud and pale.

Guinevere needn't have worried. Lancelot later lets Elaine down (after she has 
declared her love to him) with a spectacularly patronising brush-off: "This is 
not love: but love's first flash in youth / Most common: yea, I know it of mine 
own self."

This is fine poetry, but it's also fine dramatic writing. Idylls of the King 
has a narrator, but also a cast of many voices. On the page it has power, but 
it has much greater power when performed. I've come to see Idylls of the King 
as essentially a verse play and, like Dylan Thomas's Under Milk Wood, it lives 
a half-life on the page. In later life, Tennyson turned increasingly to drama. 
Inspired by seeing Henry Irving as Hamlet, he spent the best part of a decade 
writing for the stage, with little success. If only radio had been an option 
for him, his drama-through-voices might have found its true medium.

In common with those of other Victorian poets, Tennyson's literary reputation 
has had its ups and downs in recent decades. WH Auden didn't help, by 
suggesting that - though Tennyson was indeed a lyric genius - he was 
nonetheless a "stupid" poet, whose work failed to deal with raw and honest 
human emotions. Some Tennyson poems, especially "Ulysses" and In Memoriam - the 
elegy for his friend Arthur Hallam - have held their literary reputation, but 
Idylls of the King has had its detractors.

Is it too long? Too starchy? Too moralising? Was Tennyson just a stuffed 
shirt, an establishment figure dismissed by Joyce's Stephen Dedalus in A 
Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man as "only a rhymester", and contrasted 
with the mad, bad and dangerous Byron?

Well, he certainly died an establishment figure. Honoured by the great and 
good, he was given a state funeral, and buried in Westminster Abbey. Earlier 
that year, he had been described in a Times editorial as "our greatest living 
man", even greater than the statesman (and his close friend) WE Gladstone. And 
without doubt the Idylls is in part a moral allegory. Many critics have mapped 
out the character of Arthur as a vision of Victorian gentlemanly virtues, 
sorely tested by the infidelity of his wife with his best friend. But if Arthur 
is painted at the start of the Idylls as a heroic but blandly pious man, then 
Tennyson is alive to the price of that piety. As Guinevere says to Lancelot, 
her husband is "A moral child without the craft to rule, / Else had he not lost 
me".

The love triangle shifts in shape through the poems, ending up with Arthur and 
Lancelot at war with one another, and Guinevere repentant but still unable to 
forget "the sins that made the past so pleasant to us". By the end of the poem 
the three central characters are all wounded and transformed by what has 
happened to them, and although the Arthurian tradition clearly has the king as 
linchpin and hero, Tennyson leaves you less certain as a reader. Lancelot and 
Guinevere are the strongest characters in the Idylls. Some of Tennyson's 
richest, subtlest and most sensual poetry is employed to describe the illicit 
love between them. Guinevere in particular carries many of the best, and most 
insightful, lines. There is much here that gives the lie to Auden's accusation 
of emotional "stupidity".

Poetry and radio are made for each other. This is partly because of the 
intimacy of radio, its ability to act as the inner voice of the listener. But 
it's also because radio, like poetry (but unlike television), understands the 
value of silence. Silence is employed to fine dramatic effect in Idylls of the 
King, especially in the two great battles that bookend the story: "So like a 
painted battle the war stood / Silenced, the living quiet as the dead, / And in 
the heart of Arthur joy was lord."

â€¢ Idylls of the King is broadcast on Radio 3 on Sunday 12 July at 8pm.
 