
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has pushed back on the issue of foreign investment after the Chinese president, 
Xi Jinping, raised the issue at their sideline meeting at the G20.

Following Australia’s decision to knock back the sale of Ausgrid to Chinese 
buyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/19/mike-baird-to-look-for-new-ausgrid-buyers-after-rejection-of-chinese-bid>
, the prime minister said China understood Australia’s foreign investment 
policies and sought them to be continued.

“They welcome our foreign investment policies and seek them to be continued 
and of course they will continue,” said Turnbull.

Trump and Clinton's free trade retreat: a pivotal moment for the world's 
economic future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/20/trump-clinton-free-trade-policies-tpp>
“But China understands as well if not better than anyone – our sovereign right 
to determine who invests in Australia and the terms in which they invest.

“As I have said elsewhere, you know China has more freedom to invest in 
Australia – indeed all foreigners have more freedom to invest in Australia than 
almost any other country.”

Turnbull said Australia’s foreign investment laws were very open, despite the 
decision regarding Ausgrid and thehistoric agricultural property S.Kidman and Co
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/29/australian-treasurer-overrules-sale-of-13-of-country-to-chinese-firm>
.

“We have a very open foreign investment policy, so we mostly say yes, we 
almost invariably say yes but from time to time we say no and we make no bones 
about that and China respects that,” Turnbull said.

The leaders also discussed the dispute in the South China Sea and Turnbull 
said China also understood Australia’s position because it had been “completely 
and utterly consistent”.

“I have been completely consistent on this – what I say publicly and 
privately,” Turnbull said.

“We believe in the maintenance of the rules based order. Any conflicts or 
disputes about territory should be settled peacefully and in accordance with 
international law and we expect all parties to show restraint and not 
exacerbate any tensions.”

China has rejected a ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
 by the permanent court of arbitration in The Hague last month that it has no 
historical title over the South China Sea and that it has violated the 
Philippines’ economic and sovereign rights.

At the time, Australia’s foreign minister, Julie Bishop, said the court ruling 
was binding was “completely consistent” with Australia’s historical position.

Xi described Australia as an “important member of the G20” and said China 
attached great importance to developing relations.

“With joint efforts of all parties the G20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> Hangzhou summit will achieve fruitful 
results, boost the confidence of countries in the world and inject new impetus 
to the global economy,” he said.

He said hoped the two sides would remain committed to “mutual trust and mutual 
benefit, expanded practical co-operation, increased people to people and 
cultural exchanges and healthy and stable development of our comprehensive 
strategic partnership”.

Turnbull said he supported China’s G20 agenda.

“The agenda you set recognises that the keys to ensuring economic growth … are 
trade, open markets, innovation, investment in infrastructure, ensuring we have 
economic reform behind the border.”

Turnbull also addressed the so-called B20 forum of business leaders after 
meeting Xi and before the G20 leaders’ meeting on Sunday afternoon in the 
eastern Chinese city of Hangzhou.

“Protectionism, trying to turn back the clock of economic reform – that is the 
road back to poverty,” Turnbull said.


He acknowledged that there was a level of disenchantment among voters in many 
countries with the results of globalisation but argued protectionism was not 
the answer.

“We face a fundamental challenge in economic reform,” Turnbull said. “The pace 
and scale of change ... is utterly without precedent.


“In this time of change you can’t afford to hide under the doona and pretend 
it isn’t happening.”


He said G20 leaders needed to continue to advocate for trade liberalisation in 
face of calls for the reinstatement of tariffs and other forms of 
protectionism: “Now that is a road that we cannot afford to go down.”

Business and political leaders alike must work together to do more on 
reassuring the public and promoting the benefits of open trade and investment, 
he said.


Turnbull said the answer to disenchantment with globalisation was to ensure 
that all countries cracked down on tax avoidance by multinational corporations 
– andAustralia was already taking action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/12/scott-morrison-sets-up-a-showdown-with-senate-over-tax-avoidance-bill>
.

“We are taking new measures in our last budget to focus on establishing a 
diverted profits tax to establish that while we believe in lower taxes … paying 
taxes is not optional. Businesses must pay tax. Everyone must pay tax.”

He said governments needed to be able to tell their citizens: “Yes this is a 
time of change, yes this is a time of growth. But the people that are making 
money, the businesses that are doing well are paying their share of tax.”

We decide who invests in Australia, Turnbull says ahead of G20 meeting in China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/02/we-decide-who-invests-in-australia-says-turnbull-ahead-of-g20-meeting-in-china>
Turnbull was also expected to meet with the Indian prime minister, Narendra 
Modi, before the leaders’ talks start on Sunday afternoon.

Xi, who has joined the United States in endorsing the Paris climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/breakthrough-us-china-agree-ratify-paris-climate-change-deal>
, is keen to keep the focus on innovation, green jobs and boosting trade.


Australia has said it will follow suit on the Paris deal by the year’s end.

Xi and Turnbull were expected to discuss tensions over the South China Sea, 
the use of innovation and the digital economy to spur global growth, improving 
international tax transparency and ending corruption.

With Australian Associated Press
 