
Malcolm Turnbull has dismissed Julie Bishop’s argument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/julie-bishop-says-kevin-rudd-qualifies-for-job-as-un-secretary-general>
 that a nomination for Kevin Rudd for the UN secretary general position is not 
an endorsement.

On Thursday morning cabinet was to consider Rudd’s request for the government 
to nominate him as acandidate for the position 
<http://www.1for7billion.org/candidates/> when Ban Ki-moon’s term expires at 
the end of the year.

In the face of stiff opposition among Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> members, Bishop had 
argued at the first party-room meeting that nominating the former Labor prime 
minister would not amount to an endorsement.

Julie Bishop says Kevin Rudd qualifies for job as UN secretary general
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/julie-bishop-says-kevin-rudd-qualifies-for-job-as-un-secretary-general>
But Turnbull disagreed with that proposition when interviewed by the 2GB 
broadcasterAlan Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> on 
Thursday morning.

“If you are nominating someone you are … ,” the prime minister said. 

Jones said: “Indirectly supporting someone?”

“Well yes, you can’t nominate someone.” 

Pressure is mounting on the cabinet to reject Rudd’s campaign for the UN’s top 
job, with the Coalition dissidentEric Abetz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/eric-abetz> reminding his 
colleagues in a statement that Rudd’s peers had labelled him narcissistic, a 
micromanager and an impulsive control freak.

“Any cursory glance at Mr Rudd’s temperament and capacity would show Mr Rudd 
is poorly qualified for this role and if Australia were to inflict Kevin Rudd 
on theUnited Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> it would 
be a mistake,” Abetz said.


The Australian has reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/cabinet-to-dash-kevin-rudds-un-hopes-for-top-job/news-story/6501a848242f1720af0299215f7dfc69>
 unnamed Liberal sources suggesting the Rudd’s request would be knocked back by 
the cabinet.


Australians back Helen Clark over Kevin Rudd for United Nations role – poll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/28/australians-back-helen-clark-over-kevin-rudd-for-united-nations-roll-poll>
But Labor colleagues rallied, with the finance spokesman, Jim Chalmers, 
suggesting anything less than an endorsement would be petty, undergraduate 
politics.

“Anything short of a full endorsement for an Australian to run for the UN out 
of cabinet today would be a victory for petty, undergraduate politics and the 
hard right of the cabinet over Julie Bishop andMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>,” Chalmers said.

“People have the right to expect their cabinet to make a hard-headed 
assessment, a hard-headed judgment of the national interest and to act on it, I 
think not pushing for an Australian to head the UN would be an extraordinary 
failure on that front.”
 