
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has nominated his “clear economic plan” as the major achievement of his first 
12 months as prime minister ahead of the first anniversary of the leadership 
change that unseated Tony Abbott.


Speaking to reporters in Micronesia, where he is currently attending the 
Pacific Islands Forum, Turnbull said he had delivered economic growth and jobs, 
reprising his oft-repeated “jobs and growth” mantra from the recent election 
campaign.

“That is the most tangible outcome over the last year. That’s what Australians 
can look at, stronger economic growth despite the downturn in the mining 
construction boom,” the prime minister said in response to questions about his 
achievements ahead of the anniversary of his first 12 months.

“Many economists would have said Australia would have had a hard landing. 
There weren’t many people projecting growth at these levels. Since I became 
prime minister, I have set out with a clear economic plan.”

One year on, Malcolm Turnbull's brutal reality is there's no time like the 
present | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/one-year-on-malcolm-turnbulls-brutal-reality-is-theres-no-time-like-the-present>
Turnbull on Friday unveiled a financial commitment on climate change 
relocation and disaster relief ahead of talks with Pacific leaders. He said 
Australia would deliver $300m over the next four years, $80m of which would be 
additional funding, with $75m going specifically to disaster relief.

Pacific leaders have urged the Australian government to take stronger action 
to mitigate against the dangerous effects of climate change, given the 
existential risks to countries within the region posed by sea level rises.

The prime minister said the world had now reached agreement on emissions 
reductions, but he imagined commitments by individual countries would have to 
increase over time.

While Turnbull was moving into the closing stage of a week spent at 
international summits including the G20 in China and the East Asia Summit in 
Laos, back at home, the former prime ministerTony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> elected to re-enter 
the public debate during Turnbull’s absence, and ahead of the resumption of the 
federal parliament next week.

Abbott, who is appealing to conservative forces inside the government, went on 
morning radio totake a public pot shot at Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/tony-abbott-says-turnbull-panicked-in-calling-nt-abuse-royal-commission>
 for announcing a royal commission into juvenile detention in the Northern 
Territory afterthe Four Corners exposé about practices in the Don Dale 
detention centre. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/25/teenage-boys-were-locked-in-cells-when-sprayed-with-teargas-in-nt-juvenile-centre?CMP=soc_567>

“Governments normally need to pause and think before they take precipitative 
action,” Abbott told his friend, the Sydney broadcaster Alan Jones. He said he 
was confident the royal commission would produce a reasonable report, but 
“normally governments should not respond in panic to TV programs”.

The plebiscite is a device to destroy Turnbull and delay marriage equality | 
Christine Milne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/the-plebiscite-is-a-device-to-destroy-turnbull-and-delay-marriage-equality>
Abbott also fired another shot across the bows on the government’s 
superannuation reforms. “We have to be careful about the changes that we make 
and there are lots of members of parliament right now who are saying on behalf 
of their constituents, let’s think carefully about these things, particularly 
this issue of the $500,000 cap on nonconcessional contributions,” he said.

Turnbull arrives back in the country on Saturday evening ahead of the 
parliamentary sitting week, which could seefurther consideration of the 
superannuation package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/06/scott-morrison-to-release-draft-of-super-policy-minus-contentious-elements>
, which has been held up for weeks by backbench resistance, and is also likely 
to see Labor resolve its position on the “omnibus” savings bill, which is 
indicatively listed for debate in the Senate.

Labor appears set to revise its pre-election positions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/labor-signals-shift-on-election-savings-plan-after-opposition-to-welfare-and-pension-cuts>
 on the abolition of the clean energy supplement, and on cuts to the renewable 
energy agency, but the financial impact of the revisions is not yet clear.

Political donations have dominated this past political week in Australia, and 
the issue will likely spill over into the new sitting week, with theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>, Labor and the Greens 
now all proposing some elements of reform.

Tony Abbott says Turnbull 'panicked' in calling NT abuse royal commission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/tony-abbott-says-turnbull-panicked-in-calling-nt-abuse-royal-commission>
Given the procedural antics in the first sitting week of the 45th parliament, 
Labor is also likely to resume attempts to disrupt the government’s agenda over 
the course of the week.

But the Labor leader, Bill Shorten, will also face taunts from the government 
about the New South Wales senator Sam Dastyari, whoresigned from the Labor 
frontbench this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
 after a controversy about donations from the Chinese business community.
 