
State premiers are concerned Malcolm Turnbull’s radical new state income tax 
plan will be used as a distraction from the immediate funding crisis caused by 
the $80bn in cuts to long-term hospital and school funding in Tony Abbott’s 
first budget.


Guardian Australia understands Turnbull is preparing to offer the states a 
total of $3.4bn over three years in interim health funding while the longer 
term reform is negotiated, and he and the health minister, Sussan Ley, will on 
Thursday announce a new plan to coordinate the health care of chronically-ill 
patients to improve their care and reduce their hospital admissions.

Under the new scheme, which will begin in July 2017 as a trial involving 
65,000 of Australia’s estimated 7 million patients with a chronic condition, 
doctors will be paid quarterly rather than receiving a Medicare fee for each 
visit and will coordinate all facets of the patient’s care.

Turnbull's plan to end tax blame game threatens to break Morrison's budget 
pledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/30/turnbulls-idea-to-end-tax-blame-game-threatens-to-break-morrisons-budget-pledge>
On Wednesday the prime minister also confirmed he was considering a long-term 
plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/30/turnbull-confirms-state-income-tax-plan-and-says-it-will-fix-core-problem-of-federation>
 of transferring a proportion of income tax-raising powers to the states, 
including, after an initial period, the power for each state to raise its own 
income tax share.

But state premiers are determined the meeting will focus on the immediate and 
looming funding “cliff” caused by the cuts to projected funding in the 2014 
budget, which amounted to $57bn over 10 years for hospitals and almost $30bn 
for schools. It is understood the federal government is making no immediate 
offer for increased funding for schools.

The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/daniel-andrews>, said the focus of Friday’s 
Council of Australian Governments (Coag) meeting had to be health and education.

“As far as Victoria is concerned, Friday will not be about tax policy thought 
bubbles,” Andrews said.

“I fear this is a bit of distraction tactic ... from the savage cutbacks to 
hospitals and schools.”

South Australian premier, Jay Weatherill, who himself proposed the idea of 
states getting a fixed share of federal income tax, said he thought the idea of 
going a step further and giving each state the power to increase or decrease 
their tax rate was “impractical”.

“I think we need to concentrate on the real business. We want to see a 
concrete proposal to address the $80bn cut to health and education. This should 
be the first business of the nation,” he said.

“I don’t think it is practical in a country like Australia ... I don’t think 
it will work and I can’t believe the prime minister is seriously advancing this 
... I can’t imagine any state taking advantage of it even if it was available.”

And the Liberal premier of New South Wales, Mike Baird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mike-baird>, said of the tax 
changes, “these matters can be considered in the longer term. What is required 
right now is a partnership between the commonwealth and the states for the 
health and education services we need.”

As revealed by Guardian Australia on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/29/states-offered-5bn-hospitals-funding-income-tax-raising-powers>
 the radical plan involves lowering federal income tax by a certain percentage, 
allowing the states to levy an income tax surcharge at the same rate as that 
reduction, and reducing commonwealth grants to the states by the amount raised.

It is understood the commonwealth is proposing around a 2% reduction in the 
federal tax take and a similar amount to be levied by the states –although the 
actual tax collection would still be administered by the commonwealth.

Turnbull confirmed that, over time, the states would be free to increase or 
decrease the amount of income tax they levied.

“We would withdraw from a certain amount of income tax that would be available 
to the states and we would agree that that would be the maximum they would levy 
for a period. In future, on the longer term, a state should be free to lower 
that amount or indeed raise it and then they are accountable to their own 
voters,” Turnbull said.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison, had earlier insisted that “this is not a 
government that has any interest in lifting the tax burden on Australians” and 
that anything presented to Coag would not lay the path for an increase in the 
overall tax take.

State and territory leaders react to federal proposal to levy own income taxes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/30/state-territory-leaders-react-federal-proposal-levy-own-income-taxes>
Speaking to Sky news hours after Turnbull’s confirmation of the tax plan, 
Morrison said it remained “speculation” and insisted that the prime minister 
had “not gone that far” when asked whether states would be able to put their 
income tax surcharge up.

He suggested the questioner should not “jump the gun” and that the plan 
remained “an idea that was being explored” to be discussed with the states.

“This isn’t about raising taxes at all ... we have no appetite for states to 
be able to increase taxes ... we don’t want to see taxes go up, we want to see 
taxes at the most stay where they are and preferably go down,” he said.

The trial of the chronic disease care plan, to be announced on Thursday, will 
cost about $22m and perhaps more as it is extended, but is intended to reduce 
overall health spending in the longer term by providing more efficient care. 
The Coalition began investigating it whenit abandoned the Medicare copayment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/03/gp-co-payment-set-to-be-dropped-as-the-coalition-mulls-blended-system>
 after a fierce doctor backlash.

The most common chronic conditions include diabetes, heart disease, cancer, 
mental health, eye disease, respiratory conditions and arthritis.
 