
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has foreshadowed formal recommendations for policy changes at the ABC as a 
result of the government’s investigation into Q&A and has renewed his attack on 
the national broadcaster, accusing it of “undergraduate ... tabloid journalism”.

The communications minister said the ABC had a “higher duty” than other media 
organisations to be accurate, impartial and objective because of its statutory 
obligations.

“Under section eight of the act, the minister has the power to write a letter 
and make recommendations of policy which the board can either accept or 
ignore,” said Turnbull.


“Now it may be that I do make some formal recommendations. It may be that once 
the facts are exposed the conclusions are so obvious, the ABC takes it up.


“One thing that is perfectly obvious is the security protocols around the 
assembling of the Q&A audience has got to be improved.”


Speaking on ABC’s Insiders, Turnbull accused presenter Barrie Cassidy of 
“losing the plot” if he did not think there were security issues around 
allowing Zaky Mallah into a live Q&A audience.


Australia may suspend citizenship privileges of single passport holders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/27/australia-may-suspend-citizenship-privileges-of-single-passport-holders>
Mallah has been convicted and served a jail sentence for making death threats 
against Asio officials. He has also tweeted that two female journalists should 
be publicly raped. Tony Abbott last week accused the the ABC of betraying 
Australia by allowing Mallah in the audience and both the ABC and the 
communications department are instigating two separate investigations.


“Seriously, you’ve lost the plot there with all due respect,” Turnbull said to 
Cassidy.


“This is a high-profile audience, it’s a very high-profile target. This is a 
fellow that has threatened violence in the past, threatened to kill people, 
gone to jail for it, been involved in buying ammunition, buying a gun.”


Cassidy asked “why is he walking the streets if that’s the case?”


Turnbull said: “Because he served his term of imprisonment and he hasn’t 
committed another offence but that doesn’t mean that you would then consciously 
and willingly put that person in a very high-profile environment on a live 
television program.”


The debate around the ABC’s Q&A program continued as three separate attacks  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/27/tunisia-attack-death-toll-likely-increase-15-uk-tourists>
occurred in Tunisia, Kuwait and France on Friday.


After the events on Saturday, Tony Abbott declared: “the Daesh death cult has 
claimed responsibility for one of the attacks. It seems that one of the other 
attacks was inspired by Daesh”.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Ftony-abbott-terror-attack-france-tunisia-isis-daesh-coming-for-us-australia-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435448943515%2FDaeesh-death-cult-France--014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Isis%20coming%20for%20us%2C%20says%20Tony%20Abbott%20after%20Tunisia%2C%20France%2C%20Kuwait%20attacks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Ftony-abbott-terror-attack-france-tunisia-isis-daesh-coming-for-us-australia-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Isis%20coming%20for%20us%2C%20says%20Tony%20Abbott%20after%20Tunisia%2C%20France%2C%20Kuwait%20attacks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F28%2Ftony-abbott-terror-attack-france-tunisia-isis-daesh-coming-for-us-australia-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F28%2F1435448943515%2FDaeesh-death-cult-France--014.jpg>
 Isis coming for us, says Tony Abbott after Tunisia, France, Kuwait attacks.
Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jun/28/tony-abbott-terror-attack-france-tunisia-isis-daesh-coming-for-us-australia-video>
“This illustrates, yet again, that as far as the Daesh death cult is 
concerned, it is coming after us. We may not always feel that we are at war 
with them, but they certainly think that they are at war with us.”


It is still unclear if all three attacks were linked.


On Tuesday, an Isis spokesman had called for militants to cause “calamity for 
infidels” and to step up attacks during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan.


On Saturday, British prime minister David Cameron insisted that there was no 
intelligence to suggest the attacks were deliberately linked.


When asked if the attacks meant there was an increased threat in Australia, 
Tony Abbott confirmed that the security level had already been raised from 
medium to high well before the attacks.


“Some time ago we raised the threat level from medium to high and that 
regrettably means that attacks are expected because there are people with the 
intention and the capability of carrying out attacks,” Abbott said.


“As we know the death cult is regularly admonishing its supporters and 
sympathisers around the world to kill – that is what it is doing. Regrettably, 
as we saw in France, all you need for terrorism these days is a knife, a flag, 
a camera phone and a victim.”


Abbott also refused to rule out stripping sole Australian citizens of their 
right to return to Australia.


The Australian reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/in-depth/terror/terror-sights-set-on-sole-nationals/story-fnpdbcmu-1227417179438>
 measures under consideration involve forcing suspected foreign fighters to 
negotiate their return to the country by providing a “full and accurate account 
of their actions overseas” to “overcome the difficulty of securing a court 
conviction”.


Because the measures under consideration do not prevent sole nationals 
returning “forever”, the report suggests such laws would not technically render 
an Australian citizen stateless.


Citizenship laws 'not a bravado issue' says Malcolm Turnbull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/03/citizenship-laws-not-a-bravado-issue-says-malcolm-turnbull>
The government has already introduced legislation to strip dual nationals of 
Australian citizenship for certain terrorism offences inside and outside 
Australia. The proposal to strip sole nationals of citizenship is currently 
contained in a discussion paper released by the government though there is 
little detail about proposed legislation.


“The legislation that is before the parliament now obviously gives us a way of 
now saying to dual nationals, “you are never coming back,” said Abbott on 
Saturday.


“We need ways of dealing with those who are not dual nationals and, as I said, 
just as going abroad to fight with the death cult is the modern form of 
treason, perhaps to deal with it we need the modern form of banishment.”


Turnbull was one of a number in cabinet who originally opposed the legislation 
which allowed a minister to strip citizenship from dual nationals. The 
legislation was changed so that dual nationals “renounce” their citizenship by 
carrying out certain terrorist acts.


Turnbull disagreed that there was an inconsistency in the government’s 
national security laws, which both remove passports from Australians to stop 
them leaving the country to fight and also stop dual nationals from returning 
after they have fought overseas.


“In each case, when we stop people leaving to go to Syria or Iraq, we are 
stopping them from becoming terrorists,” said Turnbull.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-qanda-abc-security-zaky-mallah-review-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435043206034%2FTurnbull-Abbott-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turnbull%20orders%20ABC%20security%20review%20after%20%E2%80%98error%20of%20judgment%E2%80%99%20over%20Zaky%20Mallah%20on%20Q%26A%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-qanda-abc-security-zaky-mallah-review-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turnbull%20orders%20ABC%20security%20review%20after%20%E2%80%98error%20of%20judgment%E2%80%99%20over%20Zaky%20Mallah%20on%20Q%26A%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F23%2Fmalcolm-turnbull-qanda-abc-security-zaky-mallah-review-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435043206034%2FTurnbull-Abbott-001.jpg>
 Turnbull orders ABC security review after ‘errors or judgment over Zaky Mallah 
on Q&A. 
“If somebody chooses to go and fight in Syria, in Iraq, they have become 
terrorists. They have become trained in military techniques, they have become 
brutalised and they have become – they are much more dangerous people than the 
people that left Australia.”


Turnbull said the government’s main responsibility was to protect Australians, 
which he said was why the ABC Q&A program’s inclusion of Mallah was “such a 
mistake”.


He described the judge in Mallah’s case as being critical of the media for 
giving Mallah a platform and “feeding his sense of self-importance”.


“I support the ABC but I’ve got to tell you, the ABC is different to any other 
media organisation, it has a statutory responsibility to be accurate and 
impartial and objective,” said Turnbull.


Cassidy said: “It is also independent”.


The citizenship debate is tawdry, conflated and ultimately pointless | Richard 
Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/19/the-citizenship-debate-is-tawdry-conflated-and-ultimately-pointless>
“It is independent of government but it has a higher duty, it has a duty of 
objectivity that the rest of the media does not. They can be as opinionated as 
they like.


“The ABC gets over a billion dollars a year from the taxpayer and it’s got a 
very heavy obligation to deliver that accurate and impartial coverage and do it 
with the dignity and responsibility that befits our national broadcaster.”


On Saturday, a group calling itself the United Patriots Front protested 
outside the ABC’s Southbank office over the appearance of former terrorism 
suspect Zaky Mallah on the Q&A program on Monday.

A small number of demonstrators waved Australian flags and cooked a pig on a 
spit.
 