
Perhaps you expect us to know that “French painter Vigée le Brun” is Louise 
Élisabeth Vigée le Brun (Rare appearance for portrait of Emma Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/23/portrait-emma-hamilton-lord-nelson-on-display-national-maritime-museum>
, 24 October). The artist’s gender is crucial to this painting’s many 
observational subtleties and thematic ironies, not least because here a 
celebrated woman artist (uncommon, to put it mildly, in 1790), in depicting a 
woman who famously made a career out of presenting herself in “attitudes” for 
the male gaze (here “Lady Hamilton as Ariadne”), shows us – wittily but not 
bitchily – how this sitter also confronts the gifted appraising eye of another 
woman.
John MacInerney
London

• One of my grandchildren went to the Globe with school, no doubt to enjoy 
“the conditions within which Shakespeare and his contemporaries worked” (Letters
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/26/emma-rice-globe-shakespeare-work-as-you-like-it-or-a-comedy-of-errors>
, 27 October). Her mother asked what she thought of the performance. “It 
rained,” said the child. “Well…?” from her parent. “No fucking roof,” was the 
reply.
Christine Hawkes
Cambridge

• Side effects: acne, depression and increased libido (Male contraceptive jab 
effective in trials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/27/male-contraceptive-jab-as-effective-as-female-pill-trial-shows>
, 28 October). Have they finally stumbled on the elixir of eternal youth?
Jean Glasberg
Cambridge

• Katy Guest (The Week in Books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/oct/28/david-cameron-prime-ministerial-memoirs-deal>
, Review, 29 October) reports that David Cameron has sold his memoirs for book 
publication, but is still in need of a title. Could I suggest Laugh Out Loud?
John Pawsey
Milton Keynes

• Could I suggest Making a Pig’s Ear out of a Silk Purse.
Dave Crook
Birmingham

• My GPs’ surgery now refuses to accept magazines on the grounds of “health 
and safety” (Letters, 28 October). I have managed to sneak a few in, though.
Rosalind Clayton
York

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 