
When the National Gallery sent its collection to Wales for safekeeping at the 
outbreak of the second world war, its visionary director, Kenneth Clark, wanted 
to keep visitors coming all the same. To attract audiences he showed in place 
of the familiar masterpieces the work of British artists who had been recording 
architectural landmarks in anticipation of their possible destruction.

Among those artists was Malvina Cheek, the last surviving official woman 
artist of the war, who has died aged 100. A graduate of the Royal College ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/artanddesign> in 1938, like many 
students of her generation she had fallen under the spell of the exquisite 
draftsmanship and engraving of Robert Sargent Austin. His influence, and an 
introduction to the painter and engraver and administrator of the Recording 
Britain project, Arnold Palmer, resulted in commissions for Cheek to paint 
important buildings in Bedfordshire, Hertfordshire, Cheshire, Derbyshire, 
Staffordshire and Cornwall.

Eighteen of her finished works were presented to the scheme: the Victoria & 
Albert Museum holds 14, but three Bedfordshire and one Cornish watercolour are 
missing. Cheek was especially intrigued by the historic village of Mow Cop on 
the border of Cheshire and Staffordshire, below the hill on which Primitive 
Methodism was founded in 1810.

Widely viewed at the National Gallery exhibition, after the war the work of 
the Recording Britain team was published by OUP in a handsome four-volume 
hardback set, partly financed by the Pilgrim Trust. The exhibition and book 
enhanced the artists’ reputations both at home and abroad.

In 1943 and 1944 Cheek exhibited at the Royal Academy, where a painting 
entitled Blood Donors was sold, although its present whereabouts are unknown. 
In September 1944 the Imperial War Museum acquired a drawing of suburban 
flying-bomb damage for six guineas, and a year later a study of American 
soldiers at the Rainbow Corner club for US servicemen in Denman Street was sold 
to a private collector in Sheffield.

Cheek was also a portraitist, and one of her most characteristic studies, 
which she kept in her own collection, is that of her father, Percy Ebsworth 
Cheek, in his ARP helmet. Of the debilitation she and her compatriots felt 
towards the end of war she noted: “Not eating properly didn’t help their 
health, and confidence was extremely shaken.”

Nevertheless, her continued enthusiasm for the initiative set by Recording 
Britain led to her sketching many localLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> vistas once she had returned to the 
capital. Two particularly fine examples, Weatherall House Being Demolished 
(1948) and Hampstead Heath Station and Magdala Pub (1949) are now in the 
collection of Burgh House and Hampstead Museum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fmalvina-cheek-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42d1b94ff9d62d54138938b8ce47707528f485c6%2F0_0_2475_1674%2F2475.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malvina%20Cheek%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fmalvina-cheek-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malvina%20Cheek%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fmalvina-cheek-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42d1b94ff9d62d54138938b8ce47707528f485c6%2F0_0_2475_1674%2F2475.jpg>
 Rainbow Corner 1944, Malvina Cheek’s wartime study of soldiers at the club for 
US servicemen in Denman Street, London. Photograph: Imperial War Museum 
After the war, two further topographical books, this time illustrated solely 
by Malvina, were published by Paul Elek for the Visions of England series: The 
Black Country, by Walter Allen (1946), and Derbyshire, by Nellie Kirkham 
(1947). Illustrations for the former include St Kenelm’s Church, Romsley, 
Worcestershire, the barge Geranium, an interior and a detail of newel posts at 
Aston Hall, Birmingham, pulpit details from St Peter’s collegiate church, 
Wolverhampton, and rock dwellings at Kinver, Staffordshire. The index page 
shows the courtyard at Dudley Castle. The cover designed by her fellow war 
artist Kenneth Rowntree incorporated two of Malvina’s vignettes: the Oak House 
at West Bromwich, Staffordshire, and the Red Lion at Wednesbury.

In 1947 Malvina was appointed to teach at St Albans School of Art, where she 
stayed until she became, briefly, a full-time senior lecturer in the graphic 
design school at Twickenham College of Technology. Among her early students at 
St Albans were renowned watercolour artists such as Ronald Maddox and David 
Gentleman, and, at other establishments, John Raynes and Albany Wiseman.

In 1950 Cheek was asked to design the toy theatre sets for George Speaight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jan/12/guardianobituaries.mainsection>’s 
play The Atom Secrets. To commemorate this, in 2003 Pollock’s Toy Museum Trust 
published a greetings card showing The Cabin of the Lucy for Scene III.

In 1951 Cheek married John Oliver Dewis, a French teacher and photographer; 
the couple had a daughter. During the 1950s the family often stayed with the 
artist Peggy Angus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/jul/06/peggy-angus-designs-forgotten-warrior-in-pictures>
 at Furlongs, a rented shepherd’s cottage at the foot of the Sussex Downs and a 
magnet for many artists of the time. Malvina drew the corn stooks in the fields 
surrounding the cottage, and the farmer who leased the fields near Firle.

Fascinated by boats and the maritime artistic culture around the English 
coastline, Malvina also painted at the Royal Dockyards, Chatham, and the 
Valhalla Museum, Tresco, now a branch of the National Maritime Museum. Among 
the articles she wrote for magazines was one in 1955 illustrated with her 
drawings and photographs of the figureheads, fiddleheads and name boards 
observed in both places. The following year topographical drawings formed the 
basis of her illustrations for an edition of Gulliver’s Travels (1956).

Cheek became a member of the Society of Industrial Artists, Illustrators Group 
in 1957, having contributed to its biennial review in 1949. She also exhibited 
with the Allied International Artists (AIA) group exhibitions, the Royal 
Society of British Artists, the Royal Watercolour Society and the New English 
Art Club.

Fresh, primary colours characterise her work of the 60s and 70s. Highlights of 
red abound in her still lifes and portraits: pots of geraniums, a summer hat, 
the costume of an Indian wooden marionette. Trees were always important sources 
of subject matter, the pear tree in the garden of her home at Christchurch 
Hill, Hampstead, represents her move to the house in which she lived from the 
late 1940s until her death.

She was born in London, the younger of the two daughters of Percy Ebsworth 
Cheek, a banker with Glyn, Mills, later Coutts, and Jessie (nee Cross). Her 
first name came from her paternal family’s long-standing connection with the 
Falkland Islands. After leaving St Philomena’s, a Catholic school near 
Carshalton, then in Surrey, she studied at Wimbledon School of Art before going 
to the Royal College of Art, where she gained her diploma the year before war 
was declared. She taught for two days a week at the Central School of Arts and 
Crafts and when war broke out was evacuated with the school to Luton.

Here she continued to teach and also worked at a blood transfusion unit at the 
local hospital, where she was asked to hand out certificates for bravery, later 
moving to St Albans, where the art school was rapidly establishing itself as a 
centre of excellence. She would return to the capital for weekends, a hazardous 
journey since there had to be total darkness on the trains during the blackout. 
She recalled the eerie sound of air raid warnings and bombs falling on arrival 
in London.

In her later career, a series of large canvases, painted with a rich autumnal 
palette, reflected her interest in spirituality, in particular Freud and Jung. 
While she was growing up, her father had not encouraged a religious leaning in 
his household and she may have found an equally cool reception from her 
husband, an atheist, but the work displays an unmistakable passion.

In 2009 she published an anthology of her poems, The Silent Fairground. She 
was also a composer. The artist and author Raynes Minns, who has made a special 
study of women war artists, recalls on visiting Cheek at home the atmospheric 
combination of house plants, home-made jam, lino floors, and paintings 
everywhere.

She was pleased that an exhibition this year at Persephone Books in Lambs 
Conduit Street, Bloomsbury (which continues until 17 June), of watercolours and 
pen-and-ink drawings of female figureheads made in the 50s was attracting a new 
audience to her work.

Cheek is survived by her daughter, Sarah, a landscape historian, and two 
granddaughters.

• Malvina Cheek, painter and illustrator, born 8 July 1915; died 22 May 2016
 