
Angela Merkel is seven months old and currently lives in a refugee camp in 
Hanover, with about 700 other migrants from 33 countries. Her mother, 
26-year-old Ghanaian Ophelya Adé, arrived in Germany this year, after crossing 
the Mediterranean while heavily pregnant. In an interview with Der Spiegel, she 
said she named her daughter after the German chancellor because: “I was so 
grateful, so relieved thatAngela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> is accepting us, so impressed 
with what this woman is achieving here.”

Heartfelt tributes such as these are not exceptional among the migrant 
communities stationed on Europe’s borders: barely a month after Germany’s 
intransigence over Greek debt sawprotesters likening her to Hitler 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/features/9566622/greeces-secret-weapon-grexit-would-hurt-merkel-most/>
, Merkel is suddenly finding herself at the receiving end of a virtual love-in 
on social media.

On Facebook, there are pages with titles such as “Mama Merkel, Mother of the 
Outcasts <https://www.facebook.com/mamamirkl>”, and Syrians are sharing images 
of the chancellor with slogans such as “Wir lieben dich 
<https://www.facebook.com/freedoomPolicy/photos/a.1484912841740054.1073741828.1457149891183016/1703114759919860/?type=1&theater>
” (“We love you”) or “Compassionate mother 
<https://twitter.com/SaiyanSyrian/status/636930761057288192>”.

Some posts carry the hashtag #Merkel_TheEthiopian, a reference to the story of 
Ashama ibn Abjar, a benign Christian ruler who gave shelter to Muslim refugees 
in the kingdom of Axum (now northern Ethiopia and Eritrea) at the time of 
Muhammad. Other images are photoshopped to contrast the German politician’s 
compassion with the perceived heartlessness of Arab leaders.

In Syria, since the start of the civil war, Germany has enjoyed a broadly 
sympathetic reputation for offering the country’s refugees better asylum 
conditions than other EU states, bar Sweden. In the 12-month period to June 
this year,the country received 296,710 applications for asylum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/datablog/2015/aug/27/germany-gets-27-syrian-asylum-applications-for-every-one-to-the-uk>
. But the recent spike in pro-Merkel outpourings has been triggered by 
Germany’s decision to make use of the “sovereignty clause” of the Dublin 
convention 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2015/08/26/germanys-small-yet-important-change-to-the-way-it-deals-with-syrian-refugees/>
, allowing Syrian refugees to apply for asylum in Germany rather than being 
deported back to the EU country where they first arrived.

Monzer, a Syrian who arrived in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> this week after being fingerprinted 
elsewhere in Europe, told the Guardian: “Merkel is a respectable woman with 
humane values and very considerate. She is a mother to Syrians.” Hashem 
Alsouki, a Syrian applying for asylum in Sweden, said: “We consider Merkel 
better than any other world ruler. She’s the saviour of Syria’s children from 
the hell of war and extremism. All Syrians love Merkel and her courage.”

In Germany itself, Merkel’s stance on the refugee crisis has seen her coming 
under fire from both the left and the right, with rightwing protesters 
denouncing her as aVolksverräterin, a “betrayer of the people”, and many others 
accusing her of being slow to condemnarson attacks on refugee shelters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/25/angela-merkel-visit-asylum-shelter-attacks>
. Her critics on both ends of the political spectrum will be scratching their 
heads overTV images of refugees in Budapest chanting 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qNEH2Vva7sE>: “Germany! Germany!”
 