
Imagine what the 2016 presidential election would be like if Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> Airlines were in charge. Donald 
Trump would have been shown the door a long, long time ago.

On 9 October, the Seattle-based air carrier kicked a passenger off flight 520 
fromSeattle <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seattle> to Burbank for 
harassing a female flight attendant.

The man in question didn’t call the attendant “disgusting” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/dec/22/trump-mocks-clinton-for-taking-toilet-break-during-democratic-debate-video>
. He didn’t say she had “the face of a dog”. He didn’t call her “a neurotic and 
not very bright mess”. He didn’twalk in on her while she was naked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/donald-trump-miss-usa-dressing-room-2001-rehearsal>
 and expecting privacy, or brag about grabbing her genitalia or force a kiss on 
her.

Former Miss USA contestant: Trump barged into room when we were naked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/donald-trump-miss-usa-dressing-room-2001-rehearsal>
Those actions do not disqualify one from being a Republican presidential 
candidate. But they would keep someone out of even a middle seat on Alaska 
Airlines.

 This is what happened, according to Amber D Nelson, head of a southern 
California marketing and communications firm called Lingo Consulting who was on 
flight 520.

“Today I had an experience that drove home so powerfully the way it feels to 
be a woman in the world today,” Nelsonposted on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/amber.nelson.92372/posts/1781030832152935> Sunday.

“Before takeoff from SeaTac the flight attendants ran through their safety 
rules as they always do,” continued Nelson, 44. “Not all of us were paying very 
close attention. But a man in the row behind me changed all that by calling out 
‘ooh sexy!’ in response to a female flight attendant demonstrating how to use 
the life vest.”

The female passengers on either side of the offender were visibly 
uncomfortable. Nelson and the two other women in her row were upset, too. They 
were all uncertain, Nelson said, about what to do.

 Because they were all affected by the boorish behavior, and they were 
“trapped on a plane with a guy who clearly disrespected women and saw us as his 
own personal entertainment.”

But before anyone could speak up, the flight attendant took off the vest, 
stopped the safety demonstration and strode up to the man.

“You need to be respectful,” she said.

“C’mon, I’m just playing with you!” he responded.

The woman walked to the front of the plane and consulted with her colleagues. 
Soon, what Nelson described as “an affable-looking man” boarded the plane and 
headed to the passenger in question.

“I didn’t do anything wrong!” the passenger said. “I didn’t do anything wrong!”

With that, he was escorted off, as the rest of the crowded plane looked 
approvingly on, struggling not to applaud.

“I felt honored as a patron of the airline – and as a woman – because Alaska 
Airlines supported their staff and those of us on board who were demeaned by 
another passenger’s juvenile and exceedingly disrespectful behavior,” Nelson 
wrote.

I didn't realize how often Muslims get kicked off planes, until it happened to 
me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/08/muslim-woman-kicked-off-american-airlines-flight-islamophobia>
Alaska Airlines confirmed the incident in a three-sentence statement, which 
ended: “We stand behind the actions taken by our employees.”

By Wednesday, 14,000 people had responded to Nelson’s Facebook account of the 
incident, with more than 1,000 people posting comments. “This is how rape 
culture is stopped,” wrote one.

But not all were as supportive: “Poor weak women so soft and weak … that is 
your point, right?” responded one man. “This flight attendant should be fired 
for abuse of the passenger,” wrote another.

Nelson told the Guardian that she wrote about the incident on Facebook because 
she “just needed to say out loud that this is not acceptable to me”. She 
expected to hear from 15 or so friends and family members, she said, and was 
stunned by the reaction – how widespread and politicized it was.

Nelson believes that the male passenger’s behavior is of a piece with American 
culture and politics these days. On Friday, the video surfaced of Trumplewdly 
bragging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 about accosting women with impunity, she noted, and “I heard the same thing 
everyone else did.”

“To be confronted with this on Sunday afternoon, to me it was a test,” Nelson 
said. “I was thinking, ‘What’s going to happen next? Are we going to accept 
this?’… And then to watch thedebate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/presidential-debate-trump-bully-clinton>
, it was a triple whammy.”

Not surprisingly, many who responded to Nelson on Facebook connected the same 
dots.

Wrote one woman: “Does this mean someone will ask Trump to gather his 
belongings and exit the country?”
 