
Sir Alex Ferguson <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sir-alex-ferguson> 
will enjoy his 68th birthday today after the easiest win his Manchester United 
team are likely to have all season. Overawed by the reputation, as much as the 
quality of the opposition, Wigan hardly made a tackle all night, subsiding 
feebly to a morale-sapping defeat engineered by the player they sold to United, 
Antonio Valencia. The winger from Ecuador was the man of the match, his surging 
incursions and crosses from the right flank setting up three of the goals 
before he added the fifth himself.

United closed up to within two points of Chelsea, the league leaders, and 
boosted their goal difference, with a men-against-boys victory set in motion by 
Wayne Rooney's 14th league goal of his most prolific season to date. Michael 
Carrick, Rafael and Dimitar Berbatov added the others on what was a 
fill-your-boots occasion, which enabled Ferguson to withdraw and rest three key 
players midway through the second half.

Ferguson has been making much of the fact that United are no worse off than 
they were this time last year, when they went on to retain their title by a 
comfortable margin and the stats bear him out. Twelve months ago, United were 
third, behind Liverpool and Chelsea, then from Boxing Day until 4 March they 
put together a blistering sequence of 11 successive wins to burn off all 
opposition.

Those who say the defending champions are missing Cristiano Ronaldo may be 
right from the aesthetic viewpoint, but not from the arithmetical one. 
Portugal's strutting genius contributed just four goals to that barnstorming 
run. Berbatov outscored him with six, and if the Bulgarian recovers that form, 
United could well make another irresistible charge. So far, it has been Rooney 
who, in the argot of the dressing room, has stepped up to the plate. A year 
ago, England's most gifted footballer had scored only four times in the league, 
and finished the season with 12 goals from 30 appearances. This time he has 14 
already, from 19 games. It must be a worry for Ferguson, however, that nobody 
else has weighed in with more than Berbatov's five.

Wigan were seventh a year ago and only fell away after selling Valencia and 
Wilson Palacios. Neither player has been adequately replaced, and so the rot 
that set in at the turn of the year, and brought only three wins in the last 18 
league matches in 2008-09, continues. Thrashed 9-1 at Tottenham in November, 
they have now won only one of their last nine.

United rested Ryan Giggs, Wigan contented themselves with one change after the 
1-1 draw with Blackburn on Boxing Day, recalling the South Korean Cho Won-hee 
at the expense of Jason Scotland [no goals in 18 league appearances], and 
opting to play with only Hugo Rodallega in attack.

To nobody's surprise, United made all the running and created all the scoring 
opportunities. Wishful thinking, maybe, but Hendry Thomas seemed to believe 
Valencia was still a Wigan player, judging by the dreadful pass which gifted 
him the first shooting opportunity of the night. To the errant visiting 
midfielder's relief, it was no more than a sighter, and came to nothing. Full 
of running against his old team, Valencia then made a charge through the 
middle, combining with Rooney to set up Berbatov for a header which flew 
straight at Kirkland. There was a much greater degree of difficulty for the 
Wigan keeper with shots from Rooney and Vidic, the second of which was repelled 
on the goalline by Paul Scharner.

After 20 minutes Rooney, cutting in from the byline on the left, nutmegged 
Maynor Figueroa before shooting against the far post, then Berbatov touched the 
ball past the advancing keeper but wide of the target. A United goal was 
inevitable, and it came after 28 minutes, when young Rafael's centre from the 
right was met at the near post by Rooney who, six yards out, turned it across 
Kirkland and inside the far upright.

The second that effectively removed Wigan from contention came four minutes 
later, from the same direction. This time it was Valencia who provided the 
service from the right for Carrick to amble through the middle unopposed and 
shoot past the ludicrously under-protected Kirkland from 16 yards.

By half-time it was 3-0 and Wigan must have had visions of White Hart Lane all 
over again. Their defence was appalling once more, allowing Rafael ridiculous 
time and space just inside the penalty area to manoeuvre into optimum position 
before shooting low, past Kirkland's left hand.

Wigan replaced Kirkland with their reserve keeper, Mike Pollitt, after the 
interval, and within five minutes the substitute was picking the ball out of 
the back of his net, betrayed by Emmerson Boyce, who fell over, Ã  la Norman 
Wisdom, to allow Berbatov, on the edge of the six-yard box, to tuck away 
another cross from Valencia. In a fitting finale, the man from Ecuador had the 
goal his overall contribution deserved after 75 minutes when, supplied by 
Rooney, he fired past Pollitt on the run.
 