
About 84% of Australian telecommunication service providers are not ready to 
implement the national data retention scheme, whichcame into force on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/13/easier-access-data-starts-here-mandatory-retention-begins>
.

According to an anonymous survey by industry group the Communications Alliance 
<http://www.commsalliance.com.au/Documents/releases/2015-media-release-25>, 
just 10 of the 63 telcos were ready to retain and encrypt customer data by 
October 13, the deadline set by the legislation that passed in March.

The survey also found that two-thirds of telcos were either not confident at 
all or only somewhat confident that they correctly understood what data they 
were required to retain and for how long. Only 11% were very confident that 
they understood their obligations.

Metadata: Australians’ phone and internet details accessed 334,658 times in 
2013-14
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/jun/19/metadata-australians-phone-and-internet-details-accessed-334658-times-in-2013-14>
Only 58% had lodged a data retention implementation plan with government - the 
deadline for that passed in August - and of those who had lodged an 
implementation plan, 75% were yet to hear back from government.

The scheme will require telcos in Australia to keep the metadata of their 
customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/13/easier-access-data-starts-here-mandatory-retention-begins>
 – which includes certain types of phone, internet and location data – for two 
years, ostensibly for use in anti-terrorism investigations.

John Stanton, the chief executive of the Communications Alliance, said most 
telcos were still trying to determine how the legislation ought to be 
interpreted, how to update their systems, and how much of the cost of those 
upgrades would be covered by the $131m promised by the federal government to 
assist service providers.

That government assistance package, which is targeted toward smaller telcos, 
will not be enough. Many have found the cost of complying with the legislation 
is even greater than expected.

“Six months was never enough (time) but that was the legislated deadline,” 
Stanton told Guardian Australia. “The fact that the government hasn’t yet 
decided how to distribute the the money it allocated in the budget suggests it 
wasn’t enough time for them, either.”

The attorney general, George Brandis, told ABC’s AM programme on Tuesday 
<http://www.abc.net.au/am/content/2015/s4330469.htm> that the data retention 
scheme had been “very thoroughly discussed with industry” and that telcos would 
be given 18 months to apply for an extension of their compliance obligations. 
That would see full compliance in April 2017.

Telstra breached privacy law by refusing to give customer his metadata
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/05/telstra-breached-privacy-law-by-refusing-to-give-customer-his-metadata>
“Our objective here is to ensure that there is compliance ... we are more 
concerned with implementation than law enforcement,” Brandis said.

Brandis said the obligation on telcos was “expressed very clearly in the 
legislation,” and that the uniform standard of data required was “set out with 
particularity”.

“This is an important national security obligation,” he said. “We do, frankly, 
expect the industry to assume a large part of this burden.”

But Stanton said the legislation was not explicit about the exact data that 
telcos were required to retain, adding that it was “probably impossible to put 
that down in legislation.”

“If George Brandis <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis> 
had been part of the conversations among service providers as they have all 
compared their notes and tried to figure out the elements of particular 
sections, he would know that it’s not explicit what’s to be retained and what’s 
not,” he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fmetadata-explainer-australia-explained-whistleblowing-brandis-abbott-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F17%2F1426569489376%2FPaul-Farrell-metadata-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Metadata%3A%20Australian%20government's%20data%20retention%20plans%20explained%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fmetadata-explainer-australia-explained-whistleblowing-brandis-abbott-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Metadata%3A%20Australian%20government%27s%20data%20retention%20plans%20explained%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fmetadata-explainer-australia-explained-whistleblowing-brandis-abbott-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F17%2F1426569489376%2FPaul-Farrell-metadata-001.jpg>
 Metadata: the government’s data retention plans explained – video 
Telstra <https://www.theguardian.com/business/telstra>, Australia’s largest 
provider, says it is ready to retain customers’ metadata..

“Telstra is one of the few – if not the only one – telecommunications 
providers that has submitted a data retention plan and had it approved by the 
government,” Telstra chairwoman, Catherine Livingstone, told shareholders at 
the company’s annual general meeting on Tuesday. “So, we are organised to do 
this and will implement it over 18 months.”
 