
Mao Hengfeng, 49, was taken from her home in Shanghai by 30 police officers on 
24 February 2011. At first her family believed she had been returned to the 
labour camp where, until two days earlier, she had been held for nearly a year 
as punishment for protesting at the trial of Nobel peace laureate Liu Xiaobo. 
But after almost four months without news, they were finally told that she had 
been detained at Shanghai City Prison Hospital, though they have not been 
allowed to visit her yet.

When Hengfeng was previously held at the hospital, in 2008, she was tied to 
her bed, force-fed and given several injections against her will. While she 
remains thereAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> believes she is at 
risk of further torture. Her family is deeply worried about her wellbeing.

Since 2004, Hengfeng has been detained and tortured several times because of 
her work. She has campaigned for women's rights, spoken out on behalf of 
victims of forced evictions and publicly supported fellow human rights 
activists.

Hengfeng has also been held at Re-education Through Labour (RTL) facilities, 
where she has reported that officers there instructed other inmates to beat 
her. She was hit on the head twice with a chair, leaving a scar over her right 
eyelid, and was thrown on the floor, causing pain to her lower back, waist and 
kidneys. She is believed to have been tortured and beaten throughout her 
detention.

Amnesty International considers Mao Hengfeng a prisoner of conscience, 
detained solely for exercising her right to freedom of expression, a right 
which is enshrined in China's constitution.

To email the Mayor of the Shanghai Municipal People's Government and ask him 
to release Mao Hengfeng, clickhere <http://amn.st/maohengfeng>
 