
I was a little shocked – and delighted – to find Inayat Bunglawala announcing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/oct/21/al-muhajiroun-protest-london>
 that he is going to organise a counter-demonstration toAnjem Choudary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jun/18/al-muhajiroun-islamist-relaunch>
's group Islam4UK, which is planning to call for the implementation of their 
version of sharia law at a rally on Saturday 31 October.

My organisation, British Muslims for Secular Democracy 
<http://www.bmsd.org.uk/> (BMSD), had been working closely with likeminded 
British Muslim and non-Muslim democrats in planning a demonstration to coincide 
with Anjem's anti-democracy march and protest against freedom. Last week a 
Facebook group was also set up to float the idea and ignite people's interest. 
We had planned to make a formal announcement on Monday, but it makes sense, in 
the circumstances, to bring that announcement forward.

Our counter-demonstration is based on our belief in, and commitment to, those 
liberal values that define the British state, including legal and 
constitutional equality for all, equal rights for women and minorities, and 
religious freedom, including the right to be free of faith. We are turning out 
to defend all of these virtues of a secular democracy thatIslam4UK 
<http://www.islam4uk.com/> so despises and daydream of taking away from the 
British public.

Indeed, the irony is that these are the values which allow Anjem Choudary to 
protest and promote his grossly illiberal message in the first place. But 
Choudary often abuses the tolerance our society affords him, and that's why we 
decided something had to be done. Many established Muslim groups have not taken 
enough practical steps to oppose groups such as al-Muhajiroun or Islam4UK. BMSD 
was launched last year and we have decided to take the initiative by 
spearheading this campaign to demonstrate our commitment to democracy and 
freedom.

I am excited that Bunglawala is also joining the fight for liberalism. It 
seems obvious to me that he has been on a quite extraordinary personal journey 
in recent months. Last month, he wrote abrave article about gay rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/oct/05/gay-muslims-support>
 and the appalling abuse homosexual Muslims sometimes receive. This is a 
remarkable and welcome development – and a clear endorsement by Bunglawala of 
the values which define our country. However it is not clear whether such views 
are personal or reflect a broader change of attitudes within the Muslim Council 
of Britain, some of whose most senior members remain closely connected with, 
and openly support, theocratic parties in south Asia and the Middle East that 
oppose of the secular liberal democracy which we cherish.

I would urge all British Muslims and non-Muslims to build on the brave steps 
we have already taken and condemn theocratic organisations everywhere who seek 
to segregate Muslims from mainstream society on the basis of twisted 
ideological interpretations and impose an intolerant way of life upon them, 
calling it sharia. This is the basis on which British Muslims for Secular 
Democracy was founded. We believe that a commitment to plural and liberal 
values is necessary everywhere around the world.

Bunglawala has already taken some important steps – and I hope he will take 
another by joining me in condemning all theocratic parties and their 
grotesquely illiberal views. The Muslim community in Britain is going through a 
period of rapid change. New voices are emerging all the time. Our message is 
simple: we are fed up with the old leadership that has betrayed us and 
everything we believe in.

I make the same appeal to Bunglawala as I do to all of you – Muslim or 
otherwise – please come along on Saturday 31 and show your support by signing 
up here forsecular democracy <http://seculardemocracy.org/>. We would love you 
to join us and raise a voice against all theocratic values and parties – 
whoever they are.
 