
Southern Italy is not the place to go if you want to lose weight. From the 
pampered joys of Michelin-starred clifftop dining to the cheesy horror of an 
aeroplane ciabatta, a weekend on the Amalfi coast is one long dieter's 
nightmare.

Fortunately, however, food was exactly the reason for our visit. And as we 
drove along the coast, it quickly became apparent that food is something this 
part of the world does very, very well. The land is bursting with it: every 
other tree is heavy with lemons and chestnuts, the gardens are ripe with 
chilli, basil and tomatoes, and grapes drip from every terrace. A likely 
culprit is Vesuvius, which looms over Naples, and which - when it's not busy 
terrifying the unfortunate citizens of Pompeii - keeps the land supplied with 
rich volcanic soil.

Something else the Amalfi coast produces is skilful, reckless and frankly 
terrifying drivers. The vertiginous road that snakes down the coast is crowded 
with vehicles, with tour buses and Italy's ubiquitous Fiats flying past each 
other with millimetres to spare. It's evidently a case of trial and error, too: 
I didn't see a single un-dented bonnet all weekend.

Ravello, where we were based, is a cluster of medieval villas perched 350m 
above the coast. It's an achingly beautiful town of winding alleys, terraced 
gardens and, for no immediately obvious reason, pottery shops. It also seems to 
be the region's wedding capital, with milling crowds of white-gowned and suited 
visitors around every corner - attracted, no doubt, by the town's seductive 
combination of ancient wealth and rural tranquillity. Over the years, it has 
also seen more than its fair share of the rich, famous and talented - Garbo was 
a regular visitor, Wagner composed Parsifal here and Lawrence was so impressed 
with the rampant fertility of the land that he was moved to write Lady 
Chatterley's Lover.

The town is well worth taking some time out to explore, particularly the Villa 
Cimbrone, a magical edifice clinging to the rock-face at the highest point of 
the town. Constructed in a weird mish-mash of architectural styles (including 
carved stone pigs jutting from the walls and a bas-relief depicting the seven 
deadly sins), the villa is famed for its terraced garden overlooking what Gore 
Vidal called "the most beautiful view in the world". This is where he and 
generations of actors, writers and other luminaries would come to relax, stroll 
through the grounds and escape the attentions of the press.

The region is also famous for its limoncello, a sweet, tart and powerful 
liqueur distilled from the skins of the lemons that grow so freely by every 
roadside. The fruit's flesh, curiously enough, is discarded - prevented by a 
quirk of EU health and safety law from being reused. Fortunately they've got 
more than enough to go around.

With such an abundance of all things fruity, it's no surprise that wine is 
another prized local product, as I found out at Il San Pietro, a beautiful 
hotel and Michelin-starred restaurant carved out of a cliff in the nearby town 
of Positano. Sitting on a wide balcony with the sea far below and impeccably 
dressed, pathologically attentive waiters all around offering glass after glass 
is one of the more civilised ways to undergo a wine tasting, though it can get 
hard to read the labels when the sun has set and more than a few vineyards have 
been covered. But by then, of course, you might not care.

Inside the hotel's opulent, slightly kitsch restaurant (complete with two-man 
band tinkling out lounge classics from the 60s), the Michelin-starred chef 
creates his dishes from the hotel's own gardens. The result is intricate and 
unusual, if occasionally baffling - the pumpkin and pear soup was rich, smooth 
and gorgeous, but marred slightly by the unnecessary addition of tortellini and 
truffle oil. If you want fine dining, this is clearly the place to go, but 
personally (and call me a philistine) I'd have been happier with a big starchy 
bowl of pasta. The wine list, however, was superb, including the first 
Chardonnay I've actually enjoyed in years, beautifully served in massive, dusty 
three-litre bottles by those penguin-suited waiters.

Over the mountains to the north of Ravello is Naples. It's one of those huge, 
sprawling cities that requires some work - and a good map - to get to love. 
However, although much of it has a slightly unwelcoming, industrial feel, the 
old town - in particular the Piazza del Plebiscito, a vast cobbled expanse 
framed by the old royal palace and a graceful, curved colonnade - is stunning. 
It also boasts the magnificent Galleria Umberto I, a monumental glass-and-steel 
arcade so grand it seems faintly preposterous to be dedicated to mere shopping.

Naples is also the spiritual home of the pizza and (though this is a disputed 
point) that other great Italian culinary tradition, ice-cream. In the Gelateria 
della Scimmia, one of the oldest ice-cream shops in Naples, you can see how 
it's made. Below this fairly unassuming building is a white-tiled cavern lined 
with chrome freezers and overgrown, elegant 50s-style food mixers, where Marco, 
the debonair don of the gelateria - his family started the business in 1933 - 
talks visitors through the process. Vats of milk are pasteurised, flavoured, 
churned and frozen. Eventually - through a process that was lost in 
translation, but I like to imagine a Willy Wonka-esque series of multicoloured 
pipes winding through the building - it's forced out of what looks like a giant 
sausage machine upstairs.

The cellar is also where the gelateria's specialities, shaped lollies and 
extravagant cakes, are made. Perhaps I was being naive, but I had never 
realised ice-cream-making was so macho. The sight of two hairy, lab-coated men 
throwing ice-cream into banana-shaped moulds was almost enough to put me off.

Pretty soon, however, we got back to eating. This time it was pizza, a 
Neapolitan speciality still jealously guarded, even afforded its own local 
festival, despite having become one of Italy's most successful exports. But 
this was not pizza as many of us know it - a congealed, doughy mass kept warm 
only by its proximity to a scooter's engine. No, this was the margherita, the 
pizza reduced to first principles: tomatoes, mozzarella, basil and a drizzle of 
oil. Not a pineapple in sight.

At the Cantanapoli Restaurant, a pink-trousered waiter with a broad smile and 
a penchant for fork-balancing tricks gave a running commentary as the dough was 
prepared before being thrown into a vast wood-fired oven. Again, the whole 
business was conducted with much brawny-armed machismo, so when I got the 
chance to make one, I could hardly refuse. Under the eyes of the experts, I 
pummelled, flipped and slapped as best I could, and produced something which, 
while a tad more deep-pan than the crisp wedges of perfection they turned out 
so effortlessly, still tasted fantastic.

If you love fine flavours, and don't mind spending some time in a minibus to 
get them, you could do a lot worse than a food tour of Amalfi. Just don't go 
there assuming that when it comes to food, extravagance is the only attraction. 
In Naples, the tomato is king, and after a mound of the local crop piled high 
with buffalo mozzarella and shredded basil, I understood why. Simple? 
Certainly. But it was also the finest meal I ate all weekend.

Way to go
 Martin Nicholls travelled with Thomson Cities <http://www.thomsoncities.co.uk>
 (0870 888 0230 for food and wine tours; 0870 606 1476 for other short breaks), 
which has introduced new food and wine tours to Naples for summer 2005. 
Departure dates are May 5-8, July 21-23 and September 29-October 2.

Packages cost from Â£705, including three days' touring Naples and the Amalfi 
coast, two nights' B&B at the Hotel Graal in Ravello, return flights from 
Gatwick with British Airways plus all transfers and the use of a guide for the 
full duration of the tour. (Some other charges will apply, such as entry fees 
to villas in Ravello.)
 