
Stooping to her knees, Maria Belenzi, 42, welcomes us to her home, a 
traditional hut in the village of Kavakanjandala, Kiboga district. She beams 
with pride as she tells us about her role as a CMD.

The families are really appreciative, she says, and she likes to help the 
children. She has treated 12 in the past week and as we talk a neighbour 
arrives with two sick toddlers. Both children are feverish, sweating and 
shivering. Their breathing is shallow. Maria checks their eyes and sees the 
whites are yellow. Certain they are suffering from malaria, she collects a 
wooden box. First she brings out a register and finds out more about the 
children. She asks the name, age, if the child sleeps under a net, and the 
symptoms.

She gives the child a yellow pill and some clean drinking water to swallow it. 
Then she talks their carer through the rest of the course. Alongside the 
instructions written on the packaging are illustrations to help those who 
cannot read. "We cannot afford to give her money so we give her our blessings," 
says Joyce Mbabazi. One of the children she has brought to Maria is her own 
daughter, the other is her employer's son. She says the first thing he did when 
he took her on was bring her to meet Maria, explaining what she should do if 
any of the children fell ill.

What would help Maria in her role as a volunteer, I ask? Her request is 
modest: a paraffin lamp to help her treat children at night and a bicycle so 
she can collect the drugs from the hospital more easily. More importantly 
though, she says she wants to see the scheme extended to treat older children 
too, so she does not have to turn them away.
 