
A busy morning for corporate results has been livened by news of developments 
in the possible takeover ofNational Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationalexpressgroup>.

The consortium stalking the train and bus operator 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2009/jul/24/national-express-takeover-offer-cvc>
 has increased its proposed offer to 450p a share, valuing it at almost £690m. 
That's a 50p per share increase on yesterday's closing price. The original 
offer was thought to value National Express at around £500m.

Shares in the company rallied by 8.5% this morning to 435p.

National Express said it is considering the proposal, and also admitted that 
it is looking to raise new funds to cut its £1.2bn debt pile if a takeover does 
not proceed.

The company's future has been uncertain since it surrendered its franchise to 
run services on the east coast mainline. Our transport correspondent, Dan 
Milmo, will be probing this new offer this morning, but for nowhere's the 
official statement 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10167594>
.

Back to the results, where drinks giant Diageo has matched market expectations 
with a 10% rise in earnings 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10167426>
 but warned that it will not repeat the feat this year.

The world's largest spirits maker made an operating profit of £2.44bn in the 
12 months to the end of June, despite a fall in sales of Johnnie Walker and 
Baileys. The City was more concerned about Diageo's expectations for the 
current year - and chief executive Paul Walsh clearly expects a tough battle:


While the global economy appears to be stabilising, there is still uncertainty 
as to the sustainability and pace of any recovery and 2009-2010 will be 
challenging, as we lap a strong first quarter and a reasonable first half 
performance this year. That being recognised, we expect to deliver low single 
digit organic operating profit growth in fiscal 2010.

Diageo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/diageo> had previously indicated 
that it would grow operating profits by between 4% and 6%.

Conditions in the airline industry remain extremely hard, according to Aer 
Lingus which admitted that its operating loss has widened to €93m, up from a 
loss of (2008: loss of €23.4m):

Trading conditions continue to be very challenging across the airline 
industry. There has been a structural change in fares and in demand for our 
long haul business class product in particular. In addition, Aer Lingus expects 
that the continuation of the current market trends in Ireland and its other key 
markets will lead to further sustained and significant fare pressure. This 
dynamic and very challenging environment contributes to a highly uncertain 
outlook.


In the mining sector Kazakhmys reported that its revenues slumped by 42% in 
the first half of the year 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10167368>
 despite the company shipping 8% more copper. This was due to the copper price 
more than halving as demand was hit by the downturn.

Precious metals specialist Peter Hambro Mining, though, has quadrupled its 
profits 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10167450>
, thanks to better sales to the US, the depreciation of the rouble, and the 
buoyant gold price.

Upmarket estate agent Savills <https://www.theguardian.com/business/savills> 
has seen its profits almost wiped out by the housing crash. It reported 
earnings of £100,000 for the first half, down from £33.4m a year earlier. Chief 
executive Jeremy Helsby said avoiding a loss in the current climate was a 
significant achievement.


These results clearly demonstrate Savills's resilience in some of the toughest 
trading conditions in decades. To generate a profit is testament to the 
diversification of our business and the quality and determination of our teams 
around the world.

And back in transport, Arriva posted a 10% rise in revenues and a 4% increase 
in operating profits. But car rental chain Avis Europe hasseen its losses swell 
to €34.6m 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10167413>
.

Traders are expecting a relatively quiet day's trading in London ahead of GDP 
figures due out of America tonight. Housebuilders may be boosted by this 
morning's Nationwide house price survey, which showed the biggest monthly rise 
in two and a half years.
 