
We sit here in 2014 and we think we’ve “got” digital. We’ve been talking about 
it forever and we’ve introduced new processes, expressions, agencies. We’ve 
acquired, hired and rebuilt. What more evidence is needed? How could it be in 
an age whereUnilever has a YouTube Channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/Unilever>, Oreo can put tweets on cookies and 
where we makeTV ads out of recycled vines 
<http://www.thehubcomms.com/here-is-the-airbnb-television-ad-made-from-crowdsourced-vines/article/323947/>
, that we’re not on top of it?

I believe we’ve accomplished nothing with new technology in marketing. We’ve 
missed the entire point of it all; we’ve taken the revolutionary power of 
digital and found a way to adapt it to what we had.

It’s always been this way because paradigm shifts are hard, be it the onset of 
the steam age, or the beginning of electricity. We tend to view the future 
through the mirror of the past, unable to start afresh with what the new 
technology means. We become fixated on embellishing what we had, instead of 
attempting to transform the status quo with what’s now possible.

Media owners still sell identical units from the past, merely digital 
equivalents of what we already knew, sold in the same way, to the same people 
in media agencies who use the same techniques to plan and execute. Clients 
operate as they always have, but with “digital people” with their own budget 
and present at meetings. Creative agencies are identical, the production line 
for ads is the same, the processes, templates and briefs identical. They’ve 
taken the supply specs for digital and bolted them on to the end. Even the 
technology we have embraced, like programmatic buying or retargeting, is based 
on an obsession with technology and a dearth of creativity. We’re getting 
better at narrow cast ads based on a misunderstanding of our own proficiency 
and a total lack of empathy about consumer behaviour.

Industry wide we’ve taken the most powerful, transformative force the business 
world has ever seen, a power so strong it’s reduced retail brands to ashes, 
bankrupted media channels, and redefined personal transportation, and have 
forced it to fit into what we could best deal with. If we are honest, digital 
has always been a problem. It threatened us, it undermined what we knew, it 
gave us measurement and removed artistry. We digested it as a problem, and as a 
result we’ve never once tasked ourselves with maximising it.

The first step is to blow up the agency environment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/oct/02/advertising-agency-marketing-marketers-structure>
 and start again.

We are built on an anachronistic structure from the days when we were funded 
by commission and aligned to media channels that no longer exist. We live in a 
world where we listen to the radio on our phones, read magazines on tablets, 
watch TV on laptops. The very least important aspect of how we consume media is 
how the stuff gets to us, the most important aspect is the context. Yet we 
order our entire workflow and budgets around the irrelevant pipe.

We should bring media owners, media agencies, technology companies and 
creative agencies together. Adding technology, strategy, creativity and media 
knowledge together will allow us to do more interesting things than replicate 
what we know. With this structure we would take advantage of new technology 
like addressable TV, we’d use targeting and creative optimisation to find ways 
to make ads more personal. We’d find ways to do native at scale.

We’d invent new advertising units, entirely new ways to connect with people, 
or create ads with more interesting calls to action. Clicks to add products to 
shopping baskets, clicks to bookmark pages. We’d leverage new media platforms 
that don’t yet exist, mobile marketing in the notification layer, maps as a 
portal for search advertising. We’d see flow advertising across devices, to 
close the loop on shopping and send mobile coupons to people.

I’d hope that we’d also rise above the world of communications and think more 
broadly about what technology means for marketing. We could think more 
imaginatively and empathetically about how brands can connect more 
meaningfully. We’d invent new business models for the internet of things, 
establish what APIs or app links can do. We’d explore digital screens in retail,
exploit omni-channel retail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/jul/22/omni-channel-retail-consumer-experience>
, find ways for brands to redesign call-centre processes and CRM strategy, 
employing over-the-top (OTT) messaging to be more personal.

We could move upstream to the big meaty problems in business and to improve 
products. Unleashed to transform the core business, we could help brands and 
business reinvent themselves for the digital age. Now more than ever companies 
face bigger threats than before. We should have been the people to get Kodak to 
become Instagram. What if we’d suggested an idea like Uber to General Motors? 
What can we do about the dying high street, or how can banks manage virtual 
currencies? What do companies threatened by the innovator’s dilemma do to keep 
fresh and nimble? This should be a role for marketeers in the digital age.

Let’s put down the drone, forget “follow Friday”. Let’s step up a gear, be 
bold and change the future of business.

Tom Goodwin is the CEO and founder of the Tomorrow Group 
<http://www.tomorrow-innovation.com/>. You can follow him on Twitter 
@tomfgoodwin <https://twitter.com/tomfgoodwin>

More like this

• Advertising agencies are dying, just as they become most vital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/04/advertising-agencies-dying-marketers-challenges>

• How technology is changing marketing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/29/technology-changing-marketing-digital-media>

• Six things CEOs want from their marketing teams in a digital age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/23/ceo-marketing-teams-brother-exterion-media>

• Sponsored feature: How are marketers coping with the pace of change in 
marketing? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/adobe-partner-zone/2014/sep/18/marketing-technology-asda-dominos-pizza>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 