
Having featured women as disparate and fascinating as Tracy Emin and Helen 
Mirren last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/aug/19/marks-spencer-new-ad-annie-leibowitz>
,Marks & Spencer’s spring/summer "Leading Ladies" 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/s/britains-leading-ladies> lineup was bound to 
be a talking point – and here it is, in all its Annie Leibovitz-shot glory.

The lineup? From left to right, we have Lulu Kennedy MBE, one of the champions 
of emerging British fashion designers through her non-profit body Fashion East, 
who was pregnant at the time of the shoot. To her left, wearing dark-red lippy, 
is chef Rachel Khoo.

Next, it’s Alek Wek, a supermodel with substance, while Rita Ora 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rita-ora> stands in the middle, popping her 
collar. At 23, Ora is the whippersnapper of the group, a No 1-selling musician 
with serious fashion clout, having walked the runway for Moschino at Milan 
fashion week in February.

Emma Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson>, of course, 
comes next, and she deserves her place. Following her tipsy barefoot speech at 
the Golden Globes, during which she held her red-soled Louboutin shoes in her 
hand and joked: "I just want you to know, this red – it’s my blood," she is the 
thesp we would all most like to have dinner with.

Having a shimmy beside her is living legend Annie Lennox, and finally it's 
Doreen Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/doreen-lawrence> – Stephen 
Lawrence’s campaigning mother, and a baroness to boot. Structural Engineer Roma 
Agrawal will appear in further campaign images released later this week.

This picture represents one of four main trends from M&S this season, titled 
90s luxe. Aside from Wek, whose dress is a homage to Celine’s painterly 
spring/summer collection, all of the looks feature clean lines and simple 
colours: white and navy. Overall, the impression is of a more streamlined 
approach than the last Marks & Spencer campaign, which showcased a variety of 
trends in every picture. The image seems to say that, while M&S can do 
trend-lend pieces (see: Wek’s dress), its focus is on offering minimalist 
clothing to a variety of women, regardless of age or attitude.

Or, as M&S executive director marketing and business development, Patrick 
Bousquet-Chavanne, puts it, it is a vision of "the unique and diverse women of 
a modern Britain … Marks & Spencer is a democratic brand which is relevant to 
women of all ages and strands of life.” With M&S losing share in womenswear, and
Next poised to overtake M&S for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/20/next-profits-marks-spencer-rise>
, the question remains: will the democratic approach have the desired effect on 
the bottom line?
 