
Millions of filmgoers who enjoyed the singing of Deborah Kerr in The King and I
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/15/reel-history-king-and-i> (1956), 
Natalie Wood in West Side Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/15/west-side-story-review> (1961) and
Audrey Hepburn in My Fair Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/25/marni-nixon-hepburn-musicals-monroe>
 (1964) were unaware that their voices were dubbed by Marni Nixon, who has died 
of breast cancer aged 86.

In order to keep the illusion a secret, the extraordinarily versatile American 
coloratura soprano was uncredited. It was only some years later, after the 
heyday of the Hollywood musical had passed, that the curtains were figuratively 
pulled back to reveal Nixon at a microphone behind the scenes. In film circles, 
this most unsung of singers was dubbed the “ghostess with the mostest”. 
However, in classical music circles, Nixon was well known for her wide range of 
recordings and opera performances, notably at the Los Angeles, Seattle and San 
Francisco opera companies, where she performed, among others,Zerbinetta in 
Ariadne auf Naxos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/30/glyndebourne2013-michael-kennedy-ariadne-auf-naxos-strauss-hofmannsthal>
, Susanna in Le Nozze di Figaro, both Blonde and Konstanze in Die Entführung 
aus dem Serail and Violetta inLa Traviata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/16/la-traviata-giuseppe-verdi-opera-victorian-love-and-sex>
.

Nixon also sang with the New York Philharmonic under Leonard Bernstein, the 
Los Angeles Philharmonic, and the London Symphony Orchestra. In addition, she 
gave a series of lieder recitals, specialising in fiendishly difficult modern 
works by Igor Stravinsky, Arnold Schoenberg and Anton Webern; and Pierre 
Boulez’s Improvisation sur Mallarmé I under Bernstein, a world away from 
Getting to Know You (The King and I), I Feel Pretty (West Side Story) and I 
Could Have Danced All Night (My Fair Lady).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmarni-nixon-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69a325bdf490408c6d156b0a77c4f58640e799a%2F0_7_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marni%20Nixon%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmarni-nixon-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marni%20Nixon%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fmarni-nixon-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69a325bdf490408c6d156b0a77c4f58640e799a%2F0_7_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Nixon singing in a tribute concert for Lerner and Loewe in 2008. Photograph: 
Hiroyuki Ito/Getty Images 
She was born in California as Margaret Nixon McEathron, the daughter of 
Charles Nixon and Margaret McEathron (nee Wittke). Her parents encouraged her 
singing when they discovered that she had perfect pitch and impeccable 
sight-reading skills from a very young age. She began a singing career at 19, 
later studying opera performance with Carl Ebert and Sarah Caldwell.

Nixon’s association with movies began when she dubbed the singing voice of the 
child star Margaret O’Brien in Big City (1948) andThe Secret Garden (1949) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LN_GZCt1fbk>. In the former, Nixon immediately 
demonstrated her talent for mimicry by imitating the 10-year-old O’Brien taking 
off the nightclub singer Betty Garrett. “It was just a part of the working 
singer’s job in Hollywood to do anything that was necessary and a lot of 
dubbing was going on,” Nixon explained. “It also helped subsidise my ‘serious’ 
singing career.”

In 1953, Nixon was asked to dub Marilyn Monroe’s high notes in the number 
Diamonds Are a Girl’s Best Friend, from Gentlemen Prefer Blondes. Most of the 
song is in Monroe’s own voice but she needed help in two phrases: “These rocks 
don’t lose their shape, diamonds are a girl’s best friend”, and at the 
beginning with a series of high-pitched “nos”.

When Natalie Wood realised that Nixon would be doing all the singing, she 
walked off the set

Nixon worked for about a month with Deborah Kerr on The King and I, managing 
to replicate Kerr’s distinctive “ladylike” accent seamlessly in song. “Deborah 
wanted also to look like she was really singing and wanted to be seen using the 
same muscles. I stretched my neck in the same way and altered the shape of my 
mouth to emulate hers,” Nixon recalled.

Both Wood and Hepburn initially resented Nixon “stealing” their voices, 
thinking that they could handle the songs adequately themselves. In fact, Wood 
thought that Nixon was brought in on West Side Story merely to dub in the 
occasional high notes. When Wood realised that Nixon would be doing all the 
singing, she walked off the set. But when she heard Nixon’s interpretation of 
Tonight, she knew she could never equal it. Curiously, Nixon was hired to dub 
Rita Moreno in the same film, in a reprise of Tonight, in harmony with her 
voice for Wood, having to distinguish each voice from the other using different 
timbres. Nixon never got any credit for her work on the film ofWest Side Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/west-side-story>, although she did get 
royalties for the bestselling record of the soundtrack.

Audrey Hepburn, a very fair lady indeed: from the archive, 23 October 1964
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/23/my-fair-lady-audrey-hepburn-archive-1964>
Nixon’s brilliance reached its peak in My Fair Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/my-fair-lady>, by having to replicate 
Hepburn’s voice as the cockney Eliza Doolittle in Wouldn’t It Be Loverly and 
then singing with a posh accent, after the character’s transformation, in I 
Could Have Danced All Night. One of Nixon’s few appearances in films was in the 
small part of Sister Sophia in The Sound of Music (1965), singing Maria with 
three other nuns, getting the solo line: “She waltzes on her way to mass and 
whistles on the stair.”

As film musicals became more pop-based, there was less work for a vocal 
stand-in like Nixon. Her last movie voice job was as the grandmother in the 
Disney animation Mulan (1998), singing Honour to Us All. On stage, she toured 
as Fräulein Schneider in Cabaret (1997–98), and appeared in productions of The 
King and I and The Sound of Music; she played the Nurse in Romeo and Juliet off 
Broadway, and was on Broadway in 2000 as Aunt Kate in James Joyce’s The Dead. 
All the while, she continued to teach voice.

Nixon was married three times, first to the film composer Ernest Gold, with 
whom she had a son, the singer-songwriterAndrew Gold (who died in 2011) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/06/andrew-gold-obituary>, and two 
daughters, Martha and Melani, and then to Lajos Fenster; both these marriages 
ended in divorce. Her third husband, the flautist Albert Block, died in 2015. 
She is survived by her daughters.

• Marni Nixon (Margaret Nixon McEathron), singer, born 22 February 1930; died 
24 July 2016
 