
My mother, Mary Thomas, who has died aged 85, trained as a textile designer at 
the Royal College of Art in London in the late 1940s. In the 50s, she designed 
fabrics for industry, including a moquette forLondon Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground>, and she exhibited at the 
Design Centre London in 1958.

In the late 50s she was offered a prestigious design job in Turin but after 
discussion with her husband, the sculptorRobert Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/may/28/guardianobituaries3>, turned it 
down in order to remain in London, which they felt would be better for them 
both. They taught at Ealing Art School until the end of the 60s, and in 1969 
Mary was in her element co-designing a modernist house in Chiswick for our 
family.

As a youngster, she had wanted to be an architect. She was born in Barry, 
south Wales, the only child of George Gardiner, a fitter, and his wife, Ellen 
(nee Kelly), who was later a shopkeeper. Mary started at the local girls’ 
grammar school at the age of 10. She was the only student in the immediate 
postwar period to win a scholarship fromCardiff School of Art 
<http://cardiff-school-of-art-and-design.org/> to go to the RCA 
<http://www.rca.ac.uk/>. There she studied woven textiles under Professor 
Margaret Leischner, who had taught at theBauhaus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bauhaus>.

From the outset she stood out, winning a Cotton Board travel scholarship to 
Paris, Zurich and northern Italy. As a student she met and befriended the
Festival of Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2012/dec/30/observer-archive-spender-festival-britain>
 furniture designerErnest Race 
<http://design.designmuseum.org/design/ernest-race.html>, who was best man at 
her wedding in 1952.

In the early 70s, she returned to Barry with Robert and us children (me, my 
sister, Sara, and brother, Derw) and her career went on the back burner – due 
also to the continuing decline in the British woven textiles industry. She 
didn’t see this negatively, and often said that designing the interiors of her 
three successive homes in south Wales, and nurturing all of us, was a very 
rewarding alternative.

One of her favourite bits of advice was “you can have anything you want but 
not everything you want”. A paraphrase of Abraham Lincoln’s dictum, this was 
all about aspiration and single-mindedness tempered by realism and moderation – 
pragmatic idealism, not consumerism – and it summed her up.

She dug deep when necessary and did some art teaching in her 40s and 50s. She 
exhibited in a group show at theAlbany Gallery, Cardiff 
<http://www.albanygallery.com/> in 1989. After my father’s death in 1999, she 
carried the torch for his sculpture and represented him at the unveiling of his 
IK Brunel statue by thePrince of Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> in Pembrokeshire in 1999. Six 
years later, she helped to bring to fruition a major project to place a set of 
Robert’s bronze sculptures in the centre of Cardiff. Robert and Mary had first 
met there in 1947.

She is survived by Sara, Derw and me, and by two grandchildren.
 