
If asked to identify the single most important physical attribute that marks 
mankind from the beasts, the ability to run for long distances without falling 
over would probably trail last - long after an expanded brain, dextrous hands, 
the existence of childhood or even just standing upright. Yet according to a 
report in today's Nature, it is endurance running - as distinct from sprinting, 
walking or just standing up - that explains many of the peculiarities of the 
human frame.

Most of the explanations of the origins and evolution of bipeds have 
concentrated on our ability to walk. But humans have two gaits, walking and 
running, and in discussions of evolution, running gets left behind.

Why? The easy answer is the proverbial one, that we had to learn to walk 
before we could run. This does not really explain anything, and in any case 
there's more to it than that, according to Dennis M Bramble of the University 
of Utah, and Daniel E Lieberman of Harvard.

Scientists have not looked at the evolution of running because in the world of 
animal athleticism, humans are seen as very poor runners.

Or are they? As every Olympian will know, there is more than one kind of 
running. But when we think of running, it is running fast over short distances. 
Sprinting demands specialist training. Few humans make good sprinters and even 
an Olympian can't keep up the pace of a 100-metre dash for more than 15 seconds 
or so.

Which is, in the scheme of things, pathetic. Horses, antelope and greyhounds 
can gallop twice as fast for several minutes without conspicuous distress.

Long-distance running, however, is a different game, and something we are 
surprisingly good at. With a little training, we can maintain a steady pace for 
miles at a time and our speeds compare not too unfavourably with those of 
horses and dogs.

Although easily outpaced by four-legged animals in a sprint, this is partly a 
function of four-leggedness, in that quadrupeds can gallop, a fore-and-aft gait 
that is physically impossible for an animal with two legs, one on each side. 
But trotting is a contralateral gait directly comparable with human running, 
and a human can keep up with a trotting pony.

If this sounds incredible as you charge down the street after a 
fast-disappearing bus, consider this. Long-distance running may be common among 
animals such as dogs and horses, but extremely rare in primates - so rare, in 
fact, that humans are the only primates to do it. To be sure, chimps may be 
nifty sprinters, but they are lousy joggers.

All this, say Bramble and Lieberman, demands explanation. So they point to a 
number of features of the human frame that seem particularly good adaptations 
for running, as distinct from just walking.

Our long legs with compact, strongly-arched feet, pulled together with long 
tendons that store energy, ensure a bouncy, efficient trot.

Less obvious is the fact that our bodies are constructed so that our arms can 
swing freely, out of phase with our moving feet, keeping us balanced as we run. 
Our forearms are proportionally shorter and lighter than in other primates - an 
advantage given that we keep them habitually flexed as we run. We have a 
ligament in our necks that ensures our heads are kept facing upwards and 
forwards, towards the finish line. An equivalent ligament is found in horses 
but not, crucially, in chimpanzees.

Questions of cause and effect in evolution are notoriously tricky, as they so 
often go no further than "just-so" stories that cannot be tested or falsified. 
Scenarios abound explaining why humans stood upright: to free hands for 
carrying food, making tools or cuddling babies; to expose a greater area of 
(increasingly hairless) skin to cooling breezes; simply to see over the long 
grass, and so on.

All are possible, but none can be tested rigorously. In any case, none can 
explain adaptations that seem to make sense only in the context of endurance 
running. To explain these, we have to invoke scenarios that are equally 
unfalsifiable.

One interesting idea comes from studying animals that also go in for endurance 
running - open country pursuit-predators and scavengers such as dogs and 
hyenas. A suitable frame for long-distance running emerged with the genus Homo 
around 2.5 million years ago, along with big brains, small guts and small teeth 
- all traits consistent with a carnivorous lifestyle and a diet rich in fats 
and proteins.

Before we invented bows and arrows to bridge that gap, if we wanted to bring 
home that bacon, we had to run for it.

Â· Henry Gee is a senior editor of Nature. His latest book is Jacob's Ladder: 
The History of the Human Genome. His next book TheScience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/science> of Middle-earth is published in 
the UK next year
 