 Girl Asleep  Goldstone  The Turning  The Babadook Spooky! This horror film 
from 2014 was Jennifer Kent's directorial debut.  Wolf Creek 2  Reckless Kelly 
This satirical take on the story of Ned Kelly from 1993 was written by, 
directed by and starred Yahoo Serious.  The Pack  Snowtown  Chopper  He Died 
With A Felafel in His Hand  Metal Skin  Romper Stomper This 1992 Australian 
drama about neo-Nazis in suburban Melbourne is often considered one of Russell 
Crowe's break-out roles.  Snowtown  The Hunter  Animal Kingdom Starring Ben 
Mendelsohn, Joel Edgerton and Guy Pearce, this crime drama from 2010 was 
inspired by the Melbourne-based Pettingill family, many of whom were convicted 
of criminal acts.  Tomorrow When the War Began  Australia  The Proposition  Mad 
Max: Fury Road  Priscilla: Queen of the Desert Hugo Weaving and Guy Pearce star 
in this 1994 comedy-drama about two drag queens and a transgender woman 
travelling across the Australian outback in a bus named Priscilla.  Mad Max  
Mad Max 2  Mad Max: Beyond the Thunderdome  Mad Max: Fury Road This 2015 return 
to the story of Mad Max (the first Mad Max film was made in 1979) received 10 
Academy Award nominations and won six.  Storm Boy  Dead Calm This thriller from 
1989, in which a couple sailing through the Pacific encounter danger after 
investigating a damaged boat, stars Sam Neill, Nicole Kidman and Billy Zane.  
On the Beach  Black Water  The Castle This comedy from 1997 follows the 
working-class Kerrigan family who attempt to save their house from compulsory 
acquisition by developers seeking to expand a nearby airport.  Snowtown  Wog 
Boy 2: Kings of Mykonos  The Great Gatsby  Holding the Man  Two Hands  
Somersault  Looking for Alibrandi Looking For Alibrandi (2002) is a 
coming-of-age film set in suburban Sydney, based on Melina Marchetta's 1992 
novel of the same name.  The Dressmaker  Lantana  The Great Gatsby  Australia 
Epic in scope (and length) this very ambitious 2008 film directed by Baz 
Luhrmann is set during the second world war and stars Nicole Kidman and Hugh 
Jackman.  Paper Planes  Babe: Pig in the City  Babe This 1995 film about a pig 
who wanted to be a sheepdog was nominated for seven Academy Awards and directed 
by George Miller (of Mad Max fame).  Mad Max: Fury Road  Metal Skin  Romper 
Stomper  Chopper  Wolf Creek Inspired by a spate of murders and disappearances 
in the Australian outback, Wolf Creek (2005) is an Australian horror film 
notorious for its graphic violence, particularly towards women.  The Great 
Gatsby  Romeo and Juliet  Strictly Ballroom Inspiring ballroom dancers 
everywhere, this 1992 romantic comedy was Baz Luhrmann's first as director, and 
the first in his "red curtain" trilogy, followed by Romeo + Juliet and Moulin 
Rouge.  Little Fish  The Sapphires  Muriel's Wedding Starring Toni Collette and 
Rachel Griffiths, this 1994 comedy follows the bumbling, sweet-hearted Muriel 
who longs for a fairytale wedding.  The Dressmaker  Strictly Ballroom  You gotâ€¦ 
 "You're terrible, Muriel!"  "That's going straight to the Pool Room!"  "I am 
the rocker, I am the roller, I am the out-of-controller!"  "Tell him he's 
dreaming!"  Challenge your friends Submit answers  