
New Top Gear co-host Matt LeBlanc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/04/matt-leblanc-to-co-present-top-gear-bbc-chris-evans>
 is to star in a US sitcom pilot, prompting questions about how he might juggle 
his commitments on either side of the Atlantic if both his new shows take off.

The former Friends actor is to appear in and executive produce CBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/cbs> pilot I’m Not Your Friend, having just 
signed what is understood to be a year-long contract with the relaunched BBC2 
hit motoring show.

He also appears in BBC2 transatlantic comedy Episodes. If I’m Not Your Friend 
goes to a full series and the newTop Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> is a success, LeBlanc’s 
schedule is likely to become more packed than the M25 at rush hour.

Top Gear usually requires both location filming around the world and in the 
studio for the audience shows in Surrey. However, the revamped version may have 
some tweaks to its format and line-up that puts less pressure on all the 
presenters.

Chris Evans <https://www.theguardian.com/media/chris-evans>, LeBlanc’s 
co-presenter on the BBC’s most lucrative show, is also no stranger to the 
pressures of being in demand.

Matt LeBlanc as Top Gear host – what’s not to love? | Anne T Donahue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/04/matt-leblanc-top-gear-car-show-good-news>
In December he bowed out of hosting more episodes of his revived Channel 4 
chat show TFI Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/27/chris-evans-gives-up-tfi-friday-role-top-gear-focus>
 to focus on his Radio 2 breakfast series and the BBC’s car show – which 
effectivelyhe is executive producing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/22/top-gear-bbc-chris-evans> 
although BBC rules state he cannot have that title as he is also the show’s 
star.

That Sachsgate guideline was introduced to stop a repeat of the controversy 
surrounding Russell Brand and Jonathan Ross’s “gratuitously offensive” call to 
Andrew Sachs’ granddaughter in 2008 , which ultimately led to Ross leaving the 
corporation.

At the time the BBC was fined £150,000 by regulator Ofcom for weaknesses 
including a “lack of clarity” – about the role of the show’s executive 
producer, who was a senior figure at the management agency that represented 
Brand, and about who at the BBC had editorial oversight of the show.


The BBC declined to comment on the effect LeBlanc’s new show might have on his 
Top Gear commitments.

The revamped Top Gear is due to air in May in the UK and has already attracted 
interest from international buyers. LeBlanc’s hiring made headlines around the 
world.

Motoring journalist Chris Harris and German driver Sabine Schmitz are also 
expected to be announced as part of the line-up within days and former racing 
driverEddie Jordan has also been asked to join the show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/05/eddie-jordan-poised-to-join-chris-evans-and-matt-leblanc-for-new-look-top-gear>
.
 