
Patrick Mboma scored the only goal of the game yesterday as the favourites 
Cameroon beat Egypt 1-0 to qualify for the semi-finals of the African Nations 
Cup.

Mboma, the African Footballer of the Year, rose above Egypt's defence to score 
from a 62nd-minute corner and set up a match with the host nation, Mali, in 
Mamako on Thursday.

It should not have taken the Indomitable Lions so long to take the lead, and 
the final score poorly reflected their dominance. The Real Mallorca striker 
Samuel Eto'o was the prime culprit, missing wonderful chances at the start of 
each half.

A splendid save from Essam el Hadary denied him on the first occasion, after 
Eto'o latched on to Pierre Wome's blocked shot, but there could be no excuses 
when he was next presented with a clear sight of goal.

This time El Hadary was the villain, needlessly trying to dribble the ball out 
of his area. Eto'o dispossessed him and ran clear but, with the goal gaping, 
scooped his shot over the bar.

It was not Cameroon's only embarrassing miss. Arsenal's Lauren Etam√© Mayer 
somehow avoided a similarly inviting target from a few yards out and Daniel 
Ngom Kome hit the bar after 81 minutes.

Finding themselves still in the game as it neared its end, Egypt - four times 
winners of this competition - started to push forward. Ahmed Hossam headed wide 
in the 70th minute and Yaser Radwan sent a free-kick over a minute later.

With five minutes remaining, the north African side finally carved open the 
Cameroon defence but, when the ball flashed across a poorly guarded goal, there 
was no forward there to finish the move.

Despite the closeness of the scoreline, Cameroon will remain favourites to add 
the Nations Cup to the Olympic title they won in 2000. They have yet to concede 
a goal in four games, all of which they have won. But a highly partisan crowd 
of 50,000 in the Malian capital should ensure a more stringent test in the next 
round.
 