
In 2014, one strong month of Major League Baseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> can be enough for a shot to win 
the World Series. Just ask the Pittsburgh Pirates.

The Buccos boast a very un-playoff like record of just a few games over the 
.500 mark, butthanks to a 17-10 June 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/PIT/2014-schedule-scores.shtml>, their 
ability to tread water for the remainder of the season and most importantly an 
epic (and really, that’s not even a strong enough adjective aftertwo wins in 15 
games <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/MIL/2014-schedule-scores.shtml>) 
collapse by their National League Central-rival Milwaukee Brewers, Pittsburgh 
are in with a shot of a second consecutive wild-card spot.

In contrast to last season, when the Pirates snapped out of a slump of two 
decades by winning 94 games, this edition of the Buccos are not so lethal.Their 
fabled “Shark Tank” <https://twitter.com/BuccoSharkTank> bullpen has less of a 
bite, while the starting pitching, a group that has mostly come around lately, 
have given up nearly a half-run more a game this season overall, slipping from 
third-rankedEarned Run Average in the NL to seventh. 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/PIT/2014-pitching.shtml> Perhaps it’s 
because their hurlers are pitching with less confidence thanks to the 
Swiss-cheese defense behind them – Pittsburgh have committed more than 100 
errors thus far, the most in the National League.

So yeah, it’s a good thing they can hit. Last season, the Buccos were 
arm-strong, with their pitching picking up the hitters en-route to a memorable 
season at PNC Park. Nowadays its the bats that are carrying the club, moving 
from 11th in runs scored to third. That’s quite a leap and as usual, Pittsburgh 
can count on the production of NL MVP Andrew McCutchen, who had a 
stand-up-inside-the-park home run on Wednesday in thevictory against intrastate 
rivals Philadelphia 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_09_10_pitmlb_phimlb_1&mode=box>
.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
McCutchen has been in superb in 2014, and he’s not alone inside the suddenly 
potent lineup – Josh Harrison has played out of his skin in what is nothing 
short of a breakout season. The 26-year-old was the National League player of 
the month in August, andMcCutchen himself told USA Today 
<http://www.freep.com/usatoday/article/14995279>:

If we don’t have J-Hay here, how would we be doing? You take him away from 
this team, and that would answer your question. He really is the most valuable 
player for me.

Sure, Cutch is a bit biased, but that’s some serious backing for a utility 
player who has played in five positions this season, hitting a league-leading 
.318 whileputting up an OPS of .860 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On-base_plus_slugging>. Another vital cog in both 
the leadership and performance category has beenRussell Martin 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/martiru01.shtml>. Yinzers coughed 
when they heard he was given two years at $17m, but the Canadian catcher who is 
set to be a free agent after this season has paid major dividends, especially 
this time around, as have other supporting cast members including Neil Walker 
and Starling Marte. One blow has been the disappointing Pedro Alvarez – the 
slugging third baseman has underperformed and is nowlikely done for the season 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24704496/pedro-alvarez-likely-done-for-season-with-stress-reaction-in-left-foot>
 with a stress reaction in his left foot.

Despite that hiccup, Pittsburgh are in the midst of their best stretch of 
baseball since climbing out of the hole they dug for themselves early on in the 
season, winning five of six, maintaining a 1.5 game lead over the Atlanta 
Braves and the Brewers and sitting 3.5 games behind the division leaders, the 
St Louis Cardinals with 17 games remaining. It’s quite the turnaround – 
according to Baseball Prospectus, just seven days ago the Brewers hada 50% 
chance of making the playoffs, 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/probability.jsp?ymd=20140910> the Buccos, 
just a 22% chance. Today, Pittsburgh chances have shot up to 56%, while 
Milwaukee have plummeted to 19%. The Braves have a 25% chance of swiping the 
slot.

After finishing their season series with Philly on Thursday, the Pirates have 
six straight games at home against sub-.500 clubs Chicago Cubs andBoston Red Sox
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boston-red-sox>, before hosting big games 
against Milwaukee.

KC Masterpiece

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmccutchen-pirates-brewers-braves-wild-card%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410406173011%2F4a11d5ab-b072-44f9-a913-aa572f6c2c23-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=McCutchen's%20daring%20Pirates%20buck%20Brewers%20and%20Braves%20in%20chase%20for%20wild-card%20treasure%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmccutchen-pirates-brewers-braves-wild-card%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=McCutchen%27s%20daring%20Pirates%20buck%20Brewers%20and%20Braves%20in%20chase%20for%20wild-card%20treasure%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmccutchen-pirates-brewers-braves-wild-card%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410406173011%2F4a11d5ab-b072-44f9-a913-aa572f6c2c23-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kansas City second baseman Omar Infante celebrates after a game against 
Detroit at Comerica Park. Kansas City won 3-0. Photograph: Rick Osentoski/USA 
Today Sports 
The Royals, desperate to to hang on to first-place in the American League 
Central, took a key victory from their rivals on Wednesday.Kansas City beat 
Detroit 3-0 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_09_10_kcamlb_detmlb_1&mode=box>
, avoiding a series sweep to the Tigers and managing to get out of Motown with 
a slim standings advantage. After recovering from aneight-game deficit earlier 
in the season 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/KCR/2014-schedule-scores.shtml>, 
Kansas City have have had at least a piece of first place since 11 August, and 
a loss on Wednesday could have popped the air out of their balloon.

Instead, James Shields played the role of stopper to a tee 
<http://scores.espn.go.com/mlb/preview?gameId=340910106>, stymying Detroit’s 
lineup for seven innings, striking out eight and walking just one, with the 
bullpen sealing the win with two scoreless innings. Salvador Perez and Lorenzo 
Cain drove in a pair of runs in a two-run fourth inning, one that provided 
enough offense for the victory.

The team which doesn’t win the Central will fall into a pack of three teams 
for two American League wild-card spots along with the Oakland A’s and Seattle 
Mariners. Further behind the lead wild-card pack are the Toronto Blue Jays, New 
York Yankees andCleveland Indians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-indians>, low-percentage shots to 
reach the postseason. The Royals and Tigers will face-off again in a three-game 
series in Kansas City in a week’s time.

LA(X) fielding 

The Los Angeles Dodgers may be a first-place team, but on Monday they managed 
to put together one of the most disturbing defensive sequences of the season. 
On one playagainst the San Diego Padres 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_09_10_kcamlb_detmlb_1&mode=box#gid=2014_09_08_sdnmlb_lanmlb_1&mode=recap&c_id=la>
, LA committed no fewer than three errors.

Three. 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24702073/gif-dodgers-make-three-throwing-errors-on-one-play>

In one play 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24702073/gif-dodgers-make-three-throwing-errors-on-one-play>
.

True story. 

It was an amazing sequence, one that began with an erratic throw from Yasiel 
Puig and ended with the Dodgers ace Clayton Kershaw purposely avoiding contact 
with Rymer Liriano while covering home plate. As the disgusted broadcaster Vin 
Scully said: “That’s the smartest thing of the night.”

You’ve just gotta see it for yourself … if you can stomach it, of course: 
Your browser does not support iframes. 
This is a play that offers proof of a theory of mine, which says that any time 
a catcher throws a ball from anywhere besides the home-plate area, the ball has 
absolutely no chance of reaching its destination. Zero. This time, AJ Ellis 
flung the ball into the outfield from behind the first-base line.

Meanwhile, Kershaw continues to show why he is a candidate for both the NL MVP 
and the Cy Young Award,lowering his ERA to 1.67 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/gl.cgi?id=kershcl01&t=p&year=> after 
another dominant eight innings, in which he allowed one earned run and struck 
out eight.The southpaw 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/news/most-valuable-everything-clayton-kershaws-dominant-2014-season-20140910>
 is two games from 20 victories, that despite making just 24 starts. LA are 
battling San Francisco for supremacy in the National League West, with the 
Dodgers holding a 2.5 game lead after both won their games on Wednesday.

Another Mets mess
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmccutchen-pirates-brewers-braves-wild-card%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410434018715%2Fc47ea75e-9825-49c5-88cd-0c0ed8a24d31-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=McCutchen's%20daring%20Pirates%20buck%20Brewers%20and%20Braves%20in%20chase%20for%20wild-card%20treasure%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmccutchen-pirates-brewers-braves-wild-card%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=McCutchen%27s%20daring%20Pirates%20buck%20Brewers%20and%20Braves%20in%20chase%20for%20wild-card%20treasure%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmccutchen-pirates-brewers-braves-wild-card%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410434018715%2Fc47ea75e-9825-49c5-88cd-0c0ed8a24d31-2060x1236.jpeg>
 All-star Mets third baseman David Wright is out of the season with rotator 
cuff inflammation. Photograph: Steve Mitchell/USA Today Sports 
The New York Mets have shown some improvement on the field in 2014, but off it 
the ballclub continues to flop. Leigh Castergine, the former senior 
vice-president for ticket sales,is suing the team, 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/mets/mets-co-owner-jeff-wilpon-accused-discrimination-pregnant-unmarried-woman-bombshell-lawsuit-article-1.1935123>
 claiming she was discriminated against after becoming pregnant without being 
married, claims the club say are “without merit”.

The son of owner Fred Wilpon, Jeff, who is chief operating officer, is accused 
of humiliating Castergine 
<http://nypost.com/2014/09/10/former-exec-mets-fired-me-for-being-pregnant-and-single/>
 in front of her colleagues, and the filing includes accusations such as:

Wilpon told her that when she gets a ring she will make more money and get a 
bigger bonus.

And in-meeting barbs from Wilpon including:

I am as morally opposed to putting an e-cigarette sign in my ballpark as I am 
to Leigh having this baby without being married.

Castergine, who reportedly received raises and bonuses in a time when the Mets 
are 13th of 15 NL teams in attendance, was fired but refused a compensation 
package allegedly offered in exchange for an agreement to not sue. There have 
been persistent calls amongst the fanbase for the Wilpon family, who have been 
involved ina series of unsavory scenarios 
<http://deadspin.com/5886867/how-bernie-madoffs-money-ran-the-mets>, to sell 
the team. Now, in the shadow ofthe Ray Rice NFL quagmire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/10/ray-rice-sport-domestic-violence-dilemma>
, MLB just may have a serious issue of its own to deal with.


Meanwhile, franchise third baseman David Wright is out for the year with 
rotator cuff inflammation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/10/sports/baseball/bothersome-shoulder-ends-david-wrights-season.html?_r=0>
, as the team bids to finish with a .500 record or above for the first time 
since 2008. New York, a team in a city that can almost definitely be considered 
a “big market”, has a payroll in the lower third of MLB, and general manager 
Sandy Alderson hasindicated yet again 
<http://insider.espn.go.com/blog/buster-olney/post?id=8048> that there won’t be 
significant increases in free-agent spending this coming offseason, drawing 
further outcry from a fanbase that have seen their franchise wither away since 
leaving Shea Stadium.

Sox done and dusted
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmccutchen-pirates-brewers-braves-wild-card%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410433668918%2F24d49495-493a-4529-b721-517112195843-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=McCutchen's%20daring%20Pirates%20buck%20Brewers%20and%20Braves%20in%20chase%20for%20wild-card%20treasure%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmccutchen-pirates-brewers-braves-wild-card%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=McCutchen%27s%20daring%20Pirates%20buck%20Brewers%20and%20Braves%20in%20chase%20for%20wild-card%20treasure%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fmccutchen-pirates-brewers-braves-wild-card%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F11%2F1410433668918%2F24d49495-493a-4529-b721-517112195843-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Red Sox have taken a fall since winning the World Series in 2013 
Photograph: David Butler II/USA Today Sports 
The 2014 season in Boston will always be remembered as a dud, but one that 
smarted considerably less after the team won a third World Series title in 10 
seasons in 2013. So the losses were more or less forgiven in Beantown during a 
free pass of a campaign in which the roster was radically rejigged in 
preparation for 2015. Now comes the news that former AL MVP Dustin Pedroia is 
preparing for season-ending surgeryon his hand and wrist 
<http://espn.go.com/boston/mlb/story/_/id/11504100/dustin-pedroia-boston-red-sox-having-surgery-left-hand-wrist>
. The All-Star said on Tuesday:

It’s kind of like a release or something to get the inflammation out of there. 
If that were the case, I would have a normal offseason and be able to lift 
weights, something that I didn’t get a chance to do very much last offseason.

This will be the third consecutive offseason that Pedroia is to be recovering 
from a surgical procedure, and there are signs of the strain on his body adding 
up. The second baseman has seen his OPS decline for four straight seasons, with 
a significant drop in production during 2014 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/p/pedrodu01.shtml>. The rough and 
tumble 31-year-old is owed $96.5m on his contract, which expires after the 2021 
season.

Meanwhile, Boston lost to the Baltimore Orioles 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_09_10_balmlb_bosmlb_1> on 
Wednesday, 10-6, and dipped below the Houston Astros, becoming the second-worst 
team in the AL. Only the Texas Rangers are below them.


Click here for the Major League Baseball Standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/index.jsp?tcid=mm_mlb_standings>
 