
McLaren dropped out of a bidding battle to retain the services of Adrian Newey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey>, their highly rated formula 
one technical director who has switched to Red Bull, because they were not 
prepared to match his salary demands.

Newey, whose McLaren contract was due for renewal in February, reputedly 
demanded a salary hike from $6m (Â£3.5m) to $10m a year to stay with the team 
whose cars won 10 of the 19 grands prix in 2005. According to sources close to
McLaren <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mclaren>, their chairman Ron Dennis 
and chief executive Martin Whitmarsh did not feel such an investment could be 
justified and have been prepared for Newey's decision to leave for some time.

Neither Dennis nor Whitmarsh was available for comment yesterday but a McLaren 
source hinted that it was felt the formula one design process had grown to the 
point that no individual was bigger than the team and consequently they were 
prepared to let Newey go. Red Bull's billionaire owner Dietrich Mateschitz, 
though, was prepared to meet the British engineer's requirements.

Indeed, Christian Horner, Red Bull's sporting director, was yesterday 
proclaiming that they would rather have Newey than Michael Schumacher on their 
strength. "It's a massive recruitment for us," he said. "Given the choice of 
Adrian Newey or Michael Schumacher, I'd go for Adrian every time. It's of that 
kind of magnitude. I think that it sends out exactly the right message in that 
we are totally serious about what we want to do and what we want to achieve."

Horner's assertion that Newey was not moving for the money may bring a wry 
smile to the faces of the McLaren hierarchy. "Adrian's motivation wasn't money 
or fiscal," Horner said. "His motivation was to take on a new challenge within 
a smaller team environment. I have a decent relationship with him and I think 
he sees the aspirations of the team andRed Bull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> and it feels right. The size of 
the challenge ahead is not to be underestimated but it's one that I'm sure he's 
going to throw himself fully into.

"We now have a very strong technical group. We need to make a step forward 
next year. That progression has to be focused on getting into the top six in 
the constructors, ideally the top five. Then in 2007 the real impact of 
Adrian's appointment will start to be seen."

The 46-year-old Newey has built a reputation as one of the most imaginative 
and innovative formula one engineers of the past two decades. As chief designer 
at Williams his work carried Nigel Mansell (1992), Alain Prost (1993) and Damon 
Hill (1996) to world championships and subsequently he headed the McLaren 
design team when Mika Hakkinen took back-to-back championships in 1998 and 1999.

In the summer of 2001 Newey was at the centre of an embarrassing controversy 
when he agreed to join the Jaguar formula one team as technical director only 
to reverse his decision in a matter of days after a series of highly charged 
meetings with Dennis.

Jaguar were sold to Red Bull last year and Horner acknowledged that the fact 
he was now joining Jaguar's successor was "a complete coincidence and somewhat 
ironic". He added: "Adrian is comfortable with his decision. I am not familiar 
with the full detail of what happened last time around but he has informed 
McLaren and he is a free agent as of the end of January."
 