
Your main concerns when you attend a festival might include any of the 
following: how will I identify my tent at 5am? Is glamping worth it? WillEste 
from Haim do bassface <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S7jGXf2NeO8>?

But one thing you should not have to worry about is: will I get measles?

Public Health England has confirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/08/measles-warning-young-people-festivals-outbreaks>
 a significant number of infections linked to music festivals and other large 
public events. There have been reports of 38 suspected measles cases at events 
in June and July alone. Glastonbury had 16 cases, with seven cases reported 
from the NASS festival near Bristol; six at the Triplicity festival in north 
Devon; three at Tewkesbury medieval festival; two at Nozstock: the Hidden 
Valley in Herefordshire; two at Noisily in Leicester; one at the Secret Garden 
Party near Huntingdon; and one at Yeovil Show.

In all, 234 cases have been confirmed between January and June, compared with 
54 for the same period last year.

Why is this happening now? One possibility is that the Wakefield generation 
has come of age. The fraudulent study by Andrew Wakefieldthat incorrectly 
linked the MMR vaccine and autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/21/no-link-between-mmr-and-autism-major-study-concludes>
 was published 18 years ago. Although later discredited (withWakefield being 
struck off the medical register 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/mmr-doctor-andrew-wakefield-struck-off>
), the rate of vaccination against measles plummeted after the study’s 
appearance in The Lancet. There were 56 cases of measles the year before its 
publication in England and Wales;by 2008 there were 1,370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/nov/29/health-measles-epidemic>.

Many parents of the Wakefield era chose not to vaccinate their children and 
were understandably swayed by breathless media coverage, inconsistent messages 
from health providers, and apparent validation of Wakefield’s findings by the 
scientific community; it took The Lancet 12 years toretract the publication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/feb/02/lancet-retracts-mmr-paper>. If 
you were the parent of a toddler in those years, what would you have done?

Now, those unvaccinated children have grown up. They go to festivals. The 
virus is so contagious that if one person has it, 90% of those in close contact 
will also become infected if they arenot immune themselves 
<http://www.cdc.gov/measles/about/transmission.html>. And so Public Health 
England has urged teenagers and adults tocheck with their GP 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/measles-vaccination-advice-for-young-adults>
 if they have been vaccinated and to receive two doses of the MMR vaccine if 
required.

The Wakefield-era children also grew up to account for most of the 1,219 
measles cases in the Swansea measles epidemic in 2012, in whichone person died 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-23168519>. Although some recovered quickly 
fromfever, conjunctivitis and a rash 
<http://www.nhs.uk/CONDITIONS/MEASLES/Pages/Symptoms.aspx>, others suffered 
more significant complications.According to the US Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention <http://www.cdc.gov/measles/hcp/>, one or two out of every 1,000 
children who become infected with measles will die from respiratory and 
neurologic sequelae including blindness, seizures and encephalitis. Since 2006, 
there have been three deaths from measles in England and Wales.

This historical legacy is compounded by anti-vax 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-33774181> sentiment that has become more 
visible in recent years, albeit not necessarily more widespread. The 
consequences of this movement travel beyond forums and Facebook posts. It is 
easy to imagine it to be as infectious as the virus itself, but I think there 
is a more nuanced subtext, too.

Measles arrived at Disneyland, California with one case in December 2014. 
Within four months,there were 145 confirmed cases in seven states 
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6406a5.htm?s_cid=mm6406a5_w> and 
three countries, all linked to Disneyland. The authors of an analysis inJAMA 
Pediatrics journal 
<http://archpedi.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=2203906> said the 
outbreak was directly associated with substandard vaccination compliance: “The 
ongoing measles outbreak linked to the Disneyland Resort in Anaheim, 
California, shines a glaring spotlight on our nation’s growing anti-vaccination 
movement and the prevalence of vaccination-hesitant parents.”

Vaccination is more than a personal choice; the inaction of others can affect 
even vaccinated children and adults

Vaccination is more than a personal choice; the inaction of others can affect 
even vaccinated children and adults. Community vaccination helps to halt the 
spread of the virus and thus protects the wider population. The sum is greater 
than its parts. But here’s what is crucial. Each outbreak is different, there 
are nuances to each one, and not all can be attributed simplistically to a 
groundswell of anti-vax sentiment. Swansea is definitely not California.

For example, early 2014 cases were linked to unvaccinated travellers returning 
home who had acquired the virus abroad (an outbreak in thePhilippines was an 
important factor <http://www.cdc.gov/measles/cases-outbreaks.html>) and then 
infected others in communities withlower vaccination rates 
<http://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2014/p0529-measles.html>. Despite the 
concerns expressed in pockets of unvaccinated residents, there is no nationwide 
loss of confidence in vaccines. Sometimes it’s a case of missed doctors’ 
appointments or single vaccines refused rather than staunch dissent. And 
vaccine refusal does not correlate with a lack of knowledge. Moral outrage is 
too easy.

Julie Leask, an associate professor at Sydney University’s school of public 
health,provides level-headed discussion on this topic 
<http://tinyurl.com/jyz2ucy>: “To be committed to the science of immunisation 
ideally comes with a commitment to the science of immunisation behaviour. Media 
often present this problem as refusal to vaccinate. But the evidence is clear 
and it’s more complex: under-vaccination is broadly about a lack of acceptance 
and a lack of opportunity to vaccinate fully or on time. It’s not just the 
haves, but the have-nots who don’t fully vaccinate.

“A typical measles outbreak will reveal this. There will be children whose 
parents refused vaccination; children whose parents were unwittingly not up to 
date for lack of access; affordability or awareness; adults and travellers who 
didn’t get a needed booster; and babies who are too young to be vaccinated.”

So although “festival measles” seems to largely fit with the coming of age of 
the Wakefield generation and more particularly a broader anti-vax narrative, it 
is too simplistic to conclude that this is applicable to all. But it does 
provide an opportune moment to discuss issues around vaccination, to strengthen 
public health infrastructure to deliver effective programmes, and to ensure 
there is never even the possibility of a Wakefield generation occurring again.

Measles warning to young people at festivals after series of outbreaks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/08/measles-warning-young-people-festivals-outbreaks> 