
Not-quite-dead <http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/NotQuiteDead> is 
one of the crappiest clichés in horror movies. The chaste and plucky heroine 
has laid the bad guy out cold, and then rather than sawing through his neck 
with a handy breadknife or pulping his skull with the nearest brick, she just 
wanders off complacently, leaving the bad guy to rise again and jump her from 
behind. How contrived, how boring. What kind of moron hands out second chances 
to the inhuman force that wants to kill them?

Well, we did. Up until 1998, measles looked like it was thoroughly defeatable. 
There were only56 confirmed cases 
<http://www.hpa.org.uk/web/HPAweb&HPAwebStandard/HPAweb_C/1195733833790> of the 
disease in England and Wales that year. Tragically, 1998 was also the year in 
which Andrew Wakefield (he was a doctor then; he isn't any more) claimed there 
was a link between the MMR vaccine and the development of autism in children.

Twelve years later, the Lancet retracted Wakefield's paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/feb/02/lancet-retracts-mmr-paper> and 
the journal's editor described the research as "utterly false". The GMC struck 
Wakefield from the registerafter finding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/mmr-doctor-andrew-wakefield-struck-off>
 that he had "abused his position of trust" by conducting invasive and 
unethical procedures on children, and committed "multiple separate instances of 
serious professional misconduct".

A year after that, investigative journalist Brian Deer revealed that 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/342/bmj.c5347> before Wakefield even started his 
notorious research, the then-doctor had been contracted (confidentially and 
lucratively) to work on a lawsuit that sought to demonstrate the existence of a 
brain-bowel syndrome. Now, denuded of both title and credibility, Wakefield can 
be foundhawking a reality show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/06/what-happened-man-mmr-panic> 
that recycles the same discredited connections between the digestive tract and 
autistic spectrum disorders.

Those 12 years gave the measles monster all the time it needed to regroup. 
Take-up of theMMR <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr>, which has always 
been relatively low in the most deprived areas, started to fall among the 
well-off too, and though vaccination rates recovered to reach 91% last year, 
that's still short of the 95% needed to create herd immunity.

The awful effects of Wakefield's claims are only beginning to be seen now. 
Since 1998, measles cases have increased, sporadically but inexorably, until in 
2012 there were2,030 confirmed cases 
<http://www.hpa.org.uk/web/HPAweb&HPAwebStandard/HPAweb_C/1195733833790> of 
measles in England and Wales. That's a 36-fold increase on the pre-scare 
figure. 2013 will probably be another bumper year for the virus. Anoutbreak 
around Swansea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/apr/05/swansea-measles-epidemic-mmr-jab> 
has already infected nearly 600, and there's been a case at my children's 
school, unsurprisingly, since we live in the south west, where uptake was a 
calamitous85.4% <http://www.bmj.com/content/336/7647/754> in 2008.

So many children suffering from a potentially fatal illness that should barely 
even exist. There's a powerful temptation to be angry at the parents who left 
their offspring so exposed, but to feel that way, you have to forget how 
mortifyingly real the fear was for the minority who opted out. I had my son in 
2002, around the point of peak MMR hysteria, and conversation about the "triple 
jab" was fervent and frequent. I didn't share the worries, but I could see they 
were sincere.

One mum fixed me with an earnest look across a playgroup coffee table and told 
me she knew "three women whose babies turned autistic because of the jab". Did 
she really? Of course not. But credulous reporting had encouraged the belief.
Almost every media outlet in the UK helped to perpetuate the scare 
<http://www.badscience.net/2008/08/the-medias-mmr-hoax/>, with terrifying 
headlines and specious first-person accounts from concerned parents.

In this environment, anyone who had any concern about the neurological 
development of their child was encouraged to link it to the MMR jab, and anyone 
who had any doubts at all about letting a nurse stick needles in their baby was 
given an excuse to stay away from the surgery. These parents may have been 
wrong, but they weren't wholly without reason. Besides, with measles cases so 
low, it was easy to forget what the vaccines were protecting us from.

Mumps, measles and rubella sounded almost picturesque. Vintage diseases from 
the 1950s, something that might be caught and recovered from in time to have a 
jolly good adventure in short trousers and wool socks. What they actually meant 
if contracted was pain, death, loss of sight, loss of hearing, infertility, the 
theft of futures. It was as difficult to imagine as the taste of Spam. These 
were illnesses that for all practical purposes had ceased to be, so why not 
skip clinic and do something less stressful instead?

The Swansea outbreak tells us why: because a monster like measles is never 
really dead, only allayed. To keep it down, you have to keep on attacking 
without rest. About 1,200 people have received the MMR at emergency clinics in 
SouthWales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, and that's a start. Now we 
just need everyone else who is either at risk themselves or has children in 
danger to remember it's measles, not MMR, that we should have been afraid of 
all along.

• This article was amended on 8 April 2013. The last paragraph did say that 
12,000 people had received the MMR jab at emergency clinics in South Wales. 
This has been corrected to 1,200
 