
You could debate which country has the most ornate government office: the 
gilded Elysée, the fortresslike Kremlin, the hulking Great Hall of the People 
in Beijing. But no leader has an office quite likeEdi Rama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/04/anri-sala-answer-me-review-art-cures-20th-centurys-broken-dreams>
, the prime minister ofAlbania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania>. 
Covering the walls of his office in Tirana are hundreds of drawings: colourful, 
tightly wound abstractions, with tendrils of colour spiralling out from densely 
packed cores. The wallpaper, it turns out, is of the prime minister’s own 
design. “If art cannot make politics more sane,” Rama tells me when we meet one 
warm Tirana night, “politics, with its insanity, can sometimes make art even 
better.”

Rama is that rarest thing: not a politician with artistic leanings, but a 
real, bona fide artist in power. A former art professor, he had no intention to 
enter public life – and when he did, he didn’t fully abandon his initial 
career. Now, amiddebates on EU accession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/27/the-guardian-view-on-the-eu-and-migration-lets-stop-the-balkans-being-part-of-the-problem>
 and occasional squabbles with Balkan neighbours, Rama is preparing for his 
first US exhibition, at Marian Goodman gallery in New York. It is surely the 
first time a sitting head of government has nabbed a show at one of the world’s 
leading galleries; even George W Bush, who started painting only after his 
presidency, couldn’t get a showoutside his own library in Dallas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/04/george-bush-portraits-world-leaders>
.


Rama, who leads Albania’s socialist party, came to power in a landslide in 
2013. (His adviser on that campaign was oneAlastair Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jun/21/tony-blair-albania-elections>
.) He had previously spent 11 years as mayor of Tirana, one of Europe’s poorest 
capitals. With little money to repair the city’s rundown infrastructure, Rama 
undertook a rough-and-ready makeover 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/edi_rama_take_back_your_city_with_paint>, ordering 
its drab, communist-era apartment buildings to be repainted in bright, bold 
colours. Blue and white stripes cascade down tower blocks; green squares 
punctuate coral-coloured facades. There’s a palpable energy when you walk the 
streets of Tirana unlike anywhere else in the Balkans: the city’s young, 
multiethnic and literally multicoloured.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87111e57304a2782825513e6ed5fd7c828edbe02%2F0_6_640_469%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Edi%20Rama%2C%20Albania's%20artist%20prime%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Edi%20Rama%2C%20Albania%27s%20artist%20prime%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F87111e57304a2782825513e6ed5fd7c828edbe02%2F0_6_640_469%2F640.jpg>
 One of Tirana’s painted buildings, an art movement that kickstarted 
revitalisation in the city. Photograph: Alamy 
The paint-slathered capital caused an international commotion – thanks in part 
to a video by Anri Sala,Albania’s most prominent artist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/04/anri-sala-answer-me-review-art-cures-20th-centurys-broken-dreams>
, who studied under Rama in the 1990s. Sala’s videoDammi i Colori 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/sala-dammi-i-colori-t11813>, now in the 
collection of Tate Modern, followed Rama around a nighttime Tirana, transformed 
into a dreamland of pigments. But Rama is keen to stress that he never saw the 
city as agesamtkunstwerk. “The colours of the buildings were not art for me. It 
was a political action, with colours. Because we didn’t have money to make big 
construction projects. People needed everything: water supply, roads, lighting. 
When I became mayor of Tirana, there were only 78 lights functioning in the 
streets. So imagine going to ask people what colour you want your building to 
be! They would say, Fuck you! It would seem the most exquisite way of saying 
you are not interested in them.


“It had a chain effect I didn’t imagine. Once the buildings were coloured, 
people started to get rid of the heavy fences of their shops. In the painted 
roads, we had 100% tax collection from the people, while tax collection was 
normally 4%. People accepted to pay their share for the city, because they 
realised that through the colours the city exists.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F953b47e1dc6f78865e013e9a439a7c5fc2c91c11%2F454_21_4730_3380%2F4730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Edi%20Rama%2C%20Albania's%20artist%20prime%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Edi%20Rama%2C%20Albania%27s%20artist%20prime%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F953b47e1dc6f78865e013e9a439a7c5fc2c91c11%2F454_21_4730_3380%2F4730.jpg>
 Edi Rama at Munich’s Galerie Kampl. Photograph: Gisela Schober/Getty Images 
Rama’s first act after his election in 2013 was to tear down the barricades 
around the prime minister’s office – a low-slung bunker on Tirana’sMartyrs of 
the Nation Boulevard 
<https://www.roughguides.com/destinations/europe/albania/tirana/bulevard-d%C3%ABshmor%C3%ABt-e-kombit-blloku/>
, next door to acrumbling concrete pyramid 
<http://www.atlasobscura.com/places/pyramid-of-tirana> dating from the end of 
communist rule. The front door is wide open now, and above it is a 
Broadway-style marquee: an artwork byPhilippe Parreno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/03/philippe-parreno-turbine-hall-anywhen-review-mesmerising-unmissable>
, the French artist currently occupying the Turbine Hall at London’s Tate 
Modern. Walk under the bright marquee and you’ll discover the newCenter for 
Openness and Dialogue <http://cod.al/en/?page_id=1434>, featuring an art 
gallery, a library, a small cinema and internet kiosks, open for free until 
late at night. The goal, the PM says, was to “make the first floor for the 
citizens, the second floor for power”.

Rama was born in Tirana in 1964; his father was a sculptor who worked in an 
official socialist-realist style. Albania then was under the control ofEnver 
Hoxha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/30/enver-hoxha-iron-fist-of-albania-blendi-fevziu-review>
, a paranoid dictator who, even more than his Yugoslav or Romanian 
counterparts, suppressed modern art and outside influences. “The first wave,” 
Rama explains, “was a wave against religion. In 1967, God was banned. More than 
2,000 churches, Roman chapels and mosques, were blown up with dynamite and 
300,000 works of religious art and books were burned in the street.


'I couldn’t find a way to survive these long meetings as a minister. Drawing 
helped me to listen'

“Then in 1974 came the second wave, under the spell of this big love story 
with communist China. Art and culture of the 20th century were degenerate and 
were forbidden. So from impressionists to the present day we have no sense.” At 
Tirana’s art academy, where Rama enrolled as a teenager, the last slide in his 
introductory art history lectures was Gustave Courbet’sThe Artist’s Studio 
<http://www.musee-orsay.fr/index.php?id=851&L=1&tx_commentaire_pi1%5BshowUid%5D=7091>
, a realist panorama of 1854–55. “After that, it was just a white wall. The art 
history professor would tell us how bad things turned out. Some spoiled petit 
bourgeois kids who called themselves impressionists abandoned the working 
classes, and transformed painting into an illusion. And then the schizophrenic 
Vincent van Gogh, and then the antisocial Paul Gauguin and the diabolical Pablo 
Picasso. All just words. Images were forbidden.”


Travel was forbidden, too. Until 1990, Albanians were not permitted to go 
abroad unless on official business. Rama, who stands more than 6ft 5in tall, 
joined the national basketball team – and not only out of love of the game. 
“One of the only groups who could travel at that time were sportsmen. The 
reason I played, and absolutely wanted to reach the national team, was to have 
the possibility to see a museum. I remember my first trip to Vienna, in 1984, a 
very cold day. I left the hotel and walked I don’t know how long to go to the 
Kunsthistorisches Museum. Can you imagine my disappointment when I found the 
museum closed, because Tuesday was the day it was closed?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ccd3ed696b7ae3ea09dfbd97bd5495b9fe2a52e%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Edi%20Rama%2C%20Albania's%20artist%20prime%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Edi%20Rama%2C%20Albania%27s%20artist%20prime%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ccd3ed696b7ae3ea09dfbd97bd5495b9fe2a52e%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Sculptures by Rama, who organised Albania’s first international exhibition. 
Photograph: Cathy Carver/courtesy of the artist and Marian Goodman Gallery 
“So I had to wait five years, for my second trip, to Bremen. Leaving the hotel 
was very dangerous; you were not supposed to leave the team. We went to the 
modern art museum of Bremen, and I still remember the unique perfume of the 
parquet and the sound of silence. It was morning. Nobody was there. First was 
Rodin, and then I was in front of Picasso. I couldn’t believe it.”


Rama became a professor of painting at Tirana’s Academy of Arts in the waning 
days of communism, and took part in the protests that paved the way to 
democratisation. He was awarded a fellowship in Paris, where he and Sala lived 
together. He might have stayed in France, but in 1998, while in Tirana for his 
father’s funeral, he got a call that juddered his career: the then prime 
minister was reshuffling his cabinet and looking for a culture minister. There 
was no budget to speak of, but Rama was able to pull off Albania’s first 
international art exhibition – the “biennial without money,” he calls it – 
which brought Europe’s artists and curators to the once isolated nation for the 
first time.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20e236b8c5877af81cc56af97baa06af74202b1b%2F0_0_3650_4335%2F3650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Edi%20Rama%2C%20Albania's%20artist%20prime%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Edi%20Rama%2C%20Albania%27s%20artist%20prime%20minister&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmeet-edi-rama-albanias-artist-prime-minister-exhibition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20e236b8c5877af81cc56af97baa06af74202b1b%2F0_0_3650_4335%2F3650.jpg>
 Drawing on the job … Rama’s work against wallpaper made from his sketches. 
Photograph: Cathy Carver/courtesy of the artist and Marian Goodman Gallery 
It was at the culture ministry that Rama began doodling, almost without 
noticing. “I couldn’t find a way to survive these long meetings. Drawing helped 
me to listen. Only much later did I read studies that showed doodling improves 
concentration or lowers stress. It’s a process that has become completely part 
of me. And it’s very fruitful. If I’m in circumstances when I can’t do it I 
feel nervous, I simply feel like I’m not there.” The drawings have matured over 
time, from idle scribbles into more substantial, all-over compositions. Many 
recall the automatic drawing of Max Ernst or André Masson, midcentury 
surrealists who created flowing, biomorphic patterns without initial planning.


But, critically, Rama works at the office. These are not a hobbyist’s Sunday 
paintings; they’re made at the desk of the most powerful man in the country, at 
the same time as he meets with ministers or makes decisions. Most of them are 
done on A4 printouts from Microsoft Outlook of the prime minister’s daily 
schedule – flowers blossom and monsters emerge from the regimented hours of a 
politician’s day. The drawings, with their seething colours and winding curves, 
don’t illustrate, or even abstract, the rough and tumble of politics. Instead, 
they reassert the individuality of a man whose job is to represent others.

Albania is still poor. Corruption remains endemic, though Rama has made 
progress. But Tirana, at least, is rocking: hipsters guzzle beer in the shadow 
of the coloured buildings, and the city’s huge main square is being remade into 
a pedestrian idyll. Under Rama’s leadership,Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> is knocking at the door of the 
European Union – many countries still want to join, despite the shadow of 
Brexit – though lately negotiations have slowed. (“We’re in a kind of affair,” 
he tells me. “We hope to start negotiations for the marriage, and we hope that 
the EU is there when we’re ready to be the bride.”)


Rama has a full inbox. Is there room for art in such circumstances? “When I 
became a minister, I thought art was gone once and for all,” he says. “The 
stress, the burden, was overwhelming. A daily battle for things you never 
imagined. And then when this happened” – he gestures around the prime 
ministerial citadel, a sly smile on his face – “I thought that politics is the 
battle of everyday life. And art is like a prayer.”


•The exhibition Edi Rama 
<http://www.mariangoodman.com/exhibition/3840/press-release> is on view at 
Marian Goodman gallery, New York, until 23 December.

 