
The couple are entwined on a small bed in a dormitory room in New York City. 
Young and inexperienced, they fumble at each other’s clothes, his hands all 
over her. The camera draws in nearer, almost uncomfortably stark and intimate 
in the way of all mumblecore movies about the awkward first stages of a new 
relationship. But this is not an independent film. This is a video game, and 
the woman on the bed is played by its designer, Nina Freeman. It’s a long way 
fromCall of Duty <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/call-of-duty>.

Video games to get you through Valentine's Day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/14/video-games-to-get-you-through-valentines-day>
For the last five years, Freeman has been working with small teams of artists 
and programmers, making intensely personal games about sex and relationships. 
She came to prominence with the acclaimedHow Do You Do It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/14/video-games-to-get-you-through-valentines-day>
, an interactive skit about a little girl exploring the idea of sex by bashing 
a Barbie doll and Action Man together. InLadylike <http://ninasays.so/ladylike/>
, you control a conversation between a teenage girl and her mother during a 
drive to the mall. No matter what you say about school, boyfriends or clothes 
through a series of conversation options, the mum always disapproves. You 
literally can’t win.

Earlier this month Freeman released her latest project, a multilayered 
narrative game named Cibele <http://ninasays.so/cibele/>. Developed with small 
studio Star Maid Games, it’s about the designer’s brief relationship with a man 
she met in the multiplayer adventure game,Final Fantasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/final-fantasy> XI, where hundreds of 
players gather and form online clans to slay monsters and discover treasure.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3QyZagctAOU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3QyZagctAOU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3QyZagctAOU&media=>
Watch a video trailer for the game Cibele 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3QyZagctAOU> 
When you start Cibele, you find yourself accessing a simulation of Nina’s own 
computer desktop from the time of the affair, complete with folders full of her 
real photos, poems and live journal entries; but if you click on a specific 
icon you enter a role-playing game called Valtameri, a fictitious take on Final 
Fantasy, where you meet Blake, who leads his own in-game clan of fellow 
players. As you fight monsters in this synthetic adventure, you hear Nina 
talking with Blake on the phone and see short film sequences, showing her 
taking selfies and emailing them to him.

It’s a short but complex and self-reflexive experience; a game-within-a-game 
about the ways in whichmultiplayer role-playing adventures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mmorpg> like Final Fantasy XI double as 
social arenas where players meet, flirt and gossip. “I wanted to explore the 
journey that these two went on together in the digital space,” says Freeman, 
who refers to the Nina of the game in the third-person. “It’s about what it’s 
like to have these intimate interactions through an online game; what it’s like 
to be the girl who is sending pictures to her lover over the internet and 
talking to him on the phone and longing for this physical interaction that 
feels almost out of reach.”

Although the character of Blake is fictitious, he represents the man Nina met, 
but is no longer in contact with. “He does know the game exists,” she says. “He 
got in touch with me and he was like, ‘It’s cool that you’re making this.’” To 
make things even more complex, his role in the game is played by Freeman’s 
partner, Emmett Butler, who also worked on the project. Did she find this 
strange?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnina-freeman-punk-poet-game-designer-cibele-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7b713bd28252a03ae3f6d6382f0568222916719%2F79_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Nina%20Freeman%2C%20the%20punk%20poet%20of%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnina-freeman-punk-poet-game-designer-cibele-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Nina%20Freeman%2C%20the%20punk%20poet%20of%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnina-freeman-punk-poet-game-designer-cibele-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7b713bd28252a03ae3f6d6382f0568222916719%2F79_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Nina Freeman acts out a scene in Cibele 
“Emmett has worked with me on a number of personal games in the past,” she 
says. “So he had a good idea of what he was getting into. Filming the intimate 
scene at the end was a lot easier for both of us, since we know each other so 
well. Our roommate at the time actually filmed it – it was nice to be able to 
create that portion of the game with people I feel comfortable around. The 
voice actor for Blake was actually not Emmett, but a young man named Justin 
Briner who we worked with remotely. He was really great, too.”

For Freeman, video games have never been the solitary, isolating pastime of 
common stereotype. As a child in the sleepy coastal town of Ipswich, 
Massachusetts, her favourite thing was to visit her friends Melanie and 
Brittany, hide out in their basement and play on a Nintendo console all day, 
until their parents kicked her out for the evening. Together they devoured 
games likeSuper Mario 64  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/18/super-mario-64-high-definition-mod>
and Legend of Zelda, sharing the stories as they unfolded on screen. When she 
discovered Final Fantasy XI at the age of 14, it was a way of meeting up with 
friends – but also forging new relationships. In Cibele, the player can swap 
between playing Valtameri and chatting with other characters via simulated 
instant messaging, email and chat forums. It’s a clever approximation of how we 
now socially multitask online, seamlessly moving from one window to the next.

Freeman says that in our era of Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> and Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, this idea of the internet as 
just another romantic space is prevalent and natural. “For my generation online 
relationships are basically a normal part of life. A lot of people have 
contacted me after completing Cibele, saying: ‘Oh wow, this happened to me when 
I was playingWorld of Warcraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/world-of-warcraft> as a teenager. I was 
that young girl on the internet, trying to negotiate a relationship with 
someone I’d never met.’”

For some, the way Freeman explores her own experiences so personally through 
her games is extraordinary. But she sees many parallels with poetry, which she 
studied at New York’s Pace University under Charles North. He introduced her to 
the New York School: Elizabeth Bishop, Langston Hughes, Frank O’Hara. She 
worked for a while at legendary East Village live poetry venue thePoetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> Project.

Later, two things happened: she started hanging out with a bunch of 
independent game developers who introduced her to offbeat, experimental titles 
like Anna Anthropy’sDys4ia <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y8x9hjGBY7c>, about 
the transgender designer’s own transition, andGone Home 
<http://www.gonehomegame.com/>, about a burgeoning romance between two teenage 
girls. She also came down with a chronic illness. “I was suddenly surrounded by 
game makers,” she remembers, “and I thought, these games are poetry. So while I 
was sick I had a bunch of free time and taught myself how to program.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnina-freeman-punk-poet-game-designer-cibele-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a21c4584f68869a2fb1da650132ef5d6462605c%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Nina%20Freeman%2C%20the%20punk%20poet%20of%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnina-freeman-punk-poet-game-designer-cibele-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Nina%20Freeman%2C%20the%20punk%20poet%20of%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnina-freeman-punk-poet-game-designer-cibele-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a21c4584f68869a2fb1da650132ef5d6462605c%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Inspiration: screengrabs from the games Gone Home, left, and Dys4ia 
Has she ever been concerned about the implications of putting herself out 
there so honestly? “Putting myself into these stories in a vulnerable way has 
definitely taken practice. I’m more and more comfortable with each project. I 
have learned to separate my present personal life from them, because it could 
be uncomfortable to feel like critics are talking aboutme when they talk about 
the game. Yes, they are talking about me, in a sense, but they are really 
talking about the character I created based on me. That distinction is 
important.”

Freeman and her collaborators Emmett Butler and Diego Garcia are now part of a 
vibrant new era of independent game design. The explosion of broadband internet 
access, together with the arrival of cheap development tools likeGameMaker 
<http://www.yoyogames.com/studio> and Twine <http://twinery.org/>, has meant 
that almost anyone can make a game now, put it online and find a global 
audience. Whereas big PlayStation titles require teams of hundreds and budgets 
of millions, a downloadable indie title can be built by one or two people on a 
cheap PC.

The result has been an explosion of idiosyncratic titles – but also the 
emergence of indie gaming scenes and venues. Games have effectively become the 
new punk rock – or, as Nina sees it, the new poetry: “I saw a lot of parallels 
with theBeats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/23/allen-ginsberg-howl-poem-film>,” 
she says. “I was excited because what I found so inspiring in poetry was 
starting to happen in games.”


With Cibele now finished, Freeman is concentrating fully on her current 
project,Tacoma <https://tacoma-game.com/>, the latest title from Gone Home 
creator the Fullbright Company. Nine months ago, she moved to Portland, Oregon, 
where the team is based. Set on a lunar research station, this eerie adventure 
is an ambitious move for her. “I’ve never made a 3D game before,” she says. 
“Fullbright is one of the few studios that’s really exploring this idea of 
games as character-focused narrative spaces; it’s very much about letting the 
players explore stories rather than being controlled by them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnina-freeman-punk-poet-game-designer-cibele-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31614684ecf385c23a06c7746a1aed7f051b6c47%2F0_0_2545_1426%2F2545.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Nina%20Freeman%2C%20the%20punk%20poet%20of%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnina-freeman-punk-poet-game-designer-cibele-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Nina%20Freeman%2C%20the%20punk%20poet%20of%20gaming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnina-freeman-punk-poet-game-designer-cibele-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31614684ecf385c23a06c7746a1aed7f051b6c47%2F0_0_2545_1426%2F2545.jpg>
 A desktop view from Cibele 
But what of our rookie couple in Cibele? Is there a happy ever after to their 
hook-up? Not exactly. While Blake is confident and seductive online, he shies 
away from anything more than a single physical meeting: “I don’t think 
relationships are comfortable,” he tells Nina. It’s not hard to see this as a 
reflection on the alienation of online relationships but maybe it’s actually 
just about kids finding new ways to deal with social anxieties.

“Cibele is about the two characters negotiating their boundaries,” says 
Freeman. “In the end it may not really work out for them – but at least they 
were honest with each other. That’s important to me because as a developer and 
a person, I want to be as honest as possible. I want to write characters that 
feel really raw and real; I want to show my flaws and the good things and the 
bad all at once – because that’s what people are.”

 * Find out more at ninasays.so/cibele/ <http://ninasays.so/cibele/>  