
You only need to look at the title of the book to know that something’s wrong. 
“Melanie’s Marvelous Measles” is an anti-vaccination book aimed at children, 
written by Australian activist Stephanie Messenger. Although it’s been around 
for a few years, it’s garnered attention recently following theDisneyland 
measles outbreak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/09/measles-cases-us-rise-121-disease-spreads-mexico>
 in December - the book has had nearly 1000 1-star reviews onAmazon.com 
<http://www.amazon.com/Melanies-Marvelous-Measles-Stephanie-Messenger/dp/1466938897/ref=cm_rdp_product>
. Here’s the blurb from the back cover:


Melanie’s Marvelous Measles was written to educate children on the benefits of 
having measles and how you can heal from them naturally and successfully. Often 
today, we are being bombarded with messaged from vested interests to fear all 
diseases in order for someone to sell some potion or vaccine, when, in fact, 
history shows that in industrialised countries, these diseases are quite benign 
and, according to natural health sources, beneficial to the body.

First off, there’s nothing benign about measles. The World Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs286/en/> (WHO) estimates that in 
2013, there were around 146000 measles-related deaths across the globe –an 
increase 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2014/eliminating-measles/en/> 
from 122000 the previous year. Thecomplications 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Measles/Pages/Complications.aspx> that can arise 
as a result of contracting the illness can be anything from diarrhea and 
earache, to liver infections, meningitis, and very rarely,encephalitis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subacute_sclerosing_panencephalitis>. None of 
these things are ‘beneficial to the body’. It shouldn’t need to be said, but 
Messenger’s promotes a dangerous worldview about measles – and vaccines – that 
isn’t based in robust scientific evidence.

Thankfully, common sense seems to be prevailing in the Amazon comments 
section, and the vast majority of responses are eitherscathing derision 
<http://www.amazon.com/review/R2I42B6YWZN6V2/ref=cm_cr_rdp_perm?ie=UTF8&ASIN=1466938897>
, orheartbreakingly poignant 
<http://www.amazon.com/review/R3T07785361EMV/ref=cm_cr_rdp_perm?ie=UTF8&ASIN=1466938897>
. Nevertheless, Messenger’s book highlights two interconnected issues: the 
power than anti-vaccination conspiracy beliefs can have over people who are 
undecided about vaccines, and the continuing, devastating impact of Andrew
Wakefield’s false claims <http://www.bmj.com/content/342/bmj.c7452> about the 
dangers of the MMR vaccine.


Anti-vaccination rhetoric affects vaccination intentions

In a 2014 paper in PLOS ONE 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0089177>, 
Daniel Jolley and Karen Douglas at the University of Kent looked at the link 
between being exposed to anti-vaccination conspiracy theories, and intentions 
to vaccinate children. In one study, they gave participants information 
relating to anti-vaccination conspiracy theories (which included information 
such as “there is a significant amount of evidence that vaccines hurt more than 
they help”), information that countered anti-vaccination claims (for example, 
“…whilst millions of people have been immunized over the years, less than .005% 
have ever had an adverse reaction to a vaccine…”), or no information at all 
(the control condition).

They were then given a scenario in which they had to decide whether to have a 
fictitious child vaccinated for a fabricated disease. In general, they found 
that the participants who had been given anti-vaccination information were much 
more reluctant to have a child vaccinated than those who had been given 
anti-conspiracy information. This finding seemed to occur in part because of 
perceived dangers of vaccines, as well as feelings of powerlessness and 
mistrust in authorities.

This presents a clear problem in situations where parents are undecided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2013/apr/19/mmr> about 
whether to vaccinate their children. The medical evidence is clear – vaccines 
for measles areextremely effective 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/store/10.1002/ebch.1949/asset/1949_ftp.pdf?v=1&t=i60qs3k7&s=a9e7749a0af9804d437195c6ee4958fd29b0b7dd>
, and while they can be associated with serious adverse events, these are
extremely rare 
<http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/134/2/325.full.pdf+html>. On 
balance, the sensible, evidence-based decision is to vaccinate. However, 
medical evidence isn’t always that easy to get a hold of – much of it is behind 
journal paywalls, and if you’re not in the privileged position of having 
university/institutional access to these journals, the price of knowledge can be
 prohibitively high 
<http://scienceblogs.com/digitalbio/2012/01/09/how-much-does-it-cost-to-get-a/>
. Moreover, reading these sorts of papers, even with the relevant sort of 
training to be able to understand the prose, can be like wading through 
treacle. So unfortunately, we’re in a position where relatively low cost (or 
free) alternatives to objective medical evidence, presented in an easy-to-read 
format (like a children’s book) are able to proliferate and sway opinion.

The MMR vaccine and autism – the myth that will not die

Of course, we likely wouldn’t be in this mess if it wasn’t for the legacy left 
behind by Andrew Wakefield. In 1998, he co-authored a study published in the 
Lancet,implying <http://briandeer.com/mmr/royal-free-press-1998.pdf> a link 
between the MMR vaccine and a ‘new syndrome’ involving autism and bowel disease.
No such link 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673699012398> has ever 
been scientifically validated, and the paper itself has now beenretracted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/feb/02/lancet-retracts-mmr-paper?DCMP=EMC-thewrap08>
 amidclaims of fraud and data fabrication 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/342/bmj.c7452>. Wakefield, who had his medical 
license revoked by the GMC in the wake of the scandal, claims that he is the 
victim of aninternational conspiracy 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/24/magazine/mag-24Autism-t.html?pagewanted=2&_r=2>
 of public health officials, pharmaceutical companies and bloggers to discredit 
his work. In the aftermath, he seems to have spent a considerable amount of 
time suing (or threatening to sue)bloggers 
<http://www.ageofautism.com/2014/05/andrew-wakefield-responds-to-emily-willingham-and-forbes.html>
 andjournals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jan/05/andrew-wakefield-sues-bmj-mmr> 
for defamation, orpitching reality TV shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/apr/06/what-happened-man-mmr-panic> 
based on his discredited research.

The reality of the situation is that Wakefield’s claims sowed a seed of doubt 
about the safety of the MMR vaccine in the mind of the public, and we’re still 
seeing the repercussions of that today. Melanie’s Marvelous Measles is just the 
latest in a long trail of nonsense starting in 1998 which has rambled via
high-profile celebrities 
<http://scienceblogs.com/insolence/2010/02/08/best-conspiracy-theory-ever-over-andrew/>
 claiming a vast conspiracy theory, and newspapers giving himunnecessary airtime
 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/full-statement-by-mmr-scare-doctor-andrew-wakefield-the-government-has-tried-to-cover-up-putting-price-before-childrens-health-8570596.html>
. When I put these accusations to Messenger, she replied “Clearly Pete you are 
not very good at what you do as What [sic] you have written below in regard to 
Wakefield is absolute rubbish. His work has been duplicated and also there was 
a whistleblower from the CDC Just [sic] mid last year who said his study 
actually showed the MMR vaccine is causing autism.” Presumably, the 
whistleblower in question concerns the story ofWilliam W Thompson 
<http://www.snopes.com/medical/disease/cdcwhistleblower.asp>, a CDC 
<http://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/Concerns/Autism/cdc2004pediatrics.html> 
official who allegedly confessed about a coverup concerning the supposed 
autism-MMR vaccine link. This is a notion that has since beendebunked 
<http://scienceblogs.com/insolence/2014/08/22/brian-hooker-proves-andrew-wakefield-wrong-about-vaccines-and-autism/>
.

So it’s great that so many people are poking fun at Messenger’s book – it 
shows that common sense still prevails. But the fact that we’re still seeing 
anti-vaccination nonsense crop up so frequently shows how much work still needs 
to be done in making robust scientific evidence about vaccines easily available 
and easy to understand. Incidents like the Disneyland measles outbreak – in 
which most cases occurred in unvaccinated individuals – attest to that fact.
 