
Melbourne shocked premiership favourites Hawthorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn> at the MCG by recording a 29-point 
win to blow the race for the AFL’s top four wide open. The Hawks were denied a 
10th straight victory by a determined Demons outfit on Saturday afternoon, 
reducing their buffer at the top of the ladder to just one game.

If the three-time reigning premiers – who face North Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne> and West Coast in the next 
fortnight – slip up again, they risk throwing away hosting rights in week one 
of the finals. Coach Alastair Clarkson will rue sloppy goal-kicking, with his 
side losing 17.8 (110) to 11.15 (81).

Tigers put aside week of turmoil for AFL win over Collingwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/05/tigers-put-aside-week-of-turmoil-for-afl-win-over-collingwood>
There could also be further ramifications for the Hawks, who suffered their 
first defeat against Melbourne since 2006. James Frawley was a late withdrawal 
because of a jarred shoulder, and fellow defender Ben Stratton played no part 
in the second half due to a shoulder injury.

The match review panel is likely to scrutinise two incidents involving Cyril 
Rioli, who returned with a bang – and a bump – as he threatened to drag his 
side over the line. Rioli caught Clayton Oliver high in the first quarter, and 
he dumped Neville Jetta in a bruising tackle during the second term.

Rioli, who missed the Hawks’ preceding win over Carlton because of injury, 
laid 12 tackles and booted four goals, including a clutch effort in the fourth 
quarter that put his team in front. The Demons responded with the final five 
goals of the game, including two from Dom Tyson.

Midfielders Tyson, Nathan Jones and Jack Viney were magnificent for Melbourne, 
while ruckman Max Gawn produced arguably the highlight of his incredible 
season. He clutched eight contested marks, tallied 41 hit-outs and booted a 
goal in a best-on-ground performance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe97669d1dbe277e393c05981569afec53bc62ca8%2F0_0_3000_1892%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20blow%20AFL%20top%20four%20race%20wide%20open%20with%20shock%20win%20over%20Hawthorn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20blow%20AFL%20top%20four%20race%20wide%20open%20with%20shock%20win%20over%20Hawthorn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe97669d1dbe277e393c05981569afec53bc62ca8%2F0_0_3000_1892%2F3000.jpg>
 Lance Franklin was one of four Swans players to kick two goals each in the 
victory over Port Adelaide at the SCG. Photograph: Mark Nolan/Getty Images 
Earlier, Sydney continued their charge to the finals with a 67-point home rout 
of aPort Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide> side whose 
faint playoff hopes have surely been obliterated. The Swans piled up the first 
54 points and 14 scoring shots of the game on their way to a 14.16 (100) to 4.9 
(33) win at the SCG, which shored up their top-four placing.

Sydney had 10 goal-kickers, with Lance Franklin, Isaac Heeney, Xavier Richards 
and Gary Rohan kicking two each. Port didn’t score until the 11th minute of the 
second quarter and looked anything but a team with their season on the line, 
while the Swans kicked six first quarter goals to lead 41-0 at the opening 
break.

Robbie Gray broke Port’s drought with a classy turn and finish, but he touched 
the ball only seven times. Sydney led by 49 at half-time and kicked the first 
three goals of the third quarter, which ended with them holding a 74-point 
advantage.

Luke Parker had 39 touches and Dan Hannebery 36 for Sydney, who had a 186-132 
advantage in contested possessions and finished 69-36 ahead in inside-50 
entries. Ollie Wines had 32 touches for Port and Jasper Pittard 29.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F698752e5ee368ab58c759c034bc9170e272df56f%2F0_110_3257_1954%2F3257.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20blow%20AFL%20top%20four%20race%20wide%20open%20with%20shock%20win%20over%20Hawthorn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20blow%20AFL%20top%20four%20race%20wide%20open%20with%20shock%20win%20over%20Hawthorn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F698752e5ee368ab58c759c034bc9170e272df56f%2F0_110_3257_1954%2F3257.jpg>
 Brisbane fell to a big defeat to the Crows as their season got even worst at 
Adelaide Oval. Photograph: Ben Macmahon/AAP 
Brisbane’s disastrous year went from bad to worse, conceding the highest score 
of the AFL season in a dismal 138-point loss to Adelaide. The Crows piled on 13 
goals to one in the second half of their 27.15 (177) to 6.3 (39) win atAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> Oval on Saturday night.

The margin was just one point shy of the Lions’ biggest-ever loss and will 
surely add to the enormous pressure on coach Justin Leppitsch. A week after 
giving up 25 goals to Port Adelaide, the hapless Lions were even worse against 
the Power’s cross-town rivals.

It took just 12 seconds for the Crows to get on the scoreboard, with livewire 
Charlie Cameron running onto a loose ball and kicking truly. Adelaide piled on 
seven goals in a first quarter that often resembled a training drill for the 
home side. And it only got worse from there.

Adelaide had four times as many inside-50s as the Lions in the second quarter, 
and would have led by more than 64 points at half-time if not for some 
inaccurate kicking. The Crows set about adding to their highlight reel in the 
second half to the delight of the 43,459 crowd.

There was an acrobatic fly-kick from Josh Jenkins, a goal on debut for ruckman 
Reilly O’Brien and a set shot from the tightest of angles from talented 
youngster Cam Ellis-Yolmen.

Ball magnet Brad Crouch showed why several clubs are keen to secure his 
services next season, gathering 34 touches, nine clearances and two goals, 
while star forwards Eddie Betts, Taylor Walker and Tom Lynch each booted four 
majors, Josh Jenkins had three, and a total of 14 Crows shared in the goals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ba66f5e150fe8bdf44f01efdb15b0cad667f405%2F0_0_3000_2108%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20blow%20AFL%20top%20four%20race%20wide%20open%20with%20shock%20win%20over%20Hawthorn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20blow%20AFL%20top%20four%20race%20wide%20open%20with%20shock%20win%20over%20Hawthorn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ba66f5e150fe8bdf44f01efdb15b0cad667f405%2F0_0_3000_2108%2F3000.jpg>
 Marcus Bontempelli was given special attention but the Bulldogs still emerged 
victorious against the Kangaroos. Photograph: Michael Dodge/Getty Images 
The Western Bulldogs <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/western-bulldogs> 
showed their fighting spirit to return to the winners’ list, defeating North 
Melbourne by 14 points at Etihad Stadium. In an ill-tempered contest between 
two finals-bound teams, the Kangaroos targeted Marcus Bontempelli but the Dogs 
and their young star prevailed, winning 9.7 (61) to 7.5 (47).

The 20-year-old might have expected some attention from North after calling 
out Lindsay Thomas for a crude tackle on Lachie Hunter in their earlier meeting 
this year. He was roughed up before the first bounce and found himself in the 
middle of melees at quarter-time and half-time.

Bontempelli wore the jumper punches and the bumps well, responding with a 
best-afield performance (15 kicks, nine tackles and a goal) in a strong team 
performance to snap a two-game losing streak.

The win both keeps alive the Bulldogs’ top-four ambitions and delivers a 
hammer blow to North Melbourne’s own hopes. The Kangaroos are likely to be two 
wins outside the top four by round’s end and must play the top three clubs – 
Hawthorn, Sydney and GWS Giants – in their final three fixtures.

Much could depend on an injury to key tall Ben Brown, who left the match early 
in the second quarter after hurting his already-strapped left knee.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F237ab735dcaaf1caf70805fb2088f594c189ff4c%2F0_65_2022_1213%2F2022.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Melbourne%20blow%20AFL%20top%20four%20race%20wide%20open%20with%20shock%20win%20over%20Hawthorn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Melbourne%20blow%20AFL%20top%20four%20race%20wide%20open%20with%20shock%20win%20over%20Hawthorn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fmelbourne-blow-top-afl-four-race-wide-open-with-shock-win-over-hawthorn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F237ab735dcaaf1caf70805fb2088f594c189ff4c%2F0_65_2022_1213%2F2022.jpg>
 Jeremy Cameron kicked four goals in the Giants’ win over the Suns at Metricon 
Stadium. Photograph: Dan Peled/AAP 
Greater Western Sydney were forced to work extremely hard to beat Gold Coast 
and keep alive theirAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> top-two hopes. 
The Giants were hoping for a percentage-boosting victory over the injury-hit 
Suns on Saturday at Metricon Stadium but had to eke out a 14.8 (92) to 13.6 
(84) win.

Gold Coast held a slender lead late in the fourth quarter but back-to-back 
goals by Jeremy Cameron and Toby Greene with five minutes to go secured the 
points for the visitors. Cameron kicked four goals for the Giants, while Green, 
the excellent Steve Johnson and Jonathan Patton had two majors each.

Key defender Steven May was superb for the Suns, picking up 27 disposals and 
14 marks, while Tom Lynch remains firmly in the Coleman Medal race after a 
four-goal haul. Youngster Jarrod Garlett was everywhere in the forward line for 
the Suns, picking up 18 disposals and a goal while Brandon Matera and Ryan 
Davis also chipped in with two majors for the hosts.
 