
‘Half of our customers are Japanese men, mainly heterosexual, who want to 
transform into something different,” says Michiru, owner of the Studio Geisha 
Cafe in Tokyo, which provides people with the chance to live out their dreams 
of transforming into beautiful Japanese geisha. Michiru used to be a model but 
now prefers life behind the camera and has, for the past five years, worked 
with her husband – a wig specialist in the film industry – offering this 
makeover service. We were the first foreign men to try it out.

The cafe (actually two apartments) is in the Tokyo suburb of Morishita and 
people come here to experience what it’s like to be a geisha (or a samurai) and 
get a feel for traditional Japan. Most dress up for a photo souvenir, while 
others are honeymooners who want to dress up in traditional Japanese wedding 
outfits.

The cafe does not offer a rental service; the outfits stay in the building, 
and Michiru explained that she is keen not to promote male geisha 
transformation as some sort a joke. She had one Japanese man who wanted to 
dress up like a geisha, with a moustache, as part of a “funny” TV broadcast. 
The cafe declined the offer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fmemories-as-a-geisha-makeover-studio-geisha-cafe-tokyo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4141bf357bc211958b47504dd919b65dfa277e4b%2F181_0_4980_2988%2F4980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Memories%20as%20a%20geisha%3A%20makeover%20fun%20at%20Studio%20Geisha%20Cafe%2C%20Tokyo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fmemories-as-a-geisha-makeover-studio-geisha-cafe-tokyo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Memories%20as%20a%20geisha%3A%20makeover%20fun%20at%20Studio%20Geisha%20Cafe%2C%20Tokyo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fmemories-as-a-geisha-makeover-studio-geisha-cafe-tokyo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4141bf357bc211958b47504dd919b65dfa277e4b%2F181_0_4980_2988%2F4980.jpg>
 Man in the mirror … Sebastien takes a selfie during makeover preparations. 
The experience is an education on geisha daily life. Tradition is everywhere, 
whether it’s the way wigs are styled or the vivid whiteness of the makeup. 
Michiru was on hand to answer our questions about culture: such as why geisha 
pose with a pout or serious expression (to avoid baring their teeth) or flash a 
little red from the undergarment (a coy way to titillate). There’s so much 
detail involved at every stage of dressing up as a geisha that you only begin 
to appreciate it once you transform into one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fmemories-as-a-geisha-makeover-studio-geisha-cafe-tokyo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7548c30f819a4b48df31d10426d5ecb5b2de6019%2F0_72_1080_648%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Memories%20as%20a%20geisha%3A%20makeover%20fun%20at%20Studio%20Geisha%20Cafe%2C%20Tokyo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fmemories-as-a-geisha-makeover-studio-geisha-cafe-tokyo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Memories%20as%20a%20geisha%3A%20makeover%20fun%20at%20Studio%20Geisha%20Cafe%2C%20Tokyo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fmemories-as-a-geisha-makeover-studio-geisha-cafe-tokyo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7548c30f819a4b48df31d10426d5ecb5b2de6019%2F0_72_1080_648%2F1080.jpg>
 Best feet forward … tabi socks divide the toes into two sections 
The process, which took around three hours, including the photoshoot, began 
with us undressing down to our trousers and putting on the white hada-juban 
undergarment. We also put on the geisha tabi socks, which divide your toes into 
two: one space for the big toe and the other for the remaining toes. This 
optimises the feet for walking in the high wooden okobo shoes, worn outside to 
prevent the kimonos from touching the ground.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fmemories-as-a-geisha-makeover-studio-geisha-cafe-tokyo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffffdb8885cda4ca9d0a22eefdfc4c9100413e159%2F43_89_1037_1531%2F1037.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Memories%20as%20a%20geisha%3A%20makeover%20fun%20at%20Studio%20Geisha%20Cafe%2C%20Tokyo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fmemories-as-a-geisha-makeover-studio-geisha-cafe-tokyo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Memories%20as%20a%20geisha%3A%20makeover%20fun%20at%20Studio%20Geisha%20Cafe%2C%20Tokyo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fmemories-as-a-geisha-makeover-studio-geisha-cafe-tokyo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffffdb8885cda4ca9d0a22eefdfc4c9100413e159%2F43_89_1037_1531%2F1037.jpg>
 The Nomadic Boys at the end of their three-hour makeover experience in full 
makeup and dress. 
Geisha are instantly recognisable by their elaborate shironuri (white) makeup. 
This is a white paste, traditionally applied to showcase a young, beautiful 
face in the dark candlelit rooms before electricity was invented. As part of 
the application, several layers of foundation were applied to hide our beard 
shadow.

In addition, our eyebrows had to be hidden using a special wax and new ones 
painted over. This was the most surprising part of the experience as we watched 
our faces transform from the features we’re so used to, into this new, more 
feminine impression.

Finally, the wigs: geisha wigs are based on the shimada hairstyle where the 
hair is gathered together at the crown of the head and a portion of the bun 
sectioned off to point outward. The hairstyle developed during the Edo period 
(1603-1868) as a popular fashion among merchants’ wives.


Once our kimonos were fitted, we perfected our pouts and were ready for the 
full-length mirror. We do like to dress up once in a while. We did an excellent 
drag dress up for London Pride and a less glamorous dress up for one Halloween 
when we transformed into The Hairy Sisters… But the geisha transformation was 
the most professional one we’ve done. The makeup is so intense that the image 
staring back is almost unrecognisable.

As the photoshoot progressed, Michiru, who was apprehensive towards us at 
first, started to open up. We’ll never forget her enthusiasm as she rushed to 
adjust where the kimono was placed between each shot, and then her crying out, 
“Gorgeous! Gorgeous!”

• geishacafe.jp <http://www.geishacafe.jp/>, from £90 a session. Follow the 
Nomadic Boys onFacebook <http://www.facebook.com/nomadicboys>
 