
Once the thing that mattered most was to get a good degree: a first-class or 
2:1. Now it is more important to have been to a good university, usually 
defined as one of theRussell Group 
<http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/our-universities/> elite universities, although 
there areseveral non-Russell institutions just as good or better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/25/university-tables-coventry-slips-past-russell-group-peers-to-enter-top-20>
.

One supposed reason for this revealing shift is that with so many universities 
and so many subjects, it is more and more difficult to accept that a first is a 
first, whichever university awarded it.

University league tables 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>
External examiners from other universities may still crisscross the country 
attending examination boards and reviewing student scripts, and signing 
declarations that the criteria for deciding degree classifications meet the 
standards that apply in other universities. But they are believed less and less.

The pecking order in higher education is now so strong it subverts 
universities’ good work. In the eyes of too many people, a degree from 
Cambridge, self evidently, must be better than a degree from a university lower 
down that pecking order – especially when the gulf between entry standards for 
students is taken into account: three or more A*s for Cambridge compared with a 
minimum of two A-level passes (if that) for much lower ranked institutions.

The variety of subjects is an even bigger problem. In the past, universities 
awarded degrees only in conventional academic subjects, such as history or 
physics, plus traditional professional subjects, such as law and medicine. Now 
they award degrees in almost everything, fromfashion design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/24/fashion-school-ranking-students-central-saint-martins-csm>
 to leisure management (even if these just happen to be in areas vital to the 
UK’s economy).

The pecking order in higher education is now so strong it subverts 
universities’ good work

It doesn’t seem worth fighting back, by pointing to the thousands of 
people-hours devoted to ensuring that degree standards are broadly comparable 
throughout higher education (something the Americans don’t even pretend to 
check) or by arguing that ensuring comparable standards across the traditional 
arts and sciences has always been just as difficult as it is with newfangled 
vocational subjects.

Another supposed reason for the emphasis on where you get your degree, rather 
than how well you did, is that traditional degree classifications are no longer 
fit for purpose. More exact measurements are needed. The favourites are 
American-stylegrade point averages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/may/29/uk-universities-urged-to-adopt-us-style-grading-system>
 (GPAs), the average mark for almost every piece of work students have done, or 
“transcripts”, which claim to describe what students have achieved. The 
argument is that this is fairer to students and easier for employers. But it 
does not get over the problem that lots of people will still believe that GPAs 
and/or transcripts from Cambridge must be better than those from Coketown 
University, just like firsts, 2:1s and 2:2s.

The precision of GPAs and the detail in transcripts also suggest they are 
somehow more objective than degree classifications, when in fact they are just 
an aggregation of the same —subjective judgments. But in an age in thrall to
metrics and analytics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/04/research-metrics-higher-education-academic-measure-university>
, which takes nothing on trust, these alternatives seem to have a compelling 
logic.

Universities cramming as they top up student numbers | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/02/universities-cramming-as-they-top-up-student-numbers>
But the real reason for the shift from “good degrees” to “good universities” 
is that meritocracy is in retreat in 21st-century Britain (well, England – the 
Scots and Welsh deserve credit for resisting higher student fees). Bright 
students from poor homes, who so enriched our universities and our society, 
were always a small minority. Even in today’s wider-access university system, 
poorer students are massively disadvantaged.

But the principle that entry to universities should be open to all those with 
the ability and motivation to benefit, enshrined in the famouspostwar Robbins 
report <http://www.educationengland.org.uk/documents/robbins/robbins1963.html>, 
has never been challenged – until now.

Whatever the party, our political elite is an Oxbridge club | Carole Cadwalladr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/24/our-political-elite-oxbridge-club>
As one of the totems of liberal Britain, this principle is not openly 
challenged. However, the increasing weight placed on attending “good 
universities”, which just happen to be those with the most privileged student 
intakes, shows what is really happening. Social connections now trump academic 
aspirations and achievements.

Why should we be surprised? It is happening everywhere. Unpaid internships, by 
definition only open to the rich, now serve as gateways into the most 
prestigious and best-paid jobs. Only young people bankrolled by rich parents 
can aspire to be homeowners across wide reaches of Britain. Only in the health 
service is true equality of access maintained – and it is fraying.

But none of this excuses what is happening in higher education. Precisely 
because universities are such pivotal institutions in a meritocracy, they have 
a special responsibility to maintain equality of opportunity. So theirs is a 
special betrayal.
 