
 Meryl Streep <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Streep,+Meryl> has signed on to 
take a small role in the Fox/DreamWorks productionMinority Report 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0181689>, which begins shooting this week with 
Steven Spielberg in the director's chair. Set in an Orwellian future where 
prospective criminals are tracked by a rampant police state, Minority Report is 
based on a Phillip K Dick short story and stars Tom Cruise. The role marks 
something a renaissance for Streep. The Oscar-winning actress recently 
completed work on Adaption, the new film from Being John Malkovich director 
Spike Jonze, and last week signed to play the schizophrenic mother of Gwyneth 
Paltrow in Daughter of the Queen of Sheba.

 Still smarting from both her split with husband Tom Cruise and a knee injury 
she sustained on the set of Moulin Rouge,Nicole Kidman 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Kidman,+Nicole> has clearly elected to throw 
herself into her work. The Aussie actress has just signed on to star in 
Dogsville, the new film from maverick directorLars von Trier 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?von+Trier,+Lars>. Set in a small Midwestern town 
in the 1930s, Dogsville will co-star Stellan Skarsgard and Katrin Cartlidge, 
who both collaborated with von Trier on his award-winning Breaking the Waves. 
Production will begin this autumn, after the end of the scheduled SAG strike 
and as soon as Kidman has finished acting in Stephen (Billy Elliott) Daldry's 
British-setThe Hours <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0274558> in London. 

 Oscar winner Kathy Bates <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Bates,+Kathy> will 
star oppositeJack Nicholson <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Nicholson,+Jack> in 
About Schmidt <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0257360>. The Misery star will 
play a hippyish mum who clashes with the starchy father of her son's fiancee. 
Nicholson will play the disapproving dad in the film which will be helmed by 
Alexander Payne, director of the brilliant 1999 satire Election.

 Seinfeld graduate Jason Alexander 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Alexander,+Jason> is to join the cast of the 
Farrelly brothers' comedyShallow Hal <http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0256380> 
in which Jack Black plays a superficial skirt-chaser who falls in love with an 
overweight lass with a heart of gold (played by Gwyneth Paltrow in a fat-suit). 
Alexander - who played the lowly, venal George in the long-running TV sitcom - 
will co-star as Black's best friend.

 The Hannibal <http://film.theguardian.com/Film_Page/0,4061,405025,00.html> 
franchise looks set to continue. ProducerDino De Laurentiis 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?De+Laurentiis,+Dino> is reportedly laying the 
ground for a prequel to his record-breaking horror flick, and has commissioned 
Ted Tally to write a script loosely based on Thomas Harris's novel Red Dragon 
(previously filmed as Manhunter). The movie's casting could well have buffs 
choking on their sandwiches. Rumours suggest that Dino is gung ho forJude Law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/Film/Player/Player_Page/0,4159,42320,00.html> to 
play the young Hannibal Lecter.
 