
Mia Hansen-Løve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2012/apr/29/mia-hansen-love-french-director>
’s latest film tells of a life at the crossroads. It’s about a woman in crisis, 
the quest for artistic fulfilment and the freedom that comes from an acceptance 
of loss. Things to Come takes its lead from the experiences of Hansen-Love’s 
mother, a Parisian academic, although the director points out that all of her 
films are personal enterprises, steeped in the specifics of her own individual 
concerns. Tangentially, I suspect, this one is about her as well.

Things to Come review – Isabelle Huppert in exquisite agony
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/things-to-come-review-isabelle-huppert-in-exquisite-agony>
She suggests we meet around lunchtime at her Paris apartment. I know the 
director is married toOlivier Assayas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/olivier-assayas> – a fellow film-maker, 26 
years her senior – so I’m picturing something grand and book-lined, perhaps 
with a maid smiling discreetly in the wings. Instead, the flat turns out to be 
a spartan duplex, as defiantly impersonal as an Airbnb. Hansen-Løve pads 
barefooted to the door and says she can’t offer me coffee, she’s not even sure 
she has tea. She plops down on the couch and appears to be racking her brains. 
“I could pour us some water,” she says with a faint show of brightness.

On balance, I reckon the surroundings suit her. At the age of 35, Hansen-Løve 
still carries herself like an ascetic student who has just pulled an 
all-nighter. She has sleep-dust in her eyes and her red hair is a haze, while 
her floral-print trousers could conceivably be PJs. Her conversation, meantime, 
is fuelled by earnest enthusiasm. She talks of Ingmar Bergman and Andrea 
Arnold; Kelly Reichardt and Abbas Kiarostami. She says she’d love to work with 
Hou Hsiao-Hsien. She can’t imagine a world where this would ever happen.

Barack, the Beatles and Bridget Jones's Baby – 40 films to watch in autumn 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/30/barack-the-beatles-and-bridget-joness-baby-40-films-to-watch-in-autumn-2016>
Hansen-Løve talks like a novice when she’s practically an old hand. I loved 
her 2009 breakthrough,The Father of My Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/04/the-father-of-my-children-review>
, a heart-soaring drama about a death in the family, and adored 2011’sGoodbye 
First Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/03/goodbye-first-love-review>, a 
piercing coming-of-age story. Hansen-Løve makes films that are tender and 
nuanced. Her characters are like saplings bent by storms. In last year’s Eden, 
she mined the experiences of her brother Sven, a one-time DJ, to paint the
French house-music scene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/12/spotlight-on-the-french-touch-eden-mia-hansen-love-house-music>
 as a boulevard of half-chances, epiphanies and broken dreams.

“I’ve never made a film that was literally about my life,” she says, “although 
Goodbye First Love was probably the closest. But they are all transpositions, 
inspired by the people I know. The idea of a portrait is the first thing for 
me. There is a precise presence I am trying to grasp. People I’ve known and 
loved or who have disappeared. Like a painter, you know, even though I’m not a 
painter at all – I’m a really bad drawer.” She scrunches her face with 
embarrassment and reaches for her water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fmia-hansen-love-things-to-come-autumn-arts-preview-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe18c2239130a9446dcd11f6648e06478197d0233%2F385_552_5182_3109%2F5182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mia%20Hansen-L%C3%B8ve%3A%20'Oh%20no%2C%20please%20don't%20touch%20the%20cat!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fmia-hansen-love-things-to-come-autumn-arts-preview-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mia%20Hansen-L%C3%B8ve%3A%20%27Oh%20no%2C%20please%20don%27t%20touch%20the%20cat%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fmia-hansen-love-things-to-come-autumn-arts-preview-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe18c2239130a9446dcd11f6648e06478197d0233%2F385_552_5182_3109%2F5182.jpg>
 Isabelle Huppert in Things to Come 
Inevitably, the facts and fictions have a tendency to blur. Her work risks 
leaving her subjects uncomfortably exposed. She worries about Eden and the 
effect it had on her brother. Sven collaborated on the story and provided the 
basis for the footloose nearly-man at its centre. But when he saw the movie, he 
found the portrait upsetting. “He had a feeling it shone a harsh and brutal 
light on his life at the time. I mean, when we made the film, he was already in 
the process of leaving that world behind. But the film accelerated the process 
– a lot. So it was brutal and cruel, but it was probably good for him as well.” 
Another scrunch of the face. “So yes, it’s difficult. But I don’t know any 
other way I can write.”

Eden: 'There was no film that took club culture seriously'
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/21/mia-hansen-love-eden>
On Things to Come, it was her mother’s turn. Hansen-Løve’s parents (both 
philosophy professors) separated when she was in her 20s, and her mum’s 
subsequent search for a new life and meaning is played out afresh by Isabelle 
Huppert. Her mother, she says, was OK with the process. She read over the 
script, advised on the philosophy scenes. “The only time she censored me – and 
this is very strange – was the name of the cat. In the film, she has a cat 
called Pandora. In reality, the cat was Desdemona. I wanted to use it, but she 
said, ‘No, that’s the cat’s privacy.’ I love the fact that she would be totally 
cool with everything else but, ‘Oh no, please don’t touch the cat.’”

Hansen-Løve started out as an actor and as an occasional critic for Cahiers du 
Cinéma. In her teens, she landed a supporting role in Assayas’s 1999 film Late 
August, Early September, and they’ve been together since she turned 20. Their 
daughter, Vicky, is now seven. I’m tempted to view them as a kind of latter-day
Agnès Varda <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agn%C3%A8s_Varda> and Jacques Demy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacques_Demy>: married artists whose individual 
work can be read as a kind of ongoing conversation.

Hansen-Løve laughs. She’s not so sure. “I ask a lot from him,” she admits. 
“But he doesn’t ask a lot from me. I think the age difference is partly why. 
He’s more self-confident than I am. So he reads my scripts and then, when I’m 
editing, he’s always the first person I show the film to. And that allows me 
not to ask anybody else. It’s a clear, simple dialogue, and I trust him 
completely.”
 Boulevard of half-chances … Eden. 
Does the fact that they’re both in the same industry ever lead to friction? 
“Well, there is some friction between us as a couple, like all couples, on an 
everyday life level. But film-making has been like a paradise, like a preserved 
area, and our relationship has allowed me to find serenity in my work. I don’t 
think I would have found it otherwise.”

I look around the spartan apartment. There is a poster for Eden on one wall, a 
poster for an Éric Rohmer retrospective on the other. Aside from that, the 
place could be a blank slate. I’m guessing this can’t be the actual family 
home. Is it, perhaps, an office where she comes to write? “No,” says 
Hansen-Løve. “It’s my home. It’s my new home.” But this subject seems to 
unnerve her. She gives a mirthless laugh. “I just moved here. It’s quite small, 
I know, but there are other rooms downstairs.” Another laugh. “But I haven’t 
really been living here. I’m just starting out.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUhErAqJ8HGE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUhErAqJ8HGE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUhErAqJ8HGE&media=>
Watch the Things To Come trailer on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UhErAqJ8HGE> 
I open my mouth to ask another question, at which point she piles in to 
explain that, actually, she has just returned from the island of Faro, where 
Ingmar Bergman used to live. She says I’d love it. She was there scripting a 
new film, which will be called Bergman Island. And what’s funny is that the 
story touches on all the things we’ve been discussing – the professional and 
personal relationship between a film-making couple. Of course, Bergman Island 
is not really about her and Assayas. But she accepts that some people will 
choose to see it that way.

Things to Come review - Mia Hansen-Løve puts Isabelle Huppert through later 
life crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/13/things-to-come-review-mia-hansen-love-berlin-film-festival>
She takes a gulp of water and fixes me with a stare. “When I was in my 20s,” 
she says, “I was completely lost in life. Realising I wanted to make films gave 
me strength. Because film-making is a perpetual questioning of existence. What 
is beauty? Why am I living? And I need that, I think, perhaps because of being 
the daughter of two philosophy teachers.”

She’s on a roll now. I can’t get a word in. “When I was 20,” she says, “I felt 
so disconnected from the world, so melancholic. And to find this activity that 
allowed me to deal with all that and get me back into the world – I’m still so 
amazed by that. I don’t have the words to say how happy that makes me. It saved 
my life. I mean, I know other people probably say that. But for me it is true.”

Outside, interview done, I decide to walk the two miles back to Gard du Nord. 
The day is warm and sunny; the walk should be pure pleasure. And yet all the 
way I’m nagged by the memory of that sparsely furnished apartment - and by the 
awkward follow-up question I tried and failed to get out. Why is Hansen-Love 
there? Where is her husband and daughter? Has the marriage now ended or am I 
merely jumping at shadows? I don’t know, it’s a mystery and no doubt that’s as 
it should be. Some situations need time to sift and settle and be repositioned 
as drama. She may feel free to tell us, a few films down the line.

• Things to Come is released on 2 September.
 