
Not many people in the arts over the past half-century in Britain had as big 
an influence behind the scenes – writing, producing, proselytising – as Michael 
Kustow, who has died aged 74 following a heart attack. For someone who never 
really felt he belonged, Kustow was nonetheless involved in many of the 
greatest artistic enterprises of our day. This activity was always pursued 
under the aegis of some outstanding figure he admired as a creative father 
figure: Arnold Wesker at Centre 42 at the Roundhouse in London, Peter Hall at 
theRoyal Shakespeare Company <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc> (and later 
the National Theatre), Jeremy Isaacs at Channel 4 and Peter Brook at the RSC 
and in Paris.

Kustow was always a cardinal, never a pope – except for the period from 1967 
to 1970 when he successfully ran theInstitute of Contemporary Arts 
<https://www.ica.org.uk>, which moved into its magnificent new home on the 
Mall, within hailing distance of Buckingham Palace. Even then he was uneasy 
with his status, worried that he might not catch the new surge of the 
alternative culture in so palatial a setting. But he did, masterminding, for 
instance, a fantastic series of plays, events and exhibitions dedicated to the 
surrealist poet Guillaume Apollinaire, and signing out with a memorable fiesta 
celebrating comic books, entitledAAARGH! 
<http://bearalley.blogspot.co.uk/2009/07/aaargh-bumper-souvenir-catalogue.html>

Kustow's complicated view of himself – part vanity, part insecurity – was best 
expressed in his autobiographical memoir,Tank 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tank-Autobiographical-Fiction-Michael-Kustow/dp/0224010492>
 (1975), in which he adopted a third person, K, to describe his youth, his 
background, his sex life and his cultural enthusiasm. It's one of the best 
books of the decade, and a fine example of the sort of radical, intellectual 
energy that defined the movements of the era.

A brilliant writer and critic, Kustow positioned himself at the heart of 
cultural politics at home and abroad, a true internationalist with an 
incredible contacts book. He was equally at home with underground poets, 
high-ranking television executives, troubadours, actors and alternative 
comedians. His cultural appetite was voracious. He was the only person I ever 
encountered jogging on Hampstead Heath who owned up to listening to Harrison 
Birtwistle on his earphones.

Born and brought up in Golders Green, north-west London, Michael was the son 
of Mark and Sarah. Mark came from a Russian immigrant family, and sold 
children's clothes in a shop in Bermondsey, in the south-east of the city. 
Sarah came from a Polish immigrant family, worked as a secretary and was very 
interested in literature. Thus Michael was a second-generation English Jew, and 
identified from an early age with Kafka, James Joyce and Brecht. He was 
educated at Haberdashers' Aske's school, then in Hampstead, and Wadham College, 
Oxford, where he read English and was a contemporary of Melvyn Bragg, whom he 
regarded as a smoother version of himself.

His leftism was at once natural, heartfelt and fashionable: after Oxford, 
where he was enthralled by the New Left and worked in undergraduate theatre 
alongsideJohn McGrath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/jan/24/guardianobituaries.books>, Ken 
Loach andMichael Billington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michaelbillington>, he joined the Campaign 
for Nuclear Disarmament and went to Israel to work on a kibbutz.

He took a boat from Haifa to Marseilles and joined Roger Planchon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/may/20/roger-planchon-obituary>'s 
Théâtre de la Cité in Lyon, one of the great Brecht-influenced postwar 
companies, which performed classics in the suburbs. Planchon was Kustow's first 
professional father figure. As well as teaching English and translating with 
the company, he appeared in minor roles in important Planchon productions such 
as The Three Musketeers, touring in Germany.

Back in Britain, he became a postgraduate in the Bristol University drama 
department, finding a sympathetic nexus of activity withHarold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
's first play produced there, Charles Wood and Peter Nichols writing in the 
city and Tom Stoppard working on the local paper. But in 1962 he was drawn to 
London by Wesker's Centre 42 project at the Roundhouse, and then the following 
year by Hall's RSC. Wesker was Kustow's ideal of "a messianic Jew", while Hall 
was a role model in applying the standards of the literary critic FR Leavis to 
Shakespeare in developing a militant classicism; against which Brook was busy 
reacting and churning up controversy.

Some RSC directors disliked Kustow's intellectual flamboyance, dismissing his 
influence and that of the American directorCharles Marowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/09/charles-marowitz>, Brook's 
associate on the Theatre of Cruelty season, as pretentious. But Kustow and 
Marowitz widened the company's range and, in the RSC magazine Flourish, which 
Kustow edited, created an invaluable outpost of criticism and debate.

Kustow's first book, The Book of US (1968), was an account of Brook's 
anti-Vietnam war protest play US, which he scripted alongside the poetAdrian 
Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/21/adrian-mitchell-obituary> and 
the playwrightDenis Cannan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/oct/17/denis-cannan-obituary>. After 
four turbulent years he was ready for the even more volatile world of the 
visual arts at the ICA, leading his troops into the Mall in April 1968, shortly 
before Parisian students occupied the Odéon theatre during the May riots; the 
coincidence was not entirely inappropriate.

When Kustow rejoined Hall as an associate director at the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> in 1973, he took charge of 
visiting foreign companies, in-house exhibitions and what became known as 
platform performances, highlighting the work of Brecht, Philip Larkin, Groucho 
Marx and Robert Lowell. In 1980 he directed Simon Callow in a performance of 
all Shakespeare's sonnets; Callow was also involved in performances of Kustow's 
new translation of Stravinsky's The Soldier's Tale.

And then, ever in search of the new departure, he joined the new Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> in 1981 as commissioning editor 
for arts programmes, calling in contacts and favours with a dizzying frenzy 
and, as recounted in his book One in Four (1987), a journal of his penultimate 
year at the channel, unbounding elation.

Kustow's programmes tended to shadow the establishment arts world, even record 
specific events, notably Brook's Mahabharata epic (the film was completed in 
1989), rather than break new ground. But his default setting was the shock of 
the new and the cutting edge, so he never really invaded Bragg's South Bank 
Show territory.

Kustow left Channel 4 and formed his own production company in 1990, working 
with his former RSC associate John Barton, as well as Hall, on programmes about 
Shakespeare workshops and the elephantine genesis of Barton's theatrical epic 
about the Trojan war, finally filmed as Tantalus: Behind the Mask (2001). Two 
further books,theatre@risk 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Theatre-risk-Diaries-Letters-Essays/dp/041376690X> 
(2000) and Peter Brook (2005), remain eloquent testimony to a sustained 
engagement with the performing arts, the first in particular containing astute 
and vivid critical writing on figures as various as Ariane Mnouchkine, Mark 
Ravenhill,Ken Campbell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/sep/01/obituary.ken.campbell>, Alan 
Ayckbourn, Robert Lepage and the brilliant South African satirist Pieter-Dirk 
Uys.

Kustow's first marriage, to his Oxford contemporary Liz Leigh, ended in 
divorce. In 1973 he married Orna Spector, and they divorced in 1998. He later 
lived with Jane Shallice for more than 10 years, and is survived by his sister, 
Alexandra, and brother, Lionel.

• Michael David Kustow, producer and writer, born 18 November 1939; died 29 
August 2014

• Michael Kustow in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michaelkustow>
 