
Chelsea have confirmed that Michael Essien is out of the Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> with a knee injury. 
The club are expecting the Ghana midfielder to return to London later this 
week, when their medical staff will assess the state of the problem. Ghana's 
team doctor has already claimed the 27-year-old will be out of action for at 
least a month after suffering the injury in training.

Scans on Essien's left leg in Luanda are understood to have shown that he has 
suffered a partially torn medial collateral ligament in his knee and damage to 
his meniscus. A spokesperson for Chelsea confirmed: "We are aware of the injury 
to Michael and have been in contact with the Ghanaian national team. We will 
fully assess the injury on Michael's return to us later this week. Until then 
we are unable to comment further."

Essien's injury is a massive blow to both Ghana and Chelsea. Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> were hoping he would recover from 
the injury to play some part in their vital Group B clash with Burkina Faso 
tomorrow, which the Black Stars must win to progress to the quarter-finals. But 
if his injury is as bad as first feared, then Essien is likely to miss 
Chelsea's Premier League encounter with Arsenal at Stamford Bridge and the 
opening leg of their Champions League tie against Jos√© Mourinho's 
Internazionale.

Ghana's players feared the worst when Essien, who was not fit enough to start 
his side's first match, the 3-1 defeat by Ivory Coast, after a hamstring strain 
but played 45 minutes as a substitute, went down during a training session. 
"This is a big blow because Michael is so important to our team," said striker 
Matthew Amoah. "We've lost the motor in our midfield, and this is very bad."

Midfielder Anthony Annon added: "Michael was turning to make a pass when he 
just went down. There was no contact from any other player but those around him 
say they heard a click, and then the physios rushed over." Essien was forced to 
leave the session on crutches and was then taken to hospital in an ambulance.

The midfielder had only returned to training with Chelsea two weeks ago after 
tearing his hamstring during the club's final Champions League group match 
against Apoel Nicosia at Stamford Bridge on 8 December.
 