
Michael Gove has been told that people see him as a “political serial killer”, 
in a bruising interview in which he claimed that his decision to run for the
Conservative leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservative-leadership> was a question 
of putting the country first.

The BBC’s Andrew Marr suggested that Gove had deliberately destroyed the 
political career of his friends David Cameron and Boris Johnson, drawing a 
comparison to the television character Frank Underwood, the conniving, 
machiavellianHouse of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/house-of-cards> protagonist who 
murders his way to the White House.

 Gove said he had withdrawn his support from Johnson “reluctantly and with a 
heavy heart” but said it was “telling” that the former London mayor had decided 
to pull out of the race.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fmichael-gove-frank-underwood-house-of-cards-andrew-marr-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4211f491747c865890efb0147e9a17cf8b5ad20%2F301_5_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Gove%20seen%20as%20'political%20serial%20killer'%2C%20says%20Andrew%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fmichael-gove-frank-underwood-house-of-cards-andrew-marr-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Gove%20seen%20as%20%27political%20serial%20killer%27%2C%20says%20Andrew%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fmichael-gove-frank-underwood-house-of-cards-andrew-marr-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4211f491747c865890efb0147e9a17cf8b5ad20%2F301_5_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
 Kevin Spacey as Frank Underwood in the Netflix series House of Cards. 
Photograph: Netflix 
 “I enjoyed working with Boris during the referendum campaign. I think he has 
great talents and great abilities, but you need something else to be prime 
minister. You need that executive authority, that sense of purpose, that 
clarity. I had hoped that Boris could show that, but in the end it wasn’t 
there,” he said.

Theresa May and Andrea Leadsom to contend for PM as Gove’s bid fades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/02/andrea-leadsom-v-theresa-may> 
 Gove argued that Johnson had the support of the Vote Leave architecture 
during the referendum, but in the four days leading up to the deadline for Tory 
leadership nominations he came to realise that Johnson “was not the man and 
this was not the time”.

 The justice secretary said he was standing because the country needed 
leadership from someone who had argued for Brexit, insisting it was nothing to 
do with personal ambition or political gains.

 Marr hit back by saying people had witnessed the “political assassination of 
Boris Johnson’s career on live television in the most humiliating 
circumstances”. He then raised the issue of House of Cards, suggesting people 
were calling Gove Britain’s Underwood, and asking if he was likely to turn to 
the camera and say something sinister in the character’s trademark way.

 “There are all sorts of people who will say disobliging things about me. I 
don’t mind that because I would rather people said ‘this is a man who sticks to 
his principles’ rather than ‘this is a man who is worried about popularity’,” 
responded Gove.

He said he wanted the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> to be the “warriors for 
the dispossessed” and “tackle the scandal of the undeserving rich” - by 
cracking down on questionable behaviour in the corporate world.

 “There are two Britains,” added Gove, arguing that the country was divided 
between those who had done well and those left behind. His candidacy was to 
represent the second group, many of whom had backed Brexit, he said.

It came as Gove, Andrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> and Theresa May all 
agreed to publish their tax returns during the contest in the name of 
transparency.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Ftory-leadership-contenders-michael-gove-and-andrea-leadsom-agree-to-publish-tax-returns-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tory%20leadership%20contenders%20Michael%20Gove%20and%20Andrea%20Leadsom%20agree%20to%20publish%20tax%20returns%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Ftory-leadership-contenders-michael-gove-and-andrea-leadsom-agree-to-publish-tax-returns-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tory%20leadership%20contenders%20Michael%20Gove%20and%20Andrea%20Leadsom%20agree%20to%20publish%20tax%20returns%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Ftory-leadership-contenders-michael-gove-and-andrea-leadsom-agree-to-publish-tax-returns-video&media=>
Tory leadership contenders Michael Gove and Andrea Leadsom agree to publish tax 
returns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/03/tory-leadership-contenders-michael-gove-and-andrea-leadsom-agree-to-publish-tax-returns-video>
Also appearing on The Andrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> Show, Leadsom defended herself 
against accusations of hypocrisy in the Mail on Sunday after it dug up a speech 
in 2013 where she warned of the economic risks of an EU exit. Leadsom said she 
had been clear then that the EU needed “fundamental reform” and she believed 
that Cameron had fallen well short on his negotiation.

 She highlighted her real-life experience “running enormous teams, small 
teams, running start-up businesses. I have also set up charities. I have a 
passion for early years.”

 She said there was no “establishment stitch-up” over Brexit but said that 
there was a need to get on with it and tell “the world we are open for 
business”.

 “We need to get a grip and make progress,” she added. She said that May was a 
“superb candidate” but said people had voted to leave so needed someone who had 
backed that position to lead the effort.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fmichael-gove-frank-underwood-house-of-cards-andrew-marr-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6daa2e1295e2adcdff4819fc2123bd6a05d2497%2F0_61_4402_2641%2F4402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Gove%20seen%20as%20'political%20serial%20killer'%2C%20says%20Andrew%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fmichael-gove-frank-underwood-house-of-cards-andrew-marr-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Gove%20seen%20as%20%27political%20serial%20killer%27%2C%20says%20Andrew%20Marr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fmichael-gove-frank-underwood-house-of-cards-andrew-marr-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6daa2e1295e2adcdff4819fc2123bd6a05d2497%2F0_61_4402_2641%2F4402.jpg>
 Author Michael Dobbs: ‘I keep reminding everybody that House of Cards is 
fiction.’ Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
The House of Cards author, Michael Dobbs, a former deputy chairman of the 
Conservative party, criticised the way the leadership contest was developing.


Lord Dobbs told Radio 4’s The World This Weekend: “I keep reminding everybody 
that House of Cards is fiction and I’m rather fed up with everybody rushing 
around and seeing it as if they are auditioning for parts in the next series.


“This is serious stuff. We are talking about the future of the country, the 
future of Europe and somehow it’s been reduced to not House of Cards, more like 
St Trinian’s.


“It’s like a posh boys’ punch up and, frankly, I and millions of people around 
the country are rather fed up with it.”
 