
Could it be another example of the Boris Johnson effect? If politicians are no 
longer afraid to scatterLatin tags <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cgThJK8xfKw>
, then surely it's just the next step to reference golden-age Japanese cinema 
in attempting to put your mark on a resignation crisis. Michael Gove, in his 
defence of thenow-ex-chief whip Andrew Mitchell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/oct/21/andrew-mitchell-resignation-cabinet-split>
, suggested the old truth-is-relative concept by mentioning the Akira Kurosawa 
classicRashômon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/jun/17/rashomon-kurosawa-film-review>.

Asked in a 5 Live radio interview 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2012/10/21/plebgate-rashomon-andrew-mitchell-gove-_n_1997980.html?ncid=GEP>
 whether he believed Mitchell, he said: "Yes I do. There's a Japanese film, I 
think it's called Rashômon, in which different participants who see the same 
event all have different recollections of it."

Rashômon famously upended the neatly packaged resolution of crime fiction by 
offering four different versions – none of them conclusive – of the same 
unpleasant crime: the murder of a samurai and the rape of his wife. Gove, 
rather carefully, is opening up two fronts here: he is casting aspersions on 
the recorded version of the "plebgate" exchanges; but also drawing a little 
flak to himself: not only is Rashômon – horror of horrors – a subtitled film; 
it was also made in 1950. It's old and foreign; just the sort of thing those 
new-intake Tories despise most. (Though Gove covers himself by not being 
entirely confident of the film's actual title – he'd lose all credibility if he 
looked actually cosmopolitan.)

Rashômon, of course, had a seismic effect on Anglo-American crime cinema 
(which had hitherto been dominated by cigar-chewing flatfoots or 
deerstalker-toting master detectives), influencing an entire generation of 
courtroom drama, such asWitness for the Prosecution 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0051201/>, Twelve Angry Men 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/sep/07/culture-flash-courtroom-dramas>, 
Anatomy of a Murder 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/85943/anatomy.of.a.murder>, as well as 
fractured-time crime films as varied asStanley Kubrick's The Killing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/87920/killing> to Quentin Tarantino's 
Pulp Fiction <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/56612/pulp.fiction>. It has 
alsogiven its name to an analytic concept <>, whereby differing but equally 
plausible accounts arise of the same event. So how can we apply this elsewhere 
in contemporary politics?

You don't have to look far. It's already happening to George Osborne, 
currently ensnared in the "great train snobbery" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/oct/19/george-osborne-standard-ticket-first-class-train>
. One onlooker says Osborne himself refused to move from first class; another 
account has it that it was his aide who didn't want to leave. Who to believe?

Is David Cameron planning to hug or mug a hoodie? Again, depends who's telling 
you 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/oct/21/cameron-hoodies-crime-tough-young-people>
. Though the most promisingly Rashômon-y intrigue will no doubt rear its head 
the next time a householder ends up in front of a judge after taking on a 
burglar with a baseball bat.Will it be a case of "disproportionate force", 
Chris Grayling style? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2012/oct/09/chris-grayling-self-defence-lawyers>

Just remember: disbelieve everyone.
 