
Michael Herr, who has died aged 76, was the author of Dispatches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/28/100-best-nonfiction-books-of-all-time-no-9-dispatches-michael-herr-vietnam-war-apocalypse-now>
 (1977), by wide consent the best book about the Vietnam war, described by no 
less a critic thanJohn Le Carré <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnlecarre> 
as “the best book ever written about men at war in our time”. Herr also made 
vital contributions to two of the best films on the war,Apocalypse Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now> and Full Metal Jacket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/19/full-metal-jacket-action>.

It took Herr eight years to write Dispatches, in part because he went home 
from Saigon with a bad case of what might now be diagnosed as post-traumatic 
stress disorder. He had gone to Vietnam as a correspondent, incongruously, for
Esquire <http://www.esquire.com/> magazine. An American general asked him 
whether he was there to write about military fashion, and another whether he 
was there to write humour. No, he told them. He wrote little for Esquire, but 
took advantage of the US government’s decision to allow correspondents 
extraordinary access – they could catch military helicopters, Herr said, like 
taxis – to go to war with the grunts. He shared their discomforts and their 
fears, witnessed their death and mutilation and recorded their language.

His own language, a stream of consciousness pulsing with energy, but 
masterfully controlled, captured the fear and the horror, but also the 
excitement, of the war in the jungle and paddy fields. “So much beauty”, he 
recalled, “and so much pleasure”. He recorded with a connoisseur’s expertise 
such details as the many ways in which soldiers would wish each other good 
luck, and the degrees of madness that were deemed acceptable – and those, such 
as booby-trapping the latrines with a powerful explosive, that were not.

He identified with the young Marines – at 27 he was older than most of them – 
and learned in the first few days that you could not affect neutrality. “If you 
are neutral,” he said, “you don’t get it.” He generally did not carry a weapon, 
though on occasion he did fire at Vietnamese in emergencies. The young grunts, 
he said, “are my guns”.

The power of the book, perhaps, comes from Herr’s insistence on describing the 
war, or more precisely his own responses to it, rather than protesting against 
it. It also comes from the ceaseless accompaniment of two elements, drugs and 
music – more particularly rock music, and especially the music ofJimi Hendrix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jimi-hendrix>. Herr himself spent 
drug-fuelled weekends in a flat in Saigon, staring at an ancient French map of 
Indochina, and he never caught a helicopter without a Hendrix cassette.

He met soldiers with a left pocket full of Dexedrine, the “upper” officially 
administered by the army to get them into battle, and a right pocket full of 
“downers” to get them through it. Dispatches did not come out until 1977, when 
the country was beginning to have its mind on other problems, but it did more, 
perhaps, than any other book to freeze an image of despair and a sense of waste 
about the war, rather as the trench poets of 1914-18 did in Britain.

Herr also made vital contributions to two of the most influential Vietnam 
films. He wrote Martin Sheen’s voiceover for Francis Ford Coppola’sApocalypse 
Now <https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now> and later wrote the 
screenplay for Stanley Kubrick’s Full Metal Jacket. His work, in the book and 
the two films, has been seen as part of the process whereby the US came to see 
itself and its history no longer merely through traditional literature, but in 
sounds and images, in ways that prefigured the internet.

He also contributed to the New Journalism genre, in which the writer became 
part of the story. He found the instant celebrity that greeted its publication 
in 1977 almost as hard to take as a bombardment in Khe Sanh. Quiet and intense, 
he experienced what he called “deep paralysis”, which he dealt with in part by 
affecting to have lost interest inVietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vietnam>. At one point his wife, Valerie, 
whom he married the year Dispatches came out, left him for a year, then 
returned.

In 1980 Herr moved to London, where he stayed until he moved back to the US in 
1991. It was there that he metStanley Kubrick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stanleykubrick>, who became a close friend, 
though Herr counselled against doing business with him. Herr wrote Kubrick’s 
biography, but he wrote surprisingly little else after Dispatches – Walter 
Winchell: A Novel and a nonfiction book about Hollywood.

Herr was born to Jewish parents in Lexington, Kentucky, where his father was a 
jeweller. The family moved to Syracuse in upstate New York, where Herr attended 
high school and Syracuse University. After dropping out of university he 
travelled in Europe, working as a magazine writer, focusing on film and music. 
He had, by his own account, a “Hemingway complex”, and persuaded his friend, 
Harold Hayes then editor of Esquire, to send him to Vietnam, though the 
magazine did not expect or demand much from him. He was repelled by what he 
called the “horrible glamour value” Dispatches had won for him in New York 
City. After he returned from London he lived in Delhi, New York.

Herr is survived by Valerie and by two daughters.

• Michael David Herr, writer, born 13 April 1940; died 23 June 2016
 