
The other day, an intelligent young woman told me she had just watched Bleak 
Moments <http://uk.imdb.com/title/tt0066842/>, my first film. Didn't she find 
it too slow, I asked – like watching paint dry? Oh no, she had loved every 
second – it was gripping, moving and funny. Theveteran actor George Coulouris 
<http://www.coulouris.net/gc_archive/> (Thatcher the lawyer in Citizen Kane) 
was in the cast when the rehearsals began. After three days, he walked out. He 
hated it. He would have played the father of the two sisters, but they became 
orphans instead. When the film was released and favourably received, George 
graciously came to a screening. Ungraciously, he walked out after half an hour, 
the last I ever saw of him. He was 70, my age now, nearly. I was 28, somewhat 
younger than my sons today. Inevitably, there is much I could criticise in my 
quirky old 1971 relic. But it was my first effort, and I've made 17 full-length 
films since, as well as having written and directed a dozen or so stage plays,
including Abigail's Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/oct/14/television.bbc>. So, praise 
first. From this distance, I cautiously feel I'm allowed to feel a touch of 
paternal pride in my young self. With such brief life experience, did I really 
invent this painful, tragic-comic tale of a beautiful but suppressed young 
woman, tied to her elder, mentally challenged sister? I guess I'm astonished at 
the maturity and sophistication of my achievement, not to mention its pathos 
and irony. But one doesn't make films by oneself, and Bleak Moments was a 
consummate team effort. It was shot on a shoestring budget,backed imaginatively 
by Albert Finney 
<http://film.theguardian.com/Player/Player_Page/0,,45377,00.html>; it was 
brilliantly produced and edited by Les Blair, elegantly photographed by Bahram 
Manocheri, and was achieved by the smallest of crews, with absolutely everybody 
working for £20 a week, including the wonderful cast. So what are the faults of 
what some people called the most boring film in the world, which won first 
prize at the Chicago and Locarno film festivals, which the [film producers and 
directors]Boulting brothers 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/film/id/446435/index.html> complained was "too 
relentless", and which Roger Ebert in the Chicago Sun-Times called"a 
masterpiece, plain and simple" 
<http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/19721104/REVIEWS/41129002/1023>
? Was the film technically good enough? No – the sound quality was quite 
dreadful. Could it have been shorter and quicker? Possibly, but then its famous 
longueurs are integral to its excruciating charm. Could I have directed it 
better, visually? Only the material we shot early on, before I found my feet. 
Could the dialogue have been better written? Yes, but only in the few scenes we 
constructed in a hurry, resulting in unhealthy elements of improvisation. 
Should the drama have exploded into catharsis? No – the experiment was never to 
allow the bubble to burst, and I think this works. Could the acting have been 
better? Certainly not! Jean Renoir declared that we all go on making the same 
film over and over again. I agree. I've tried to vary my films considerably, 
but I would have to admit that Bleak Moments remains, in some ways, the mother 
of all Mike Leigh films. And I'm very proud of it.
 