
“We are more than just a radio station” said Alan Davey, announcing highlights 
of Radio 3’s autumn and winter season in which classical might still be at the 
heart of the station’s output, but arts and drama, jazz, roots music and new 
talent play an important part.

Drama is represented in a strong lineup that celebrates the great US 
playwright Arthur Miller in the centenary of his birth. David Suchet, Zoe 
Wanamaker and director Howard Davies, who in 2010 brought the award-winning 
production of Miller’s All My Sonsto the West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/may/28/all-my-sons-michael-billington>, 
have reunited to create a new production of another classic Miller play, Death 
of a Salesman, that will be broadcast on 11 October.
 David Suchet and Zoe Wanamaker at the recording of Death of a Salesman for 
Radio 3. 
Harriet Walter curates a season of new productions of plays by Harold Pinter, 
Moira Buffini and Nicholas Wright that will broadcast in November, and Sir Tom 
Stoppard’s Artist Descending a Staircase – written forRadio 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3> in 1972 and later adapted for the 
stage, will return to the airwaves in its first new radio production since its 
BBC premiere.

The Free Thinking Festival of ideas will be hosted by Sage Gateshead for its 
10th year from 6 to 8 November, with a keynote speech given by American poet 
Claudia Rankine who will talk about the power of language and what it means to 
be black in the new millennium.

“Diversity is on the agenda” said Davey, confirming the station’s ongoing 
commitment to featuring work by female composers, building on their Celebrating 
Women Day in March 2015. He announced a partnership with the British Academy of 
Songwriters Composers and Authors to produce a diversity in composition seminar 
day to be held in the new year.

'We’re too darned modest about what we do': Radio 3 boss Alan Davey's typical 
day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/21/were-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day>
Nurturing new talent and education is a central concern of the station, said 
Davey.BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Introducing – the initiative 
that allows unsigned musicians to upload their material for possible airplay – 
is being extended to the UK’s classical composers and performers. The scheme 
has helped launched the careers of pop acts including Florence + the Machine, 
James Bay and Jake Bugg. Radio 3’s presenters and producers will select the 
best pieces and performances for airplay on drive-time programme In Tune and 
contemporary music programme Hear and Now.


Davey also confirmed that Pied Piper, a much-loved show presented by David 
Munrow from 1971 to 1976 whose aim was to introduce children to music of all 
kinds and all eras, was to return in some form. “I want to capture that spirit 
of exploration and excitement,” he said.

The new year brings a week celebrating contemporary classical music that will 
be launched on 1 January with the world premiere of the four-channel 
transmission of Stockhausen’s electroacoustic classic Hymnen. Radio 3 has 
acquired copies of the original four-channel tapes of Regions (ie Movements) 1, 
2 and 4 from the Stockhausen Foundation for Music, and alongside these will be 
broadcast a recording of a live performance by the London Sinfonietta of Region 
3, making the BBC the first to broadcast the complete work as it was conceived 
by Stockhausen in 1967.

'People reveal themselves in talking about music'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/apr/16/michael-berkeley-private-passions-people-reveal-themselves-about-music>
Davey spoke of the “elephant in the room” – Classic FM. “We do different 
things but there’s room for both of us – we’re both an important part of the 
UK’s classical music ecology,” he said. Earlier this week his stationannounced 
a pop-up collaboration with their commercial rival Jazz FM 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2015/bbc-radio-jazz-pop-up-station>
. Would he consider a similar partnership with Classic FM? “Of course – if we 
could find the right thing,” he said.

Finally, rounding off a year in which Michael Berkeley’s Private Passions 
celebrated its 20th anniversary, will be Alan Bennett’s first and long-awaited 
appearance on the show. Bennett credited the programme for partly inspiring The 
History Boys, but has never appeared on the show in which guests discuss the 
influence music has had on their lives and careers.

 