
Mining shares led the way higher as markets surged on the US Federal Reserve's 
decision to stick with its $85bn a month stimulus programme.

But platinum specialist Johnson Matthey missed out, falling 42p to £28.52. It 
was the biggest loser in the leading index after UBS downgraded by buy to 
neutral, albeit with a target price raised from £28 to £29.10. It said:
 Since April, Johnson Matthey has rerated by more than 20% as the catalysts 
we'd flagged have mostly played out: emission control technologies is seeing 
pre-buying, and there is greater market awareness of the value of the process 
catalyst business. We now find ourselves broadly in line with Bloomberg 
consensus for 2014 earnings per share of 164.76p, having previously been 8% 
ahead. In addition multiple expansion from current levels is limited in our 
view. 
Overall the FTSE 100 finished 66.57 points higher at 6625.39, albeit off its 
best level of 6659.

As metal prices bounced in the wake of the Fed's decision, Randgold Resources 
rose 363p to £48.41,Fresnillo finished 61p higher at £10.69 while Anglo American
 added 57.5p to £16.35.

Among the mid-cap miners African Barrick Gold climbed 20.9p to 156.7p as it 
named director Andrew Wray as its chief financial officer, part of a shake-up 
which has seen the recent departures of both the chief executive and chief 
operating officer.

Back in the FTSE 100, the perceived boost to emerging economies from the Fed's 
decision lifted Asia-focused bankStandard Chartered by 50p to £15.64.

United Utilities added 16p to 707.5p after an in-line trading update. Killik 
analysts said:
 Overall, today's trading update was reassuring, and we remain positive on the 
shares ahead of the group's interim results on 27 November. Following last 
night's surprise decision by the Federal Reserve to delay the tapering of QE – 
which sent Treasury yields down – we would also highlight a prospective 
dividend yield of 5.2% growing in real terms as being particularly attractive. 
BG rose 12p to 1204.5p after the Australian Financial Review said the 
Queensland Investment Corporation and Industry Funds Management were preparing 
a bid of some $4bn for BG's infrastructure assets at the Queensland Curtis 
Island liquefied natural gas project. 
<http://www.afr.com/p/opinion/heavyweights_join_forces_for_bg_Gwo1Gk00B3fqGP1zE7zICM>

Among the fallers, Vodafone lost 1.6p to 209.75p following recent share 
selling by key directors.Tesco dipped 1p to 377.3p as Nomura cut from buy to 
neutral and reduced its price target from 430p to 400p.

Whitbread slipped 4p to £30.08 as analysts at Societe Generale issued a sell 
note:
 We initiate coverage of Whitbread with a sell rating and a target price of 
£29. After gaining 36% over 12 months, we now believe that the Whitbread share 
price fully factors in the anticipated success of the group's development plan 
out to 2018. We believe that, in the hotel industry, greater opportunities can 
be found in Intercontinental Hotels group, which is fully benefiting from the 
outperformance of the hotel cycle in the US market.

Direct Line added 0.2p to 218p ahead of an announcement after the market 
closed that Royal Bank of Scotland planned to sell another 272m shares in the 
insurer to raise around £650m and cut its stake to 28.5%.

Finally department store group Beale lost 4% to 11p after sales for the 45 
weeks to mid-September fell 8.4%, following the closure of a number of loss 
making shops. Like for like sales, however, were still down 7.3%, hit by its 
withdrawal from the TV and audio market, and a decision not to chase sales 
through promotions. David O'Brien at house broker Shore Capital said:
 A normal seasonal run-up to Christmas remains critical to the group and 
management is confident that it has the right ranges throughout the store 
portfolio, which should augur well in terms of full-price sales. We remain 
relatively upbeat on the continuing recovery on the group's prospects, which 
largely reflects management actions but will be helped by the aforementioned 
wealth effect.  