
The Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> has 
dismissed claims by a former doctor who started a global scare about the MMR 
vaccine that officials were responsible for the outbreak of measles in south 
Wales.

The epidemic in south Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, which has 
affected almost 700 people, is believed to have been partly caused by parents 
not vaccinating their children because of fears that the MMR (measles, mumps, 
rubella) vaccine could cause autism.

Health officials in south Wales said that more than 1,000 MMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> jabs were given on Saturday at the 
Singleton, Morriston, Neath Port Talbot and Princess of Wales hospitals.

The fears were promoted by Andrew Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, who was later struck 
off by the General Medical Council (GMC). In a written statement, he accused 
the government of causing the epidemic by stopping the import of a vaccine that 
acted against measles only.

Wakefield wrote that in September 1998, the government withdrew the import 
licence for the single vaccine, effectively blocking this option for parents, 
and so "measles cases in the UK rose".

He said: "The government's concern appeared to be to protect the MMR programme 
over and above the protection of children."

Wakefield said two MMR vaccine brands had to be withdrawn for safety reasons. 
"These government officials put price before children's health and have been 
seeking to cover up this shameful fact ever since."

The GMC struck Wakefield off the medical register in 2010, saying he had 
behaved "dishonestly and irresponsibly" and showed "callous disregard for 
children's suffering".

A Department of Health spokesman said: "Andrew Wakefield's claims are 
completely incorrect. Immunisation advice from the department has always kept 
the interests of patients paramount.

"Measles is a highly infectious and harmful disease. If your child has not had 
two doses of MMR, whatever their age, we urge you to contact your GP surgery 
and make an appointment."

Almost 700 people have become infected in the Swansea area.

Another 73 cases were announced on Thursday â€“ bringing the number infected 
there to 693. Public Health Wales has urged parents of unvaccinated children 
across Wales to act immediately to ensure they are protected against the 
potentially fatal disease.

It has warned that at least 6,000 children remain unvaccinated in the Swansea 
area alone.

Drop-in vaccination clinics were open in south Wales on Saturday, at hospitals 
in the Cardiff, Vale of Glamorgan, Newport, Hengoed, Swansea, Bridgend and Port 
Talbot areas.

Last weekend more than 1,000 queued up for the MMR vaccination at clinics 
across south Wales.

Although the outbreak is centred on Swansea, cases have continued to be 
reported across the area.

Most are in the Abertawe Bro Morgannwg health region, which includes Swansea, 
Neath, Port Talbot and Bridgend.

Cases have also been found in Powys and in the Hywel Dda health board area, 
which covers Carmarthenshire, Ceredigion and Pembrokeshire.

Typical symptoms of measles include fever, cough, conjunctivitis and a rash. 
Complications are quite common even in healthy people, and about 20% of 
reported measles cases experience one or more complications.

These can include ear infections, vomiting and diarrhoea, pneumonia, 
meningitis and serious eye disorders.

Before the introduction of the measles jab in the UK in 1968, about half a 
million people caught measles each year of whom about 100 died.

Annual measles deaths fell to single figures after the introduction of the MMR 
vaccine in 1988 but concerns over the jab's safety were raised in the late 
1990s when Wakefield produced a since discredited paper suggesting MMR was 
linked to an increased risk of autism.
 