
As a lone trumpeter sounded the Last Post during the final act of England's 
Ashes whitewash in Sydney yesterday, supporters who had spent small fortunes 
following Andrew Flintoff's hapless tourists may not have been alone in 
wondering whether the investment was worthwhile.

While the average Barmy Army foot-soldier has forked out north of £2,000 to 
witness defeats from Brisbane to Sydney and points in between, the sponsors 
whose logos adorn the team's shirts, bats, pads, gloves, caps and courtesy cars 
have committed millions to players and the England and WalesCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board. Clearly the worst drubbing 
in 85 years was not what any of them had in mind when they signed the cheques.

Executives from Vodafone, which signed a four-year deal worth £20m to be team 
sponsor in 2005, may have watched the sorry final act in Sydney with dismay. 
The same might be said of those from Toyota, the ECB's motoring partner, 
Ask.com, the official search engine, or Hugo Boss, supplier of grooming 
products to the defeated squad. The marketing teams from Citizen, which 
provides watches to Kevin Pietersen, Volkswagen, official car of Pietersen, 
Flintoff and Team England, and Barclay's Capital, which sponsors the bat 
manufactured for the captain by Woodworm, are unlikely to have been turning 
cartwheels in the early hours either.

Many of these commercial partners were drawn to English cricket after the 
heady summer of 2005 when Ashes victory bathed the sport and its stars in an 
unprecedented glow of approval and popularity. This winter's travails, however, 
have been a harsh reminder of the realities of sporting sponsorship. Defeats 
are part of the gamble sponsors take when investing in sporting properties.

The ECB has been berated for poor planning, but in commercial terms they 
cannot be reproached. Deals with their three major sponsors, Vodafone, NPower, 
which sponsors domestic Test matches, and NatWest, who support one-day 
internationals in England, were all tied up before or during the summer of 2005 
when the game's value was at an unprecedented level.

An exclusive deal for domestic live cricket worth more than £200m was sealed 
with Sky in late 2004.

All these deals run until the Australians arrive to defend the urn in 2009, 
and so the ECB is insulated from the short-term commercial impact of defeat.

"Clearly we would prefer to see England winning, but this will not be a 
commercial disaster for the ECB because of the strategy we have followed," said 
commercial director Jon Perera. "We have a structure that can withstand the 
instability that comes with working in sport, where results can unpredictable."

Mr Perera admitted cricket's fair-weather supporters may look elsewhere, but 
he was confident its appeal to sponsors will be unaffected by the walloping.

"The sport is comparable with rugby, which attracted a huge amount of interest 
in the wake of the 2003 World Cup win. Cricket rather overtook it in 2005, and 
now unfortunately both sports are in less happy times. But the sponsors 
appreciate that this is the way of sport. Vodafone have had some exposure this 
winter as team sponsor, but NPower and NatWest are more focused on the domestic 
season, which I think will prove to be as commercially strong as ever."

The sponsors for their part are realistic enough to know that sponsoring 
England is not a smooth ride, and Vodafone were quick to reiterate their faith 
in the team yesterday.

For individual players the picture may not be as straightforward. Andrew 
Flintoff, the colossus of 2005 and a millionaire as a result, has seen his 
publishers cancel plans for a follow-up to last year's autobiography which sold 
250,000 copies.

Individual sponsors were quick to distance themselves from the team yesterday. 
Alan Mace, general marketing manager of Citizen, said: "Obviously we're not 
happy that the English team didn't do well. We are only involved with Kevin 
Pietersen. If we were sponsoring the English cricket team I may well feel very 
different about it."

Adam Benson, an executive with Arundel Promotions, which represents Ian Bell, 
Paul Collingwood and Ashley Giles, acknowledged that the market may now take a 
downturn: "Inevitably there will be a negative impact from this defeat, but 
that is the nature of sport. It is about ups and downs ... the Ashes victory in 
2005 was a high point for the sport and the players and governing body 
benefited. But there is plenty of time to put it right before the Australians 
arrive to defend the Ashes in 2009."

He may well be right. Defeat notwithstanding, the game and its leading 
practitioners have never been wealthier. Flintoff, Pietersen and the new star 
Monty Panesar retain star quality and continue to earn greater sums than their 
predecessors. Experience has made followers of English cricket a resilient 
bunch and the West Indies will arrive in May to play in front of full houses 
eager to put the misery of the winter behind them.

Quotes: what they say - and what they really mean

Vodafone

The sponsor says: "We have sponsored the England cricket team since 1997. The 
latest deal runs through until 2009. We have stood by the team through that 
entire period. From a sporting point of view, this Ashes result was 
disappointing but we're in it for the long term and we are with the team all 
the way" - Maria Bellanca, head of group sports sponsorship

The PR expert translates "Between the lines, that says 'for God's sake get 
your act together. We've spent a lot of money with you, and you had better 
start performing, or else'" - Mark Borkowski

Citizen Watches,

The sponsor: "Obviously we're not happy that the English team didn't do well, 
but it is a team and we are only involved with one player of the team. We are 
sponsoring Kevin Pietersen, we are not sponsoring the English cricket team. If 
we were sponsoring the English cricket team I may well feel very different 
about it" - Alan Mace, general marketing manager

The PR expert "Thank God we have backed one of the few with talent, and the 
only problem was that every hook shot he got out he didn't wear our watches" - 
MB

TIGI Bed head hair gel

The sponsor: "We share the nation's disappointment in the Ashes defeat though 
as Kevin Pietersen's proud official haircare provider we wonder if there is a 
connection between his clean-shaven hair style and performance" - spokeswoman

The PR expert "That demonstrates someone is feeling fairly smug that they have 
backed one of the winners" - MB

Marston's ale

The sponsor: "We were very disappointed with the result and by the way that 
they were beaten. But we are not just a sponsor. We call ourselves a supporter 
of the England team and take the good times with the bad times" - Peter 
Jackson, director of marketing

The PR expert: "At times like these it's always good to be looking at the 
bottom of the glass. The junior that suggested sponsoring the Barmy Army will 
get an immediate promotion" - MB

Barclays Capital 

The sponsor: "Obviously we are disappointed that the team didn't do better but 
in the longer term it doesn't affect our relationship with Freddie [Andrew 
Flintoff]. Obviously a positive result is a more upbeat message but you have to 
take the rough with the smooth and clients understand that" - Peter Jackson, 
director of marketing

The PR expert: "At least we had a good time with our corporate clients out in 
Australia" - MB

Woodworm 

The sponsor: "We sponsor individuals within the team and my view is that it's 
these individual's performances that matter. In this series Kevin [Pietersen] 
averaged 54 and had the whole world talking about his prowess. This result has 
no effect on our sponsorship" - Joe Sillett, chief executive of Woodworm

The PR expert:"Between the lines, it is that old saying: it is a poor workman 
that blames his tools" - MB

Volkswagen 

The sponsor: "We were disappointed but we are pretty pragmatic and rational. 
But we will continue to sponsor them and take a view at the end of the year. I 
am sure the team will take a long, hard look at themselves. But they have got 
both the players and the structure to turn it around" - Spokesman

The PR expert: "Basically, we are a German company and we are still trying to 
understand the rules of cricket, and we are not quite sure if they have lost 
yet" - MB

Toyota 

The sponsor: "If it is in connection with the team being abroad that is not 
really to do with us because we have advertising on the home games not away 
matches" - David Crouch, press officer

The PR expert "Did we sponsor them?" - MB

Interviews: Alexi Mostrous and Dan Bell
 