
Independent films show up occasionally on the radar of Academy voters, earning 
wild-card nominations that are rarely converted into statuettes. In the 2009 
awards,Frozen River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/17/frozen-river-film-review>, a US 
drama about people-smuggling, was one such movie. Though it earned a best 
screenplay nomination for its writer-directorCourtney Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/12/courtney-hunt-paper-moon-ryan-tatum-oneal>
 and one for best actress for its star,Melissa Leo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2011/feb/06/melissa-leo-fighter-oscars>
, there was important work done in the film also by the NativeAmerican actor 
Misty Upham, who has been found dead at the age of 32 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/18/misty-upham-body-identified-ravine-seattle-suburb>
. This was recognised when she received a best supporting actress nomination in 
the Independent Spirit awards.

Upham played Lila Littlewolf, who accompanies Ray (Leo), a penniless single 
mother, in ferrying migrants into the US. Their runs involve evading the police 
and crossing the frozen St Lawrence river. Tension in the picture was not 
limited to those treacherous expeditions: the fraught relationship between Ray 
and Lila, which thaws only gradually, was expertly investigated by both actors. 
Leo’s prickly demeanour and brassy appearance (tattooed toes, hurricane hair) 
were complemented by Upham’s taciturn stillness and stoicism. Lila’s past is 
the stuff of melodrama: her husband drowned on a previous run; their infant son 
was then snatched by her mother-in-law. But the actor played every scene 
straight, truthful and unfussy, without pleas for the audience’s pity or 
sympathy.

Daughter of Charles and Mona Upham, she was born in Browning, Montana, on the 
Blackfeet Reservation, which borders Alberta, Canada. She lived there until the 
age of four, when she moved to Billings, in the same state, so that her father 
could attend Montana State University. Eventually the family returned to 
Browning. “I come from one of the poorest families on the Blackfeet 
Reservation,” she said. “There was lots of violence, and I felt doomed there.” 
She spoke in interviews of having harboured suicidal and depressive feelings at 
an early age; she was later diagnosed with bipolar disorder.

At 12, she decided she wanted to act, and persuaded her father to take her to 
drama workshops in Seattle. “I needed to lose the reservation,” she said. “I 
needed to leave. My idea was to go to the nearest city and go to the first 
theatre I could find. I would watch movies, take breaks, and eat. At 13, 
I stopped being suicidal, and I found something to live for.”

After an appearance in a theatrical showcase in Seattle, Upham landed an agent 
and a series of parts in films pertaining to Native American life, including 
Skins (2002) and Expiration Date (2006), and the TV movies Skinwalkers (2002) 
and Dreamkeeper (2003). She also appeared in the 2002 revival of the British 
television series Auf Wiedersehen, Pet, as part of a plotline about the
Middlesbrough transporter bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/the-northerner/2011/oct/17/middlesbrough-transporter-bridge-nikolaus-pevsner-cleveland>
 being dismantled, and reconstructed on a Native American reservation. She took 
menial jobs between roles, sometimes earning so little that she had to live in 
her car. Then in 2006 she received a call from Hunt, asking her to star in a 
short for which she would be paid expenses only. This was a more modest version 
of Frozen River that Hunt expanded into a feature two years later, with Upham 
reprising her role.

Frozen River brought Upham new-found attention, but parts were still fairly 
sparse. In 2010, she starred in two episodes of the acclaimed HBO series Big 
Love, about a Mormon family in Utah, and in the drama The Dry Land, which also 
featured her Frozen River co-star Leo. She was seen briefly as a bar-owner in 
Quentin Tarantino’s violent westernDjango Unchained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/django-unchained> (2012).

She then appeared, in a larger role, in Arnaud Desplechin’s 
Jimmy P: Psychotherapy of a Plains Indian (2013), about the friendship between 
a Blackfoot Native American man (Benicio del Toro) and his therapist (Mathieu 
Amalric) in postwar Montana. Promoting Desplechin’s movie at the Cannes film 
festival, Upham reflected on this return to the subject of her own background. 
“I had no dreams and no way to make a dream. I had to leave the reservation. So 
18 years later … [I am] coming full circle to the reservation I left to fulfil 
my dream.”

She was part of the starry ensemble cast in the 2013 screen adaptation of 
Tracy Letts’s hit playAugust: Osage County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/23/august-osage-county-review>. 
Upham played a careworker for a fearsome, dying matriarch (Meryl Streep) who 
presides over a fractured family (including Julia Roberts, Juliette Lewis and 
Benedict Cumberbatch). One of her last performances was in a small role in the
blackly comic drama Cake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/10/cake-review-jennifer-aniston-toronto-film-festival>
, starring Jennifer Aniston as a woman coping with chronic pain, which 
premiered recently at the Toronto film festival.

She is survived by her parents, a brother, Christopher, and sister, Amanda.

• Misty Anne Upham, born 6 July 1982; found dead 16 October 2014
 