
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology has released a long-awaited review 
of its involvement in the prosecution of Aaron Swartz, who was facing charges 
for hacking into the university's computers when hekilled himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/12/aaron-swartz-hacking-reddit-dies>
 in January.

The 182-page report 
<http://swartz-report.mit.edu/docs/report-to-the-president.pdf> finds that 
school officials did not request federal prosecution of Swartz, and that MIT 
was not consulted about the charges or punishment, but it also questions the 
school's decision not to intervene in court proceedings.

Swartz had been federally indicted on 13 felony charges at the time of his 
death and was facing up to $1m in fines and 35 years in jail for downloading 
several million academic articles from the JSTOR database through the MIT 
computer network. The aggressive prosecution wasroundly criticized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/13/aaron-swartz-family-mit-government>
 following his death.

"I am confident that MIT's decisions were reasonable, appropriate and made in 
good faith," said MIT president L Rafael Reif in astatement 
<http://swartz-report.mit.edu/docs/letter-from-president-reif.pdf> (pdf). He 
said the report also makes clear that the school did not "target" Swartz.

According to the report, MIT administrators did not know Swartz was the person 
who had hacked into their networks until his arrest on 6 January 2011. The 
school also did not intend to "call in the feds" to take over the 
investigation, saying the presence of a secret service agent at his arrest was 
not their intention, "but a recognized possibility," when they alerted 
authorities that its network was compromised.

The school said it did not request a criminal prosecution be brought against 
Swartz and adopted a neutral position early in the prosecution. Though they 
issued no public statements, "MIT did inform the prosecution that it was not 
seeking punishment for Swartz, and it did inform the defense that it was not 
seeking any civil remedy from him."

"MIT took the position that US v Swartz was simply a lawsuit to which it was 
not a party, although it did inform the US attorney's office that the 
prosecution should not be under the impression that MIT wanted jail time for
Aaron Swartz <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz>. MIT did not 
say it was actually opposed to jail time," the report said.

According to the report, prior to his death, "the MIT community paid scant 
attention" to Swartz's prosecution and few people expressed concerns to the 
administration about the case. However, Swartz's father, a consultant to the 
MIT lab and former student there, asked MIT to aid efforts to have the charges 
dropped or to get a plea deal that would not have jail time. Two faculty 
members advocated a similar appeal.

In choosing the position of neutrality, the report says the school did not 
consider Swartz's contributions to internet technology and was not critical 
enough of the US government's "overtly aggressive prosecution." MIT also did 
not account for Swartz's prosecution under theComputer Fraud and Abuse Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/mar/20/computer-fraud-abuse-act-law-technology>
, which the report called " a poorly drafted and questionable criminal law." 
That lawhas been widely criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/24/hacking-us-government-cyber-crackdown>
 since Swartz's death.

"MIT's position may have been prudent, but it did not duly take into account 
the wider background of information policy against which the prosecution played 
out and in which MIT people have traditionally been passionate leaders," it 
concludes.

Reif asked computer science professor Hal Abelson to lead a review the 
school's involvement in his prosecution in January with assistance from other 
members of the MIT staff. The group consulted 10,000 documents and conducted 
interviews with 50 people to assess the school's involvement in the case.

"Only Swartz knows why he committed suicide," the report said. "However, for 
the final 24 months of his life, he was the subject of a vigorous investigation 
and prosecution by the US Department of Justice, with an indictment and then a 
superseding indictment that could have resulted in years in prison."
 