
Australia have revealed that their fast bowler Mitchell Starc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mitchell-starc> has been struggling with a 
right-ankle condition for which he needed cortisone injections during the tour 
of England.

The 25-year-old from New South Wales, who was a near ever-present during the 
Ashes Tests and one-day series, missedthe fourth ODI at Headingley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/australia-ease-past-england-to-clinch-series-after-eoin-morgan-injury>
, which England won by three wickets.

It has now been confirmed that bone spurs caused fresh inflammation to Starc’s 
ankle, thoughCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia said 
surgical intervention was not called for.

A statement read: “Mitchell has a chronic right ankle condition that has 
required arthroscopic surgery twice during his career. It is an injury that the 
Cricket Australia medical team, coaches and Mitchell have become accustomed to 
managing for some time.

Australia’s Mitchell Starc warns England: ‘Short stuff will be on menu’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/27/australia-mitchell-starc-warns-england-short-stuff>
“During the recent Ashes Test and ODI series in the UK there have been times 
when Mitchell has struggled and required cortisone injections to treat the 
inflammation within the joint.

“As part of his management, we have had regular MRI scans that have confirmed 
the presence of some bone spurs that cause the inflamed joint.

“Pleasingly, the most recent scan did not show any significant deterioration 
despite the heavy playing schedule in the past 12 months, and he has generally 
coped OK. We have also had specialist surgical opinion, and advice so far is 
that surgery is not required at the moment.

“It is also pleasing that until he missed the fourth ODI against England 
recently, Mitchell has been able to play every T20, ODI and Test for Australia 
in 2015 [25 games in total] and has not missed a game due to injury in the past 
18 months.”

After winning the ODI series 3-2, Australia’s attention has turned to a 
two-Test series with Bangladesh, with the first of them taking place in 
Chittagong on 9 October.

Starc, who forced the England one-day captain Eoin Morgan to retire hurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/steve-smith-reminded-of-phillip-hughes-death-by-eoin-morgan-incident>
 after being hit on the helmet in the final ODI, has not been ruled out yet, 
with Cricket Australia adding: “Our plan is to continue to manage Mitchell and 
monitor how his ankle responds.

“While surgery has been discussed, like most other situations, it is a last 
resort, particularly as it will involve a lengthy lay-off from playing 
[three-five months].

“Mitchell has had similar surgery in the past and understands the amount of 
time and effort that is required to return to playing at his best. We will be 
guided by the surgeon on the need for surgery but are hopeful that will not be 
necessary in the short term.”
 