
Where as the Divisional Series round only began in earnest in 1995, the 
Championship Series round began in 1969, so there’s considerably more history 
here to plow through. These six, three from each league, will only scratch the 
surface, so please, make yourself at home, and feel free to mention some of 
your favorites below the line.

Ozzie Smith, 1985
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnVVAf_fY5a0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnVVAf_fY5a0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnVVAf_fY5a0&media=>
What, you think the St Louis Cardinals just started torturing the Los Angeles 
Dodgers? Not by a long shot. In 1985, The NLCS was tied at two games a piece at 
Busch Stadium in St Louis. The score was also tied at two in the bottom of the 
ninth, andDodgers reliever Tom Niedenfuer was on the hill 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2010/oct/10/sports/la-sp-crowe-20101011>, set to 
face switch-hitting future hall-of-fame shortstop Ozzie Smith, not exactly a 
power threat, and certainly not from the left side. In the 3,009 at-bats prior, 
Smith had hit a grand total of zero home runs as a lefty. Then came a 2-2 
fastball that The Wizard pulled and drove off the facade and onto their old 
astroturf. Joe Buck famously cried “Go crazy!”, and fans of the Redbirds were 
only too happy to oblige. Two days later,Jack Clark came to bat in the top of 
the ninth inning 
<http://miscbaseball.wordpress.com/2013/10/11/the-cardinals-and-dodgers-in-the-1985-nlcs/>
 at Dodger Stadium and also crushed a Niedenfuer offering, this time it was a 
three-run blast that basically ended the Dodgers season. Yup, very Cardinal-ish.

The Bartman play, 2003
Your browser does not support iframes. 
The Chicago Cubs haven’t won a World Series since 1908 and haven’t played in 
one since 1945 
<http://www.csnchicago.com/cubs/what-will-it-be-when-cubs-finally-win-world-series>
. But in 2003, they were going, really, they were. In Game 6 of the NLCS, they 
were four outs away from an elusive trip to the Fall Classic, holding a 3-0 
lead over the Florida Marlins in the eighth inning. Chicago starter Mark Prior 
was on cruise control, pitching with a runner on second before a high fly ball 
off the bat of Luis Castillo headed towards the stands in left field. Moises 
Alou was in pursuit, and looked to be under itbefore the hand of Steve Bartman 
interfered with the ball, 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/14/sports/baseball/10-years-later-a-cubs-fan-remains-invisible.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
 preventing Alou from a shot at the second out of the inning. The crowd roared 
in disappointment and the city followed, especially after it became the first 
of a series of disastrous moments that led to an eight-run eighth inning. 
Bartman needed police protection, the then Florida governor offered him asylum 
in Florida,the ball was blown up as a publicity stunt 
<http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/sports/baseball/nl/cubs/2004-02-26-bartman-ball-destroyed_x.htm>
 and a life-long Cubbies fan became part of the wretched post-season lore of 
the lowly Chicago Cubs. And in truth, Alex Gonzalez’s flubbing a would-be 
double play ball a few batters later was a much, much bigger factor, but no one 
cared because Bartman was an easier target as the villain. The Cubs lost Game 
7, and haven’t won a postseason game since.

Cabrera connects, 1992
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFgjIVvEQo_o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFgjIVvEQo_o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFgjIVvEQo_o&media=>
Francisco Cabrera (who?) had just 10 at-bats the entire 1992 season, but in 
the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 7, he was facing Stan Belinda with the 
season on the line. His Atlanta Braves were trailing the Pittsburgh Pirates, 
2-1 with David Justice at third and Sid Bream at second. Cabrera slapped a base 
hit to left field, Justice came home and then the lead-footed Bream tried to 
score from third. Barry Bonds’ throw was late andBream beat the tag from Buccos 
catcher Mike Lavalliere, sliding into the postseason history book along with 
Cabrera <http://m.braves.mlb.com/news/article/33033816/>. It was the third 
straight NLCS the Pirates would lose, and the team wouldn’t finish with a 
winning record for another 20 years.

Aaron Boone, 2003
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCLY16wmHdUk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCLY16wmHdUk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCLY16wmHdUk&media=>
Or as he is known in Boston, Aaron f*&%ing Boone 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/ten-years-alcs-hero-boone-embracing-yankee-moment-article-1.1486855>
. In 2003, the Curse of the Bambino was alive and well, with the Red Sox still 
looking for their first World Series title since 1918. In Game 7 of the ALDS, 
the New York Yankees were down two runs in the eighth inning but threatening. 
Then Sox manager Grady Little succumbed to aJedi mind trick from a fading Pedro 
Martinez 
<http://larrybrownsports.com/baseball/pedro-martinez-defends-grady-littles-decision-to-leave-him-in-game-7/60161>
, and the skipper allowed him stay in the game. The Yanks tied it up 5-5, and a 
moment that should have never happened, happened in the 11th. Boone took Tim 
Wakefield deep to left, and the curse continued for one more long season.

That bloody sock, 2004
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlwjJg3vmM_Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlwjJg3vmM_Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlwjJg3vmM_Y&media=>
Curt Schilling got shelled a year later in Game 1 of the 2004 ALDS as the 
sheath around his right ankle tendon, that’s the ankle he used to push off the 
pitching rubber, had torn. It seemed unlikely the he would take another turn, 
but modern science intervened on the Red Sox’s behalf –Red Sox doc Bill Morgan 
“sutured the ankle skin to some of the tendon tissue 
<http://sports.espn.go.com/mlb/news/story?id=2849980> to try to keep everything 
in place.” In Game 6 at Yankee Stadium, with the Sox trying to extend the 
series yet again after going down 3-0 in the series, Schilling pitched seven 
innings and allowed just a single run, all while doing his best impersonation 
of The Natural and blood running through his sock. Schilling would be forced to 
deny rumors that the blood was actually ketchup andeventually auctioned it off 
for $92,613 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2013/02/24/curt-schilling-bloody-sock-sells-at-auction/1942457/>
. Boston won the game 4-2 and would make history by coming back to beat New 
York in the series before winning their first World Series since the Wilson 
administration.

Jeffry Maier, 1996
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYVNlvnsQ828&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYVNlvnsQ828>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYVNlvnsQ828&media=>
I know, I know – all the AL moments involve the Yankees. What can you do? 
They’re in it … a lot. In 1996 they were facing the Baltimore Orioles in Game 1 
of the ALCS and down a run in the eighth inning. Derek Jeter stepped to the 
plate and drove an Armando Benitez pitch deep to right field. Tony Tarasco went 
back for the ball and seemed to have a beat on it, except that it never came 
down. That’s because12-year-old Jeffrey Maeir reached out over the wall and 
pulled the ball in 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2014/04/jeffrey-maier-derek-jeter-new-york-yankees>. 
Left field umpire Rich Garcia called it a home run and the Orioles went crazy. 
Benitez ran out to right field to protest as Tarasco feverishly campaigned to 
Garcia along with O’s manager Davey Johnson, all to no avail. The “home run” 
turned Maier into a celebrity and tied the game, opening up the door for Bernie 
Williams to hit an 11th inning walk-off homer. Baltimore never recovered, 
losing the series 4-1, return the next season before suffering through a15-year 
postseason drought. Had the play happened today, instant replay would have 
overturned the call and Maeir would have have likely been ejected from the 
ballpark.
 