
We are close, very close, to another long regular season and all of its 
statistics being signed, sealed and enshrined inside the warm and cozy web 
pages ofbaseball-reference.com <http://www.baseball-reference.com/>, for all of 
us to stare at forever and ever and ever. Still, there are games to be played 
and playoff spots to be filled, so if it’s OK with you, let’s take a little 
spin around Major League Baseball to see where we are at this late stage. When 
I’m through I’ll provide a post-season schedule, just to wet your whistle a bit.

American League

The Baltimore Orioles have had the AL East in the bag for a while 
<http://m.mlb.com/news/article/95902366/orioles-clinch-home-field-in-alds-despite-loss>
. Just in case anyone was wondering, their all-knowing manger (that’s not 
sarcasm, that’s just the truth), Buck Showalter, decided to let the world know
who would be starting in Baltimore for game one of their AL Divisional Series 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/11572663/buck-showalter-says-baltimore-orioles-use-four-man-rotation-alds>
, a full nine days ahead of first pitch. Chris Tillman will get the ball 
against the mighty TBDs as the O’s try to take a team without three major 
offensive cogs (Chris Davis, Matt Wieters and Manny Machado), and one huge one (
Nelson Cruz and his 40 homers 
<http://www.sbnation.com/mlb/2014/9/23/6836823/nelson-cruz-40-home-runs-orioles>
) to the next stage.

I don’t think it really matters, but that could be the earliest a manager has 
ever announced who would take the ball to open the playoffs, although I have 
absolutely no data to support such a carefully worded claim. It does make me 
wonder if he’ll announce his2015 opening day starter 
<http://baltimore.orioles.mlb.com/schedule/sortable.jsp?c_id=bal&year=2015> 
over the next few weeks.
Orioles on MASN (@masnOrioles) 
VIDEO: Buck Showalter has named his starter for at Game 1 of the ALDS! Here's 
why he chose Tillman:http://t.co/D6izBgwGuR <http://t.co/D6izBgwGuR> 
#IBackTheBirds <https://twitter.com/hashtag/IBackTheBirds?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/masnOrioles/status/514551547054006272> September 23, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/masnOrioles/status/514551547054006272> 
As we move west, the playoff picture becomes a little bit of a frosty mug. 
Right nowthe Tigers are battling the Kansas City Royals 
<http://deadspin.com/angry-royals-fan-baby-mean-mugs-tigers-fan-gives-her-t-1637709635>
 for AL Central supremacy and thus the right to avoid the dreaded one-game, win 
and move on wild-card round. Desperate to win a fourth consecutive divisional 
crown, the Tigers have failed to live up to their billing over the course of 
the regular season.

Actually, considering just how bad their bullpen is, the Tigers are lucky to 
be where they are – Detroit relievers have the13th worst ERA in the AL 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/stats/team/_/stat/pitching/split/128/league/al>. It 
sure does seem hard to win with a bad bullpen these days but having said that, 
the Tigers seem to find a way. Last season, they took a pen that ranked 12th 
all the way to the ALCS. One big difference this time around, however – in 2013 
their starters had the best ERA in the league, this year, they rank 10th. That 
may have something to do withJustin Verlander’s Hollywood beau 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2014/09/02/justin-verlander-kate-upton-leaked-nude-photos/14985489/>
 but again, I have no data to support such a carefully worded claim. Detroit 
have five games left, all in Motown, against the Chicago White Sox and the 
Minnesota Twins.

Right now the Royals, who were outspent by their division rivals by about $90m 
<http://www.gammonsdaily.com/2014-mlb-opening-day-payrolls/> this season, have 
their own issues, one of which is a lack of power, being dead last in the AL in 
home runs. Despite being a punchless bunch, KCtrail Detroit in the standings by 
a single game 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_09_23_chamlb_detmlb_1&mode=recap_home&c_id=det>
, well within reach with five games to play, all on the road against the 
Cleveland Indians and the White Sox. If the two teams tie, they will play a 
163rd regular-season game to decide the division title.

Now, the team that does not win the AL Central doesn’t just pack up and go 
home. On the contrary, there’s that potential safety net of a wild-card place 
for two teams with the best records amongst non-division winning teams. Right 
now those two teams are the Royals andthe Oakland Athletics 
<http://blog.sfgate.com/athletics/2014/09/22/as-top-angels-8-4-magic-number-4/>
, with Robinson Cano’s Seattle Mariners still alive, albeit on life-support.

Seattle trail the Royals and the A’s, who are tied for the first and second 
slots, by three games with five to go, two in Toronto against the Blue Jays, 
and three against the 2014 AL West champs, the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, 
who happen to have the best record in all of baseball. This means that in order 
for the M’s, whose surprise success this season came well ahead of schedule, to 
make the playoffs, Kansas City, Detroit or Oakland are going to have to go into 
a serious stall. Oakland have already had their implosion, posting a dismal 
14-26 record from 10 August,but should hang on to a postseason place 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2014/09/23/jeff-samardzija-pitches-as-past-angels-8-4/16087331/>
, with some thanks going to the Mariners current four-game losing streak, one 
that includeda royal flop from ace Felix Hernandez on Tuesday. 
<http://scores.espn.go.com/mlb/recap?gameId=340923114> That’s good news for one 
A’s fan:
MLB Fan Cave (@MLBFanCave) 
A young @Athletics <https://twitter.com/Athletics> fan wrote a letter to Billy 
Beane asking for a win on his birthday:http://t.co/e4KSsoKa8s 
<http://t.co/e4KSsoKa8s> pic.twitter.com/yLDBWLVmnh <http://t.co/yLDBWLVmnh>
 <https://twitter.com/MLBFanCave/status/514579479935844352> September 24, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/MLBFanCave/status/514579479935844352> 
Harrison Gomes’ arch enemies, The AL West-winning Angeles Angels of Los, are 
simply trying to get healthy as the season winds down. Manager Mike Scioscia 
may have one-time slugger Josh Hamilton back in time for the postseason, should 
he heal from rib inflammation (if they even need him 
<http://halohangout.com/2014/09/21/hamilton-roster/>); same goes for starting 
pitcher Matt Shoemaker, who has carried the team down the stretch and is
recovering from a mild left rib-cage strain 
<http://espn.go.com/los-angeles/mlb/story/_/id/11573845/los-angels-angels-hopeful-matt-shoemaker-go-playoffs>
, not to mention his rookie hazing role as a Saudi oil tycoon.
Matt Young (@mjoven1975) 
@senecal_debbie <https://twitter.com/senecal_debbie> @KyleShowalter 
<https://twitter.com/KyleShowalter> I said that the rookie hazing of Matt 
Shoemaker was inappropriate.pic.twitter.com/ij1E0Aqg8U <http://t.co/ij1E0Aqg8U>
 <https://twitter.com/mjoven1975/status/513892240331010048> September 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/mjoven1975/status/513892240331010048> 
Here’s how the AL playoff lineup would look if the season ended today:

AL wild-card, one game

Kansas City @ Oakland, 30 September

ALDS, best of five

Detroit @ Baltimore, starting 2 October

Winner of wild-card game @ Los Angeles, 2 October

National League Update


The NL is simple and easy.

Washington coasted to a second Eastern Division title in three seasons 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/nationals/for-some-washington-nationals-first-time-in-playoffs-feels-like-a-charm/2014/09/23/3356861e-429a-11e4-b437-1a7368204804_story.html>
 in what is the dullest pod in all of baseball. Despite the 76 games they 
played against sub-par competition, the Nationals are looking like favorites to 
reach the Fall Classic, which is kind of stunning when you recall their 
roller-coaster ride through these last two seasons. St Louis, the team that
shocked DC in the NLDS two seasons ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/oct/13/st-louis-cardinals-washington-nationals-nlds-game-5-live>
, enjoyed a steady ride up the NL Central Division standings to a familiar 
position, first, a place they hold ahead of the hottest team in baseball. The 
Pittsburgh Pirates havewon 15 of their last 18 games 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/2208998-in-season-full-of-doubts-pittsburgh-pirates-found-a-way-to-win-games>
, which is not a bad way to enter the postseason for the second straight 
season. The question now is, will they head to the playoffs as a NL wild-card 
team, or as Central champs? The Buccos are now just 1.5 games behind the 
Cardinals, with five games to play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Fmlb-playoff-picture-derek-jeter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411528525133%2F9a65272f-6c12-4f2c-aa42-91e7a556dbbb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MLB%3A%20a%20frosty%20mug%20of%20a%20playoff%20picture%2C%20and%20New%20York%20hosts%20a%20Jeter-palooza%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Fmlb-playoff-picture-derek-jeter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MLB%3A%20a%20frosty%20mug%20of%20a%20playoff%20picture%2C%20and%20New%20York%20hosts%20a%20Jeter-palooza%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Fmlb-playoff-picture-derek-jeter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411528525133%2F9a65272f-6c12-4f2c-aa42-91e7a556dbbb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Justin Wilson of the Pittsburgh Pirates and his team-mates celebrate clinching 
a National League playoff spot. Photograph: Kevin C Cox/Getty Images 
Pittsburgh finish with trips to see the messy Atlanta Braves (see below) and 
Cincinnati Reds, while the Redbirds have just four games remaining, facing the 
Cubs in Chicago before heading to Arizona, where they could potentially 
celebrate a division title in their pool, just as the Dodgersinfamously did a 
season ago <http://m.mlb.com/news/article/61134528/>. Meanwhile, the Milwaukee 
Brewers, who had a 93% chance of reaching the playoffs as late as 26 August, 
are on the verge ofcrashing out of the 2014 season after a disastrous 7-19 
stretch <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/MIL/2014-schedule-scores.shtml>
.

In the West, the Dodgers never seem to do anything easily, but they won’t get 
a whole lot of sympathy with a payroll over $200m. It looks as though they will 
hold off their rivals to the north, the San Francisco Giants, for another 
division title. Heading into the playoffs, the focus will be on Clayton 
Kershaw, whoseems a decent shot to win the NL MVP and Cy Young Award 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/fancy-stats/wp/2014/09/23/clayton-kershaw-deserves-to-be-mvp/>
 after another near-perfect season, but lost twice in the NLCS to the Cardinals 
last season. Yasiel Puig will also get his share of attention, just as the 
enigmatic Cuban received on Monday night for his latest outfield gun show.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
A thing of beauty and a joy forever to be blessed with an arm like that …

… said Dodgers broadcaster Vin Scully after watching Puig keep the score tied 
at two versus the Giants with his run-saving throw. San Francisco eventually 
won the game, which was intense, and that made you wonder how fun it would be 
for these two teams to meet in the NLCS, which is a possible playoff scenario. 
The Giants, whothis week brutally lost their starting center fielder, Angel 
Pagan 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/story/_/id/11578238/san-francisco-giants-angel-pagan-needs-back-surgery-playoffs>
, for the season, to back surgery, have a mathematical chance at overtaking LA, 
but more likely will be fighting for home-field advantage in the NL wild-card 
game.

So, if the season ended today, what would the NL playoff match-ups be?

NL wild card, one game

San Francisco vs Pittsburgh, site TBD, 1 October 
NLDS, best of five series

St Louis @ Los Angeles, 3 October

Winner of wild-card game @ Washington, 3 October

Jeter-palooza

The Yankees may be facing back-to-back playoff-less seasons for the first time 
since 1992 and 1993, but the impending retirement of Derek Jeter has served as 
a suitable and lucrative distraction, covering up what has been a brutal season 
in the Bronx. The final few games in Yankee Stadium III have served as a 
celebratory backdrop to aJeter-fest of epic proportions 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/bondy-uniform-tough-captain-sail-article-1.1949096>
. Here’s a summary of recent events/coverage:

A Gatorade commercial that is absolutely everywhere 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/cmo/2014/09/23/viral-video-of-the-week-a-gatorade-send-off-for-derek-jeter/>
:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxfgS1lvqX8I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxfgS1lvqX8I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxfgS1lvqX8I&media=>
Reports ranging from how many swings Jeter took 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014/09/14/sports/baseball/jeter-swings.html?_r=0>
 in his career, to how hisNo2 jersey is the all-time leader in sales 
<http://espn.go.com/new-york/mlb/story/_/id/11576562/derek-jeter-new-york-yankees-jersey-top-selling-baseball-jersey-all>
, to his receiving theCommissioner’s Historic Achievement Award 
<http://espn.go.com/new-york/mlb/story/_/id/11577594/bud-selig-mlb-honor-new-york-yankees-derek-jeter-commissioner-historic-achievement-award-donation>
 – which I have never, ever heard of until this week – are packing publications 
which can’t get enough of the guy.

Somewhat amazingly – and if you’ve been watching absolutely anything negative 
slide off Jeter for 20 years, it is indeed amazing – there has also been some 
negative coverage of the shortstop.

The New York Post featured a piece called Hypocritical Jeter always – somehow 
– comes out on top 
<http://nypost.com/2014/09/22/hypocritical-jeter-always-somehow-comes-out-on-top/>
, which features coverage of an event at a New York theatre where attendees 
paid a four-figure sum to watch the Yankee captain on stage with Yankees 
memorabilia dealer Brandon Steiner, who is reportedly selling a pair of his 
game-worn socks … no, excuse me, a game-worn sock,for $409 
<http://www.si.com/extra-mustard/2014/09/23/new-york-yankees-derek-jeter-game-used-sock>
. Over at the SNY TV Network, which is partially owned by the crosstown Mets, 
there was a diatribe from from Chris Carlin, who co-hosts a show called 
Loudmouths.

Your browser does not support iframes. 
Then ESPN’s Keith Olbermann got in on the action: 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D__UJ9VZB508&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D__UJ9VZB508>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D__UJ9VZB508&media=>
Back to print: New York magazine was given rare access to Jeter 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2014/09/derek-jeter-private-photos.html>, 
providing a tiny glimpse of his personal life, illustrating once again just how 
well Jeter has been able to control the message throughout a 20-year 
Hall-of-Fame career, during which he became one of the most adored players the 
sport has ever known.

The most interesting portion of the New York piece was by far the denial Jeter 
issued regarding one of the most amusing off-field stories of his career. After 
long ignoring the2011 New York Post story 
<http://nypost.com/2011/12/13/jeter-gives-autograph-swag-to-one-night-stands/> 
which accused the shortstop of providing autographed baseball memorabilia to 
women he sleeps with, Jeter finally said this week:


Like I’m giving them signed baseballs and pictures of myself on the way out! 
Who comes up with a story like that?’ He laughs, incredulous. ‘It said the 
reason people found out was because I gave the same girl the same basket and I 
had forgotten I’d given her one – like there are so many people coming 
through I forgot!

That lead to what is by far my favorite headline of the week, courtesy of 
Foxsports.com 
<http://www.foxsports.com/buzzer/story/derek-jeter-gift-baskets-092214>:

Yankees’ Jeter denies giving gift baskets to women

Now, the Jeter who won the five World Series titles, had the 3,000+ hits, the 
14 All-Star Games, and of course, had all those “intangibles” that covered up 
his below-average fielding (Cal Ripken Jr 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/r/ripkeca01.shtml> moved to third 
base from shortstop at age 36 after a defensive season that was better than any 
of Jeter’s during the prime of his career, yet Jeter somehow stayed at the 
position for two decades), suits up for two final games at Yankee Stadium on 
Wednesday and Thursday beforepossibly finishing his career at Boston’s Fenway 
Park. 
<http://www.nj.com/yankees/index.ssf/2014/09/will_yankees_derek_jeter_play_in_boston_joe_girardi_wont_make_promises.html>

A Brave changes

The Atlanta Braves are used to playing in October, but this year it will be 
spent rebuilding a franchise that has suffered two major collapses in four 
seasons. The Bravosfired their general manager, Frank Wren, on Monday, 
<http://www.sbnation.com/mlb/2014/9/22/6827129/frank-wren-fired-braves-playoff-collapse>
 after his ballclub bottomed out in 2014. The latest Atlanta collapse follows 
the 2011 crash that saw the team blow a 10.5 game, late-August lead 
<http://bleacherreport.com/articles/876307-atlanta-braves-and-the-greatest-collapse-in-the-history-of-baseball-sort-of>
 to the Cardinals. This time around the drop included a 4-16 stretch that shook 
the franchise out of contention and on to a major crossroads, with former 
Indians and Rangers GM John Hart taking over on an interim basis while they 
decide who will become just the third executive to assume the role since John 
Schurholz was hired in 1990. Schurholz, the current Braves president, has
reportedly offered Hart the job full-time 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/sources--braves-offer-john-hart-full-time-gm-job-012722315.html>
 should he wish to leave his current position as an MLB Network analyst.

Atlanta suffered major pitching injuries before the 2014 season began, but 
moves during Wren’s reign, including the signings of busts BJ Upton and Dan 
Uggla 
<http://markbradley.blog.ajc.com/2014/09/22/in-the-end-even-this-wren-defender-has-no-objection/>
, backfired and made he and his team vulnerable. The Braves are on the verge of 
finishing with a losing record for just the second time in 24 seasons.

DeGreat?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Fmlb-playoff-picture-derek-jeter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411536237015%2Fc91dd6fd-9c56-4ebe-81f6-fc3300e18c0c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MLB%3A%20a%20frosty%20mug%20of%20a%20playoff%20picture%2C%20and%20New%20York%20hosts%20a%20Jeter-palooza%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Fmlb-playoff-picture-derek-jeter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MLB%3A%20a%20frosty%20mug%20of%20a%20playoff%20picture%2C%20and%20New%20York%20hosts%20a%20Jeter-palooza%20%7C%20David%20Lengel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Fmlb-playoff-picture-derek-jeter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411536237015%2Fc91dd6fd-9c56-4ebe-81f6-fc3300e18c0c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Jacob deGrom has become the New York Mets ace in 2014. Photograph: Anthony 
Gruppuso/USA Today Sports 
Most New York Mets fans believe Matt Harvey, who did not pitch 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24711119/mets-matt-harvey-hits-95-mph-in-final-bullpen-session>
 in 2014 after undergoing Tommy John surgery in the offseason, will be their 
franchise pillar for many years to come. Now, after the elbow injury and the 
unexpectedemergence of Jacob deGrom 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/d/degroja01.shtml>, that’s a title 
he’ll have to compete for next spring.deGrom was shut down by New York 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24721990/jacob-degrom-reportedly-shut-down-nl-rookie-of-the-year-next>
 this week after the rookie reached his innings limit, finishing 2014 with an 
impressive 2.63 ERA to go along with a 9-6 record and 144 strikeouts in 140 
innings. The 26-year-old ninth-round draft pick isa good bet to beat out Reds 
speedster Billy Hamilton for rookie of the year 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2014/09/23/mlb-awards-jacob-degrom-nl-rookie-of-the-year/16110115/>
, making 22 starts after debuting in mid-May as an injury fill-in, tying a MLB 
record along the way by striking out eight consecutive batters to start a game 
on 15 September against Miami.

Meanwhile, Mets GM Sandy Alderson was re-upped 
<http://espn.go.com/new-york/mlb/story/_/id/11576097/sandy-alderson-new-york-mets-general-manager-gets-contract-extension>
 for three more seasons by controversial owners Fred Wilpon and his son Jeff. 
The duo say the team, one that operates out one of MLB’s biggest markets with a 
payroll in the lower echelon of the 30 MLB clubs, claim there will be“payroll 
flexibility” 
<http://www.nj.com/mets/index.ssf/2014/09/mets_have_payroll_flexibility_this_offseason_jeff_wilpon_says.html>
 when it comes to assembling the 2015 Mets, a team miserable fans will expect 
to finally compete after six years of watching their franchise deteriorate.

Click here for the MLB standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/index.jsp?tcid=mm_mlb_standings> and the 2014 
postseason schedule <http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/schedule/ps.jsp?y=14>
 