
The American League and National League Divisional Series, which begin today 
with the Tigers at the Orioles and the Royals at the Angels,have been around 
longer than some might think, <http://www.baseball-reference.com/postseason/> 
and thus, there is a bit more history to wade through. Even still, the biggest 
dramas are usually saved for the later rounds of the playoffs, when the stakes 
rise another notch. However, that doesn’t mean there hasn’t been intriguing 
action over the years in the ALDS and NLDS - here are five moments that caught 
our attention.

Roy Halladay’s no-hitter
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8Ju2p-UrBkc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8Ju2p-UrBkc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8Ju2p-UrBkc&media=>
 Roy Halladay tosses a no-no. 
Roy Halladay had been dominant for most of his 12 seasons 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/h/hallaro01.shtml> as a Toronto Blue 
Jays starter, but had never pitched in a postseason game. Doc signed with the 
Philadelphia Phillies for enormous money and that elusive shot at pitching in 
the playoffs. And the righty got just that, winning 21 games before Game 1 of 
the NLDS vs Cincinnati in 2010, making history in the process. Not since 1956 
andDon Larsen’s famed World Series perfect game 
<http://www.baseball-almanac.com/box-scores/boxscore.php?boxid=195610080nya> 
against the Brooklyn Dodgers had we seen a no-hitter in the postseason – after 
Brandon Phillips was thrown out by catcher Carlos Ruiz, Halladay had etched his 
place in lofty postseason lore.

“The Double”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPoA7raMFPlM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPoA7raMFPlM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPoA7raMFPlM&media=>
 Seattle win their first ever playoff series 
Black Jack McDowell 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/mcdowja01.shtml> had started 30 
games in his only season as a New York Yankees pitcher, but in Game 5 of the 
1995 ALDS he was throwing in relief during the 11th inning. The Seattle 
Mariners were riding a hot streak, having overcome a late-season six-game 
deficit before dramaticallybeating the California Angels in a tie-breaking game 
163 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7tE7wJ3zafs>. The M’s had never won a 
postseason series and were down one after surrendering an 11th-inning run. 
McDowell had come on in relief of a young Mariano Rivera and promptly given up 
two singles to Joey Cora and Ken Griffey Jr. Then Edgar Martinez came to the 
plate, crushing a two-run double that almost imploded the Kingdome. It sent 
Seattle to the ALCS, where they would lose to the Cleveland Indians. The 
Yankees recovered well enough – they fired their manager, Buck Showalter 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1995/10/11/sports/sports-of-the-times-buck-should-fire-george-and-leave.html>
, hired Joe Torre, and, well, the rest is history.

Expos win!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZw1454ALsR4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZw1454ALsR4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZw1454ALsR4&media=>
 The Montreal Expos won their only playoff series, in 1981. 
A strike-shortened 1981 season had produced an unusual regular-season format. 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/leagues/NL/1981-standings.shtml> Each league 
had two divisions, and they spit the season into two halves – the winner of 
each half would meet in the first ever Divisional Series. The Phillies had won 
their first World Series title a season earlier, but the Montreal Expos were 
loaded with young talent and reliable vets. No Canadian team had ever played a 
postseason series, and the match-up went all the way to a decisive Game 5. The 
Phills hadfuture Hall-of-Famer Steve Carlton 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/c/carltst01.shtml> on the mound, but 
Montreal scratched out three runs and Steve Rodgers threw a complete game 
shutout, as Montreal won their only playoff series in Quebec. Somewhat 
amazingly, super Expos fan and a-list actor Donald Sutherlandcelebrated with 
Nos Amours in the clubhouse 
<http://cdn1.bloguin.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/113/2010/08/sutherlandexpos.jpg>
. The ‘Spos came within a whisker of ousting the Los Angeles Dodgers in the 
next round, untilBlue Monday ended their title dreams 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R7UlrLlKg0A>. 

Wild (Mid) west
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKDZX525CSvw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKDZX525CSvw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKDZX525CSvw&media=>
 Rick Ankiel walked the house in the 2000 NLDS. 
Life isn’t all glitz and glamour, and Rick Ankiel will remind you of that 
should you ask. In 2000, Ankiel was a promising young20-year-old phenom 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/a/ankieri01.shtml?redir> who had 
pitched to a 3.50 ERA while striking out 194 batters in 175 innings during his 
first full big-league season. There were some warning signs of what was to come 
– the lefty walked 90 batters during the campaign, and against the Braves in 
Game 1 of the NLDS, his control issues came to a head all at once. He threw no 
fewer thanfive wild pitches 
<http://sports.espn.go.com/espn/page2/story?page=merron/050310&num=0> while 
giving up six, first-inning runs. Ankiel was done by the third inning but the 
Cardinals weren’t, coming all the way back to win the game 7-5, ousting Atlanta 
in the series before losing the NLCS to the New York Mets. Ankiel would pitch 
just 12 more games in MLB, before heading back to the minors to work on his 
hitting stroke and returning as an outfielder.Ankiel retired this before this 
season 
<http://www.sportsonearth.com/article/68796854/rick-ankiel-retired-on-wednesday-look-back-on-his-career>
.

“The Flip”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DApoJk9X7Vto&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DApoJk9X7Vto>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DApoJk9X7Vto&media=>
 Derek Jeter was in the right place in the right time in 2001. 
By now we know that the Oakland A’s are just magnets for postseason torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2014/sep/30/american-league-wild-card-oakland-athletics-vs-kansas-city-royals-live>
. By Game 3 of the 2001 ALDS, the Athletics were up 2-0 in the series, and 
seemingly on their way to a date with the Seattle Mariners. But no.

Down 1-0 in the seventh inning and with Mike Mussina on the mound, Jason Giambi
 <http://steeshes.files.wordpress.com/2013/02/jason-giambi-mustache.jpg> 
reached on a base hit, bringing Terrance Long to the plate with two outs. Long 
hit a ball deep into the roomy corner of Oakland’s Coliseum and Giambi, who was 
in his prime then, if still not fleet of foot, was waived around to try and tie 
the game. Shane Spencer missed every cut-off man on the planet, but Derek Jeter 
found his way to about 15 feet or so from home plate on the foul line, catching 
the ball on a bounce and then flipping it to Jorge Posada, who tagged out 
Giambi who for some reason did not slide. The play is an A-list moment in 
Yankees andJeter highlight reels 
<http://m.mlb.com/news/article/79619840/flip-play-in-oakland-iconic-moment-in-derek-jeters-career>
, and just another of disaster in a series of harrowing postseason events that 
have haunted general manager Billy Beane and his A’s.

MLB postseason schedule

Tuesday 30 September

American League wild-card game: Oakland 8-9 Kansas City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2014/sep/30/american-league-wild-card-oakland-athletics-vs-kansas-city-royals-live>


Wednesday 1 October

National League wild-card game: San Francisco 8-0 Pittsburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2014/oct/01/national-league-wild-card-san-francisco-giants-vs-pittsburgh-pirates-live>

Thursday 2 October

American League divisional series: Kansas City @ Los Angeles Angels; Detroit @ 
Baltimore

Friday 3 October

National League divisional series: San Francisco @ Washington; St Louis at Los 
Angeles Dodgers
 