
There is only one thing certain about what's left of the 2014 Major League 
Baseball season – the American League will have home-field advantage in the 
World Series. That's thanks to a 12-year-old policy that provides the winner of 
the annual All-Star Gamewith an extra home date 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article.jsp?ymd=20030716&content_id=429442&vkey=allstar2003&fext=.jsp&c_id=mlb>
 in the Fall Classic. Since the National League lost 5-3on Tuesday in Minnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/16/derek-jeter-all-star-game-al-world-series>
, the NL's representative could wind up playing the biggest game of the year on 
the road in October.

It's nothing less than farcical, and such a system becomes even more 
unfortunate after we learn that in the All-Star Game Adam Wainwright may have 
served up the soon to be retired Derek Jetera few fat pitches 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/sports/baseball/yankees/harper-adam-wainwright-grooved-pitch-derek-jeter-admission-mistake-article-1.1868490>
, to help provide yet another signature career moment. Keep that in mind if, 
when the fall chill arrives, the fate of a franchise hinges on the shenanigans 
of a July exhibition game.

That is certainly part of the legacy of the soon to be gone MLB commissioner 
Bud Selig, but so is the parity that has defined the first half of the 2014 
season. Under the leadership of Selig,which began in 1992 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/16/sports/baseball/derek-jeter-and-bud-selig-in-matching-tenures-made-mlb-better.html>
, the postseason has expanded from from four teams to 10, and today there are 
23 teams within eight games of either first place in their divisions or the 
wild-card spots. That makes races for playoff positions more inclusive, and 
allows fans of teams on the fringe to daydream a bit deeper into the schedule. 
Unlike the silliness surrounding the All-Star Game, there's certainly nothing 
wrong with that.

On Friday, the second half of the season begins with all 30 teams regrouping, 
signifying the start of a stretch run that will reveal which ballclubs play for 
a championship. For now, however, fans of the game suffer through the darkest 
days of the calendar, 72 hours without any baseball whatsoever. It gives many 
of us the shakes, but let's use the power of distraction to help get through 
it. Here's a quick whip around the league, a review of the first half.

American League East
 The Boston Red Sox don't look like repeating as World Series champs. 
Photograph: Rob Carr/Getty Images 
The Boston Red Sox left spring training bidding to repeat as World Series 
champions, but they have played much closer to the model that crashed to a 
last-place finish in 2012. The Bosox are 9.5 games out of first place in the AL 
East, and have the lowest scoring line-up in the American League. Jackie 
Bradley and Xander Bogaerts disappointed andso did Will Middlebrooks 
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/sports/2014/07/14/jenny-dell-will-middlebrooks-get-engaged/CxrUPUXw5J0Nor984N2KgN/story.html>
, who was demoted to make way for the return of Stephen Drew. The bullpen was 
mostly great, the starters were uneven. But after winning an unlikely title, 
they entire franchise gets a pass.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405569615378%2Fa0171d6c-d002-4a59-8ab1-727db808dd0b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who's%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who%27s%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405569615378%2Fa0171d6c-d002-4a59-8ab1-727db808dd0b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Masahiro Tanaka is out at least six weeks with elbow issues. Will he face the 
dreaded Tommy John surgery? Photo: Jesse Johnson/USA Today Sports 
The win-now Yankees never get such allowances, but after the loss of four 
starting pitchers to injuries, even their demanding core of fans are reduced to 
shrugs. What can you do when you loseMasahiro Tanaka 
<http://www.nj.com/yankees/index.ssf/2014/07/why_yankees_masahiro_tanaka_might_know_early_if_he_needs_tommy_john_surgery_1.html>
, who was competing for a Cy Young award in his first season? How do you make 
up for CC Sabathia stinking it up yet again before heading to pasture? When 
your big money free-agent catcher, Brian McCann, puts up minor-league stats, 
and Carlos Beltran's age finally catches up with him? Nothing. The Yankees are 
a .500 team at the break and that sounds about right. There will be no playoffs 
for the second consecutive season, the first time we've seen that in the Bronx
since 1993. <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/NYY/> That means even more 
time to focus on thelong goodbye for Jeter 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/nationals/derek-jeter-has-earned-universal-respect-during-his-hall-of-fame-career/2014/07/14/e15e4fb4-0b5c-11e4-b8e5-d0de80767fc2_story.html>
, which may not be such a bad thing for Yankees fans.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7X9QYfwTuE8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7X9QYfwTuE8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7X9QYfwTuE8&media=>
The second-placed Toronto Blue Jays and the first-placed Baltimore Orioles are 
in it for the long haul. The O's have Nelson Cruz, who has every other team 
wondering why they didn't take a flyer on the outfielder/designated hitter. A
50-game drug suspension one year, 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/sports/nationals/fans-set-aside-biogenesis-scandal-make-orioles-nelson-cruz-an-all-star/2014/07/14/68c1a98a-0ab1-11e4-b8e5-d0de80767fc2_story.html>
 28 first-half home runs and a ticket to the All-Star Game the next, Cruz is 
carrying Baltimore's offense, and if Chris Davis snaps out of his slump they 
could become a juggernaut, even without injured catcher Matt Wieters. Still, to 
take it to the next level they must trade for pitching. The same can be said 
for the Jays, who are in desperate need for arms to back up boppers Edwin 
Encarnacion and Jose Bautista, who have combined for 43 jacks. Ten-game winner 
Mark Buehrle can't do it on his own, and the team must bring consistency to the 
Rogers Centre. At one point they went 18-4, and followed that run by going 
11-17. In Tampa, the biggest question is how much longer David Price will stay
with the disappointing Rays 
<http://www.talkingchop.com/2014/7/16/5909443/david-price-said-to-want-trade-to-braves>
.

American League Central
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570399579%2F38c89bcd-9499-41f9-94aa-c519a58dca0a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who's%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who%27s%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570399579%2F38c89bcd-9499-41f9-94aa-c519a58dca0a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A dozen years after his debut, Victor Martinez is having a career season in 
Detroit. Photo: Rick Osentoski/USA Today Sports 
The Detroit Tigers have an arms length lead in the AL Central 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/tigers-proving-to-be-as-good-as-advertised?ymd=20140705&content_id=83251436&vkey=news_mlb>
, and that's mostly thanks to the one-two punch of Miguel Cabrera and Victor 
Martinez. Despite their own issues with consistency, Detroit likely cruise to 
another central crown. They must be concerned with Justin Verlander (who spent 
his All-Star break re-focusing and decompressingwith Kate Upton in Mexico 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/article/20140716/SPORTS0104/307160079/Report-Tigers-Justin-Verlander-spending-his-All-Star-break-Kate-Upton>
) and Joe Nathan, both of whom sport ERAs way north of their norms. Meanwhile, 
the Kansas City Royals and Cleveland Indians are somewhat disappointing, still 
trying to figure out whether or not they will be buyers or sellers at the 
upcoming 31 July trading deadline. Perhaps the most noise in the division is 
coming out of Chicago, whererookie Cuban slugger Jose Abreu 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/sports/baseball/whitesox/ct-jose-abreu-white-sox-spt-0717-20140717,0,1889825.story>
 lashed 29 home runs in the first half. Like Cruz, he's a player anybody could 
have had last offseason.

American League West
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570207097%2F9221c293-c8b7-411d-8824-880039834f63-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who's%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who%27s%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570207097%2F9221c293-c8b7-411d-8824-880039834f63-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Yu Darvish is a rare bright spot for the Texas Rangers in 2014. Photo: Jesse 
Johnson/USA Today Sports 
There's a lot of fun out in the West, but none of it is happening in Texas, 
where the last-placed Rangers are about to see their four-year streak of at 
least 90 wins snapped. Like the Yankees, they have seen theirpitching staff 
decimated 
<http://texas.rangers.mlb.com/news/article/tex/seasons-unexpected-turn-has-rangers-looking-toward-future?ymd=20140714&content_id=84737606&vkey=news_tex>
 by injuries. Adding to their misery, Prince Fielder arrived via a blockbuster 
offseason deal but is now out for the season after undergoing neck surgery.

The Oakland A's have no such issues, stunning baseball by recently trading for 
Jeff Samardzija and Jason Hammel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/oakland-athletics-land-pitcher-jeff-samardzija>
, shoring up what was already the best pitching staff in the AL. Oakland are 
the most complete team in MLB, but the Angels are closing in, just 1.5 games 
behind - Los Angeles are on a tear, winners of 19 of 23 games, playing like a 
team keen on avenging four seasons of disappointing baseball. All-Star Game MVP 
Mike Trout 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/mlb/mike-trout-cements-status-among-elite-with-all-star-mvp?ymd=20140715&content_id=84843360&vkey=news_mlb>
 is leading the way again, while Albert Pujols' bat returns to respectability 
if not its former greatness. Like so many other teams, the Angels need pitching 
to help the surprising Garrett Richards in the rotation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570288886%2F392f16ce-9ae9-4fd0-8580-92b9987b783c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who's%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who%27s%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570288886%2F392f16ce-9ae9-4fd0-8580-92b9987b783c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Seattle Mariners are making noise, partially thanks to the arm of Felix 
Hernandez. Photo: Scott Rovak/USA Today Sports 
The Seattle Mariners currently occupy the second wild card slot in the AL, 
which is somewhat remarkable considering the state of their franchise over the 
previous decade. Robinson Cano andKyle Seager 
<http://seattletimes.com/html/mariners/2024078038_allstarnotebook16xml.html> 
are All-Stars but have little help in the lineup. So far that hasn't mattered, 
because Felix Hernandez putting together a career season while Hisashi Iwakuma 
and the surprising Chris Young make a formidable top three starters. The 
bullpen has an ERA of 2.39, the best in all of baseball, and that will keep 
them hanging around until the end. Last but not last in the West, thanks to the 
Rangers, are the Houston Astros, who make headlines for not being last. After 
three consecutive seasons in the basement, Houston are fun again, debuting 
prospects such asGeorge Springer 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/yahoo-sports-minute/george-springer-makes-incredible--no-look-catch-against-the-wall-045447203.html>
 and Jon Singleton, while All-Star second baseman Jose Altuve boasts a .335 
batting average.

National League West
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570672025%2Fb0fab233-8d56-4abc-b389-37445b47126e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who's%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who%27s%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570672025%2Fb0fab233-8d56-4abc-b389-37445b47126e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Clayton Kershaw shut out opponents for 41 consecutive innings and threw a 
no-hitter in the first half of the 2014 season. Photo: Scott Rovak/USA Today 
Sports 
The San Francisco Giants may have two titles in four seasons, but the Los 
Angeles Dodgers are still the glamor team from Hollywood. So even after San 
Francisco raced out to a 9.5 game lead, it was always about when LA and their 
$200m roster would come around. And they did. Clayton Kershaw threw a no-hitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/19/la-dodgers-clayton-kershaw-no-hitter>
 amidst 41 consecutive innings without allowing a run, Yasiel Puig remained the 
enigmatic powerhouse and Don Mattingly's Dodgers climbed back into the race, 
little by little. Now they're up by 1.5 games off the back of a 19-10 run which 
put the Giants on their back feet.

San Francisco also got a no-hitter – Tim Lincecum tossed his second career 
no-no 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/26/mlb-tim-lincecum-no-hitter-david-price>
 vs the San Diego Padres in late June – but his team dropped 22 of 32 games. 
Their once home-run happy offense, which hit 63 jacks over the first two months 
of the season, was cut down to size in June and July when it hit just 23. Look 
ahead to 25 July, when the Dodgers head north for three games at AT&T Park.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570601683%2F3ed1922e-a429-4f33-8a15-6d51d4e07efe-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who's%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who%27s%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570601683%2F3ed1922e-a429-4f33-8a15-6d51d4e07efe-2060x1236.jpeg>
 How much longer will Troy Tulowitzki be a member of the Colorado Rockies? 
Photo: Chris Humphreys/USA Today Sports 
In Colorado the story is Troy Tulowitzki, who is leading the league in every 
major offensive category with a team mired in fourth place. He has had just 
about enough of spinning his wheels in Denver, and said recently he wants "to 
be somewhere where there's a chance to be in the playoffs every single year”. 
That's not in Colorado, where the biggest question is whether general manager 
Dan O'Dowd willtrade him away 
<http://redbirdrants.com/2014/07/16/colorado-rockies-shortstop-troy-tulowitzki-talks-st-louis-cardinals-trade-rumors/>
 in a blockbuster deal.

In San Diego, 2014 will be remembered as the year they lost the face of their 
franchise,Tony Gwynn, to cancer at age 54. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/16/tony-gwynn-dies-cancer-padres-hall-fame>
 Baseball fans mourned the loss of Tony Gwynn this season. Photograph: Lenny 
Ignelzi/AP 
National League Central
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570760009%2F22f9276a-5db2-454b-89e2-aaa6659cd908-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who's%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MLB%20mid-season%20review%3A%20who%27s%20best%20placed%20at%20the%20All-Star%20break%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fjul%2F17%2Fmlb-mid-season-review-all-star-break%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F17%2F1405570760009%2F22f9276a-5db2-454b-89e2-aaa6659cd908-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Francisco Rodriguez of the Milwaukee Brewers became an All-Star again in 2014. 
Photo: Jesse Johnson/USA Today Sports 
The NL Central may be the best division in all of baseball – again. The 
long-time stomping ground of the St Louis Cardinals has evolved into a group of 
death, with four formidable teams capable of making the postseason. The 
Pittsburgh Pirates were the story last season, breaking theirsub-.500 streak of 
20 seasons <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/PIT/> and making a playoff 
appearance. The Buccos have climbed back into contention after a slow start, 
but Milwaukee are the surprise package. Ryan Braun, who received a lengthy 
suspension for his involvement in the Biogenesis scandal, returned toa standing 
ovation on Opening Day 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2014/04/ryan-braun-brewers-standing-ovation-peds> and 
his Brewers got out to an enormous start. They score in droves thanks toCarlos 
Gomez, Aramis Ramirez 
<http://msn.foxsports.com/wisconsin/story/gomez-ramirez-k-rod-lucroy-to-represent-brewers-at-asg-070614>
, Braun, Jonathan Lucroy, Mark Reynolds andScooter Gennett 
<http://www.jsonline.com/sports/getting-to-majors-has-been-a-roller-coaster-ride-for-scooter-gennett-b99304225z1-265750881.html>
, while Francisco Rodriguez has come out of absolutely nowhere to pick up 27 
first-half saves - the last time he eclipsed that number was 2009.

The break came at just the right time for the Brew Crew – they have dropped 11 
of their last 13 games, and all that separates the Cards, the Cincinnati Reds, 
the Brewers and the Pirates are 3.5 games. The Reds are in a great spot with 
starter Mat Latos making a return to the roation, joining all-stars Alfredo 
Simon and Johnny Cueto. Offensively, Brandon Phillips and Joey Votto are on the 
DL, but catcher Devin Mesoraco is having a torrid season, as is Todd Frazier – 
Cincinnati will bea real threat as their health improves 
<http://www.si.com/mlb/2014/07/16/cincinnati-reds-aroldis-chapman-hamstring-injury-all-star-game>
.

We are not used to seeing the Cards struggle with the bat, but they have the 
second-lowest run total in the NL and now their cornerstone, Yadier Molina, is 
out for multiple months after thumb surgery. With pitchers Michael Wacha, 
Shelby Miller and Jamie Garcia on the shelf, 2014 could wind up being being an 
off year for the NL's version of the Yankees.

National League East
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaQ-3RoHK3aE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaQ-3RoHK3aE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaQ-3RoHK3aE&media=>
The NL East isn't scaring anybody. The homer-happy Braves have managed to 
compete despite a pitching rotation hit by injuries,although David Price could 
help 
<http://www.sportsworldreport.com/articles/32081/20140716/david-price-trade-rumors-atlanta-braves-offer-alex-wood-dan-uggla-tampa-bay-rays-pitcher-ny-yankees-cc-sabathia-masahiro-tanaka-replacements.htm>
 if Atlanta can swing a trade for the Rays ace. In truth, the Bravos are 
competing mostly because the Washington Nationals continue to under-perform 
despite having the best team ERA in the National League. All the Nats have to 
do is score a few more runs and they should, at least in theory, wrap up the 
division easily – thus far, it hasn't happened.Bryce Harper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/03/mlb-bryce-harper-washington-nationals-a-rod-yankees>
 has played in fewer than 40 games, and hasn't got it going.

Now teams like the New York Mets are starting to creep into the fray, winning 
eight of 10 heading into the break, riding a steady starting rotation and a 
suddenly half-decent lineup into a position in which they can at least tease 
their frustrated fans. The Miami Marlins are likely a year or two away from 
contending in ernest, while thePhiladelphia Phillies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/philadelphia-phillies> and their followers 
wrestle with the idea of rebuilding a franchise that has a sky-high payroll and 
little to show for it.

Click here for the Major League Baseball standings <http://mlb.mlb.com/home>
 