
Andrew Wakefield <https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, the 
doctor at the centre of the MMR scare, has been struck off the medical register 
after being found guilty of serious professional misconduct.
 Andrew Wakefield, the doctor at the centre of the MMR row, has been struck 
off for serious professional misconduct. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
He was not at the General Medical Council <http://www.gmc-uk.org/> (GMC) 
hearing to receive the verdict on his role in a public health debacle which saw 
vaccination of young children against measles, mumps and rubella plummet.

The GMC said he acted in a way that was dishonest, misleading and 
irresponsible while carrying out research into a possible link between the 
measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine, bowel disease and autism.

He had "abused his position of trust" and "brought the medical profession into 
disrepute" in studies he carried out on children.

The GMC said there had been "multiple separate instances of serious 
professional misconduct".

One of Wakefield's colleagues at the time at the Royal Free hospital in 
London, John Walker-Smith, 73 and now retired, was found guilty of serious 
professional misconduct and struck off. Another, Simon Murch, was found not 
guilty. Wakefield had already been discredited after a series of research 
projects failed to find any link between the tripleMMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> vaccine and autism, although a number 
of families continue to support him, even claiming to have been victimised for 
working with him.

He said today in an interview with BBC Radio 4's Today programme 
<http:/news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_8700000/8700062.stm> before the 
verdict that he and colleagues had listened and responded to "concerns of 
parents about their very sick children" and had acted "appropriately in the 
children's best interests to determine what the nature of their problem was".

Months after his research was published, the government withdrew single 
vaccines for measles, mumps and rubella, which parents could have opted for 
instead of the triple jab.

"When I made the recommendation to single vaccines they were available in the 
UK," he said from New York. "It is the government that is to blame for the 
resurgence of measles."

Wakefield said he had never opposed vaccination or claimed to have proof that 
MMR was linked to autism.

"I never made the claim at the time, nor do I still make the claim that MMR is 
a cause of autism," he said.

"You are conflating the two things. You are conflating the link with autism 
with the overall review of the vaccine."

In a statement after the verdict, he claimed that efforts to "discredit and 
silence me through the GMC process" had provided a screen to shield the 
government from exposure over the the MMR vaccine "scandal".

Wakefield had been found guilty in January of acting dishonestly and 
irresponsibly 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2010/jan/28/andrew-wakefield-mmr-vaccine> 
for carrying out unnecessarily invasive tests on children. He was said to have 
abused his position of trust, although his dishonesty had not led to personal 
financial gain.

He and the other doctors published a paper in the Lancet medical journal in 
February 1998 suggesting the measles virus might be linked to inflammatory 
bowel disease and play a role in autism.

The paper, based on just eight case studies, conceded that no definite link 
had been found but Wakefield, at a press conference, said he believed that 
instead of the triple MMR, children should be given doses in single jabs, 
preferably a year apart.

The GMC panel in January found Wakefield had conducted the trial unethically, 
including subjecting 11 children to invasive tests, such as lumbar punctures 
and colonoscopies they did not need, and without proper approval.

In February 1998, the same month the Lancet paper was published, he applied 
for ethical permission to run a trial of a new potential measles vaccine and 
set up a company called Immunospecifics Biotechnologies which would produce and 
sell it. The father of one of the children he had seen with developmental 
problems and bowel disease would be the managing director.

Wakefield tried the new vaccine on the child without mentioning it in medical 
notes or telling the child's GP. He was also found to have unethically arranged 
for his son's friends to have blood samples taken from them during his birthday 
party – for which he paid them £5 each.

The GMC panel chairman, Surendra Kumar, said: "In causing blood samples to be 
taken from children at a birthday party, he callously disregarded the pain and 
distress young children might suffer and behaved in a way which brought the 
profession into disrepute."

Wakefield hit on his theory after seeing children with bowel disease who had 
developmental problems. The third step in the hypothesis was the timing of the 
MMR vaccine: the first shot is given at around 13 months, about the age when 
autistic spectrum disorders start to be noticed.

In February, the 53-year-old left his role at a Texan clinic, The Thoughtful 
House Centre for Children, which he founded to study developmental disorders.

Kumar said Murch's involvement was more limited than that of Wakefield and 
Walker-Smith. He should have ensured there was appropriate ethical approval for 
research on the children, but ended the lumbar punctures after being unable to 
draw any clear inference that the children were suffering from a serious 
neurological disorder.

"The panel concluded Prof Murch acted in good faith, albeit it has found he 
was in error," said Kumar. "His actions, although comparable to professional 
misconduct in respect of undertaking procedures which were not clinically 
indicated, were mitigated by the fact he was under a false impression that they 
were clinically indicated."

Terence Stephenson, president of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child 
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, said: "Measles, mumps and 
rubella vaccines have all been shown to be safe and UK families are fortunate 
to have free access to these which is not true of many parts of the world. The 
false suggestion of a link between autism and the MMR vaccine has done untold 
damage to the UK vaccination programme."

The Department of Health said: "The safety of MMR has been endorsed through 
numerous studies in many countries.

"Thankfully, more parents are having their children vaccinated with MMR and 
they see it as being as safe as other childhood vaccines."

Isabella Thomas, 53, from Somerset, insisted that her two sons Michael, 18, 
and Terry, 16, received "fantastic" treatment at the Royal Free hospital under 
Wakefield.

"They were normal, then they started to deteriorate neurologically and 
medically. They were in the most horrendous pain you could think of. I went 
from doctor to doctor trying to find out what was wrong. I was only too pleased 
to be part of the study because we needed to find out what was wrong with the 
boys."

Thomas said that, as controversy erupted surrounding the research, the family 
was blacklisted.

"When I went to my doctor he said: 'I don't want politics being brought into 
this surgery'. I said: 'My son is ill, it's not about politics.'"

Allison Edwards, chairwoman of the campaign group Cry Shame which supported 
Wakefield, said: "This is to issue a warning to doctors not to dissent. No 
children were harmed in the clinical tests, they were trying to look at the 
problems and treat them, and the children improved. How do you get charged with 
doing your job?"
 