
Mo Farah <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mo-farah> opted for the cosy 
confines of the GMTV sofa and softball questioning from Kate Garraway on 
Thursday rather than face the world’s press, and Britain’s double Olympic and 
world champion is likely to get a similarly easy ride when he races in the 
3,000m at the Anniversary Games on Friday night.

While many of the fields are stacked with world stars, Farah has been granted 
what amounts to a penalty kick from organisers after his tough races in 
Lausanne and Monaco during the last fortnight. They know the 40,000 crowd at 
the Olympic Stadium will want to leave on the high of a home victory. And 
Farah, who is racing for the first time in Britain since theaccusations against 
his coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/allegations-alberto-salazar-response>
, Alberto Salazar, were broadcast last month, will oblige. Instead the main 
focus will be on whether he can break his own stadium record of 7min 36.85sec, 
set in 2013.

Usain Bolt: I’m not planning on losing to Justin Gatlin at World Championships
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/23/usain-bolt-justin-gatlin-world-championships-anniversary-games>
Certainly he has every chance. Farah has been in ripe form in recent weeks, 
romping to victory over 5,000m in Lausanne and finishing fourth in a red-hot 
1500m in 3:28.93 in Monaco, so it came as scant surprise that when asked by 
Garraway if he had put all the accusations against Salazar to one side, he 
replied: “For sure, yes – it’s not a nice thing but at the same time, I 
answered everything that I can and it’s not in my control, it’s nothing to do 
with me.”

When he was lobbed another easy one about returning to the Olympic Stadium, 
where he won 5,000m and 10,000mgold at London 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/11/mo-farah-olympic-5000m-victory>, 
Farah replied: “I’m very excited to be able to go back in that stadium and 
compete again in front of my home crowd.”

And that was about as searching as the questions got. Pleas for Farah to speak 
to the world’s press were met with shrugged shoulders – as BritishAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> officials pointed out, their 
athletes are obliged to devote only two hours a year for media work and Farah 
has already used up his time.

Usain Bolt <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/usainbolt> is confident Farah 
has the mental strength to put a difficult few weeks behind him. “I’ve come 
through the ranks with Mo, so I’ve seen the work that he’s put in,” he said. 
“I’m sorry for Mo, because every day I hear in the papers they’re trying to 
tear him down. I think he works so hard. I just really hope that he doesn’t 
take it too seriously and it doesn’t stress him out. It’s part of the sport, 
people like to point fingers sometimes.”

Bolt also believes Farah is right to stand by Salazar, the coach who 
transformed him from a European champion into the world’s best middle-distance 
runner. “When you have confidence in your coach over the years and you know who 
he is as a person, of course you’re going to want to support him,” Bolt said. 
“If Mo believes in his coach, I believe in him.”

While Bolt and Farah are the headline acts on the first of two days of Diamond 
League competition at the Olympic Stadium, there is plenty else for the crowd 
to get excited about, with 21 Olympic and 37 world champions on show.

The leading names on Friday night include the Olympic heptathlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/london-2012-jessica-ennis-gold> 
gold medallist, Jessica Ennis-Hill, who races in the 100m hurdles against a 
host of top athletes, including Sharika Nelvis and Jasmin Stowers, the two 
fastest women over the distance this year; the 2008 Olympic champion Dawn 
Harper-Nelson, who recently won the US trials; Britain’s Tiffany Porter and her 
sister Cindy Ofili.

Ennis-Hill is still undecided over whether to compete in the heptathlon at the 
world championships in Beijing next month: if she can slip under 13 seconds for 
the first time since her comeback after the birth of her son Reggie it could 
just nudge her towards the plane.

The field events are also strong, with Mutaz Essa Barshim aiming to threaten 
the high jump stadium record of 2.38m and the world pole vault record holder, 
Renaud Lavillenie, confident he can go over six metres – providing the rain 
stays away.

The Frenchman said: “I think I’m ready to win. I’m in very good shape and in a 
good condition to jump near to my best. The stadium will have a very good crowd 
and that will help me find extra motivation for the jump. I have great memories 
from the stadium in 2013, it brought so much back to me from the Olympics and 
it helped me to jump 6.02m, which was a personal best back then.”

The 110m hurdles world record holder, Aries Merritt, is also looking for some 
magic of a different kind as he returns to the city where he won Olympic gold 
in 2012. “Being here sparks great memories,” the American said. “And afterwards 
I hope to celebrate my birthday with a visit to the Harry Potter Experience as 
I am a huge fan.”
 