
When Mo Farah belatedly issued a passionate statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/19/mo-farah-statement-denies-taking-performance-enhancing-drugs>
 on Friday in an attempt to claw back some of the damage his reputation has 
incurred this week, the reaction on social media was telling. While many of 
those commenting underneath his statement on Facebook were clearly fans, urging 
him to fight on against what they saw as damaging slurs, the wider public 
reaction on Twitter emphasised the scale of the challenge facing the Farah camp 
and those close to it.

His exhortation that he had taken hundreds of drug tests and never failed one 
was met with weary references to Lance Armstrong. The cynicism on show from a 
sporting public let down one too many times by their heroes was almost the 
polar opposite of the mood of giddy optimism that reverberated around the 
Olympic Stadium and the nation as a whole in the summer of 2012.

Rewind to August of that year and it was one of the biggest months in the life 
of not only Usain Bolt and Farah but also of their agent Ricky Simms and his 
burgeoning company Pace Sports Management. As Bolt stood atop the podium doing 
Farah’s “mobot” and the British double Olympic champion struck the Jamaican 
dancehall stance that has become the trademark of one of the biggest sporting 
stars of his generation, it confirmed the London Games as a triumph for all 
three in not only sporting but commercial terms.

Farah’s wife, Tania, who had been with Mo since they were at school and exerts 
a strong hold over his career off the track, was entitled to feel a swell of 
pride too as she walked the track with their family.

Alberto Salazar <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar>, the coach 
with the golden touch who had taken Farah’s career to the next level since he 
joined his Project Oregon team, exuded satisfaction as he chalked up a golden 
double and his training partner Galen Rupp, the American now at the centre of 
doping allegations that he and Salazar strenuously deny, picked up a silver in 
the 10,000m.

And for the UK Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> 
executives looking down from among the 80,000 crowd, Farah’s golds were vital. 
Even with them they failed to hit the medal targets set before the Games, but 
they provided the vital magic moments prayed for by everyone from UKA to London 
2012 chairman, Lord Coe (another man now wearing multiple hats, including chair 
of the British Olympic Association, Nike advisor, IAAF presidential candidate 
and avowed friend of Salazar, amid the fallout from this mess).

Three years on Farah finds himself engaged in a very different battle – not 
for medals but for the trust of the public – and pulled in every direction by 
the competing advice and priorities of all four. While Salazar has gone to 
ground, unfairly or not increasing suspicion with every day he stays silent and 
prepares his defence against the claims by the BBC’s Panorama, Farah has 
appeared to have been left twisting in the wind.

After initially bolting from Birmingham and returning to Oregon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/mo-farah-flies-us-confront-alberto-salazar-doping-allegations>
 to “seek answers” from Salazar, he is now in the south of France preparing for 
hisreturn to the track in Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/17/mo-farah-return-track-monaco-diamond-league>
 next month.

Simms, who handles other members of the Nike-sponsored Project Oregon team 
including Rupp, cannot help but have been conflicted. In all there are at least 
five athletes on Pace’s books who currently train with Salazar or have been 
linked with the project – Mary Cain, Matthew Centrowitz, Shannon Rowbury, 
Jordan Hasay and Rupp among them.

It is Simms, hands-on with his charges even as the sums they can attract in 
the form of sponsorship and appearance fees has soared, who appears to have 
been advising Farah to stay silent until Salazar has said his piece.

But every day that has gone by since that initial Panorama was broadcast has 
made Farah appear less sure of his ground. That impression only intensified in 
the wake of this week’s revelation that hemissed two tests within one 18-month 
window 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/18/mo-farah-fresh-questions-missed-drug-tests>
 during the run-up to London 2012.

The amateurish video that then emerged of Simms trying to prove to UK 
Anti-Doping that Farah could not hear his doorbell when testers came to call in 
2011 will not do wonders for his reputation.

Farah’s loyalties to Simms, Salazar and, of course, Tania run deep. It was 
Simms who acted as coach, mentor and agent at various points in Farah’s 
development from callow prospect to late-flowering world beater, in 2006 
famously moving him into a house in Teddington with some of his Kenyan charges.

According to Farah folklore it was the moment he realised he had to get 
serious if he was to challenge the best. “Mo has seen that their life is 
running, sleeping, running,” said Simms at the time, before also playing a 
pivotal role in the decision to move to Oregon and join Salazar in 2011 before 
the Games.

Pace now has more than 50 clients listed on its website but Simms prides 
himself on maintaining his hands-on approach. His priority is his athletes to 
the exclusion of all else but that can sometimes appear to blind him to the 
fact that, in Bolt and Farah in particular, he now has two names that transcend 
their sport and, particularly in the wake of London 2012, have become fair game 
for the front half of the newspapers as well as the back.

A series of avoidable missteps dulled the golden post-2012 glow: the 
six-figure fee that Farah took home forrunning half of the London marathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/18/mo-farah-london-marathon-criticism>
 in 2013, which could have been mitigated by simply taking the full amount the 
following year; the spat with the Daily Mail over a story about his family; the 
Twitter rows with fellow athletes; that bizarre episode where he refused to 
reveal the names of his newborn twins but then unveiled them in an exclusive 
interview with a celebrity magazine.

All those incidents drew on a well of goodwill that had once seemed 
inexhaustible and now leave Simms in a tricky position as he attempts to 
reconcile responsibilities to Farah, to Rupp, to Project Oregon and to his 
business. He is not the only one conflicted. As noted several times in the past 
fortnight, UK Athletics – which is currently conducting areview of its 
relationship with Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/12/uk-athletics-mo-farah-alberto-salazar-review-relationship>
 – has its own questions to answer too.

The one thing that is clear at the end of a week that leaves more questions 
than answers for Farah, despite his belated and welcome statement, is that all 
of this could have been handled so much better from the start. And that the 
next six months will define the way that Farah is remembered by a generation 
for whom his immortality once seemed inviolable.
 