
Mo Farah has confirmed that he will be staying at his home in Oregon for the 
foreseeable future, increasingly the likelihood that he will remain with his
controversial coach Alberto Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/24/mo-farah-back-training-alberto-salazar>
 as he prepares for next year’s Olympic Games.

An independent UK Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> 
review, which is due to report next week, is expected to advise UKA to sever 
its close ties with Salazar, who acts as a unpaid adviser to its endurance 
programme but who has been accused by the BBC of violating anti-doping rules.

Mo Farah will be back training with me soon, says Alberto Salazar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/24/mo-farah-back-training-alberto-salazar>
However Farah, who runs in the Great North Run on Sunday, confirmed that he 
would be staying with his family in Oregon until he begins altitude training in 
January. “I am going to be in Portland until January when I will go to Ethiopia 
or Kenya,” said Farah, whose wife, Tania, is due to give birth at the end of 
the month. “I plan to go on holiday with family in California – I’m getting a 
camper van.”

Last month Salazar, who strenuously denies he has done anything wrong, told the
Guardian: “Nothing has changed with Mo, and nothing will. Mo will be back with 
us.”

When Farah was asked whether he had thought about severing ties with Salazar, 
or what he would do when the UKA report was published, he said: “I haven’t. The 
allegations are about Alberto, not me.

“But as an athlete, I have been in the game for years, you don’t really change 
a lot in terms of where you are going to be based, the whole training camp.”

He was more expansive when asked about the challenges of his difficult year. 
“It hasn’t been easy to be honest with you,” he said. “It was hard times. I’m 
just glad that everything has come together. Sometimes if you have faith and 
believe in yourself and you have the right people, you get through it.”

“When I went home and you reflect on everything, I couldn’t have asked for a 
better year. I’m already thinking about Rio, and what is the plan.”
 