
Audiences came back for a second helping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/27/moana-frozen-beatty-pitt-allied> 
of Moana and Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them this weekend, as the 
family-friendly films topped the post-Thanksgiving box office charts. Moana 
brought in $28.4m and Fantastic Beasts earned $18.5m, according to studio 
estimates on Sunday.

Moana review – sail of the century from Disney
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/moana-review-disney> 
Disney’s animated Moana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/moana-review-disney>, in only its 
second weekend in theaters and second weekend at No 1, has grossed $119.9m, 
while Warner Bros’ Harry Potter spinoffFantastic Beasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/21/passionate-and-profound-readers-on-fantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them>
 has earned $183.5m in three weeks.

Paramount’s sci-fi mind-bender Arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/arrival> took third with $7.3m, while its 
second world war spy thriller Allied placed fourth with $7.1m. Disney and 
Marvel’s Doctor Strange rounded out the top five with $6.5m, bringing its 
domestic total to $215.3m.

The weekend’s only new opener, the micro-budget horror film Incarnate, fell 
short of modest expectations and took in only $2.6m. The film, which stars 
Carice van Houten and Aaron Eckhart, was expected to earn in the $4m range.

“We are disappointed that we fell short of our goal and repeating the success 
of our previous releases,” BH Tilt executive John Hegeman said.

“The low-cost nature of the BH Tilt films and release model enables us to 
experiment and take risks, and we look forward to seeing what we can learn from 
this weekend for our future BH Tilt slate releases in 2017.”

In limited release, the Jacqueline Kennedy biopic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/13/jackie-review-natalie-portman-kennedy-jfk>
 Jackie, starring Natalie Portman in one of the year’s buzziest performances, 
earned $275,000 from five theaters. Another awards contender,Manchester by the 
Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/manchester-by-the-sea-review-kenneth-lonergans-morose-echo-of-margaret>
, expanded to 156 theaters and brought in $2.4m.

Jackie Kennedy biopic casts spotlight on a brighter American age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/26/jackie-kennedy-biopic-natalie-portman-jfk>
Paul Dergarabedian, a senior media analyst for box office tracker comScore, 
said that the post-Thanksgiving weekend is usually pretty slow.

“The Thanksgiving holiday is a long, extended binge of eating food and 
watching lots of movies and then this weekend is the diet. It is somewhat 
typical,” Dergarabedian said.

“It’s like we’re taking a quick breather before the home stretch.”

The weekend overall is expected to be down about 3% from last year, which saw 
the Christmas-themed horror film Krampus rake in $16.3m. But the box office for 
the year remains up around 4%.

The question now is whether or not the 2016 box office will surpass last 
year’s record $11.135bn. While there are still some big films on the horizon, 
including Rogue One: A Star Wars Story and the animated Sing, they must compete 
with the late-game 2015 juggernaut of The Force Awakens, which earned $652m in 
the last 14 days of the year.

“It’s going to be a tight race,” Dergarabedian said.
 