
Whether you look to population polls or popular TV for your socio-cultural 
trends, one thing is clear: the nuclear family has been nuked.

Around the globe, we're witnessing an explosion of new family structures. In 
the US,cohabitation has doubled since 1990 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2011/06/27/i-prevalence-and-growth-of-cohabitation/>
 and41% of births are to unmarried women 
<http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/unmarried-childbearing.htm>. Twice as many 
Britons <http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-15164970> have mixed-ethnic parentage 
compared with a single ethnic background. And in Australia,nearly half of 
same-sex couples are raising two or more children 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/4102.0Main+Features10July+2013#children>
. AsUSA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/business/2014/03/10/honey-maid-mondelez-coca-cola-cheerios-diversity-commercials/6131151/>
 said: "Whatever a traditional family used to be, it is no longer."

Global TV culture deserves a lot of credit for reflecting the changing face of 
family. FromModern Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/sep/23/modern-family-sitcom>
 in the US toEm Familia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Em_Fam%C3%ADlia_(telenovela)> ("In Family") in 
Brazil, TV has brought the diversity and quirkiness of modern families to 
centre stage.

This much is clear – we're finally forming the family units we want, instead 
of the ones we've been told to. Yet, advertisers are among the last to embrace 
a broader family landscape. The global research and advisory company Stylus 
said: "Brands still have some way to go in showcasing the diversity of the 
modern family." Here's how marketers can catch up with modern family culture.

Represent: know your tribe
Exemplifying your core user is the simplest way to show love to today's 
evolving family. Any marketer can cast diverse talent – asChevy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U_WQNgLHo2w> and Cheerios 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LKuQrKeGe6g> did this year – but knowing what 
makes your tribe's situation special makes for a deeper connection.

For example, single mums are a key segment for the US food producer Oscar 
Mayer. Since many rely on extended family to fill childcare gaps, thebrand 
introduced Grandpa Frank 
<http://www.ispot.tv/ad/7I_1/oscar-mayer-deli-fresh-honey-ham-grandpa> – whose 
grandkids and daughter live with him – in its latest round of advertising.

From the UK, retailer Mamas & Papas firmly positioned itself on the side of 
their tribe with aglobal campaign called How We Roll 
<http://mamasandpapasblog.com/index.php/urbo/>. The ads featured same-sex and 
single parents, and online shorts offered insight into their daily lives.

Connect: act accordingly
If you're already talking the talk, walk the walk. Use your brand's behaviour 
to better cater to modern families' needs.

In the US, the mobile phone provider Sprint introduced a new phone plan that 
plays to the trend of surrogate friend-families by letting users decide who is 
in their family.The ad campaign is centred around the Frobinsons 
<http://www.sprint.com/landings/framily/>, a new-wave family unit that includes 
a hamster dad, African-American grandpa, French daughter, cardigan-clad mum and 
Gor-Don, the goth roomie of the son, Chuck.

The Japanese fashion retailer Beams launched a store to capitalise on the 
multi-generation landscape <http://www.bminglifestore.jp/>. Designed to 
accommodate the needs and tastes of three generations, fashions for each group 
are housed in one space so they can shop together; a fourth collection contains 
matching items.

In Singapore, Coca-Cola approached multi-generation living differently. The 
#CalmComebacks digital campaign <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RdT3nF_s8bM> 
helped their millennial base to navigate awkward questions from relatives with 
witty one-liners to questions such as "How much do you make?" and "Why aren't 
you married?"

Support: stand in solidarity
To be permanently rooted in diversity and acceptance, make celebrating real 
families an enduring strategy that your brand stands by and defends.

From the US, Honey Maid's This Is Wholesome effort is a shining example 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2xeanX6xnRU>. The work doesn't just show 
diversity, which other brands have done; its core message is that 
unconventional families are wholesome.

In response to the inevitable controversy, the brand held firm. It released a 
follow-up spot <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cBC-pRFt9OM> which made art of 
hateful online comments and proclaimed that the only thing that matters when 
defining family is love. Its behaviour backed up a belief that even if the 
image of family has changed, what defines it hasn't.

Brands that depict non-traditional families earn higher equity marks
Acknowledging modern families is more than nice sentiment. The media group 
NBCUniversal's Brand Power Index, which measures consumer perception of 500 
brands, found that brands that most accurately depict non-traditional families 
– like Dove, Oscar Mayer, Microsoft, and Samsung – have higher equity marks 
than brands that don't.

New methodologies have emerged to help marketers understand audiences at a 
deeper level. For example, the consumer research company Networked Insights can 
sample online posts from hundreds of niche audiences to place them into small 
sub-groups for marketers to hone their message to.

These capabilities matter because the modern family continues to evolve. As 
Andrew Cherlin, professor of public policy at Johns Hopkins University, said, 
"It's a mistake to think this is the endpoint of enormous change. We are still 
very much in the midst of it."

Jennifer Costello is planning director and Nick Barham is chief strategy 
officer atTBWA\Chiat\Day LA <http://tbwachiatdayla.com/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 