
Reading <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/reading> for pleasure is 
declining among primary-age pupils, and increasing numbers of "time poor" 
parents are dropping the ritual of sharing bedtime stories with their children 
once they start school.

Research presented to the Children's Media Conference 
<http://www.thechildrensmediaconference.com> in Sheffield last week found that, 
while parents read to pre-schoolers, this later tails off, and by the final 
year of primary school only around 2% read to their children every day. Once 
children can read competently, parents tend to step back, and this usually 
happens at the age of seven or eight.

The report, entitled Is Children's Reading a Casualty of Modern Life?, also 
found that 82% of teachers blame the government's "target-driven" education 
policies for the fact that fewer children are reading for pleasure.

They believe that a "straitjacket" of regimented schooling is squeezing young 
people's ability to read more widely. Two-thirds of teachers polled said they 
lacked time in the school day to introduce a variety of books and that this was 
a "major barrier to being able to develop a level of reading".

Teachers also cited as contributory factors the reduction in the number of 
school librarians, who could put interesting books before children, and the 
rise in "screen time", diverting children from reading to playing games.

The majority of teachers said the curriculum's "emphasis on reading as a skill 
to be mastered" was "cranking up the pressure". This was compounded by parents 
who saw reading just as a focus of learning, a skill critical to career 
advancement in a competitive world.

Reading habits and the digital revolution in publishing were key topics of 
debate at the conference. The theme of the impoverishment of British culture 
was echoed by children's writer Frank Cottrell Boyce, who wrote the scripts for 
the opening and closing ceremonies of the 2012 Olympics. "We discovered the 
whole nation had collectively forgotten that they did the industrial 
revolution," he said. "Books are so central to it; books can be written by 
anyone. A lot of the pleasure of a book is listening to somebody read it to 
you."

The survey of 1,000 parents and 250 teachers, plus studies of 12 families, is 
part of a research project funded by publishing groupEgmont 
<http://www.egmont.co.uk/>. "We found a real love of reading among teachers, 
and a strong desire to encourage more children to read for pleasure," said 
Egmont senior vice-president Rob McMenemy. "However, the teachers also had an 
overwhelming sense of frustration with their situation."

A team from the BBC's CBeebies channel presented a paper that looked ahead to 
the next five years in children's media. It noted that last Christmas was a 
tipping point in the sale of tablet computers: "TheCBeebies website 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/cbeebies/> saw a huge shift in numbers of its users 
trying to access it by devices other than laptops and personal computers."

"Touch-screen phones and tablets are intuitive to children," it said, and 
predicted a period of "awkwardness" as everyone else adapts. By 2018, 
children's television will have adopted the presence of this second screen, and 
it "will be odd not to have children at home drawing along on tablets and then 
having these appearing live in the show".

The hope is that user-friendly screens could, if material is adapted and 
downloaded easily, present an opportunity for more ambitious publishing â€“ for 
example, books children can either read or choose to have read to them; or 
digital books with moving pictures instead of photos to illustrate factual and 
scientific points.

Parental controls that are easy to use would be key, the conference was told, 
such as "an alert for when devices use the Wi-Fi, especially after bedtimes", 
to allow parents to shut off access to children in the home.

The CBeebies paper concluded: "Wrapping a cheap tablet in a washable surround 
is where children's products are going."
 