
Stick a pin in the centre of a map of Andalucía and you might well hit 
Montilla. Geographically this is the heart of Spain's deep south, with Seville 
to the west and Granada over the mountains to the east. But as I thunder up the 
deserted motorway towards Córdoba from Málaga airport, I nearly miss the 
undulating vineyards that are the source of Montilla-Moriles fortified wines. 
And as most of the wineries are small affairs in the folds of the sierra, they, 
too, remain under the radar, as discreet as their brands. Only the determined 
traveller finds them – but I discover the effort pays off.

Moriles, to the south, is one half of this D.O. (Denominación de Origen) 
classification but the town of Montilla is the boss, on the edge of a rolling 
sierra of white limestone, where the pedro-ximénez grape flourishes. A close 
cousin of sherry in strength and flavour, Montilla-Moriles wines are not easy 
to track down. You can order a fragrant, dryfino, a nutty amontillado (named 
after Montilla), a voluptuouspalo cortado or a figgy oloroso in Cordoba, but 
they're rare further afield. Only 10 of the 170 producers export their nectar.
 Montilla-Moriles wines have a distinct taste, and are mostly drunk locally. 
Photograph: Alamy 
So it's supremely rewarding to stop off here, tour a bodega or three and bask 
in a mellow little-visited vino-world (bodegas such as Gonzalez Byass in Jerez 
are visited by thousands of tourists a day). Earthy, authentic and just about 
surviving the economic storms, the area is at its liveliest in the grape 
harvest in late August and early September (Spain's first of the year), when 
the hills hum with activity and party-time kicks off in Montilla.

My first destination is Lagar Blanco <http://www.lagarblanco.es/>, a few miles 
east of town, owned by agronomist and oenologist Miguel Cruz. As we twist 
through the chalky hills, he explains the importance of climatic extremes (from 
furnace-like heat in summer to bitter cold in winter) for the grapes and how 
this wine can be dated back to the Romans.
At the summit of Cerro San Juan, his immaculate lagar (wine press) commands 
fantastic views, but it is in the lofty, whitewashed interior that I begin to 
appreciate the complexities of the wine process, from the naturally sweet 
grapes to the solera system of ageing, where younger wine is added to old as it 
ferments in the casks. The tour ends on a high note, with a tasting of delicate 
fino straight from the barrel, followed by a 20-year-old amontillado that is 
pure heaven – and only €12 a bottle.

Different style, different hilltop, different wines – this time Lagar La 
Primilla <http://laprimilla.es/>, between vineyards and olive groves. The first 
things you see at this family winery are two giant Ali Baba-styletinajas 
(earthenware jars), local icons of grape-juice storage that today are 
supplanted by huge cement containers. Cheerful Charo Jiménez leads the visit 
through this typically Andalucían establishment, part home, part winery, with a 
courtyard ablaze with geraniums. Although the wines do not match the 
exceptional quality of Lagar Blanco, it is a delight to sip them in the cosy 
tasting-room, accompanied by plate after plate of homemade tapas drizzled with 
their own olive oil, brought out by Charo's niece.
 Vineyards near Montilla. Photograph: Alamy 
Montilla is a busy working town spilling downhill from its medieval heart, 
short on postcard prettiness but proud of its bodegas, its 16th-century convent 
where unseen nuns sell biscuits through a revolving hatch, and its workshops 
where oak wine casks are still made by hand. The two imposing buildings on the 
main street areAlvear  <http://www.alvear.es/index.php/en/>(the oldest bodega 
in Andalucía, founded in 1729) andPérez Barquero <http://www.perezbarquero.com/>
 (1905). Tours take in silent, shadowy "cathedrals" where hundreds of barrels 
of wine, some decades old, are stacked to the rafters.

But I zip round the corner to the 80-year-old Taberna Bolero <>. Here I sample 
succulent Huelva prawns followed by tender pork cheeks cooked in a reduction of 
oloroso, all washed down with the house fino. It's lunchtime, the place is 
packed, and the narrow, beamed bar, plastered with vintage photos, reverberates 
with guttural Andaluz, while every local without exception knocks back fino.

It makes me wonder if perhaps there is little reason for Montilla-Moriles to 
export their wines. Maybe they prefer to preseve them as one of Spain's most 
intoxicating secrets, in all senses.

• Lagar Blanco (+34 696 875391, lagarblanco.es <http://www.lagarblanco.es/>) 
tour, tasting and tapas €8pp, plus €10 an hour for translator if needed, 
lunches available. Lagar La Primilla (+34 616 111392,laprimilla.es 
<http://laprimilla.es/en>) tour, tasting and tapas €12pp. Taberna Bolero, 
Fuente Alamo 9, has house fino from €1.20. Stay at Hacienda La Vereda (+34 957 
335301,haciendalavereda.es <http://www.haciendalavereda.es>), 15 minutes 
south-east of Montilla with doubles from €55. For tailormade bodega tours try 
Bacus Travel & Tours (+34 957 022063,bacustravel.es 
<http://www.bacustravel.com/>) More information on Montilla wines at 
rutadelvinomontillamoriles.com <http://www.rutadelvinomontillamoriles.com/> 

 