
Theresa May continued with a reshuffle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/theresa-mays-cabinet-state-educated-but-mostly-male>
 that some have called ruthless with the announcement thatAnna Soubry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/26/anna-soubry-brexit-norway-trade-worst-deal-for-small-business>
 – a supporter during the leadership battle – was gone from her position as 
small business minister.

Ros Altmann <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ros-altmann>, the pensions 
expert was also removed from the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) on 
Friday to make way for Penny Mordaunt, a Brexit supporter who was a close ally 
of Andrea Leadsom in the leadership contest. Mike Penning took her role at the 
Ministry of Defence.


Who's who in Theresa May's new cabinet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/who-theresa-may-cabinet-boris-hammond-rudd>
Further appointments made after 10.30pm included Brandon Lewis, a key ally 
during May’s leadership, becoming minister for policing, and Robert Goodwill 
becoming the new immigration minister.

Matt Hancock and Greg Hands – two allies of George Osborne – were spared the 
axe. Hancock was appointed as minister for digital policy, and Hands goes to 
international trade under Liam Fox.

Jane Ellison was given the role of financial secretary to the Treasury, Jo 
Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jo-johnson> stays as universities 
minister, John Hayes has become transport minister and Damian Hinds becomes a 
minister at the DWP.

Ed Vaizey <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ed-vaizey>, a friend of David 
Cameron, left the government after a long tenure as culture minister.

May continued appointing junior ministers on Saturday, with Michael Gove ally 
Dominic Raab leaving the Ministry of Justice and the government. Former 
solicitor general Sir Oliver Heald was promoted to a minister of state role at 
the department.

Philip Dunne was moved from the Ministry of Defence to become a minister of 
state at the Department of Health, while Nick Hurd was moved from International 
Development to become a minister of state at the Department for Business, 
Energy and Industrial Strategy.

Mark Price was appointed minister of state at the Department for International 
Trade.
Hugo Swire (@HugoSwire) 
Not a good time to be a Cameroon. The tumbrils are rolling again!
 <https://twitter.com/HugoSwire/status/753973933955776512> July 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/HugoSwire/status/753973933955776512> 
Hugo Swire said he was retiring from his role as a foreign minister hours 
after likening sacked allies of David Cameron to condemned prisoners sent to 
the guillotine during the French revolution.

He tweeted yesterday: “Not a good time to be a Cameroon. The tumbrils are 
rolling again!”

Tumbrils were carts used to carry prisoners to the guillotine during the 
revolution.
On Saturday, he tweeted a photo of the famous Looney Tunes cartoon sign-off 
“that’s all folks!” and said: “I am retiring to the backbenches to join my 
friends. It’s been an honour and a privilege to have served as a minister in 
the government since 2010.”

 * This article was amended on 18 July 2016 to correct the name of the new 
minister of state at the Department for International Trade to Mark Price. An 
earlier version incorrectly referred to him as Peter Price.  