
Heavy rain has returned to the sodden state of South Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia>, bringing a 
renewed risk of flooding.

A flood watch is in place in the Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/adelaide> Hills, where up to 100mm of rain 
is predicted over Monday and Tuesday as a cold front moves across the state.

Rain started falling on Sunday night in the soaked northern areas along the 
Gawler River catchment, which was hardest hit last week.

The Bureau of Meteorology cancelled its severe weather warning early on Monday 
but the risk of flooding remains.

“There is a chance that the Gawler River will break out and impact on homes,” 
State Emergency Services chief officer Chris Beattie said.

Beattie urged people in flood-threatened areas to prepare their homes as 
emergency crews distributed sandbags.

The federal Labor leader, Bill Shorten, met with emergency services workers 
around Gawler on Monday as the rest of the state enjoys a public holiday.

River levels had been receding after a short break in the rain over the 
weekend, with numerous roads reopening in the area.

But Port Wakefield Road, a main road north of Adelaide, remains closed because 
of low-level flooding.

South Australia floods: state on alert as Gawler and Wakefield rivers burst 
banks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/01/south-australia-floods-state-on-alert-as-wakefield-river-continues-to-rise>
In Victoria, strong winds that lashed the state overnight will ease as people 
assess the damage and begin to clean up.

The SES received more than 400 calls for assistance on Sunday as winds up to 
93km/h hitMelbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>. 
Hundreds lost power, with fallen trees causing damage to powerlines.

The lights go out in SA and Turnbull flicks the switch to peak stupid | Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/01/the-lights-go-out-in-sa-and-turnbull-flicks-the-switch-to-peak-stupid>
Heavy rain was also predicted overnight, with totals up to 50mm expected to 
fall in Melbourne and outer areas of the east, west and central region.

Showers will continue in Melbourne during the day on Monday, while winds will 
ease to 45km/h.

Two men had to be rescued by water police on Sunday when their dinghy capsized 
in Corio Bay.

A man also had to be treated for hypothermia after his kayak capsized in 
Mentone and drifted more than 20km south to Oliver’s Hill, near Mt Eliza.
 