
Traditionalist clerics often invoke a masculine term to discourage women from 
running for political office inIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. 
While the question of gender isn’t addressed in Iran’s electoral laws, 
candidates wishing to participate in the Iranian political scene must be 
considered “Rajol-e-siasi,” or statesmen. If the political arena is legally 
defined as the purview of statesmen, women have no business entering it, 
conservatives argue.

This paradox helps explain the status of female politicians in a system where 
only 49 women have served in parliament since 1979, accounting for only 3% of 
all parliamentary seats. To maintain any presence at all, female lawmakers must 
reconcile conservative Islamic values with the social advancement of their 
gender.

Even if they possess an immaculate political and theological pedigree, female 
politicians struggle to advance their agendas without altering traditional 
women’s roles as defined by male Islamic jurists. When addressing basic issues 
such as workforce participation, successful female lawmakers like conservative 
MP Soheila Jelodarzadeh take care to only support part-time employment, 
prioritizing women’s roles as mothers and homemaker.

Outspoken female parliamentarians from across Iran’s political spectrum have 
been ostracized, even jailed, for their overly progressive views. Others have 
maintained a merely ornamental presence in politics, voting along factional 
lines and against their own interests as women.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca054e8ad7b28bb6a813625264786f9c7b28b2c1%2F0_0_5760_3804%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran's%20'female%20statesmen'%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran%27s%20%27female%20statesmen%27%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca054e8ad7b28bb6a813625264786f9c7b28b2c1%2F0_0_5760_3804%2F5760.jpg>
 Iranian women attend a campaign for the upcoming parliamentary elections at 
the Hejab Hall in downtown Tehran on 18 February. Photograph: Atta 
Kenare/AFP/Getty Images 
“Most of the women MPs of the current parliament have not only failed to 
achieve anything remarkable in the field of women’s rights, but supported 
anti-women ideas, remained silent and approved such ideas,” Fatemeh Rakei, a 
reformist political activist, told Isna news agency last April, criticizing 
female MPs’ silence on such topics as gender segregation at universities, 
women’s presence at sports complexes, and bills supporting polygamy and 
temporary marriages.

President Hassan Rouhani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani> 
has often advocated a greater role for women in the Islamic republic’s public 
sphere, most recently in an 8 February speech at a conference titled “Women, 
Moderation and Development.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88c6dcfc93ea4d70a6c50379309b4633678158e9%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran's%20'female%20statesmen'%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran%27s%20%27female%20statesmen%27%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88c6dcfc93ea4d70a6c50379309b4633678158e9%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 An Iranian man hands out leaflets for reformist candidate Parvaneh Salahshori 
in the upcoming parliamentary elections. Photograph: Atta Kenare/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Encouraged by the promises Rouhani made during his presidential campaign, 
Iranian women’s rights advocates viewed the upcoming 26 February election as an 
opportunity to increase their presence in parliament and break into the 
all-men’s club of the Assembly of Experts, a body charged with choosing Iran’s 
next supreme leader.

“Towards changing the masculine face of parliament,” a campaign launched last 
October, aims to raise the number of seats held by female members of parliament 
from the current 9% to 30%.

But as in the 8 February speech, in which Rouhani said “Women have a big 
responsibility on their shoulders” and “must fulfill a significant and 
influential presence” in all fields, the government has done little to show 
female politicians how they might achieve these goals.

Of the 12,000 candidates for the parliamentary election, more than 1,400 were 
women. The Guardian Council has qualified 584 of them. Of the 801 total 
candidates for the Assembly of Experts, all 16 women were disqualified.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe72b6f477b58e51f86051c624567545e238ca94b%2F0_0_4350_2640%2F4350.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran's%20'female%20statesmen'%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran%27s%20%27female%20statesmen%27%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe72b6f477b58e51f86051c624567545e238ca94b%2F0_0_4350_2640%2F4350.jpg>
 Iranian women wave flags of reformists for the parliamentary elections in a 
campaign rally in Tehran. Photograph: Vahid Salemi/AP 
To date, only one woman, Zohreh Sefati, a Mujtahid who co-founded the women’s 
branch of the Qom seminary, passed the stringent vetting of the Guardian 
Council in 1998. Despite her exemplary credentials, she withdrew her candidacy 
after a conservative cleric opposed the presence of women in the Assembly.

Despite Rouhani’s campaign promises to eliminate gender discrimination, the 
current government hasn’t followed up on plans to establish a ministry for 
women’s affairs. Within the cabinet, all ministerial positions have been filled 
by men, while women hold subordinate roles as deputies or the heads of 
governors’ offices.

Last year, Shahindokht Molaverdi, vice president for women and family affairs, 
asked the Expediency Council to modify the election rules in favor of women, 
including measures to gradually increase their representation in parliament and 
city and village councils. The suggestion didn’t gain enough votes at the 
Expediency Council.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b8f42037756a93eb01fe2169c7438dd566c77b8%2F0_0_5184_2802%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran's%20'female%20statesmen'%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran%27s%20%27female%20statesmen%27%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b8f42037756a93eb01fe2169c7438dd566c77b8%2F0_0_5184_2802%2F5184.jpg>
 Iranian women, among them activists in the foreground, attend a reformists 
campaign rally for the parliamentary elections in Tehran. Photograph: Vahid 
Salemi/AP 
Women’s rights activists say the key to securing a broader space in the 
Iranian political sphere is to nurture a dialogue that bridges deep-seated 
factional divides. Non-collaboration could lead to such disasters as the 2007 
debate overMahmoud Ahmadinejad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahmoud-ahmadinejad> government’s family 
support bill, whose original wording freed men from the obligation of 
registering temporary marriages and obtaining their first wife’s consent if 
they wished to marry a second one.

While reformist female MPs called the bill “catastrophic,” women from 
conservative factions went along with the opinions of their male colleagues. 
Laleh Eftekhari, a principlist MP, and speaker of the women’s faction of 
parliament, advised lawmakers not to abide by what the international community 
says, adding that “Based on God’s order and Sharia, a man doesn’t need his 
first wife’s consent to get married again.”

Zohreh Elahian, another principlist MP, even called the bill “progressive” and 
added that if Iran approves the bill, it doesn’t have to give in to 
international pressures to accept theconvention on the elimination of all forms 
of discrimination against women <http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/cedaw/>.

To educate MPs and bring a spectrum of female opinions into the fold, women’s 
rights activists should meet regularly with their local representatives - male 
or female - and develop grassroots pressure on politicians, says Fatemeh 
Haghighatjoo, who served as a reformist MP from 2000-2004.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f3072e74b9389f2509e53b2fe7981948d05cd65%2F0_0_1969_1319%2F1969.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran's%20'female%20statesmen'%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20than%20an%20ornament%3A%20Iran%27s%20%27female%20statesmen%27%20and%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Firan-women-candidates-rights-elections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f3072e74b9389f2509e53b2fe7981948d05cd65%2F0_0_1969_1319%2F1969.jpg>
 Fatemeh Haghighatjoo, who served as a reformist MP from 2000-2004, holding 
papers, poses for a lawmaker to take a photo after the parliament accepted her 
resignation. Photograph: Hasan Sarbakhshian/AP 
Haghighatjoo left Iran in 2005 while facing a prison sentence for “inciting 
public opinion and insulting the judiciary,” but remains an active supporter of 
the women’s rights movement in her home country. “We have to see how we are 
more useful,” she said in 2009 of her self-imposed exile.

While she notes that the number of female candidates is higher than in the 
previous election, in 2012, Haghighatjoo predicts that political differences 
will challenge the unity of the women who fill the seats of Iran’s next 
parliament.

“The female MPs of the next parliament are not going to think alike,” 
Haghighatjoo told Tehran Bureau. “But I think they are going to agree on most 
of the issues related to women. They just need to sit together and discuss all 
the matters together.”

Farnoosh Amirshahi is a former parliamentary reporter for Iran’s Shargh 
newspaper. Denise Hassanzade Ajiri contributed additional reporting.The Tehran 
Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the Guardian. Contact us
@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 