
In Finland, fantasy can be more reliable than reality. That’s why, despite the 
fact that 160,000 tourists travel to Lapland every year hoping to see the 
elusive northern lights, the Finns have installed a dead cert: Father 
Christmas. Come cloud or snow, solar wind or solar silence, he’ll be on duty in 
Santa’s Village with a warm smile and a beard fluffier than a reindeer’s tail.

For me, Santa can wait. I touch down in Rovaniemi, 520 miles north of 
Helsinki, on a clear night, so there’s every chance of seeing the fabled 
aurora. The locals seem as used to overexcited adults as they are to children. 
In the Arctic Circle Wilderness Lodge at Vaattunki, my host, Marko Mustonen, 
levels with me in deadpan Finnish fashion: “Maybe you’ll see them. Maybe you 
won’t.”

It hardly seems to matter, though, as we tie on our snowshoes for a hike in 
the forest before dinner. The moon is bright, and recent snowfall means the 
trees are heavily laden, looming over us like Tove Jansson’s wobbly 
Hattifatteners. Snow crystals sparkle underfoot and above us the stars are 
pinpoint sharp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Flapland-finland-northern-lights-igloo-ice-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419353481398%2Fc6317519-62d9-4a30-b186-294fd05b9e48-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20to%20Finland%20than%20the%20northern%20lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Flapland-finland-northern-lights-igloo-ice-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20to%20Finland%20than%20the%20northern%20lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Flapland-finland-northern-lights-igloo-ice-hotel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419353481398%2Fc6317519-62d9-4a30-b186-294fd05b9e48-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In all its glory, the aurora borealis. Photograph: Antony Spencer/Getty 
Images/Vetta 
We emerge on to an expanse of white that I assume is a clearing. Marko tells 
me it’s part of a river. “We should go back now,” he says. “I’m not so sure how 
thick the ice is.”

I don’t see anything apart from a clear sky that night, but I still have three 
more nights here and, in any case, the northern light I have already seen is 
exquisite: a hundred shades of blue under the moon and, in the morning, a slow 
dawn that scatters pink light over every snow-covered surface. My next chance 
will come 20 miles to the east, at the Arctic Snow Hotel in Lehtojärvi, also 
well out of the way of light pollution – a key demand among the steadily 
increasing numbers of aurora tourists. If you’re not keen on the prospect of a 
frozen bed in the snow hotel itself (rebuilt every year with ice from the 
nearby lake), there are 15 brand-new, glass-domed “igloo” rooms. These are 
small, but toasty, borrowing the concept of 360-degree comfort-viewing of the 
night sky from luxurious resorts such as Kakslauttanen, 140 miles to the north.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Flapland-finland-northern-lights-igloo-ice-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419264631559%2F475778e6-8515-45c3-8cdb-f40e520eeec9-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20to%20Finland%20than%20the%20northern%20lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Flapland-finland-northern-lights-igloo-ice-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20to%20Finland%20than%20the%20northern%20lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Flapland-finland-northern-lights-igloo-ice-hotel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F22%2F1419264631559%2F475778e6-8515-45c3-8cdb-f40e520eeec9-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Arctic glass igloos, Rovaniemi 
In Lehtojärvi, there’s a definite no-frills feel – a basic bathroom and enough 
room to swing an arctic fox – but the focus is on looking out, not in. Dark 
furnishings are designed not to cast reflections on the heated-glass panels 
overhead and the adjustable bed allows you to prop yourself up, facing north, 
for the best possible view.

It’s still dark as I prepare for a morning audience with Father Christmas, 
which inspires less mirth around here than might be expected. Marko, who is 43, 
has already confided that he believes in him “in my heart”. Jaana, who 
accompanies me to Santa’s Village, tells me she was once a wedding elf, then a 
tour-bus elf, and that most of the locals have done their share of elfing: 
“They take it seriously, especially Father Christmas.”

And when I meet him, he stays resolutely in character. “No, I’m not an actor,” 
he tells me firmly. I feel like I’ve breached an unspoken rule: you just don’t 
talk about the fact that Santa might not be the real thing.

Though there is daylight at this time of year, darkness creeps in from about 
1.30pm. By that time I’m zipping across frozen marshland on a snowmobile, a 
piece of kit that Laplanders love to use for business – they’re handy for the 
annual reindeer roundup – and pleasure. There’s even a snowmobile-mounted 
branch of the police who, we’re warned, may stop and breathalyse us. But it’s 
only hot berry juice we drink as we pause a mile or so out of town to watch the 
sun go down. It’s an extraordinary moment – the light, a special kind of 
violet, blankets the west while, behind us, a huge moon rises from among the 
trees where wild reindeer observe us warily. A husband and wife from Hong Kong 
tell me they’ve been here for a week and still haven’t seen the northern 
lights. “We’re very disappointed,” they say. Surely all this makes up for it?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Flapland-finland-northern-lights-igloo-ice-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419353842507%2F0fccc483-d610-44b4-b1d1-db636524d5dd-2060x1732.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=More%20to%20Finland%20than%20the%20northern%20lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Flapland-finland-northern-lights-igloo-ice-hotel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=More%20to%20Finland%20than%20the%20northern%20lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F28%2Flapland-finland-northern-lights-igloo-ice-hotel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419353842507%2F0fccc483-d610-44b4-b1d1-db636524d5dd-2060x1732.jpeg>
 The igloo’s interior 
After a couple of nights in the glass igloo, peering out from my bed into the 
sky at regular intervals and seeing nothing but clouds, I begin to understand 
their frustration. Being fatalistic is all very well, but it’s hard to shake a 
sense of how absurd it would be to miss out on the whole reason for travelling 
here in the first place.

So I’ve signed up for aurora text alerts, a service run by entrepreneur Reijo 
Kortesalmi. His network of sensors tell you when the lights are visible. I 
clutch my phone hopefully as I make my way to thekota, a traditional Sámi hut, 
for a final meal of salmon roasted on an open fire. As we’re tucking in, the 
door swings open. It’s Ville, the hotel’s owner. “I think you should come and 
see this,” he says.

We scramble out excitedly. To the north-east, a faint vertical line appears, 
joined by another in the north. Soon, the whole sky is lit by dancing curtains 
of colour, mainly green, some yellow and purple-tinged. Thick waves gather on 
the horizon, but we are lucky to be almost directly underneath a display, so 
streams of light appear to be bearing down on us, radiating in every direction. 
I realise that the pictures we’re all familiar with aren’t exaggerations, 
souped up with long exposures and Photoshop. This is every bit as stunning as 
any image.

After about 20 minutes, they fade. There are a couple of repeat performances 
during the night – I get a text alert at 1am and watch from the warmth of my 
bed – but nothing like that first show.

I try to keep hold of the aurora in my mind’s eye, but it all begins to seem 
like a dream – did it really happen like that, on my last night, on Finnish 
independence day? It seems too perfect. Perhaps I shouldn’t have doubted 
Santa’s powers to grant even grown-up wishes.

• The trip was provided by Only in Lapland (onlyinlapland.com 
<http://www.onlyinlapland.com/>) and Visit Rovaniemi (visitrovaniemi.fi 
<http://www.visitrovaniemi.fi/>). Arctic Glass igloos (arcticsnowhotel.fi 
<http://www.arcticsnowhotel.fi/>) cost from £153pp per night, including 
breakfast. An apartment for two at the Arctic Circle Wilderness Lodge (
wildnordic.fi <http://wildnordic.fi/>) costs from £186 per night. Snowmobile 
safaris cost from £78pp, husky safaris from £118pp withlaplandsafaris.com 
<http://www.laplandsafaris.com/en/>. Return flights from Heathrow to Rovaniemi 
(via Helsinki) cost from £229 with Finnair (finnair.com 
<http://www.finnair.com/INT/GB/select-country>)
 