
Good morning folks, and welcome to the Morning Mail – sign up here to get it 
straight to your inbox before 8am every weekday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guardian-australia-morning-mail/2014/jun/24/-sp-guardian-australias-morning-mail-subscribe-by-email>
.

Ebola

Labor has again renewed calls to send Ebola workers to Africa, with Tanya 
Plibersek saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/ebola-labor-renews-calls-for-health-workers-to-be-sent-to-west-africa>
Australia would be in ‘big trouble’ if it waited for the virus to spread to 
Asia Pacific before offering help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/ebola-labor-renews-calls-for-health-workers-to-be-sent-to-west-africa>
. The call comes asScott Morrison accused Labor of risking Australians’ health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/17/ebola-row-scott-morrison-accuses-labor-risking-australians-health>
.


In the United States, Barack Obama has warned against Ebola hysteria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/18/ebola-us-travel-ban-barack-obama>
, as senator Ted Cruzdemands travel bans and extra border guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/ted-cruz-attacks-white-house-doctors-ebola>
.


An infected Spanish nurse is reportedly making ‘giant steps’ towards recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/ebola-spanish-nurse-recovery>, 
whilethe death toll from Ebola in Liberia is said to be ‘much worse than 
reported’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/ebola-liberia-death-toll-data-sorious-samura>
.


Cruise ship returns to Texas amid Ebola scare: ‘Y’all blew it out of 
proportion’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/ebola-cruise-ship-returns-texas-woman-quarantine>


Australian news and politics
 Australian foreign minister Julie Bishop, left, listens to her Iraqi 
counterpart Ibrahim al-Jaafari speaking during a news conference in Baghdad. 
Photograph: Photograph: Khalid Mohammed/AP 
• Foreign minister Julie Bishop has confirmed Australia will send about 200 
special forces soldiers to advise Iraqi troops in the fight against Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/19/australia-special-forces-iraq-isis-advisory-julie-bishop>
, after a deal was agreed in Baghdad.

• Finance minister Mathias Cormann channelled Arnold Schwarzenegger to call 
Bill Shorten an ‘economic girlie man’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/18/mathias-cormann-calls-bill-shorten-an-economic-girlie-man>
 on the weekend. Swift backlash led him to defend his remarks, saying“I am not 
talking about girls. I am talking about economic girlie men. I don’t think 
there’s anything gender-specific here. Not girls, girlies; it’s very different. 
I hope you are not going to say I am a sexist misogynist.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/19/mathias-cormann-denies-his-economic-girlie-man-insult-is-sexist>

• A new report shows households will pay an extra $300 a year for gas, but the 
same report says government should do nothing to stop that increase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/19/australia-faces-gas-price-shock-but-its-in-the-national-interest-says-report>
, because “the economic benefits that will flow as a result represent an 
opportunity too good to miss”.


• Indonesia’s new president Joko Widodo has a blunt message for Tony Abbott 
about asylum seeker boat turnbacks,he will not tolerate Australian navy 
incursions into Indonesian territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/oct/18/joko-widodo-tells-tony-abbott-he-will-not-tolerate-navys-incursions>
.

Around the world


• Isis reportedly sold a widow and her child into marriage for $12 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/isis-forced-marriage-syria-iraq-women-kidnapped>
 after shooting her husband and taking them into captivity during a raid.• As 
the US launches further air strikes against Isis at Kobani,Turkey’s president 
calls Syrian Kurdish group ‘a terrorist organisation’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/turkey-will-not-cooperate-us-support-kurds-erdogan>
.

• The deadly trekking route in Nepal has been closed where snowstorms killed 
at least 38 people last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/trekkers-himalayan-route-rescue>.

• Tension rises along the Korean border, with a second border clash in 10 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/shots-fired-tension-rises-korean-border>
 despite hopes of easing animosities after rare visit by North Korean officials.


More from around the web
 Swedish armed forces involved in the search off Stockholm. Photograph: 
Photograph: IBL/Rex 
• Among the most read on the Guardian this morning: Sweden’s military has 
spent three days scouring the waters off Stockholm for a ‘Russian submarine’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/19/sweden-search-russian-submarine-stockholm>
, with helicopters, minesweepers and 200 service personnel mobilised in the 
search after a tipoff about “foreign underwater activity”.


• After revelations last week of Professor Barry Spurr’s racially derogatory 
emails, edited transcripts of the exchanges have been published 
<http://newmatilda.com/2014/10/19/transcripts-partial-works-professor-barry-spurr-poet-racist-misogynist>
 by New Matilda, including one in whichSpurr claimed AFL player Adam Goodes won 
Australian of the Year so Tony Abbott could put “Abos in the Constitution” 
<http://newmatilda.com/2014/10/19/goodes-won-australian-year-so-pm-could-put-abos-constitution-barry-spurr>
.

• The ability of political activists to disrupt companies will be curbed under 
government plans to prevent small groups from convening special company meetings
 
<http://www.afr.com/p/national/activists_meeting_loophole_tightened_FUcsywJELyzQhrjCknmKBJ>
, the Australian Financial Review reports.

• Hundreds of millions of dollars in federal government funding is being spent 
on producing a glut of trainee teachers who have little chance of getting a job 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/education/graduate-glut-puts-trainee-teachers-on-the-scrapheap-20141019-115wa4.html>
, the Sydney Morning Herald reports.

• Kathy Jackson allegedly made a secret deal with now-jailed fraudster Michael 
Williamson to pay $240,000 over two years to a union ally 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/do-no-work-still-get-paid-kathy-jackson-and-michael-williamsons-union-ally-deal/story-e6frg6n6-1227095550531>
, The Australian reports.

• Driver’s licence demerit points could be introduced for people who park in 
spaces reserved for the disabled, after the NSW roads minister asked his 
department to look into it 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/demerit-points-to-disable-lowlife-parking-spot-cheats/story-fni0cx12-1227095520868>
, the Daily Telegraph reports.

One last thing
 A computer-generated simulation of placoderms having sex: ‘Fundamentally, 
they could not have done it in the missionary position’. Source: Flinders 
University/YouTube Photograph: Source: Flinders University 

The first act of copulation has been traced back to ancient animals that were 
endowed with such cumbersome sexual organs they had to mate side by side, 
‘square-dance style’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/19/first-sexual-intercourse-placorderms-fossils>
, with a bony, L-shaped male organ and female ‘cheese-grater’ genitals.


Have an excellent day – and if you spot anything I’ve missed, let me know in 
the comments here or on Twitter@earleyedition 
<http://www.twitter.com/earleyedition>.


Sign up

Get the Morning Mail direct to your inbox before 8am every day by signing up 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/guardian-australia-morning-mail/2014/jun/24/-sp-guardian-australias-morning-mail-subscribe-by-email>
.
 