
Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> is investing £30m 
in providing discounted coffee, free Wi-Fi and more comfortable rest areas for 
store employees as part of its efforts to create a happier shopping experience 
for customers and staff.

The supermarket, which said last year it would increase pay for store staff by 
20% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/29/morrisons-supermarket-shop-floor-staff-national-living-wage-george-osborne>
, is to introduce separate areas alongside dining rooms where workers can relax 
and charge their mobile phones.

David Potts, chief executive of Morrisons, said the changes were being 
introduced in response to a company-wide consultation about how to improve 
stores for staff and customers. About 100 staff areas will be revamped this 
year and all stores will be covered within four years.

The move comes as Morrisons’ rival Asda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> considers scrapping free tea and 
toast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/20/asda-axe-morning-cuppa-free-toast-staff>
 for its employees, and staff canteens, in an attempt to cut costs. The closure 
of the canteens and withdrawal of in-store services such as pizza makingis part 
of plans to cut up to 1,000 jobs in stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/20/asda-plan-shut-canteens-services-1000-jobs-risk-supermarket>
. The supermarket is consulting with about 5,000 in-store staff about changes 
to their roles, or potential redundancy, andis also cutting about 200 head 
office jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/asda-to-cut-200-jobs-at-leeds-head-office>
.

Potts has previously said staff have a key role to play in the revival of 
Morrisons, which is battling to turn around a fall in sales amid heavy 
competition from the fast-growing discounters Aldi andLidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> as well as bigger rivals such as 
Tesco and Sainsbury’s.


Potts said: “We asked our staff for their views about their stores and many 
commented about their restrooms saying they would like them to be more relaxing 
and offer a better food service. This investment will ensure they are provided 
with the facilities and food to help them recharge during their breaks.”


Next month, Morrisons is to increase pay for 90,000 shop floor staff to £8.20 
an hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/29/morrisons-supermarket-shop-floor-staff-national-living-wage-george-osborne>
. That is above the £7.20 “national living wage” announced by George Osborne in 
the July budget last year and just below the£8.25 living wage calculated by 
independent campaigners <http://www.livingwage.org.uk/>.

Retailers have brought in a wave of wage rises ahead of the national living 
wage, and also increased publicity about the cost to the taxpayer in working 
tax credits to support those on low wages.Aldi and Lidl have also publicised 
the higher than average hourly wages they pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/26/aldi-to-increase-staff-wages-to-minimum-of-840-an-hour>
.
 