
The hour-long debate between Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> and Chris Bowen was 
both informed and feisty, but at the end voters were no wiser about the costs 
and benefits of each would-be treasurer’s biggest economic ideas to create jobs 
and boost growth.


Scott Morrison is hanging his hat on $48bn worth of company tax cuts, and the 
government has pointed to economic modelling that shows it would boost growth 
by 1% over 20 years.

But that modelling has been questioned by analysts including the Grattan 
Institute, who think the benefit could be much smaller, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/19/company-tax-cuts-are-not-a-knight-in-shining-armour-to-save-the-economy>
 and Bowen insisted the tax cuts were “unfunded” anyway because Morrison had 
not taken any other decisions to make up for the revenue forgone.

Chris Uhlmann and David Speers on leadership debates – Australian politics 
live podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/may/27/the-political-editors-edition-chris-uhlmann-and-david-speers-join-australian-politics-live-podcast>
“The PM said two days ago that was fully funded because it’s in the budget,” 
Bowen said. That’s a novel accounting practice. Frankly if I tried that I would 
have to hand in my badge. You would have it on the front page, rightly, of your 
newspaper saying we were reckless by saying things were funded by putting them 
in the budget. You have to fund them from elsewhere. We’ve done that with our 
schools policy.”

Morrison didn’t really have an answer for that, but he did have a 
counterattack – Labor is claiming the “savings” from not going ahead with the 
same tax cuts to pay for other things.

But nor could Bowen give specifics about the benefits of his plans for $37bn 
extra spending on education,with OECD modelling used by Labor also raising 
questions 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/boosting-education-or-cutting-company-tax-which-will-do-more-to-boost-the-economy-20160512-gotdnm.html>
.

“Frankly, I’m a bit surprised ... that we are having a debate in Australia 
about whether better schools funding has an economic dividend,” he said. “I 
would have thought it is self-evident that better schools funding and lifting 
educational outcomes has an economic dividend. These are people in jobs. They 
probably wouldn’t have been in jobs beforehand. I don’t mind having a debate 
anywhere, anytime about the economic impact of better education.

Scott Morrison's logical fallacy: Labor's $67bn black hole is true until 
proved otherwise | Gareth Hutchens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/morrisons-logical-fallacy-labors-67bn-black-hole-is-true-until-proven-otherwise>
“There is no surprise it takes a long time for investment in schools to pay 
off. That is self-evident. The treasurer says his policy has a 1% dividend … If 
you look at Treasury modelling it suggests it’s overstated the economic gains 
from this scenario ... We can debate the figures, but I will defend vigorously 
the argument that an investment in schools has an economic dividend for the 
nation, as it does.”

There is an emerging and important point of conflict about the timeframes over 
which parties reveal the cost of their promises, with Bowen saying he will 
provide costings over both four years and 10 years and demanding Morrison do 
the same – since the government had tried to conceal the long-term cost of its 
tax cuts and has budgeted no long-term promises for things like climate change.

Morrison says Labor has to rely on 10-year costings because it won’t be able 
to make a dent in the deficit over four.

But the only really new information in the encounter was that Labor would 
definitely provide its full costings well before polling day, and frankly it 
would have been much more surprising if Bowen had said they wouldn’t.

Perhaps they’ll be out before 13 June, which is the date Bowen laid down a 
challenge for a rematch on the ABC’s Q&A. With some more facts on the table, 
that would definitely be worth watching.

• Join Lenore Taylor and Katharine Murphy in Sydney and Melbourne as they host 
ourGuardian Live election special event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-live-australia/2016/may/10/guardian-live-election-special>
 featuring a panel of prominent political guests
 