
The Abbott government has rejected modelling showing that low income families 
are the biggest losers from the Coalition’s budget saying it does not take into 
account the government’s efforts to create new jobs and has not been released 
in full.

Modelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/24/low-income-families-the-biggest-losers-from-coalitions-budget-research-finds>
 commissioned from theNational Centre for Social and Economic Modelling 
<http://www.natsem.canberra.edu.au/> by the Labor party found single income 
families with low earnings could lose more than $20,000 over the next four 
years from the net impact of childcare benefits and family payment cuts. Low 
income families with both parents working could lose more than $10,000 over 
four years.

As Labor sought to use the partially-released modelling to argue that this 
year’s budget was as “unfair” as last year’s, the prime minister said the 
argument ignored the government’s efforts to create jobs.

“The fairest thing we can do is encourage people to go out there and take the 
jobs that are available, the fairest thing that we can do is fund with tax 
incentives the small businesses of our country to create the jobs that are 
there as well as making it easier for people to take those jobs so more jobs, 
more opportunities to take those jobs, that is the kind of fairness that this 
Government is determined to create,” he said.

And the government challenged Labor to release the full modelling, instead of 
a two-page summary.

“If members opposite want to vindicate – if members opposite want to vindicate 
the work of Natsem, release it. Release it. Just release it. Why is it that 
this work of Natsem needs to be hidden? Why do they want to hide the Natsem 
analysis upon which they rely?,” Tony Abbott asked during a rowdy question time 
debate.

Also asked about the analysis, the social services minister, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, said: “What it 
doesn’t take into account is the investments that this government is making in 
this budget to create jobs; the best form of welfare is a job … The wage you 
get is always better than the welfare that you get and that’s why we’ve 
invested so much in this budget in investing in programs that help people earn 
wages rather than draw down welfare.”

“The Natsem model takes no account of those impacts of people being able to 
earn a wage rather than earn welfare,” Morrison said.

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten, has said the modelling proves the budget 
has “all the same pain, just hidden in the fine print” but Morrison said: “What
Bill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> is 
saying is he wants a bus from the school to get to Centrelink from the moment 
someone leaves school.”

The budget changes the way job services can be offered and introduces 
mentoring programs for disadvantaged jobseekers, but its forecasts predict that 
unemployment will rise from 6.2% to 6.5% in 2015-16.

The Australian Council of Social Service <http://www.acoss.org.au/> said: 
“Despite some welcome specific employment initiatives, the budget as a whole 
does little to promote employment growth.”

Acoss released separate research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/23/federal-budget-fails-fairness-test-says-australian-council-of-social-service>
 at the weekend showing that last two budgets had reduced $9bn in spending on 
family payments over four years and $6bn of that would hit low income 
households.

Morrison accused Labor of commissioning the modelling so that it could use 
crossbench senators as “pawns” because Labor also made cuts to spending on 
family payments when it was in government.

“They just want to jam things up in the Senate for their own political 
purposes and they’re seeking to use the crossbench senators as their pawns in 
this process,” he said. “I think frankly the crossbench senators are awake to 
that, I don’t think they want to be anybody’s pawn in this process, they’ve got 
their own views about this.

“I am continuing to meet with them over the weeks ahead and I know those 
discussions will be very constructive.”

The government has said the $5.5bn in cuts to family tax benefits – announced 
in last year’s budget but not legislated – are necessary to fund its $3.5bn 
childcare plan.

The Victorian senator Ricky Muir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ricky-muir> has requested modelling 
from the government about the impact of a plan initially floated by the Acoss 
to maintain payments of family tax benefit B (paid to single income families) 
until the youngest child turns 12, instead of the current cut-off of 16, and 
also to test the impact of gradually removing payments from the time a child 
turns six, rather than immediately cutting them off as is proposed under the 
government’s plans.

The South Australian Family First senator, Bob Day, has said he only supports 
cutting the benefit once the youngest child turned 12 if the government also 
backs “income splitting” for single income families, a demand unlikely to be 
met.

But other crossbench senators remain deeply sceptical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/22/senate-shapes-up-as-budget-blocker-over-pensions-and-family-payments>
 about the planned cuts, which are also opposed by Labor and the Greens. The 
childcare plan – which the government says must be financed by the family 
benefit cuts – is not scheduled to begin until mid 2017.
 