
A dozen days ago I was relieved that it was Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> who was to be the next prime 
minister and notAndrea Leadsom <http://www.andrealeadsom.com/>, who’d implied 
her qualifications for the job were better than May’sbecause she was a mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/mother-top-job-andrea-leadsom-theresa-may>
.

Presumably Leadsom meant she would bring to the job the habit of loving 
concern, knowledge of human nature and so on. It could easily be argued that 
such skills as the ability to listen without looking bored, being used to 
everything taking longer than expected, or offering advice over and over again 
without the ones you’re advising taking the slightest notice might well be 
relevant to governing via elected politicians.

But mothers learn a whole lot more than that. Practical things such as not 
putting anything breakable near the edge of shelves or tables; knowing when a 
hug is the only way to cheer someone up; how to get the young not to wear their 
awful favourite clothes when senior friends are expected; how to balance the 
demands of your husband against the wishes of the offspring when you actually 
think they are both wrong… Well, that might indeed involve the same patience 
and sense as balancing the demands of the party you belong to against the 
assumptions of the people who voted you in, which are entirely different.

So that would have been interesting if those were Leadsom’s reasons, but sadly 
it seems she meant she had a stake in the future while May didn’t. I had been 
about to write it would be strange if women began to assume they wouldn’t get 
anywhere in politics unless they had babies. Why, they’d have to allow for 
babies being accommodated in the House of Commons. There was a discussion of 
exactly that not long ago. But I still think babies and politics should be 
considered separately.

What do you think? Have your say below
 