
A steady stream of mourners filed past the casket of Alton Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database#alton-sterling-2016563>
, the 37-year-old black man who was shot to death by two white police officers 
as he was pinned to the pavement outside a convenience store.

The grieving paused Friday in front of Sterling’s open casket, which was 
adorned with music notes and a smiling photo of the man. Sterling was selling 
CDs outside the store, as he had done for years, when he was killed by police 
responding to a call of a man threatening someone with a gun.

Alton Sterling's son: 'Everyone needs to protest the right way, with peace'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/13/alton-sterling-son-cameron-protesters-baton-rouge>
One mourner wore a T-shirt that said “No Justice, No Peace” on the back of it. 
Another carried a poster board sign saying: “Black America I’m Sorry!!”

Sterling’s death was captured on cellphone video and circulated widely on the 
internet. His death, along withanother fatal police shooting in Minnesota last 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/14/philando-castile-funeral-minnesota-police-shooting>
, sparked protests over the treatment of black people by police.

Sterling’s death heightened tensions in Baton Rouge, where about 200 
protesters were arrested over the weekend, and police said they had foiled a 
credible threat to attack officers. Authorities said they discovered the plot 
after a pawn shop burglary, and one of the suspects was to appear in court 
Friday.

Among the mourners was Darrell Jupiter, a landscaper and close friend of 
Sterling’s who came to the visitation inside the basketball arena at Southern 
University, a historically black college in north Baton Rouge.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Falton-sterling-son-press-conference-police-shooting-baton-rouge&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alton%20Sterling's%20family%20give%20emotional%20statement%20after%20police%20killing%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Falton-sterling-son-press-conference-police-shooting-baton-rouge>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alton%20Sterling%27s%20family%20give%20emotional%20statement%20after%20police%20killing%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Falton-sterling-son-press-conference-police-shooting-baton-rouge&media=>
Alton Sterling’s family give emotional statement after police killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-son-press-conference-police-shooting-baton-rouge>
“I just got my appetite back,” said Jupiter, who had a tattoo on his arm with 
the words “RIP Alton”. “My best friend is gone. I have a big chunk missing. I’m 
lost.”
He said he spent lots of time fishing and playing chess with Sterling, whose 
nickname was Dweeb.

He said Sterling had begun to turn his CD selling into a steady way of making 
a living. He had set aside enough money to buy himself a car, Jupiter said.

Albert Carter, Sterling’s 44-year-old half-brother, wore a tie with a picture 
of a grinning Sterling on it. He said he hopes Sterling’s death prompts police 
reform in Baton Rouge.

“We have a lot of terrible police out here,” he said. “They harass.” 

He complained that at last weekend’s protests a police officer pointed a gun 
at him and other protesters.

Sterling’s funeral started with a gospel choir singing hymns, as many in the 
crowd of a couple thousand joined in.

Gary Chambers, a spokesman for the Sterling family and master of ceremonies 
for the funeral, said at the beginning that the event was intended to be a 
celebration of Sterling’s life not an opportunity for demonstrations about his 
death.

“If you want to protest please leave now,” he told the crowd, which included 
two senior advisers to Barack Obama.

Meanwhile, authorities said they discovered the alleged plot against them 
after four suspects broke into a pawn shop and stole guns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/baton-rouge-arrests-black-lives-matter-police-killings>
. One of the suspects said they did so to harm officers; another one said he 
did it to sell the guns, authorities said.

Malik Bridgewater, 20, is scheduled to make his initial appearance in federal 
court on Friday. Police arrested Bridgewater and two other suspects on theft 
and burglary charges after eight handguns were stolen.

Bridgewater told investigators his motivation was to sell stolen items for 
cash, an agent from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives 
wrote in an affidavit filed Thursday in federal court.

State and local law enforcement officials said during a news conference 
Tuesday that the stolen guns were part of a credible threat to harm police 
officers.

The first suspect arrested in the burglary, 17-year-old Antonio Thomas, told 
police that “the reason the burglary was being done was to harm police 
officers”.

Baton Rouge Police Chief Carl Dabadie said threats like that justified an 
increased show of force at the demonstrations, as officers donned riot gear 
after starting with a mostly reserved, low profile.

Dabadie said Thomas didn’t give any details about when or where a possible 
plot would be carried out.

Police arrested a third suspect, a 13-year-old boy, on Monday. A fourth 
suspect remained at large Friday.
 