
In their desperation, following the end of The Night Manager, fans have been 
clinging to the possibility that John le Carré might provide a sequel. Gently, 
Tom Hiddleston has pointed out that the story “feels complete”. His co-star, 
Hugh Laurie, last spotted, as Richard Roper, in the hands of incensed 
assassins, said: “In cold, practical terms, no, we’re done.”

But precedent gives us hope. Homeland persisted, years after the death of 
Damian Lewis’s Brody. Sherlock survived that tumble off a hospital rooftop, as 
well as one down the Reichenbach Falls. And now, surpassing even Conan Doyle’s 
magnificent disregard for continuity,Andrew Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, the terminally 
disgraced British doctor, has unexpectedly returned, if not exactly from the 
dead, certainly as if his medical career had never been killed off, his 
reputation shattered.

In his new documentary, Vaxxed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/02/vaxxed-film-scientist-interview-vaccines-autism>
, Wakefield, the baddy last heard of sloping off to the US, it was assumed to 
live out his days in repentant obscurity, returns in glory as humanity’s 
saviour. To see him in aVaxxed trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EdCU2DfMBpU>, introduced as Andrew Wakefield, 
MB, BS, gastroenterologist, is to meet a fully functioning medic seemingly 
unrelated to the unethical individual who destroyed public confidence in the 
MMR – measles, mumps and rubella – vaccine in 1998 (in a paper since withdrawn 
by theLancet), needlessly putting thousands of unvaccinated children at risk of 
illness and disability. At the same time, the journalistBrian Deer 
<http://briandeer.com/mmr-lancet.htm> discovered, he was building the market 
for an alternative product, from which he stood to profit. The doctorwas struck 
off in 2010 for “serious professional misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/mmr-doctor-andrew-wakefield-struck-off>
”.

Although purportedly a factual work, Vaxxed, to judge by numerous early 
reviews, transports viewers to a world where none of the above ever happened. 
In this parallel world, it is the immunisers, not the former 
gastroenterologist, who go in for cover-ups. So comprehensively is 
contradictory evidence ignored here that Wakefield permits himself the liberty 
of rehashing some of his earlier – utterly discredited – claims, which seemed 
good reason to many of us, in 1998, to worry about theMMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> jab.

The Lancet piece warned of “developmental regression”. This time, he throws in 
the prediction that, if MMR usage continues, half of all America’s boys will be 
on the autistic spectrum by 2032. To be fully apocalyptic, his message requires 
autism itself to be portrayed – deploying footage of distressed-looking 
children – as an invariably frightful diagnosis. It is as if Wakefield wants 
parents to panic anew with the same, injurious consequences for the 
understanding of autism.

Doctors, and others aware of Wakefield’s agenda, have been protesting about 
the baseless anxiety thatVaxxed sets out to generate – and quite successfully, 
in that the film was withdrawn from the Tribeca film festival. One father of a 
boy with autism, the film director Todd Drezner, has written anopen letter 
<https://leftbrainrightbrain.co.uk/2016/03/31/todd-drezner-cinema-libre-studio-and-Vaxxed/>
 to the film’s distributors that itemisesVaxxed’s dishonesties – and dismisses 
their own absurd claims, post-Tribeca, of censorship. It concludes: “I hope 
that sometime in the future you may find ways to undo the damage you are about 
to cause.”

It would be rude and inconsistent to dismiss celebrities' instincts, where 
vaccinations are concerned, as irrelevant.

But powerful as it is, Drezner’s reproach, along with objections 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/anti-vaccine-doc-Vaxxed-a-882651> from 
doctors, must compete with support for Wakefield’s film from another prominent 
parent of a child with autism. Unfortunately for herd immunity, that parent is 
Robert De Niro.

It was only because of De Niro’s intervention that the film was initially 
included in the Tribeca festival, which he co-founded. And although it has been 
withdrawn, the ensuing fuss has only increased awareness of Wakefield’s film 
and, possibly, as damagingly as anything contained in it, of its celebrity 
endorsement. Wakefield, the obscure medical fraudster, is esteemed by a 
Hollywood star of such immeasurable stature and influence that great US 
Democrats prostrate themselves for his approval. In 2011, De Niro’s second 
championship of Obama itself made news, when he attacked “birthers” such as 
Donald Trump who contended that President Obama is not a “natural-born” 
American. “Don’t go out there and say things unless you can back them up,”he 
said 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/robert-de-niro-blasts-donald-181http://www.thewrap.com/hollywood-stars-for-hillary-clinton-list/747>
. “How dare you? That’s awful to do.”

This year, on the 40th anniversary of Taxi Driver, De Niro’s name is high on a 
USchecklist 
<http://www.thewrap.com/voting-with-the-stars-your-guide-to-celebrity-presidential-endorsements-list/>
 of Hillary Clinton supporters, just behind the Clooneys and Kardashians. And 
too bad for science: he also backs Wakefield. Regretting the withdrawal of the 
documentary,De Niro said on the Today show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/13/robert-de-niro-vaxxed-vaccines-interview>
: “I think the movie is something people should see.” Questioned, this time, 
about the facts, ones that undermine Wakefield’s claims, he said: “I believe 
it’s much more complicated than that. There is a link and they are saying there 
isn’t and there are... other things there.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmmr-autism-andrew-wakefield-robert-de-niro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff353b1b7178b467770b66fb1b6234b6fac2f1b95%2F0_227_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Movie%20stars%20have%20their%20uses%3A%20medical%20science%20isn%E2%80%99t%20one%20of%20them%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmmr-autism-andrew-wakefield-robert-de-niro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Movie%20stars%20have%20their%20uses%3A%20medical%20science%20isn%E2%80%99t%20one%20of%20them%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmmr-autism-andrew-wakefield-robert-de-niro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff353b1b7178b467770b66fb1b6234b6fac2f1b95%2F0_227_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Robert De Niro, champion of Andrew Wakefield. Photograph: Grant Lamos IV/Getty 
Images 
To counter this, the scientific camp would need to recruit, from Clinton’s 
supporters, at least Matt Damon, Tom Hanks and Lena Dunham, and maybe, as 
insurance, Ryan Gosling, from the edgier crowd backing Sanders. If Vaccinating 
With the Stars looks a little inappropriate where public health is concerned, 
so too is the prospect of children falling ill because an actor clearly hasn’t 
read Wakefield’s Wikipedia entry. Unless, worse still, he has.

Failing such an intervention, the most effective way for doctors to limit 
Vaxxed’s damage might be to advertise the names – and theories – of some of De 
Niro’s existing sympathisers, who include Jim Carrey and Donald Trump. The 
latter suggests “monster shots 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/09/17/the-gops-dangerous-debate-on-vaccines-and-autism/>
” are behind an “epidemic” of autism. In fact, if these star endorsements have 
any value, some Democrat-voting pro-Wakefield De Niro fans must now be 
agonising over how best to respond to the world’s finest method actor. Do they 
support Clinton? Or Trump, against the MMR? Maybe the former Harry Potter, 
Daniel Radcliffe, could be persuaded to adjudicate. All that spell-casting must 
have given him some insight into epidemiology.

It would be rude to the celebrities, as well as inconsistent, to dismiss their 
instincts, where vaccinations are concerned, as irrelevant. In Britain, as in 
the US, all political camps cherish a star endorsement, with the obvious 
exception of any intervention by Russell Brand. Ditto Emma Thompson’s 
representations, on a number of subjects. Remainers will be praying for no 
repetition of Nanny McPhee’s remarks on British rain and cake. Generally, 
however, the pause in Jeremy Corbyn’s noted impassivity, when he wasapproved 
<http://www.thenorthernecho.co.uk/news/national/14412900.Taxi_for_Cameron__Danny_DeVito_backs_Jeremy_Corbyn/>
 by the US actor Danny DeVito testifies to the political joy when a bankable 
entertainer takes sides.

As for the artists, it is hardly surprising if some respond to such 
appreciation with advocacy on anything from the refugee crisis, tuna fishing, 
the BBC and BP’s sponsorship of Tate Modern, £175m “garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/24/joanna-lumley-role-boris-johnson-thames-garden-bridge-london-thomas-heatherwick>
” bridges, the Elgin Marbles, the wrongness of air travel (for non-industry 
fliers) and, in the current case, the factitious link between MMR and autism.

Which stars should we listen to? I’d go for Oscar winners only, were it not 
that De Niro, Andrew Wakefield’s priceless ally, has a well-deserved two.

• Comments will be opened later today
 