
Alison Moyet <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alison-moyet> would be 
interviewed in the Royal Room, I was told. She was having her hair and make-up 
attended to in preparation for the encounter. Clearly we were on planet 
celebrity, a place of expensive hair products and VIP enclosures.

Or perhaps not. The Royal Room is a dun-coloured, windowless chamber in the 
bowels of the AdelphiTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> on 
London's Strand and, while it really is where royals are entertained at 
interval time, it has seen far better days. The walls are hung with faded 
posters advertising old Andrew Lloyd Webber musicals and in one corner, as if 
straining to make the royal connection, is a long mirror with a grand rococo 
frame, but the gilding is flaking away from it badly now.

There is an obvious temptation, while we wait for Moyet to get her hair done, 
to use this knackered room as some clumsy metaphor for the state of her career: 
the huge star, whose extraordinary, foundation-shaking blues voice gave her top 
10 hits first with Yazoo in 1982 and then as a solo artist, is now aged 40. 
Hungry for renewed exposure she is entering the retirement home for jaded 
former pop stars, a West End show. In 10 days' time she is taking over as Mama 
Morton - a dykey Chicago jailer with two songs - in Kander and Ebb's dark 
musical Chicago.

That, however, is to presume Moyet was ever particularly good at being a pop 
star; that she bought into it. Yes, she's had the hits: she has sold more than 
20 million records worldwide. Her biggest successes may have been in the 
Eighties but as recently as 1995 an album of her singles went to number one and 
her two most recent solo albums, Essex and Hoodoo, were critically 
well-received. She still has a solid fan base. Sustained by The Voice, Moyet 
has never run the risk of being merely some nostalgia item on a BBC2 programme 
called I Love 1982.

But she is also a card-carrying member of the awkward squad with enormous 
stretches of blank time on her CV to prove it. She has spent six of the last 20 
years tied up in legal wrangles with her various record companies over the 
distinctly uncommercial records she has wanted to release. As to her decision 
to take a part in Chicago, it has nothing to do with a hunger for the 
spotlight, she says. It's altogether more curious than that: Alison Moyet may 
be the first person in theatrical history to take a part in a West End musical 
as emotional therapy.

She flings open the door to the Royal Room noisily. Whatever was done to her 
hair it wasn't some massive operation. It hangs in a loose tousle about her 
shoulders. She remains a lush, striking beauty although she is smaller and more 
compact than I imagined; squared off and chunky. 'My weight can swing by four 
stone,' she says at one point. 'And I'm at a low level now.' I tell her I was 
attempting to be the one journalist not to mention her size and she just 
shrugs. 'Some people are fat and some are thin. What's the issue?'

Normally she doesn't do that much press, she says. Not because she doesn't 
like the chat. Sometimes she loves the chat. She can talk up a storm, and fast. 
She's promiscuous with words. She just doesn't know which Alison Moyet will 
emerge from the conversation: the neurotic, angst-ridden one, the lovelorn one, 
or the angry, tub-thumping feminist one, and she's been all of them over the 
years. But this interview is different. This is part of the job of being in a 
West End show.

So why agree to take the part? 'I was stuck in legal problems with my record 
company,' she says. 'I was in my house for months on end and I needed the 
company of living people.' A friend who is connected with the musical could see 
that being at home was doing her no good. 'He could sense my decline, I think, 
and my lack of exuberance so he told me that I could get the part of Mama 
Morton without auditioning.'

It was, as it turned out, a whopping lie. Moyet went to the meeting last 
January, without having seen the show, and soon found herself singing for 
producers with whom she thought she was just chatting over possibilities. A few 
weeks later the senior production team from Broadway flew in to watch her. 'I 
think it was when all the Americans were sitting six rows back that I realised 
I was being auditioned.'

Lying to her was the best thing her friend could have done, she admits now. 'I 
felt so exhilarated because I'd stood there on my own and I'd done all these 
things in front of these people I'd never met before. I'd climbed all these 
mountains.' It makes her sound like a hopeful on Popstars rather than a 
seasoned pro; it makes it sound like her time at home in Hertfordshire with her 
three kids was not just a spot of isolation, but something much darker.

It was, she says. Two years ago Moyet fell out with an A&R man at Sony, her 
record company, who wanted her to return to the shiny mainstream pop that had 
been so successful in the Eighties. She declined and, although they allowed her 
to record a new album, it was clear that they wouldn't release it.

'I sank into this rut. My daily activity was get up, tidy the house, get some 
food in for the kids' tea and then make the call to my managers to see if the 
record company had agreed to let me go.' It went on for months, this waiting 
and phoning and waiting. 'I'd sit at home getting enormously fat, watching TV 
and all the time I'd be thinking: I can't go on television... I can't do that. 
I was becoming more and more distanced from the world that I normally work in.' 
She pauses. 'I actually think there's something a bit funny in my head,' she 
says.

It's not the first time she has retreated into herself. In the Eighties a 
disdain for the baggage of celebrity, a simple hatred of being recognised, 
slipped all too easily into something resembling agoraphobia. 'I didn't even go 
out to the shops,' Moyet said during an interview in the mid-Nineties, when 
that episode had passed. 'It got to the point when if someone knocked on the 
door I'd hide in the cupboard for two or three hours. Going out terrified me. 
When I went out, the road used to rise up to meet me.'

This, she eventually realised, was no way to live. 'You get to the point where 
you think you're letting yourself and your kids down. It's no life for them 
with you living in fear the whole time.' She started off slowly, dying her hair 
black so she was less easily recognisable out on the streets. Then she 
discovered the glorious anonymity of live football matches, involving Southend, 
the team she supports. By going to watch them play she could become part of a 
massive crowd that had no interest in her. 'I could go to matches and people 
just left me alone.'

Clearly, the recent battles with Sony had pushed her back into the dark, 
domestic pit that she thought she had scrambled out of. Had she ever considered 
seeking help? 'I've never understood how people who need help pluck up the 
courage to go and get help.' Perhaps she wasn't in such a bad way, then. 
Perhaps, she says, though she believes she was in the grip of a depression. 'I 
need to work. Where I come from people work and I wasn't working.'

For her fans this emotional vulnerability may seem unlikely. She has always 
represented a certain strength and dependability in a music world built on 
flimsy reputations. She was the one who really could sing. Her thick ballsy 
tones gave bottom to Vince Clarke's flash electronics in the Yazoo days and 
while her first two solo albums, Alf and Raindancing, were clearly pop 
products, her roaring voice made them seem so much more substantial.

Then there was her beautifully authentic background as a post-punk Essex girl 
from the New Town suburb of Basildon, who somehow made it big. And, of course, 
the simple issue of her size; surrounded by etiolated pop waifs she has always 
looked so much more of a grown-up.

For her part Moyet is distinctly accepting of her own singing talent, almost 
neglectful of it. She never practises and she has never worried about the voice 
packing up on her. 'I have never truly applied myself,' she says. 'Lots of 
things have come too easily to me and at too high a level.'

In the early Eighties, already a well-known singer around the pubs of Essex, 
she advertised in Melody Maker for someone to sing with. Vince Clarke, who had 
only recently left Depeche Mode, asked her to sing on the demo for 'Only You'. 
Within weeks it - and she - was at the top of the charts. 'I started out 
wanting to be really big on the pub singing circuit,' Moyet says, 'and I ended 
up playing the Dominion Theatre. I just wanted to do a record my friends could 
go out and buy and I got a number one.'

I tell her that I saw that Yazoo gig at the Dominion Theatre, some time in 
1982. It was peculiar: two people, one big, one little, and an enormous, empty 
stage, but it worked brilliantly all the same. She agrees that it was a 
peculiar concert, but then the whole of Yazoo was peculiar. It all happened so 
fast. I also tell her that her first solo album, Alf, used to be my music of 
choice for long motorway drives in the mid-Eighties and that I saw her perform 
with her own band at Leeds University some time in 1985. (I don't, however, 
tell her that it was one of my favourite gigs of all time and that I'm 
convinced she waved to me from the stage; I don't want her thinking this 
interview is really just an unsubtle form of stalking by some tragic fan who 
can't put the Eighties behind him.)

She takes my appalling fandom graciously but says 'people's relationships with 
records are their own. That's fine but I see them differently.' Both Yazoo's 
first album, Upstairs at Eric's, and her first solo album are special to her 
because of what was going on at the time. But she says 'it was always important 
to me that I made a record where I really sang well and I don't think it's 
happened yet. There's always a possibility, with each album, that I might not 
record again and I wanted to produce one that I could feel was mine.'

She thinks the one she finished seven months ago - the one Sony records have 
passed on, which is called Hometime - is it. 'It's an adult album but it's not 
mainstream. There's some blues on it, some chanson, some heavy strings. It's 
the best album I've ever made. A lot of people will love it but it's not Radio 
One.' Now she has to find someone to release it. Sony records only finally 
agreed to let her go last week.

While her management gets on with trying to flog it, she must get on with the 
odd business of appearing in a musical. Had she previously harboured ambitions 
to be on stage? 'I wanted to act when I was young,' she says. 'When I was 12 I 
asked the head of English at my school can I audition, and he said what would 
we want you for? And I remember going "oh yeah. Why would they want me?" ' I 
ask her if she wants to name him. It would show him. She declines. He's dead 
now and she doesn't want to speak ill of the dead. It's as if the thought of 
revenge hadn't occurred to her.

Then, looking down at her lap, she says: 'I don't know why I'm doing this show 
really.' She looks up again. She's clearly intrigued by the thought, rather 
than distressed by it. Just why the hell is she sitting here in a West End 
theatre? 'I know I like singing,' she says, as if trying to work out the 
answer. 'And I have always wanted to act. It's the antithesis of the punk thing 
isn't it? It's the opposite. I've always had a horror of stage school antics 
and now I'm doing them and I think that's quite funny. I'm kind of 
over-stepping the mark.'

She also likes the discipline of it. 'I like the fact that the moves are 
choreographed because I'm quite inhibited on stage. It will be interesting to 
go out there and have every move shaped out. And I'm not the star here. I'm not 
going to be the owner of all I see.' That's a little disingenuous. Although 
Mama Morton is not the biggest part in Chicago her solo song, 'When You're Good 
To Mama' - a sly and mucky number about the importance of pleasuring those in 
authority - is a potential show-stopper.

She's contracted for 13 weeks. Would she sign on for more if it was offered? 
It's a difficult one. 'I haven't had a full-time job since I was 17. I don't 
know what it's going to be like.' She's also used to having a lot of time with 
her kids, the youngest of whom, Caitlin, is just five. Her husband, a social 
worker, is about to go to college as a mature student to take a degree. He has 
agreed to delay his studies to take on the burden of childcare. So it's 
complicated.

This part in Chicago has got her out of the house but eventually she knows 
she's going to want to get back there, even though she's not at all convinced 
that being there is good for her. 'What I'm doing now is all a little strange,' 
she says. 'But when you're sitting at home everything is a little strange. Even 
shopping is strange.'

It all sounds as dark and gloomy as the tawdry decor of the Royal Room in 
which we have been talking but she doesn't seem down; down is where Alison 
Moyet has just been. She describes it all with the giddy exuberance of someone 
who has survived a horrible car crash and isn't quite sure how. Soon she's 
going back out on stage and, as she says, 'being on stage is all I really 
understand'. It may not be the kind of stage she's used to but that doesn't 
seem to matter. Being on it is all that counts. For Alison Moyet the therapy is 
already working.

 Alison Moyet joins 'Chicago' at the Adelphi Theatre, London, on 13 August.
 