
A pair of mummified knees found in a tomb in Egypt’s Valley of the Queens are 
most likely those of Queen Nefertari, the royal spouse of Pharaoh Ramses II, 
say archaeologists.

Thought to have died around 1250 BC, Nefertari was the favourite consort of 
Ramses the Great, and wasfamed at the time for her beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2007/jan/10/psychology.internationalnews>.

“[Her] main role [was] to be the decorative bystander when Ramses was flexing 
his pharaonic muscles at public events, and she was there as the eye candy,” 
said Joann Fletcher from the University of York, a co-author of the research 
published in thejournal PlosOne 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0166571>. 
“But really, [she was] a striking woman who I think exerted a quiet power 
behind the throne.”

Nefertari’s lavish tomb was discovered in 1904 – the walls covered in 
beautiful paintings, although the tomb itself had been looted long before. But 
it was unclear whether the fragmented, mummified legs discovered among the 
remaining contents did indeed belong to the queen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmummified-knees-are-queen-nefertaris-archaeologists-conclude%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6fa5b080d83e166f79de0f912f0d26327f651f8%2F133_175_1303_782%2F1303.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mummified%20knees%20are%20Queen%20Nefertari's%2C%20archaeologists%20conclude&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmummified-knees-are-queen-nefertaris-archaeologists-conclude%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mummified%20knees%20are%20Queen%20Nefertari%27s%2C%20archaeologists%20conclude&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmummified-knees-are-queen-nefertaris-archaeologists-conclude%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6fa5b080d83e166f79de0f912f0d26327f651f8%2F133_175_1303_782%2F1303.jpg>
 When Nefertari’s tomb was discovered in 1904 it was unclear whether the 
fragmented, mummified legs belonged to the queen. Photograph: Courtesy of Joann 
Fletcher 
“There is a long, long history certainly in that part of Egypt around the 
Valley of the Queens, the Valley of the Kings and the nobles’ tombs - you have 
repeated reuse of many burial sites, so lots of tombs were reused in later 
times,” said Fletcher. “You have got the effects also of very occasional but 
dramatic flash floods, when all sorts of material can be washed into tombs – so 
while things are found in a tomb it doesn’t necessarily follow that the human 
remains that you are finding are those of the individual portrayed in there and 
on the tomb walls.”

In an attempt to resolve the question, Fletcher and an international team of 
researchers carried out a host of tests on the remains– currently housed in the 
Egyptian museum in Turin, Italy – including radiocarbon dating, x-rays of the 
legs, comparison of the knees with ancient and modern samples, and an 
investigation of the chemistry of the embalming agents.

“Having studied the woman, and having looked as so many images of her 
beautiful face, I think there is a sense of immense irony that physically this 
is what we have got,” said Fletcher. “She has been reduced to knees. But 
because we don’t give up – it’s like: ‘we have got the knees, well, let’s do 
what we can with them.’”

The results reveal that remains belong to a woman probably aged around 40 to 
50 years, who appears to have had a high social status. “The expertise that had 
gone into that mummification – even judging from the legs – the care, the 
attention, the wrapping, the materials employed; they are strongly suggestive 
someone of incredibly high status,” said Fletcher.

Together with the chemistry of the embalming agents, and analysis of various 
objects found in the tomb, the authors say the evidence suggests the knees are 
indeed those of Nefertari.



But not everyone is bowled over by the conclusion. As Christopher Eyre, 
professor ofEgyptology <https://www.theguardian.com/science/egyptology> at the 
University of Liverpool points out, no information could be gleaned from the 
team’s ancient DNA analysis, comparisons to other knees can be problematic and, 
in any case, the knees were largely assumed to belong to Nefertari.


“This is an extremely interesting scientific analysis, but in the end it 
doesn’t add anything to our assumptions before we started,” he said.

 