
Wayfinding <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wayfinding> is something that’s 
often taken for granted. At its best, you barely notice it, but at its worst, 
it becomes frustratingly obvious. This is especially true for museums and 
galleries, where visitor experience and visitor satisfaction ratings are often 
directly affected by the ability to navigate successfully around the space. For 
some, part of the appeal of visiting a gallery is in getting lost among the art 
and ephemera, but for others it can be intimidating and confusing.


 On a recent trip to the Louvre <http://www.louvre.fr/en> in Paris, France, my 
initial enthusiasm quickly turned to tension as I joined thousands of tourists 
being herded through this vast gallery. I shamefully skipped masterpiece after 
masterpiece, following a somewhat clumsy signage system that directed me almost 
straight to the Mona Lisa. I was stressed and exhausted by the time I left. I 
exited with a feeling of missed opportunity – not just on a personal level, but 
knowing that from a creative perspective there were so many ways in which the 
gallery could have employed effective wayfinding to better engage visitors.

If your space becomes a never ending list of restrictions, visitors will never 
feel relaxed nor engaged

I’ve worked with a number of galleries and institutions to help them navigate 
the trials and tribulations of wayfinding. It can be an intricate challenge. 
Lots of galleries and museums are housed in historic buildings, which have been 
extended and adapted over the years, making them extremely complex spaces. Add 
to that limited budgets and countless rules and regulations, and it’s no wonder 
that wayfinding is notoriously difficult to get right.


So with all these added complications, how can cultural attractions create 
more engaging orientation systems?


Wayfinding does not equal signage

There’s a common misconception that wayfinding simply means signage; instead 
it should be a carefully considered combination of signage, maps, guides, 
front-of-house staff, apps, intuitive design and pre-acquired knowledge. 
Consider other ways of orientating your visitors. This could start pre-visit 
with downloadable maps and guides, which allow visitors to plan their trip, or 
anapp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/series/app-story> 
that helps visitors navigate the space while also providing them with audio 
tours and additional content. Two of my favourite examples are Tate Britain’s 
downloadablemap <http://www.tate.org.uk/download/file/fid/50177> and the 
National Portrait Gallery’sapp <http://www.npg.org.uk/visit/apps.php>.

Curate experiences

 There are many different reasons people visit galleries, museums and heritage 
sites – and there’s no right or wrong way to explore them. By involving 
curatorial staff you can explore different ways in which visitors could 
experience the collections and exhibitions. There may be several key visitor 
routes that are plotted within the spaces and you could consider creating a set 
of trails tailored to different experiences. For example, when working with the 
Wellcome Collection earlier this year we createdvisitor trails 
<http://wellcomecollection.org/visit-us/trails>: thematically composed maps 
that allowed visitors to navigate the space depending on their mood. Our aim 
was that with each visit, a new experience could be had.

Writing gallery texts and wall panels: common mistakes to avoid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/aug/04/writing-gallery-texts-panels-common-mistakes-interpretation>
Think dos, not don’ts

 If your space becomes a never ending list of restrictions – no photographs, 
no food and drink, no touching, no talking and so on – visitors will never feel 
relaxed nor engaged. Rules are there for a reason, but rather than focus only 
on what people can’t do, try to point them in the direction of what they can 
do. The National Trust’s Nature’s Playgroundsigns 
<http://www.theclickdesign.com/project/national-trust-natures-playground/> 
(“please do touch”) are a great example of subverting the rules. If you need to 
impose a restriction zone, for example around a fragile object, then simply 
explain why and direct visitors to where they can take a closer look at the 
detail (for example, online). People tend to be more relaxed and understanding 
when they feel informed.

Think around the rules

 There are a number of health and safety and accessibility rules that must be 
considered when creating signage and wayfinding. The key is not to look at 
these regulations as restrictions. Instead, see them as opportunities within 
which to find creative ways to work. When working on a wayfinding project for a 
new National Trust visitor centre we were asked to create compulsory glass 
manifestations to ensure visitors were aware of the floor to ceiling glass that 
made up the space. Rather than take the usual route of putting the logo across 
the window, we used it as an opportunity to be creative and bring the estate to 
life through life-size illustrations across the glass.

Put the fun back in functional

Although functionality must always come first when creating a wayfinding 
system, it’s also a great opportunity to engage visitors with your brand and 
inject a sense of personality. Admittedly, fun may not always be appropriate, 
but consider ways in which wayfinding can be used to bring your brand to life. 
Thework 
<http://cartlidgelevene.co.uk/work/wayfinding-and-signage/guardian-news-and-media>
 that Cartlidge Levene did for the Guardian is a fine example of how a strong 
brand identity can bring your building to life.


Karen Hughes is creative director at True North <http://thisistruenorth.co.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 