
App: MusicMagpie <http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/musicmagpie/id416562292?mt=8#>

By: Entertainment Magpie Ltd

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>, iPod 
Touch, iPad

What is it?

Scan the barcodes of your unwanted CDs, DVDs or games and the MusicMagpie 
website <http://www.musicmagpie.co.uk/> will tell you how much it will pay you 
for them.

Who is it by?

MusicMagpie originally launched as a way for consumers to trade in old CDs for 
cash. The company launched gameMagpie to do the same for video games before it 
was eventually bundled into musicMagpie and DVDs were added to the service.

What does it promise?

"Turn your old CDs, DVDs and games into cash instantly. Every day thousands of 
people use musicMagpie to de-clutter their homes or make a little extra money 
for themselves."

Is it easy to use?

I had some teething problems with the app itself, both with registering and 
with scanning items. The app would not recognise my username or password, but 
when I tried to re-register it told me my email address was already in the 
system – one of those frustrating chicken and egg registration scenarios. In 
the end I had to use a second email address to complete my registration.

Once in, the app was simple enough to use. I scanned and inputted a few 
barcodes and the app calculated how much it would give me for them reasonably 
quickly. But it struggled when it couldn't find an item in its database – for a 
couple of products a spinning wheel along with the word "processing" blocked my 
screen for more than five minutes before I had to close the app and relaunch.

Is it fun?

It's fun to get paid (albeit peanuts) to effectively recycle things you don't 
want anymore.

Is it pretty?

The magpie character is endearing enough, though it does look a bit like a 
penguin. Elsewhere, icons and a clean colour scheme add to the charm.

Should you download it?
 MusicMagpie QR code 
Despite moments of clunkiness, it's certainly worth a look. This is no 
criticism of the app, but the musicMagpie service itself does not pay top 
dollar for old CDs, games or DVDs. It offered me £3 for the entire final season 
of 24 (which now has its ownJack Bauer-themed fragrance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/28/24-the-fragrance-jack-bauer>
) compared to about £18-£20 on eBay, although highly popular goods are always 
worth less than rarer items. But it is convenience that the app is offering, 
and many will feel it is worth taking less in cash in order to avoid the ordeal 
of listing each item on eBay, especially when a sale is far from guaranteed at 
the online auction house.
 