
A group of samurai, along with a motley gang of armed villagers, await the 
arrival of 13 formidable bandits on horseback. With piercing rain beating down 
on them, Kambei, the leader of the samurai, solemnly says: "This is the final 
battle." With hellish cries, the mounted invaders charge through the black mud 
and into the village, where they are annihilated by a frenzy of makeshift 
spears and deadly arrows. Samurai swords cut into the horses, bodies drop into 
the mud – mud that lurched off the screen and into my socks.

Long before I was to experience the technical marvels of 3D, I was 
experiencing something much more cinematically powerful – the percussive power 
ofAkira Kurosawa <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/akirakurosawa>'s editing. The 
subtitles didn't even register. I sat in my parent's living room; 12 years old, 
transfixed and shell-shocked by the way the images had catapulted me into the 
rain-drenched violence.Cinema would never be the same again 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xnRUHtSgJ9o> and in that moment I decided I 
wanted to become a film-maker.

Initially, however, I remember being quite resistant to my parent's suggestion 
of sitting down with them to watch a three-hour black and white film set in 
16th century feudal Japan. I had no idea what a samurai was … and why was 
everyone going bald and wearing pyjamas? It wasn't until master swordsman Kyuzo 
settled a feud with a lethal swipe of his blade that I started to pay close 
attention. (It seems Sam Peckinpah was taking notes, too.)
 Seven Samurai Toshiro Mifune Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/COLUMBIA 
Seven Samurai <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76377/seven-samurai>, made 
in 1954, is perhaps Kurosawa's most famous film. It was a blockbuster in every 
sense, being the most expensive Japanese film ever made (after Kurosawa 
insisted on shooting everything on location) and running to almost four hours 
in length. It's a period film (or jidaigeki) conceived on an epic scale, 
pitting Takashi Shimura's wise, zen-like leader against the wildcat intensity 
of Toshiro Mifune's son-of-a-farmer samurai. Along with five other 
swords-for-hire (of mixed ability), they are employed by farmers to protect 
their village from raiding bandits. What follows is pure cinematic dynamite.

The story may not be as groundbreaking as Rashomon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/83179/rashomon>, or as poignant as Ikiru 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/91111/ikiru> (said to be Steven 
Spielberg's favourite film), but everything is beautifully constructed and the 
film contains enough frenetic action sequences to make Quentin Tarantino blush. 
It's also rather funny. When asked how many enemies he's recently killed, one 
samurai responds: "Since it is impossible to kill them all, I usually run 
away." Kurosawa (from samurai stock himself) wasn't afraid to dismantle the 
mythical status cinema had attributed to samurai figures: a theme Clint 
Eastwood would later explore inHigh Plains Drifter 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/123499/high-plains-drifter> and Unforgiven
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/35209/unforgiven/review>.
 Seven Samurai Toshiro Mifune close up Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
Also paying close attention to all of this was George Lucas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/georgelucas>, who would eventually combine the 
plots and characters from Seven Samurai with another Kurosawa adventure,Hidden 
Fortress <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/83724/hidden.fortress>, to make 
Star Wars <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/starwars>. The first one (Episode IV: 
A New Hope) is essentially the first chapter of Seven Samurai, but with 
slightly fewer characters. Obi-Wan Kenobi, Han Solo and Chewbacca are ronin 
(masterless samurai), light-sabres are samurai swords (rather obvious, I guess) 
and the Force is a supernatural version of the Bushidõ samurai moral code. 
Lucas even borrows Kurosawa's favourite character theme of master and 
apprentice. When Obi-Wan Kenobi faces Darth Vader on the Death Star, 
light-sabres at the ready, Darth booms: "When I left you I was but the learner. 
Now I am the master."

I guess Kurosawa would have taken it as a compliment, as he was no stranger to 
adaptations himself – having reworked Dostoevsky's The Idiot and Shakespeare's 
Macbeth (Throne of Blood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/78082/throne.of.blood>), Hamlet (The Bad 
Sleep Well) and King Lear (Ran) to great effect. He was also a big fan of John 
Ford westerns, and so it seems only appropriate that Seven Samurai was later 
remade by Hollywood asThe Magnificent Seven 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/34969/magnificent-seven> with Steve 
McQueen and Yul Brynner.

The lesson this taught me, when I later studied film-making at university, was 
that cinema is a fluid melting pot of ideas – where every composition, every 
carefully timed edit, every line of dialogue is borrowed or remoulded from the 
long history of cinematic grammar, thrashed out over decades of genre mashups 
and cultural twists. And it's all there for the taking. What could be more 
reassuring to a young film-maker who has no idea of where to begin? Simply 
pillage from the films and stories that first inspired you to pick up a camera. 
Lucas did it to Kurosawa, and Kurosawa did it to Shakespeare and John Ford.
 