
Three Christmases ago, the Guardian moved from Farringdon Road 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/gallery/2008/dec/15/1> to a patch of 
regeneratingedgeland 
<http://www.marionshoard.co.uk/Documents/Articles/Environment/Edgelands-Remaking-the-Landscape.pdf>
 north-east of Kings Cross. And, ever since, there's been an unbeatable new 
boon to working here: you're never more than a hop or askip 
<http://www.kingscrosscentral.com/skip_garden> from where they shot 
<http://www.martinunderwood.f9.co.uk/Ladykillers/> The Ladykillers.

Alexander Mackendrick's 1955 comedy is Ealing's neatest, and its trippiest; 
the product of lurid new colour stock (including somealarming back-projection 
<http://www.thestickingplace.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/02/Ladykillers-12.jpg>
) and a hallucinatory premise. The plot – five faintly spivvy crims, headed up 
by a bafflingly dastardly Alec Guinness, get an old lady to aid them in a 
bullion heist, then (spoiler alert) one by one die in their efforts to bump her 
off – apparently came, fully formed, towriter William Rose 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Rose_%28screenwriter%29> in a dream. 

Rose fell out with Mackendrick in pre-production, so the director pieced 
together the script from Rose's notes (when the writer saw the film later, he 
thought they'd improved on his vision). Could that explain the snap and 
crackle? The quick spin and nifty lick that makes it feel more akin to The 
Sweet Smell of Success than to creaky Brit-coms of the same vintage.

For what elevates The Ladykillers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-ladykillers> way above panto 
predictability is that it operates slightly off-centre; it takes its cue from 
its heroine (christened Mrs Lopsided), rattling about in her wonky house, 
perched by the railway sidings. What makes it funny is not that they employ her 
unwitting services, but that she's so sweet-natured about it (the cops even 
give her a lift back with the cash). That, when the penny drops, fear never 
crosses her mind, only opprobrium. And that her reprimands are effective: some 
of the gang are admonished, genuinely shamed. Even the most dark-hearted can't 
even manage to wring her neck.
 The Ladykillers Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
It's a film with jazz in its bones and rhythm to its beats: I love the sudden 
violence with which Mrs Wilberforce mallets the cold water pipe, the lovely nod 
toThe Lodger 
<http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-ZH0QHR2hODo/TXGHA9L5M4I/AAAAAAAAAjk/RzHudyAcfo4/s400/lodger3.jpg>
 when Alec Guinness first materialises at the house, silhouetted behind the 
frosted glass. The audio gags – a bleed from parrot yelps to train-tunnel 
screams, the gulped asides and the fade-out lines ("It's a brown horse, 11 
years old, answers to the name of Dennis …").

Who couldn't be stirred by the gleeful noir of the opening theme 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nUNAC_DCGzA&feature=related>, nor by the 
Boccherini Minuet that the film makes famous again 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szGbpCsxreo> (their cover story is they're an 
amateur string quintet)? It's a beautifully musical film all the way through, 
in fact, partly an effect ofKatie Johnson's delivery as Mrs W 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katie_Johnson>: incredible gentle diction, all 
sweet bleats and trilly intonation.
 The Ladykillers Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
Like my other favourite 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/sep/16/back-to-the-future-25th>, I can't 
remember the first time I saw it. There was no epiphany or rite of passage, no 
lucky stumble into the wrong cinema. It's just always been there. It was one of 
three VHS tapes bought on merit when I was growing up. And as someone who spent 
a lot of time with their grandmother, it seemed only natural that bank robbers 
would meet their match in a benevolent pensioner.

The film itself is a little deeper: as Mackendrick explained in a book 
published 2005, Mrs W, with her nods to her Navy husband, and her aged friends, 
is upstanding Old Britiain – conservative sterness rapping the fingers of 
economic innovation.

The fable of The Ladykillers is a comic and ironic joke about the condition of 
postwar England. After the war, the country was going through a kind of quiet, 
typically British but nevertheless historically fundamental revolution. Though 
few people were prepared to face up to it, the great days of the Empire were 
gone for ever. British society was shattered with the same kind of conflicts 
appearing in many other countries: an impoverished and disillusioned upper 
class, a brutalised working class, juvenile delinquency among the mods and 
rockers, an influx of foreign and potentially criminal elements, and a collapse 
of "intellectual" leadership. All of these threatened the stability of the 
national character.

Though at no time did Bill Rose or I ever spell this out, look at the 
characters in the film. The Major (played by Cecil Parker), a conman, is a 
caricature of the decadent military ruling class. One Round (Danny Green) is 
the oafish representative of the British masses. Harry (Peter Sellers) is the 
spiv, the worthless younger generation. Louis (Herbert Lorn) is the dangerously 
unassimilated foreigner. They are a composite cartoon of Britain's corruption. 
The tiny figure of Mrs Wilberforce (Wilberforce was the name of the 
19th-century idealist who called for the abolition of slavery) is plainly a 
much diminished Britannia. Her house is in a cul-de-sac. Shabby and cluttered 
with memories of the days when Britain's navy ruled the world and captains 
gallantly stayed on the bridge as their ship went down, her house is 
structurally unsound. Dwarfed by the grim landscape of railway yards and 
screaming express trains, it is Edwardian England, an anachronism in the 
contemporary world.

Bill Rose's sentimental hope for the country that he and I saw through fond 
but sceptical eyes was that it might still, against all logic, survive its 
enemies. A theme, a message of sorts, one that I felt very attached to. But one 
that it took quite some time for me to consciously recognise and appreciate.
 The Ladykillers Photograph: Alamy 
I didn't twig that at the time, of course. And today I still love it not for 
its ambivalent social message but because it reminds me of my granny, and the 
teas and the friends she used to have, because of the rackety parrots and the 
fabulous RP station announcements. The foggy menace of that final shootout, the 
exotic struts of the gaswork, the intricate structure of the screenplay that 
gives us that beautiful bookend payoff, in which the cops write her off as 
dotty and so urge her to keep the lolly. I can think of no happier ending than 
that one, in which Katie Johnson totters down the street, ignoring her brolly, 
rewarding the tramp, as the sun rises over St Pancras and the trains hoot 
below, and the five coshed corpses chug their way north.
 