
Largentière is a market town, with a population of less than 2,000, in the 
Monts d'Ardèche, the north-eastern foothills of the Cévennes, those 
bigger-than-hills, smaller-than-mountains that Robert Louis Stevenson explored 
with his donkey. Crammed into a bend of a narrow valley, its harmonious stone 
houses climb and fall in steep, tight, crooked streets.

I loathe places where the changes of season are imperceptible. Largentière 
<http://www.ardeche.com/ville-village/largentiere.php> is dank under grey skies 
and glorious through long springs and autumns; it endures life-threatening 
downpours in the flood season, and in August is as stifling as a Kasbah. There 
can be few towns where the weather so affects the communal mood.

The name derives from the silver-bearing lead mines which were first exploited 
by the Romans, and came into their own as a source of funding for the Crusades. 
The medieval chateau, and the fortress towers of the surrounding villages, were 
built to protect the Crusaders' revenues.

The town's 13th-century church is called Nôtre-Dame-des-Pommiers, Our Lady of 
the Apple Trees, and the surrounding valleys also include steeply terraced 
orchards of cherry, plum and fig, among the vineyards and olive groves. For 
years I have lived in a converted silk farm among these orchards, and I go 
whenever possible to the Tuesday market. I started to go for convenience, and 
now go for love.

There are many quiet pleasures to be enjoyed in Largentière. I have a 
particular fondness for Madame Martin'squincaillerie. 'Ironmongers' doesn't 
begin to describe this two-storey shop bristling with hunting knives, 
glittering with highly polished pots and pans, and arrayed with every household 
necessity, plus a super-chic line in kitchen- and tableware. An added bonus is 
that there are often several kittens scampering about.

A few miles away is the Roseraie de Berty <http://www.roseraie-de-berty.com/> 
the garden of renowned rose-grower Eléonore Cruse. Open to the public from 
mid-May to mid-June, when the roses are flourishing, the garden is laid out in 
a semi-English manner, which French gardening formalists may find untidy. I 
have bought many roses from Mme Cruse – as well as her useful and enjoyable 
books. Her garden is a place of perfect repose, full of heady scents and rich 
colours. It is the sanest place I know on earth.

• Fly to Nîmes (two hours' drive from Largentière) from Luton or Liverpool 
from £62 return withRyanair <http://www.ryanair.com> or take a train from 
London to Avignon (seven hours direct) from £109 return throughRail Europe 
<http://www.raileurope.co.uk/> . Les Marroniers 
<http://marronniers.ardeche.com/index.php> , 3km away near La Prade, has a gîte 
sleeping six from €320 a week, B&B doubles from €43, plus camping pitches and 
mobile homes

Richard Davenport-Hines's latest book is An English Affair: Sex, Class and 
Power in the Age of Profumo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/04/an-english-affair-richard-davenport-hines-review>
 (HarperCollins, £20). To buy a copy for £16 with free UK p&p go to
guardianbookshop.co.uk 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007435845>
 