
You might think that Apocalypse Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now> finishes in Cambodia, but in 
fact it’s in Cannes that the film’s real story comes to an end. While the Nung 
river was the site of Colonel Kurtz’s ruin, it was in the French Riviera that 
Francis Ford Coppola found his redemption.

After his sanity, pride and career were driven to the brink of oblivion during 
filming, Coppola’s Palme d’Or triumph at the festival in 1979 was, at long 
last, proof that it had been worth all the hassle. The film, which had begun 
shooting three years previously, had been dubbed Apocalypse When? by studio 
suits who were doubtful it would ever see the light of day, let alone be any 
good if it did. Cannes was Coppola’s vindication.

It’s the supreme achievement of Apocalypse Now that it manages to exist 
simultaneously as a sublime relic of golden-era film-making and as an utterly 
ramshackle mess. For a start, (and unsurprisingly, given the output of the 
shoot ran to one-and-a-quarter million feet of film), the final product is 
wildly, recklessly long. The plot – to use the term in its loosest sense – is 
veering, episodic and as bloatedly incoherent as Marlon Brando’s jibbering 
climactic cameo as Kurtz.

It takes on a litany of big issues, and attacks them with scattergun 
imprecision: corrupted innocence, the irredeemable legacy of American 
imperialism and the wild disconnect between politics and combat are just the 
tip of the thematic iceberg. It should, on paper, be an unwatchable disaster.

But it’s precisely the aura of anarchy that makes Apocalypse Now a bona fide, 
towering masterpiece and the definitive film about America’s role in Vietnam. 
Whether or not the tone of chaos is Coppola’s perfectly judged distillation of 
his subject or simply a happy byproduct of the breakdown-inducing bedlam that 
ensconced the film’s production is a question for the ages.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-apocalypse-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430388755797%2F8d661f40-c782-4f0c-b410-069c13e57c35-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20Apocalypse%20Now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-apocalypse-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20Apocalypse%20Now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-apocalypse-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430388755797%2F8d661f40-c782-4f0c-b410-069c13e57c35-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Swinging wildly between deliriums of self-intoxication and black depression’ 
… Francis Ford Coppola (right) on set in the Philippines. Photograph: Sipa 
Press/Rex Features 
At Cannes, after its premiere, the director famously said: “My film is not 
about Vietnam. My filmis Vietnam.” And one suspects he meant it with minimal 
irony. As much as any Wagner-soundtracked helicopter onslaught or aromatically 
themed dialogue snippet, it is the film’s legendarily hellish production that 
cemented its place in Hollywood folklore.

As detailed in the documentary Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker’s Apocalypse 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hearts_of_Darkness:_A_Filmmaker%27s_Apocalypse>, 
trouble hit when Coppola’s set, deep in the Philippine tropics, was shredded by 
a typhoon – and then escalated from there. Reality and fiction became grimly 
blurred. Some of the corpses being used on set were in fact real – one rogue 
crew member having taken it upon himself to raid a nearby graveyard. And just 
as the iconic Ride of the Valkyries scene was being choreographed, the 
Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos decided that the helicopters which had 
been leased to Coppola by his government were required to help fight off rebel 
insurgents in the ongoing civil war.

The crises spread from professional to personal. Just as the descent of 
Captain Willard (Martin Sheen) into delirium forms the central thread of 
Apocalypse Now, by the end of Hearts of Darkness, Coppola has slowly but surely 
been reduced from Oscar-winning golden boy to wailing, pitiful man-child. “I 
tell you from the bottom of my heart that we are making a bad film,” he 
despairs, eyes darting feverishly around the room. He may have stopped short of 
disappearing into a steaming lagoon, cheeks smeared with warpaint, but you 
sense that Coppola identified with his unhinged protagonist more than most.

Apocalypse Now contains plenty of booming spectacle (Roger Ebert recalled 
sections of the Cannes crowd ducking for cover when the famed helicopter 
assault first roared into action) but, like most great films, it’s the 
understated moments which hang in the memory the longest. A tiger emerging 
unannounced from the jungly undergrowth; the vacant stare of Albert Hall’s 
“Chief” as he’s impaled by a Vietcong spear; Sam Bottoms’s surfer dude 
performing an ungainly, acid-induced dance while his boat drifts silently into 
the fog. These images cut to the film’s hallucinatory core more than any of its 
scenes of explosive warfare.
 ‘Apocalypse Now contains plenty of booming spectacle’. Photograph: Ronald 
Grant archive 
As with Willard, the megalomaniacal character of Kurtz also struck a stronger 
chord with the director than his colleagues would have liked. Easy Riders, 
Raging Bulls, Peter Biskind’s account of 70s Hollywood, describes a dishevelled 
Coppola “swinging wildly between deliriums of self-intoxication and black 
depression”. As production costs spiralled to double the initial budget, and 
then triple, and his cash-strapped crew had to commute to Manila in order to 
bathe themselves, Coppola insisted on having his pasta flown in from Italy and, 
for his 37th birthday, had a planeful of hot dogs jetted in from San Francisco. 
What were you saying about American imperialism, Francis?

His isolationist streak didn’t go quite as far as ritual animal sacrifice, but 
as the money men in LA edged ever nearer to terminating his production with 
extreme prejudice, there was little separating Coppola from Kurtz as he 
barricaded himself in a luxury resort inside an inactive volcano (no, really), 
refusing to face reality.

Despite all the gloriously ominous anticipation that precedes Willard’s 
arrival at Kurtz’s compound, the film’s final act has always seemed to me its 
weakest. Dennis Hopper’s turn as a spaced-out hippie madman is (with some 
irony) the film’s only false note – more annoying than anything else – and 
Brando’s deranged murmurings about the absurdity of war, while fun, essentially 
amount to a lesser version of what we’ve already been shown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-apocalypse-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430389326784%2Fa95029f8-f29e-4c64-b915-2af054b6cbd9-1010x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20Apocalypse%20Now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-apocalypse-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20Apocalypse%20Now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F30%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-apocalypse-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430389326784%2Fa95029f8-f29e-4c64-b915-2af054b6cbd9-1010x1020.jpeg>
 Deranged murmerings … Marlon Brando as Colonel Kurtz. Photograph: Ronald Grant 
archive 
Apocalypse Now’s Palme d’Or win came in an era when the film business had 
become enraptured with its own intellectualism, and the juries tended to favour 
the more self-consciously cinematic nominees. BothBlow-Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/23/my-favourite-cannes-winner-blow-up>
 andThe Conversation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/22/my-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation>
, with their technically obsessive heroes and their fetishistic focus on 
production processes, can be read as film-makers’ paeans to their own craft, 
whilePadre Padrone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/28/my-favourite-cannes-winner-padre-padrone>
, which had won two years earlier, wears its self-referential heart proudly on 
its sleeve.

Apocalypse Now went against that grain, catering for an audience beyond the 
film buffs and creating a lasting monument to the American counterculture from 
which it sprung.

Coppola’s Cannes win may have proved redemptive in the short-term, but his 
subsequent career has lent the movie’s title a wry double-entendre. His 
directorial downfall wasn’t quite immediate enough to make it a perfect fit 
(the decent enoughRumble Fish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/13/how-we-made-rumble-fish> was 
still to come), but his post-Apocalypse efforts have been meagre and mostly 
mediocre.

Back in 1979, Apocalypse Now was his fourth stonking masterpiece in just seven 
years, following on from the first two Godfathers and The Conversation; since 
then, he’s been responsible for such efforts asTwixt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/143114/twixt>, Bram Stoker’s Dracula 
and, least excusably of all,Jack 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0116669/?ref_=fn_al_tt_2>, a film whose multitude 
of horrors would have turned the stomach of even Colonel Kurtz.

But however grave his sins, Apocalypse Now – a film about the impossibility of 
redemption – is enough to redeem Coppola many times over. Just don’t mention 
the hot dogs.
 