
Many of the best films I’ve ever seen I first saw at Cannes. Few of them won 
awards, though. Look back through the annals and what stands out is how random 
many of the Palme d’Or winners are; a trend only increasing since the 
introduction of the one-prize-per-film rule.

People bellyache about how the Baftas and the Oscars are dished out, but 
Cannes de-democratises the process yet further, then serves it with a side of 
fruitcake. Rather than 5,000-odd industry types, you have fewer than 10, all 
heavily invested; a weird little clique dominated by the chair (can you imagine 
trying to shout downboth Coen brothers?). 

Evidence #1: Elephant not Dogville in 2003. Evidence #2: Fahrenheit 9/11 over 
The Consequences of Love or Oldboy the following year. Also last year’s victory 
for Winter Sleep over Leviathan. And I’ll lob a hot potato into the pot: Blue 
is the Warmest Colour should not have beaten Nebraska, The Great Beauty or even 
– whisper it – Behind the Candelabra the year before.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvrhRsZ56b4g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvrhRsZ56b4g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvrhRsZ56b4g&media=>
Anyhow, back in 1974, they got it bang on (admittedly, it looks a slightly 
ropy programme). What makes the victory more unexpected is that The 
Conversation’s brilliance hinges on one of the few ways in which Cannes can let 
its premieres down: they get lost in translation. When a movie is screened with 
two types of surtitles, to 20+ nationalities, you know a good section of the 
crowd are going to skip some of the subtler stuff. Doinginterviews after The 
Great Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/29/great-beauty-toni-servillo-sorrentino>
, I was conscious that the detail about the particular type of Florentine 
flaneur being mocked had gone over my head. Watching Mr Turner, I didn’t feel 
the special ludicrousness of Ruskin’s lisp played to full comedy with the 
Slovaks in the house.

In Francis Ford Coppola’s film, it all comes down to intonation in one 
sentence: “He’d kill us if he got the chance.” That’s the line PI Harry Caul 
(Gene Hackman) eventually deciphers, after much expert knob-wiggling and 
wire-adjusting, on the audio of a conversation between a couple he’s covertly 
taped. The commission to do so has come from a mysterious company director in 
San Francisco; when the director’s flunky (Harrison Ford) seems suspiciously 
eager to get his mitts on the tapes, Harry holds on to them and gives them a 
closer listen. He stumbles across the crucial moment, his imagination unravels 
and so the latent moral queasiness of “the best bugger on the west coast” 
lurches up and spills over.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRoaFl_D0S8w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRoaFl_D0S8w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRoaFl_D0S8w&media=>
One of the reasons I find The Conversation so rewarding is what it says about 
misconstrued stories: Harry pieces together the fragment in ways which make 
sense to him. Sure, The Conversation is a commentary on cinema, but also on the 
way curiosity leads us to plug gaps with the wrong colour. It cautions you 
against trying to construct motivation from snatched moments and your own 
prejudice. It tells of the ways in which intimacy and suspicion intersect, 
eavesdropping and emotional dependance fester and infect.

These days of course, it looks a little different. You could write a book 
about The Conversation’s relationship to emerging tech, reassess it in the 
light of such a wholesale overhaul to surveillance and privacy. But it’s not 
quite a prescient film – its key chime, if there is one, isWatergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/watergate>, not NSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-nsa-files> – and what touches me is 
Harry’s age-old psychological torment. He bears the guilt of the culpable 
outsider. He is silent witness to atrocities he knows are likely going on next 
door, but is paralysed when he tries to act.

As the film shows, what we imagine are the consequences of our inaction can be 
almost as dreadful as the reality: Harry in that hotel bathroom, making the 
bubbling discovery (a scene nicely referenced inStephen Frears’s Dirty Pretty 
Things <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ntALVSmIUrg>). 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F20%2F1429537578680%2Fb6f0279b-ca0e-48d9-9ce8-f8c54712cb4c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20The%20Conversation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20The%20Conversation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F20%2F1429537578680%2Fb6f0279b-ca0e-48d9-9ce8-f8c54712cb4c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Eye of God … Harrison Ford and Hackman in The Conversation. Photograph: 
Allstar/PARAMOUNT 
Coppola shot this between the first two Godfathers, on the condition that the 
second would definitely happen. It has little of those movies’ magnificent 
macho strut, nor the epic mania ofApocalypse Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now>, for which he won his second 
Palme d’Or, five years later. The canvas is macro, the edits are tight, the 
instinct to erase not to sprawl. I find it the easiest to relate to of all 
those films; odd because, on rewatch, it shortchanges everyone female. None of 
the women come out of this well – always more agents of exploitation than 
victims of Harry’s projection – and even the best are incapable of fathoming 
his hang-ups.

So what else is wonderful about this film? Everything. Its sparseness as a 
thriller means it’s absolutely unpatronisingly, despite such heightened 
intelligence. Humane, too; a strange combination, but a neat one, and, as it 
happens, exactly the same as youget in person from the film’s editor (and 
spirit animal), Walter Murch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/20/walter-murch-sound-god-particle-fever>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F15%2Fparticle-fever-walter-murch-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F6%2F15%2F1371301781547%2FFilm-editor-Walter-Murch--025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Particle%20Fever%20editor%20Walter%20Murch%3A%20'The%20Higgs%20boson%20is%20kind%20of%20a%20MacGuffin'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F15%2Fparticle-fever-walter-murch-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Particle%20Fever%20editor%20Walter%20Murch%3A%20%27The%20Higgs%20boson%20is%20kind%20of%20a%20MacGuffin%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F15%2Fparticle-fever-walter-murch-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2013%2F6%2F15%2F1371301781547%2FFilm-editor-Walter-Murch--025.jpg>
 Watch an interview with Walter Murch  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429705829000%2F141ceaf3-6b35-4c83-8edb-df582d8ab098-651x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20The%20Conversation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20The%20Conversation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429705829000%2F141ceaf3-6b35-4c83-8edb-df582d8ab098-651x1020.jpeg>
 Suited and booted … Hackman plays the sax earlier in The Conversation 
Photograph: Everett/REX Shutterstock 
The screenplay is as exact and focused as Harry himself: from the establishing 
shot, tracking the circus mime through the crowd, through to details like 
Harry’scaul <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caul>-like mac, and the times you see 
him foggily, through something not quite as translucent as it ought to be. The 
camerawork, nodding to but not mimicking CCTV, has a mechanical pan that 
unsettles. That white noise jitters your ears, shakes your soul. And I think 
it’s pretty sharp, too, on how people treat highly-trained pros in a service 
industry (Ford’s smoothie insouciance here is flooring).

When I saw it more than 10 years ago, that ending – Harry unable to find a bug 
that’s infected his apartment, sitting with his sax, floorboards up, icons 
smashed, career in tatters, safety in danger – struck me as tragic. Later, it 
might have put me in mind of the last reels ofBug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/115302/bug>, William Friedkin’s 2006 
adaptation of the Tracy Letts play, with Michael Shannon and Ashley Judd 
ripping their skin off in a motel room, in search of something they’ll never 
find. I might have even described it asKafkaesque 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FaWgRw78Y1M>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429705984083%2F469b0c31-55bd-4e03-a05f-917439d6557f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20The%20Conversation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20Cannes%20winner%3A%20The%20Conversation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F22%2Fmy-favourite-cannes-winner-the-conversation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F22%2F1429705984083%2F469b0c31-55bd-4e03-a05f-917439d6557f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 One of the final scenes in The Conversation. Ronald Grant Archive Photograph: 
Ronald Grant Archive 
It doesn’t now. It feels upbeat, exhilarating even. Harry plays unaccompanied, 
with a fluidity and absorption lacking before. Caul isn’t having anything quite 
as trite as a rebirth. But the man who stuttered he wasn’t afraid of death no 
longer looks frightened of life.
 