
Although I could read before I went to school and I won the school reading 
prize at five years old, my early children’s stories came from the radio and 
watching films at a cinema on Saturday mornings in Australia. It wasn’t until I 
was nine years old on a ship returning from Australia that I was introduced to 
children’s books. Being the oldest in the children’s area, I had been so lonely 
I climbed over the gate and ran away. When I was brought back, one of the women 
in charge took me over to a glass fronted cupboard filled with books, unlocked 
the door and handed me aFamous Five 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/well-done-famous-five.html> story by Enid 
Blyton. I read it in one night, and asked for another one the following day.

Fortunately when we arrived back in England our house was only a short walk 
away from a small library. One day, hunting for another of her books a 
librarian asked if he could be of any help. I explained that I had read all the 
Famous Five books and all theAdventure and Mystery 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/enid-blyton-adventure-treasury.html> series.

 ‘Have you read anything by Arthur Ransome?’ he asked me.

I returned home with Swallows and Amazons 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/swallows-and-amazons.html>. 

Gradually I was pulled into a world where children were living outdoors and 
looking after themselves and if they could do it, then maybe I could too. The 
fact that they also came into contact with other adults made it more real. In 
Swallows and Amazons , I liked it when after an upsetting argument with the 
Amazon’s Uncle Jim, otherwise known as Captain Flint, they found a comic 
resolution.

Arthur Ransome also put in technical details showing children of varied ages 
sailing in different conditions on lakes and on the Norfolk broads. These 
stories were set in all weathers from the height of summer to the snowy depths 
of winter and they had drama and humour in them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fmichelle-magorian-on-arthur-ransome-my-inspiration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415631181697%2F409b68c7-c60d-4785-b219-12fc4d67b587-2060x1578.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20inspiration%3A%20Michelle%20Magorian%20on%20Arthur%20Ransome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fmichelle-magorian-on-arthur-ransome-my-inspiration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20inspiration%3A%20Michelle%20Magorian%20on%20Arthur%20Ransome&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2014%2Fnov%2F11%2Fmichelle-magorian-on-arthur-ransome-my-inspiration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F10%2F1415631181697%2F409b68c7-c60d-4785-b219-12fc4d67b587-2060x1578.jpeg>
 Michelle Magorian: if I was ever bored in class I would draw maps of islands 
and make lists of provisions I would need. Photograph: PR 
My parents were wonderful people but there were terrible rows between them and 
at times I found the atmosphere at home unbearable. The Arthur Ransome books 
gave me an alternative childhood and the tools to escape. Because I wanted to 
be able to do what the Swallows and Amazons could do this led me to go camping 
with the Guides and Scouts and I learnt how to put up a tent, lay a fire using 
dried leaves and twigs, and cook a meal over it. At school, if I was ever bored 
in class I would draw maps of islands or detailed interior of boats or lists of 
provisions and equipment I would need when I went camping in the summer.

By the time I was in my teens I was walking up mountains and sleeping in 
extraordinary places in all weathers. I had other escape routes too including 
hiding in a local theatre.

When my younger son was 13 years old, he asked me to read Swallows and Amazons 
to him while he made models. He liked it so much that I ended up reading all 
thirteen of Ransome’s books including the ones that I missed out on. This led 
my son toTreasure Island 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/treasure-island-37.html>, Robinson Crusoe 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/robinson-crusoe-32.html> and Coral Island 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/coral-island.html>.

Arthur Ransome has certainly influenced the content of my new book Impossible! 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/impossible-4.html> My main character is a 
tomboy (like I used to be) and was born around the same time. She also likes 
his books, dreams of going camping and sailing and hides in a theatre, albeit a 
different theatre to the one I hid in, and for very different reasons.
 