
“Mzungu!” Every part of the African continent has its own term for white 
people. InBurundi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burundi>, where I live, 
children take great delight in screamingmzungu! at me, quickly followed by 
“Give me money!”
Pádraic (@kudupadraic) 
What it's like to be white (some of the time) in #Burundi 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Burundi?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/i4mqcy6gqt 
<http://t.co/i4mqcy6gqt>
 <https://twitter.com/kudupadraic/status/641120475884728320> September 8, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/kudupadraic/status/641120475884728320> 
I was born a white boy in apartheid South Africa. Mandela was still in prison. 
The writing was on the wall for the apartheid regime, but there was still a 
long way to go. My parents – one Irish, the other somewhat Irish but English by 
birth (I tend to downplay this fact) – moved to South Africa at this dramatic 
crossroads in its history. They had a spirit of adventure (they still do), and 
the fall of apartheidSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> was something they wanted to 
witness first-hand.

After stints in various European countries, I moved back to the continent of 
my birth four years ago. I live between Burundi and Malawi, where I’m involved 
in organising theLake of Stars festival <http://www.lakeofstars.org> and this 
year started up theLilongwe Shorts <http://www.llwshorts.com> film festival. 
These experiences, which bring me into contact with many different people, are 
often affected by the colour of my skin.

White South Africans' move to black township draws praise and accusations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/03/white-south-africans-move-black-township>
There are the moments that warm the heart: when I tell people I was born in 
Johannesburg, almost without exception the immediate, confident response is: 
“Ah. So then you are African.” They don’t seem to mind that I came into the 
world a privileged minority in an apartheid state. I am white, but I am not 
excluded fromubuntu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/08/10-things-africa-given-world>
.

But the hospitality Africans instinctively offer to strangers is one thing. In 
day-to-day life, I struggle to make black friends. Those who know about South 
Africa’s grim past immediately assume that as a white South African, I’m a 
racist. Those who don’t afford me privileges I have neither earned nor 
necessarily deserve.

In Malawi, people insist on calling me bwana, the Swahili word for “master”. 
It’s often tongue-in-cheek, but sometimes there’s more going on. It is tied to 
a broader concept of patriarchy (which is not limited to race), but also to the 
colonial past. To be white and a man is to be superior.

Living in a cocoon with people of my own colour is not ideal either. You 
notice racist views you are expected to share

With a name like Pádraic, being so obviously a foreigner also opens you up to 
lazy categorisations. “Are you American? Which organisation are you from? You 
don’t work for an NGO? So you are a journalist.”

Living in a cocoon with people of my own colour is not ideal either. You 
notice racist views you are expected to share. White friends of mine lock their 
bedroom doors when they hear there’s a black man coming to visit.

Some days, I try to forget that I am a white man on a black continent. But you 
can’t. Each day you are reminded by barefoot children, by beggars on street 
corners, by taxi drivers, by the places you shop, the company you keep. At 
least in the African contexts I am most familiar with, Malawi and the Great 
Lakes region, you cannot in any real sense escape the social status your skin 
colour traps you within.

In two months, I marry a Swedish national in Burundi. Born in Zimbabwe, she 
grew up across Africa, educated in SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, Kenya, Uganda and Ivory Coast. 
There’s an undeniable affinity in our experiences. It’s not just our love of 
this rich and varied continent, but the fact that, as much as we belong here, 
we will always be, on some level, outsiders.

The colour of our skin represents privilege, status, wealth and a dark 
colonial legacy. But today it goes beyond that. It signifies access to markets 
and the freedom to move, to act, to speak openly. Being white in Africa is not 
the same, say, as being black in Europe. But the feeling of dislocation 
remains, the sense of somehow always being, on some small but important level, 
an outsider. White Africans are not a tribe, but we are, perhaps, a diverse and 
peculiar phenomenon.

When we think of white Africans, the term may conjure images of the Boers 
fighting the English, of Karen Blixen and“her” Kikuyu 
<https://youtu.be/wYEn-ZKSg_I?t=53s>, of conservationists making sure the 
animals of Africa are keptsafely away from Africans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jun/03/how-not-to-write-about-africa>
. The term is misleading and unhelpful. I refuse to be categorised by it: I am 
both white and (South) African, not simply “the white kind” of African. AsMia 
Couto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/15/mia-couto-interview-i-am-white-and-african-i-like-to-unite-contradictory-worlds>
, a Mozambican writer of Portuguese descent, puts it: “These are apparently 
contradictory worlds that I like to unite because they’re part of me.”
 