
The Turnbull government is “banking” $13.9bn in Abbott-era savings rejected by 
the Senate in a budget update that still shows the deficit blowing out by $26bn 
over four years since the May budget.


Myefo: Scott Morrison reveals budget deficit to blow out by $26bn over four 
years – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2015/dec/15/scott-morrison-releases-mid-year-economic-update-politics-live>
The government announced new savings in the midyear economic and fiscal 
outlook (Myefo) on Tuesday –including cutting bulk-billing incentives for 
pathology services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/15/myefo-bulk-billing-rules-tony-abbotts-gp-co-payment-in-disguise-says-ama>
 and tightening a welfare “crackdown” – to pay for already announced new 
spending on innovation, the special Syrian refugee intake and processing asylum 
seekers in Australia.

But a slump in revenue, partly as a result of falling commodity prices, saw 
the 2015-16 deficit climb from $35.1bn predicted at the time of the last budget 
to $37.4bn now.

And included in that deteriorating bottom line are old savings included in 
policies that the Senate has steadfastly refused to pass – which means the 
budget update counts “savings” that are “wholly unrealistic”, according to the 
Australian Council of Social Service (Acoss).

Among the “savings” still counted in the budget update despite being rejected 
are:

* The $4.8bn that would be saved by the latest version of proposed cuts to 
family payments, even though Labor has only passed $500m of them;

* $3.2 bn from increasing the interest rate for student loans and requiring 
that they be paid back sooner;

* $1.1bn from cutting university funding;

* $1.3bn for the proposed $5 hike in the PBS co-payment that was supposed to 
start in January;

* Over $600m in rejected welfare savings, including forcing under-25s to wait 
a month to receive the dole, which was rejected by the Senate in September.

Malcolm Turnbull's stocks remain high, but his coffers are increasingly empty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/15/malcolm-turnbull-stocks-high-coffers-empty>
“Those 2014 budget measures were stalled in the Senate for good reasons,” said 
Acoss chief executive Cassandra Goldie.

“If the government wanted to give us a realistic assessment of the budget, 
they should not be booking savings that are wholly unrealistic,” she said.

The chief executive of Universities Australia, Belinda Robinson, said she 
believed “the community will be concerned that the government, despite one 
year’s reprieve, intends to pursue the cuts to university funding announced in 
the 2014 budget”.

And Labor’s health spokeswoman, Catherine King, criticised the government for 
counting the “savings” from the PBS co-payment despite health minister Sussan 
Ley saying in May she was not going to “waste time” putting them back to 
parliament because they would be voted down.

The Myefo does remove $5.8bn from the budget bottom line to account for delays 
in the Senate and concessions the government has made to try to get legislation 
through, but still counts the savings from the stalled legislation.

It shows total revenue will be $33.8bn lower than expected over four years, 
partly as a result of declines in commodity prices since Joe Hockey handed down 
his final budget in May.

Myefo: bulk-billing rules 'Tony Abbott's GP co-payment in disguise', says AMA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/15/myefo-bulk-billing-rules-tony-abbotts-gp-co-payment-in-disguise-says-ama>
Economic growth has also taken a hit, with the treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, predicting a lift 
in real GDP of 2.5% this financial year, compared with 2.75% forecast in the 
budget. The government has also cut half a percentage point from the expected 
figure in each of the next few years, with growth now tipped to be 2.75% in 
2016-17 before firming to 3% after that.

“The inclusion of this more realistic outlook on domestic growth should be 
seen for what it is; that is, a statement of confidence in our economy,” 
Morrison said as he joined the finance minister,Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, in Perth on 
Tuesday to announce the new figures.

Morrison pointed to improvements in the forecast unemployment rate, which has 
been revised down from 6.5% to 6% this financial year and is expected to fall 
to 5.5% by 2018-19.

The government is continuing its budget rule of not cutting to make up for 
revenue writedowns, but has found offsets for new spending announced since the 
last budget.

The new cuts in the health portfolio include $650m over four years by cutting 
bulk-billing incentives for pathology and MRI services, $595m from 
“streamlining” health workforce programs, and $472m from adjusting aged care 
funding formulas.

Morrison is also banking on $1.3bn by expanding the welfare payment integrity 
measure announced in the last budget, which was already slated to achieve 
$1.7bn, with an increased focus on pursuing discrepancies between the 
employment income they declare to Centrelink and the “pay-as-you-go” 
information provided to the tax office.

Myefo: key points at a glance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/15/myefo-key-points-at-a-glance> 
A further $695m is to be saved from the welfare system by increasing other 
forms of data-matching. The government will also gain $318m from a new cap on 
the number of green army projects.

Myefo represented the first major test for the new financial team installed 
after Malcolm Turnbull ousted Tony Abbott from the top job in Septemberon the 
grounds the country needed better economic leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/malcolm-turnbulls-speech-in-full-we-need-a-new-style-of-leadership>
.

The underlying cash deficit is expected to be $37.4bn in 2015-16, a 
deterioration from the $35.1bn estimated at the time of the budget. The 
expected deficit increased from $25.8bn to $33.7bn in 2016-17, increased from 
$14.4bn to $23bn in 2017-18, and increased from $6.9bn to $14.2bn in 2018-19. 
The new figures represent a cumulative hit to the budget position of about 
$26bn over four years.

The government is now projecting a return to surplus in 2020-21, one year 
later than tipped at the time of the last budget.

Morrison and Cormann said the government was not rushing back to surplus 
because extreme measures “would place a handbrake on household consumption and 
business investment growth and unnecessarily threaten the fresh new momentum 
emerging in our transitioning economy”.

The treasurer said: “Despite revenue writedowns of almost $34bn caused by 
falling commodity prices, a declining terms of trade, weaker global growth and 
the adoption of more realistic domestic growth outlook, we continue patiently 
and responsibly on the path to budget balance.”

Morrison stressed it was “a budget update, not a budget” so bigger changes 
would be considered in May and in the lead-up to the federal election. 
Decisions on tax changes have also been deferred until next year.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, said the government’s budget was “on a road to 
nowhere with no prospect of improving”.

“Instead of looking at multinational taxation, or superannuation tax 
concessions, the Liberals are at it again. They are proposing the harshest cuts 
to the people least able to protect themselves,” he said.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said Turnbull and Morrison had “presided 
over a budget deficit blowing out at the rate of $120m a day since the last 
budget”.

Bowen said: “Deficit reduction and returning to surplus was at the heart of 
this Liberal government, and it begs the question: if they have no plan to 
return to balance, what is the point of the Turnbull government?”

Greens MP Adam Bandt said Morrison was following Hockey’s lead by “taking the 
axe to the old, the sick and the poor while letting the very wealthy off 
scot-free”.
 