
The federal government will cut bulk-billing incentives for pathology services 
and ratchet up its welfare crackdown as the first budget update of theMalcolm 
Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> era 
revealed the deficit had blown out by $26bn over four years.


Scott Morrison reveals budget deficit to blow out by $26bn over four years – 
politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2015/dec/15/scott-morrison-releases-mid-year-economic-update-politics-live>
The midyear economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo) shows total revenue will be 
$33.8bn lower than expected over four years, partly as a result of declines in 
commodity prices since Joe Hockey handed down his final budget in May.

Economic growth has also taken a hit, with the treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, predicting a lift 
in real GDP of 2.5% this financial year, compared with 2.75% forecast in the 
budget. The government has also cut half a percentage point from the expected 
figure in each of the next few years, with growth now tipped to be 2.75% in 
2016-17 before firming to 3% after that.

“The inclusion of this more realistic outlook on domestic growth should be 
seen for what it is; that is, a statement of confidence in our economy,” 
Morrison said as he joined the finance minister,Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, in Perth on 
Tuesday to announce the new figures.

Morrison pointed to improvements in the forecast unemployment rate, which has 
been revised down from 6.5% to 6% this financial year and is expected to fall 
to 5.5% by 2018-19.

The government is continuing its budget rule of not cutting to make up for 
revenue write-downs, but has found offsets for new spending announced since the 
last budget such as the innovation plan and $909m for the increased refugee 
intake.

The new cuts in the health portfolio include $650m over four years from 
changes to bulk-billing incentives, $595m from “streamlining” health workforce 
programs, and $472m from adjusting aged care funding formulas.

The government says it will remove incentives for pathology services and 
reduce the incentive for MRI services. It says it will align incentives for 
diagnostic imaging services to the ones that apply to GP services, with 
incentives continuing to apply for patients with concession cards and children 
under 16.

Morrison is also banking on $1.3bn by expanding the welfare payment integrity 
measure announced in the last budget, which was already slated to achieve 
$1.7bn.

The government says the new measure will focus on recovering money from a 
greater number of people where discrepancies exist between the employment 
income they declare to Centrelink and the “pay as you go” information provided 
to the tax office.

A further $695m is to be saved from the welfare system by increasing other 
forms of data-matching. The government will also gain $318m from a new cap on 
the number of green army projects.

Malcolm Turnbull's stocks remain high, but his coffers are increasingly empty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/15/malcolm-turnbull-stocks-high-coffers-empty>
Myefo also reveals the China-Australia free trade agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/21/labor-and-coalition-reach-agreement-on-china-australia-free-trade-deal>
 will cost the budget $4.2bn over four years as a result of reductions in 
tariff revenue.

Cormann said the government had already made a provision in the budget for 
that, but argued the benefit would be reciprocated to Australian businesses 
exporting to China. The Myefo document said the government had decided not to 
offset the revenue impact of free trade agreements.

Myefo represented the first major test for the new financial team installed 
after Turnbull ousted Tony Abbott from the top job in Septemberon the grounds 
the country needed better economic leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/malcolm-turnbulls-speech-in-full-we-need-a-new-style-of-leadership>
.


The underlying cash deficit is expected to be $37.4bn in 2015-16, a 
deterioration from the $35.1bn estimated at the time of the budget. The 
expected deficit increased from $25.8bn to $33.7bn in 2016-17, increased from 
$14.4bn to $23bn in 2017-18, and increased from $6.9bn to $14.2bn in 2018-19. 
The new figures represent a cumulative hit to the budget position of about 
$26bn over four years.

The government is now projecting a return to surplus in 2020-21, one year 
later than tipped at the time of the last budget.

Morrison and Cormann said the government was not rushing back to surplus 
because extreme measures “would place a handbrake on household consumption and 
business investment growth and unnecessarily threaten the fresh new momentum 
emerging in our transitioning economy”.

The treasurer said: “Despite revenue writedowns of almost $34bn caused by 
falling commodity prices, a declining terms of trade, weaker global growth and 
the adoption of more realistic domestic growth outlook, we continue patiently 
and responsibly on the path to budget balance.”

Morrison stressed it was “a budget update, not a budget” so bigger changes 
would be considered in May and in the lead-up to the federal election. 
Decisions on tax changes have also been deferred until next year.

The Labor leader, Bill Shorten, said the government’s budget was “on a road to 
nowhere with no prospect of improving”.

“Instead of looking at multinational taxation, or superannuation tax 
concessions, the Liberals are at it again. They are proposing the harshest cuts 
to the people least able to protect themselves,” he said.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said Turnbull and Morrison had “presided 
over a budget deficit blowing out at the rate of $120m a day since the last 
budget”.

Bowen said: “Deficit reduction and returning to surplus was at the heart of 
this Liberal government, and it begs the question: if they have no plan to 
return to balance, what is the point of the Turnbull government?”

The Greens MP Adam Bandt said Morrison was following Hockey’s lead by “taking 
the axe to the old, the sick and the poor while letting the very wealthy off 
scot-free”.
 