
Although travel agents seem unlikely to compare Dublin with Northampton, 
literary critics now can. Ninety-four years after the Irish city was the 
setting forJames Joyce <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesjoyce>’s 
modernist epicUlysses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/04/100-best-novels-ulysses-james-joyce-robert-mccrum>
, the English town has become the subject of its own monumental experimental 
fiction: Jerusalem, a 1,200-page novel by Alan Moore, who was born and still 
lives in Northampton.


Reviewers of Jerusalem in the United States, where much of Moore’s fanbase is, 
have sometimes sounded uncertain whether “Northampton” is another product of 
the deranged imagination familiar from a backlist that includes the 
movie-inspiring graphic novelsWatchmen 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/watchmen-4.html> and From Hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2002/feb/08/culture.peterbradshaw>. But, 
although the novel’s version of the town exists in parallel with a shadow 
kingdom of the dead called Mansoul, The Boroughs (as the city in the novel is 
colloquially known) does closely overlap with the real map of Northampton, from 
Abington Street to Market Square.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fill-write-as-if-im-trying-to-get-sacked-stewart-lee-in-conversation-with-alan-moore-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'll%20write%20as%20if%20I'm%20trying%20to%20get%20sacked'%3A%20Stewart%20Lee%20in%20conversation%20with%20Alan%20Moore%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fill-write-as-if-im-trying-to-get-sacked-stewart-lee-in-conversation-with-alan-moore-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27ll%20write%20as%20if%20I%27m%20trying%20to%20get%20sacked%27%3A%20Stewart%20Lee%20in%20conversation%20with%20Alan%20Moore%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fill-write-as-if-im-trying-to-get-sacked-stewart-lee-in-conversation-with-alan-moore-video&media=>
‘I’ll write as if I’m trying to get sacked’: Stewart Lee in conversation with 
Alan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/aug/15/ill-write-as-if-im-trying-to-get-sacked-stewart-lee-in-conversation-with-alan-moore-video>
English readers outside of the south Midlands may be equally surprised to find 
Northampton being given such literary weight as, in recent years, the town has 
mainly been used as a cultural punchline. The Hitchcock-punning title of the 
Radio 4 comedyNorth by Northamptonshire 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b017szpf/episodes/guide> is designed to win a 
smile from the place name in the way that Bognor did for generations of 
comedians. The show’s writer Katherine Jakeways makes the area home to a 
variety of social weirdos, whileNot Safe for Work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jun/30/channel-4-not-safe-for-work-drama-this-life-lost-generation>
, a six-part Channel 4 drama screened last year, turned on the horror of a 
group of London civil servants at being relocated to the Northampton office.

Although a more affectionate counterview has been put by the Northampton-born 
author and broadcaster Andrew Collins – in his memoir Where Did It All Go 
Right?Growing Up Normal in the Seventies – civic scepticism remains, even among 
locals.

Having lived in a Northamptonshire village for almost two decades, I am aware 
of a view in the farmlands that the town of Northampton somewhat lets the 
county down. The place was put on its feet by shoe production, a tradition 
honoured in the “Cobblers” nickname of its football team. But this industry is 
now largely gone (after a revival through making high-heeled fetish gear, 
dramatised in the hit musicalKinky Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/15/kinky-boots-review-adelphi-london>
) and a town with many rundown areas offers drivers a startling first sight, 
from every direction, of a 127-metre high thin concrete tower with a ragged top 
that suggests incompetent circumcision.


Alan Moore uses nine-year-old's fan letter on new book's cover
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/21/alan-moore-uses-nine-year-olds-fan-letter-on-new-books-cover>
This is the National Lift Tower <http://www.nationallifttower.co.uk/> which, 
no longer employed for testing elevators, is now used to test drainage and 
provide a space for abseiling contests. Terry Wogan used to mock it as the 
“Northampton Lighthouse”, but its weird appearance – somewhere between an 
ancient statue and a concrete space rocket – seems to have have inspired local 
sci-fi writer Mark Gallard, whose Time to Repair is set in Northampton in 2262 
when, some locals may be depressed to hear, the tower still stands.

While Moore’s Jerusalem is a significant addition to Northampton’s cultural 
map, that document is already far more crowded than outsiders might think. The 
novel includes a section that takes place in aNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/northampton> psychiatric ward, which feels 
like a knowing nod to the town’s most significant literary historical figure.

John Clare (1793-1864) is described on his memorial in the village of Helpston 
as “the Northamptonshire peasant poet” although, through an inconvenience of 
local governmental reorganisation, Helpston is now in Cambridgeshire. But it 
was in Northants when he was born there and –his poetic gift always shadowed by 
mental instability <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/jul/22/poetry.books> 
– Clare spent the last quarter century of his life in what was then Northampton 
General Lunatic Asylum. This continues, under the kinder title of St Andrew’s 
Hospital, to be a centre of excellence for psychiatric treatment.


Clare poems such as Winter Evening and Wood Pictures in Summer depict a rural 
Northamptonshire still recognisable today, and he remains the county’s 
unofficial laureate, audible behind the writing of Moore and the music of Sir 
Malcolm Arnold, the Northampton-born composer born in 1921 who, like Clare, 
suffered mental breakdown and came home for treatment at St Andrews.

In 2010, another alumnus of Northampton, the dramatist DC Moore, wrote Town, a 
play about Clare that paid communal homage – and was not entirely cancelled out 
by his later TV depiction of Northampton as a nightmare location in Not Safe 
For Work. His Clare drama was premiered at Northampton Royal and Derngate, the 
two-auditorium theatre complex that is another key part of the town’s artistic 
heritage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Falan-moore-jerusalem-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71fdf479dd3b7e8bc16e72632c904b2281a13920%2F0_265_3200_3998%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=N%20for%20Northampton%3A%20Alan%20Moore%20celebrates%20his%20hometown%20with%20a%201%2C200-page%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Falan-moore-jerusalem-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=N%20for%20Northampton%3A%20Alan%20Moore%20celebrates%20his%20hometown%20with%20a%201%2C200-page%20fantasy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Falan-moore-jerusalem-northampton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71fdf479dd3b7e8bc16e72632c904b2281a13920%2F0_265_3200_3998%2F3200.jpg>
 From Tasmania to Northampton … Errol Flynn. Photograph: John Kobal 
Foundation/Getty Images 
The movie star Errol Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/oct/16/errol-flynn-death-obituary-actor>
, after emigrating from Tasmania, secured a season at what was then the 
Northampton Repertory Theatre. He is immortalised on the safety curtain of the 
Royal, and in the name ofan arthouse cinema 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/sep/24/cine-files-errol-flynn-filmhouse-northampton>
 recently added to the complex. A script annotated by Flynn is kept in a safe 
in the building, while other souvenirs he is reputed to have left behind 
include a trail of unpaid bills and, in the more baroque local anecdotes, 
unpaid-for children.

The stage he played has become, in its current configuration, a launchpad for 
major theatrical talent. The last two artistic directors, Laurie Sansom and 
Rupert Goold, went on to run, respectively, the National Theatre of Scotland 
and the Almeida in London. A run of fine productions under their successor, 
James Dacre, including an Arthur Miller premiere, suggests he may follow them 
to a top job.

Close to the theatre is 78 Derngate, the only house in England designed by 
Charles Rennie Mackintosh (the house dates from 1815 but was remodelled by the 
great Scottish architect a century later) – and the town’s skyline also 
includes two remarkable churches. St Matthew’s, on the Kettering Road, doubles 
as an art gallery, containing aCrucifixion painting 
<http://www.stmatthewsnorthampton.org.uk/art_history_the_crucifixion.shtml> by 
Graham Sutherland anda Madonna and Child sculpture 
<http://www.stmatthewsnorthampton.org.uk/art_history_madonna_child.shtml> by 
Henry Moore – which are among the audacious commissions made by an art-loving 
vicar, Walter Hussey.

Finally, in Sheep Street stands the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, constructed 
in the 12th century, on the orders of the Earl of Northampton, as a smaller 
replica of the circular church of the same name that had impressed him on a 
crusade to Jerusalem – a history that Moore acknowledges in the plot and title 
of his novel, uniting two strands of the town’s cultural history across 1,000 
years.

 * Jerusalem by Alan Moore is published by Knockabout and is available at the 
Guardian Bookshop <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/jerusalem-433170.html>. 

• This article was amended on 16 September 2016 to clarify details about 78 
Derngate and to remove an incorrect suggestion in the subheading that 
Northampton is a city. It was further amended on 19 September 2016 to clarify 
that Laurie Sansom is no longer running the National Theatre of Scotland.
 