
With all the hot air being blown around native advertising, you'd think people 
would have done their research. But the fact that thevideo of Fred Wilson first 
presenting the "native" concept <http://www.ustream.tv/recorded/17521806> to 
New York's advertising community has only had nine Facebook likes,21 tweets 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ustream.tv%2Frecorded%2F17521806&f=realtime>
 and six Google +1s since it was uploaded suggests that while there are many 
waxing lyrical about "native", few have really tried to find out what the man 
who coined the term was actually talking about, and far fewer have shared the 
video through social media to demonstrate that their ad strategies fulfil the 
original definition of "native".

The premise in the presentation was that the digital media landscape is now so 
fragmented that to achieve scale marketers must be prepared to place ads that 
are "native" – effectively bespoke – to each digital environment. Marketers 
"need to be operating like [they're] in the Nasa control room." Sure, native 
advertising offers improved performance, but far from encouraging marketers to 
jump for joy at the native prospect, Mr Wilson really just made native 
advertising sound like a lot of work.

The cynical may say that his presentation was simply an opportunity for him to 
promote the non-cohesive ad services offered by the variety of companies that 
his venture capital company had invested in – Twitter, which had launched
Promoted Tweets a year earlier <https://blog.twitter.com/2010/hello-world>, 
Foursquare <http://www.crunchbase.com/company/foursquare> and the Clickable 
<http://www.crunchbase.com/company/clickable> service. In fact he covered quite 
a number of formats, but rather than giving all his examples of "native 
placements", it's worth crystallising the qualities that he said made an ad 
"native".

First, he says that native is "not putting banners up on the right side [of 
web pages]. This is the opposite of that." So whilst some ad providers are 
saying that they are providing standard banners "with native elements", the 
very placement of the ads – around the content rather than within the content – 
is what relegates these formats outside of Wilson's original definition of 
native. At the core of the "orthodox" definition of native is that the ad unit 
must appear within the focus of consumers' attention, not the periphery.

Second, Wilson spoke about building unique monetisation systems – ie ad 
inventory – that are "native to the experience" of the digital service that 
consumers are using. Whether it's a text, image, audio or video content 
service, the types of ad formats must fit seamlessly within the content 
environment.

Third, he emphasises that these native placements must be "value enhancing". 
He describes ad formats that contribute to consumers' digital experience rather 
than distracting from it. In essence, it's about making sure the ad creative is 
relevant to the consumer, that the delivery of the creative fits with the 
digital "experience" the consumer is in, and that the marketing message is 
delivered at the appropriate time. This builds "familiarity and leads to much 
higher performance".

However what stands out for me from the presentation is his pessimism that 
native cannot be done at scale. "You can't go to Yahoo and just buy a bunch of 
banners," he says. His summary message was, "the online marketing world is 
fragmenting. There's no single channel any more … Your marketing opportunities 
are fragmenting. To reach your audiences, you have to go with them."

The thing is, you shouldn't have to work at Nasa to be able to run a native ad 
campaign. It should be simple. Technology is supposed to make things easier for 
both marketers and consumers. We'll take it as a given that brands and ad 
agencies desire native ad formats that have the qualities that Fred Wilson 
highlights. But they also want to be able to book a campaign of a variety of 
native ad formats with one provider. They want their chosen native ad provider 
to have a network that's sizeable enough to achieve wide reach. They also want 
the digital properties in the network to be both varied and of a premium, 
brand-enhancing quality, and that the ad formats can repurpose creative assets 
across multiple digital publications. No marketing manager or agency wants to 
hunt around a fragmented digital media landscape building custom creative for 
each digital environment they want to advertise in. If that was the future of 
native advertising, then it would be a very short-lived phenomenon, as it's 
just too painful.

Thankfully, Fred Wilson is wrong about scale being an issue. For example, 
brands have been running large-scale native ad campaigns since 2001 by placing 
double-underlined in-content ad units within the editorial of thousands of 
premium publishers. What's more, digital advertising companies are developing 
private exchanges to enable programmatic buying and selling of native ad 
campaigns at scale – and you can't get easier than computerised trading in ad 
inventory. Native advertising will no longer be rocket science, if it ever 
truly was.

Sam Pattison is UK and international sales director at Vibrant Media 
<http://www.vibrantmedia.co.uk/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 