
A former army chief has cautioned against extraditing Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> recruiter Neil Prakash to Australia, 
warning it may prove a costly and difficult exercise that inadvertently creates 
a “totem” for local extremists.


Details continue to emerge about the nature of Prakash’s arrest on the Turkish 
border last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/neil-prakash-isis-fighter-dead-george-brandis-arrested>
, six months after he wasreported killed in an airstrike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/05/neil-prakash-most-senior-australian-fighting-with-isis-killed-in-iraq-airstrike>
 in Iraq.


It has since emerged that the attack in April only wounded him, and he 
reportedly used false documentation to cross the border.

Prakash – Australia’s most wanted terrorist, and a skilled online recruiter – 
may have been tracked heading towardsTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> after continuing to use social media 
to communicate with other foreign fighters, according to a report by Fairfax.

Neil Prakash: Australia has 'strong case' to prosecute Isis militant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/neil-prakash-australia-has-strong-case-to-prosecute-isis-militant>
Australia is seeking to extradite him, and would have a strong case for his 
prosecution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/neil-prakash-australia-has-strong-case-to-prosecute-isis-militant>
.

But University of Canberra national security institute head Peter Leahy, a 
former army chief, warned against an extradition, unless there are no other 
alternatives.

He told Guardian Australia that the extradition and prosecution would be 
difficult and expensive, and that it would be of little additional intelligence 
value.

Such a move also risked creating a figure for local extremists to rally around.

“I don’t think I’d be volunteering to bring him back if there are 
alternatives,” Leahy said.

“Because bringing him back here would be hugely expensive in terms of a trial 
and in terms of then incarcerating him.

“In some ways, he would serve as a totem to other Islamic radicals here in 
Australia.”

Leahy also played down Prakash’s importance to Isis in the group’s current 
phase, which was focused on surviving the ongoingbattle to recapture Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/mosul-refuse-to-abandon-homes-isis-iraqi-army>
.

He said Prakash was an effective recruiter, but was likely of little use to 
Isis currently.

“He certainly aided recruiting out of Australia, but I don’t think he’s a 
critical part of the Isis effort,” he said.


Australia’s extradition request relates to an extant arrest warrant issued by 
the Australian federal police and Victorian police in 2015, but Prakash has 
also violated the laws of Turkey, and remains in their custody.

Australian Strategic Policy Institute counterterrorism expert Jacinta Carroll 
said Turkish jurisdiction needed to be respected.

‘We want to live again’: Mosul’s defiant citizens refuse to leave home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/mosul-refuse-to-abandon-homes-isis-iraqi-army>
Carroll said it was crucial that Prakash face justice for his involvement with 
Isis, and that intelligence is extracted from him on networks and plots 
currently in existence in Australia.

But she said both of those goals could be achieved by working “collaboratively 
with partners”.


She described his arrest as a blow to Isis, but said his value as a recruiter 
specifically targeting Australians was replaceable.


“The arrest of any Isis member is a blow to the group, as it removes the 
propaganda value of the individual, including being lauded as a so-called 
martyr,” she said.

“His primary role was being a high-profile Australian targeted at the 
Australian audience, and seeking to incite attacks.

“Isis has other Australians and other English speakers it will likely continue 
to use in its propaganda machine, but their overall message continues to be 
degraded by the group’s actual losses in the Middle East.”


Amarnath Amarasingam, who co-directs a study of western foreign fighters at 
Canada’s University of Waterloo, was involved in an online chat with an Isis 
fighter regarding Prakash’s arrest this week.


Amarasingam used Twitter to post a transcript of his conversation with the 
unnamed Isis fighter, who said Prakash “couldn’t handle war anymore” and had 
left Isis.


“He is a westerner after all,” the Isis fighter wrote.

The Isis fighter said he had heard speculation that part of Prakash’s decision 
to flee was because he was part of the extreme Hazimi sect within Isis that is 
made up of followers of Saudi cleric Ahmed al-Hazimi.

“But the main thing is cowardice ... facing airstrikes is not easy,” he said.

Prakash has been linked to a failed Melbourne plot to behead a police officer 
on Anzac Day last year andNuman Haider, an 18-year-old who was killed after 
stabbing two police officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/25/rapid-radicalisation-the-case-of-numan-haider-shocks-family-and-experts-alike>
 a year earlier.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has previously described Prakash as the 
most senior Australian operator in Isis.


He had been an effective propagandist and recruiter for Isis, having been a 
regular at the Al-Furqan centre in Melbourne’s south before leaving for Syria 
in 2013.
 