
An Amnesty International poster campaign aimed at highlighting how the Human 
Rights Act has helped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/15/hillsborough-and-shankhill-relatives-back-human-rights-act-campaign>
 causes as disparate as the Hillsborough families and the Northern Ireland 
peace process has been banned by Network Rail as too political, the rights 
group has said.

Amnesty said on Tuesday it was disappointed that posters booked for rail 
stations around the country had been pulled, even thoughTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London had run them at an 
underground station.

Network Rail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail> confirmed it 
had pulled the posters, saying they did not meet its rules on political 
advertising, in part because they directed people towards an online petition 
against government plans to scrap the act.

Hillsborough and Shankill relatives back Human Rights Act campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/15/hillsborough-and-shankhill-relatives-back-human-rights-act-campaign>
The Amnesty campaign <http://www.savetheact.uk>, which has also run in print 
and online, uses people who have been involved in cases involving the Human 
Rights Act, including relatives of those who died in the 1989 Hillsborough 
disaster, people connected with the Northern Ireland peace process, a couple 
whose son died because of hospital blunders and a woman who fought to uncover 
police errors after her mother was murdered.

The government has committed to repealing the act, passed in 1998 under Tony 
Blair’s government to incorporate the European convention on human rights into 
UK law. Ministers have pledged to replace it with a bill of rights, though the 
timetable for this process remains vague.

Amnesty said it had arranged for the cancelled posters to be displayed at 
other sites.

Kate Allen, Amnesty’s UK director, said: “We’re very disappointed by Network 
Rail’s decision to pull these adverts at the 11th hour. We simply don’t accept 
that basic human rights are ever a political issue.

“The irony is that human rights cross party-political lines and so do 
failures, coverups and abuses. Successive governments managed to let down the 
Hillsborough families, and their story demonstrates precisely why we need 
enduring human rights protections which aren’t redrafted by the government of 
the day, on a political whim.”

A Network Rail spokeswoman said: “We first saw the adverts yesterday and on 
inspection, they don’t meet our rules on ‘political’ advertising. We aim to be 
fair and even-handed when deciding which adverts to accept in our stations and 
have a set of rules in place to ensure all advertising is treated equally.

“The advertisement directs people to sign an online petition, and it is for 
this reason we deemed it political and against our rules.”

The decision prompted criticism from activists, and people associated with the 
Amnesty campaign.
Caroline CriadoPerez (@CCriadoPerez) 
.@nationalrailenq <https://twitter.com/nationalrailenq> has pulled @AmnestyUK 
<https://twitter.com/AmnestyUK> ads. Explaining what the Human Rights Act has 
done is "too political". Objectifying women is fine.
 <https://twitter.com/CCriadoPerez/status/798510076348743680> November 15, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/CCriadoPerez/status/798510076348743680> 
Barry Devonside, whose 18-year-old son, Christopher, died at Hillsborough, 
said the decision was small-minded, adding: “Human rights aren’t political; 
they cover everyone, right across society.”

Introducing the campaign on Tuesday, Becky Shah, whose mother, Inger, also 
died at Hillsborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/20/hillsborough-inquest-police-ignored-screams-pushing-fans-back-into-pens>
, said the act had been crucial in securing the second inquest into the deaths, 
whichrecorded that the victims were unlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
.

Under the act, a jury can be convened to assess the wider circumstances 
surrounding a death – something that had not been legislated for before it came 
into law.

Shah said: “Without the Human Rights Act we would never, ever have had the 
second inquest. Without theHuman Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act> we would never, ever have 
got the verdicts of unlawfully killed against all the parties that were 
culpable. It was an absolutely imperative piece of legislation.”

Other people involved include Gary McKinnon, who successfully fought 
extradition to the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/16/gary-mckinnon-not-extradited-may>
 on hacking charges, and the parents of John Robinson, who died in 2006 from a 
ruptured spleen after doctors at Stafford hospitalsent him home even though he 
was vomiting and semi-conscious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/feb/02/mid-staffs-report-cover-ups>. 
It took a second inquest into Robinson’s death in 2014 to uncover the scale of 
the errors.

“It’s fundamental to everyone, in all walks of life,” Frank Robinson said of 
the act. “It opens access to justice for the man in the street. From the 
outset, all we wanted to know was the truth, and we were denied that by an 
inadequate first inquest. Using the Human Rights Act helped us achieve our 
goal.”
 