
Any Rangers player who tries to force a move away from the 'newco' club could 
face legal action, chief executive Charles Green has warned. Green, the leader 
of the consortium that recently bought the business and assets of the club for 
Â£5.5m, is due to meet PFA Scotland representatives on Monday and said the 
transfer of player contracts to newcoRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> had already taken place.

Midfielder Rhys McCabe has reportedly lodged an official objection to the 
transfer of his contract and forward Sone Aluko is also reported to be unhappy 
to play for the new setup. Green said: "We are meeting the PFA Scotland and 
their legal advisers with a view to allaying players' concerns about the 
transfer of contracts, so the timing of these announcements by players is hard 
to understand. The transfer of contracts has already happened and the club's 
clear legal advice is that the players' purported objection is ineffective. 
Rangers would like to make it abundantly clear to players, agents and the 
chairmen and managers of other football clubs that we will take whatever steps 
necessary to challenge what we regard as a breach of contract to protect the 
interests of our club."

Rangers were forced into administration over an unpaid tax bill in February 
and failure to secure a Company Voluntary Arrangement to exit administration 
consigned the club to liquidation last week. The new regime face a battle to 
get newco Rangers granted entry into the Scottish Premier League and face a 
vote by all 12 top-flight clubs on 4 July, with Hearts and Dundee United 
already indicating they will reject Rangers' bid.

Rangers manager Ally McCoist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist>, in a statement jointly 
released with Green, said: "It has been reported that a couple of players have 
indicated they want to challenge the transfer of their contracts. This is news 
to me and no player has spoken to me about it. At all times during my first 
year as manager I strived to show players respect and, in return, would have 
hoped they would have shown me, and more importantly the club, respect by 
notifying us of their intentions before making it known elsewhere.

"Players have their decisions to make, and I understand that, but the question 
they have to ask is do they want to play for Rangers? The formation of a new 
company is not the issue. The players would be playing for the same club in 
front of the same fans."

McCoist feels that players need to make their intentions known publicly and 
has been critical of agents looking to get a move for their clients. "I don't 
want Rangers fans to be reading over the next few days how devastated players 
are about having to go. The fans deserve better than that. They are not daft.

"I can understand if a player has the chance to go somewhere else and there is 
uncertainty about which division we will be playing in. But they should not 
expect sympathy from supporters if they use the transfer of contracts as an 
excuse. I already know there are agents touting my players all over the United 
Kingdom, so let's be brutally honest. We are in a difficult situation and the 
contracts issue has given some players and agents the belief they can use it to 
leave the club. The players were magnificent last season and made great 
sacrifices and that will never be forgotten. Now, we have to look forward and 
everyone should be honest about their intentions."
 