
Participants at a follow-up meeting to the Busan conference on aid 
effectiveness <http://www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/> have agreed a set of 
indicators that will provide the basis for a global monitoring framework for 
development assistance. The extent to which emerging donors will sign up to 
these indicators remains unclear, however, as their participation will be on a 
voluntary basis, as specified in last year's outcome document in South Korea.

Agreement on the 10 indicators put forward by the UK and Rwanda followed two 
days of talks at the Paris headquarters of the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD), the club of 34 developed nations. The 
indicators cover areas such as untied aid,transparency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/transparency-and-development>, 
mutual accountability,the role of the private sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/private-sector>, and women's 
empowerment.

The post-Busan interim group also agreed on a steering committee of 18 members 
that will play a "strategic agenda-setting role". It remains to be seen whether 
any of the donors from Bric (Brazil,India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and China) countries will be part of 
this committee, given their insistence that their participation in the 
monitoring framework should be voluntary.

At Tuesday's concluding session, India expressed strong support for the 
framework, saying it wanted to play an active role, but added that it needed 
more time to come on board fully.Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, throughout the discussions, 
insisted that south-south co-operation should be judged by different criteria 
to north-south co-operation.

Ronald Nkusi, from Rwanda's ministry of finance and economic planning, 
expressed hope that one of the Bric countries would join the steering 
committee. "It would be good to have one of them at the table in the room so we 
can see what their concerns are, and for them to see that the committee isn't 
something bad," he said.

Rwanda has been prominent in pushing for greater transparency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/nov/28/busan-deadline-to-end-tied-aid>
 and further untying of aid. Nkusi said overall Rwanda had been satisfied by 
the discussions, but would have preferred clarity on these two key issues. One 
official pointed out that tied aid affects not only projects but also technical 
support, with countries such as Germany and Japan insisting that developing 
countries use German or Japanese nationals for technical support.

This week's discussions provided a reminder of the balancing act reached at 
Busan, the high-level forum on aid effectiveness held last year following 
conferences in Paris and Accra. Busan sought to deal with the emergence of new 
players, even though their aid levels are dwarfed by traditional donors in the 
OECD's development assistance committee (OECD-DAC).

Busan established a global partnership for effective development co-operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/dec/01/china-india-aid-partnership>
, but it had to be a loose alliance as emerging donors felt it was unfair to 
apply the criteria of transparency and untied aid in north-south co-operation 
to south-south co-operation. The reluctance of emerging donors to sign on the 
dotted line on a global framework stems partly from a genuine lack of capacity 
to track data, but also from practices on the ground. China, for example, uses 
Chinese workers for construction projects in Africa. A case in point was the
building of the new African Union headquarters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/jan/27/constructive-criticism-intra-african-trade>
 in Addis Ababa.

The notion that China and other emerging donors should not be subject to the 
same criteria as traditional donors irks the likes ofRwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>, but Busan was about inclusivity and 
compromises had to be struck to bring in the new players.

A draft discussion note prepared by South Korea summed up the balancing act at 
Busan and since succinctly: "The participation of south-south partners is 
essential to materialise the new global partnership. Otherwise there will be 
little political progress since Busan and possibly we will move backward to the 
old paradigm. In regards to global monitoring, it is important to ensure that 
language is provided to retain an open door for south-south partners without 
undermining the expectations and quality of the Busan spirit. Equally important 
is to reaffirm that south-south providers are not treated in the same way as 
northern providers unless they choose to be."

The best gloss on the attitude of the new donors is that they may eventually 
buy into the global framework, as voiced by a civil society delegate in Paris. 
"We are eager to see south-south providers engage on an agenda of mutual 
accountability," said Mayra Moro-Coco fromBetterAid <http://www.betteraid.org/>
, the umbrella group for civil society organisations. "They are unlikely to 
commit soon, but it leaves the door open in the future."

In another indication of the shift away from the traditional OECD-DAC model – 
regarded by Brazil as lacking legitimacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2012/feb/27/latin-america-vanguard-development-cooperation>
 – the UN Development Programme (UNDP) will partner the OECD to support the new 
global partnership, which will consist of ministerial-level meetings every 18 
to 24 months, with more frequent meetings of the steering committee. The latter 
will consist of 18 members, including three co-chairs, five developing country 
representatives, and three from donor countries.

Under the new structure, the OECD <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> 
will provide the analytical expertise while the UNDP will bring breadth, 
drawing on its extensive international development background in the field. "It 
should be emphasised that setting up this initial leadership structure is a 
test for the credibility of the global partnership," said a summary of the 
meeting by the chairman, Talaat Abdel-Malek.

This week's proposals on indicators and the governance structure of the global 
partnership will be presented to the DAC-hosted Working Party onAid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> Effectiveness, which 
brings together representatives of more than 80 countries and organisations.
 