
An old black-and-white photograph taken in 1944 at the conference in Bretton 
Woods that gave birth to the World Bank and theInternational Monetary Fund (IMF)
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/imf> shows men in grey suits meeting to 
design the future multilateral system. Fast-forward 67 years to a community a 
few kilometres west of the capital of Tanzania, where local residents are using 
GPS devices to collect public data on the delivery of local services – schools, 
health clinics, public toilets and rubbish dumps – so the information can be 
uploaded to an online data map, ultimately holding their government accountable.

As government ministers, international aid organisations, non-government 
organisations, foundations and others gather in Busan, South Korea, for the
fourth high-level forum on aid effectiveness 
<http://www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/> to discuss the future of aid 
co-ordination, one thing is clear: the development future doesn't lie with men 
in dark suits behind closed doors. Not only are developing countries now 
providing two-thirds of global growth, turning the old north-south aid paradigm 
on its head, but it is becoming clearer that effective development needs the 
participation not just of governments but of beneficiaries, local communities 
and citizens more broadly. And with 21st-century technology, we now have the 
means to make it happen.

It was the use of the internet – an interactive platform called 
checkmyschool.org <http://www.checkmyschool.org/> – that saw an elementary 
school principal in Leyte province in the Philippines get much-needed building 
work to resume at her school, damaged by a natural disaster. The principal went 
online and lodged a complaint about the delay, fearing corrupt procurement 
practices were responsible. Her complaint prompted a speedy response. The work 
was completed and 800 students were given a new school roof.

It was via SMS messages from cellphones 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hZYm0kEvkAo> that citizens in the 
conflict-affected province of South Kivu in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo were able to vote for local budget priorities, to break a vicious cycle 
of mistrust and poorly performing services. As a result, for the first time in 
decades, local budgets started to include investments in local communities 
providing basic services to the poor, and in response, citizens started to pay 
taxes.

These moves to transparency – giving citizens access to information – gives 
21st-century meaning to the saying "knowledge is power".

And the power of knowledge can spread even further: transparency breeds 
accountability and a focus on results – for the taxpayer a sense that aid 
monies are being used wisely, for the citizen a sense that government is doing 
the right thing. The tranparency spotlight has already been on donors. The 
UK-based coalition of civil society organisations working on governance, aid 
effectiveness, and access to information,Publish What You Fund 
<http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/>, has just released its aid transparency 
index <http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/resources/index/2011-index/> rating 58 
international and bilateral donors and ranking the World Bank as most 
transparent. But before we become too self-congratulory, let's recall its 
overall message: some donors do well, all donors can do better.

Perhaps we can take some heart from another study on aid quality released this 
month <http://www.cgdev.org/section/topics/aid_effectiveness/quoda>, as a nudge 
to Busan. The Centre for Global Development and the Brookings Institution found 
the World Bank's fund for the poorest, theInternational Development Association 
<http://www.worldbank.org/ida/>, the UK and Ireland all scored in the top 10. 
And the study found, because of greater commitments to transparency, the area 
in which donors make the most improvement was in transparency and learning.

We've all learned that there's no one size fits all answer to development. As 
the Busan gathering will illustrate, no one has a monopoly on development. 
We're seeing the lessons learned in the developing world transcend borders – 
Rwanda was inspired by China's successful move to terrace-degraded hillsides; 
Colombia's model for mass transit has been copied widely; and India's model for 
information communication technologies is being studied across the African 
continent.

Truly democratising development means seizing all the opportunities offered by 
information communication technologies. It was a prime motivation behind the 
World Bank's move more than a year ago to open up its data banks. New web-based 
and mobile tools make it easier for the public to find, use and download bank 
data in five languages. Rich or poor, from the developed or the developing 
world, people have the tools to play a role in devising development solutions.

Developing countries, too, are seeing value in opening up their data. Kenya 
this year became the first country on the African continent to launch a national
open data initiative 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/jul/13/kenya-open-data-initiative>
. It took just three weeks. Now it's possible for anyone to obtain census or 
budget data, check on spending at the county level or even find a nearby health 
facility. Moldova has done the same. Other nations such as Mongolia, Nigeria 
and Rwanda want to follow suit.

Transparency isn't just about following the money trail from the top down. An 
equally important part of the equation is looking at the delivery of aid from 
the ground up – examining ways to provide citizens not only the knowledge about 
what's being delivered by development dollars but also the means to act upon 
that knowledge to help find and monitor development solutions.

And there's a double-win. Transparency and citizen involvement are not only a 
check on corruption, they can also be mobilised to improve development 
outcomes. Take Uganda where health workers at 50 health centres across the 
country were inspired to work harder after community monitoring – via citizen 
score cards. The result: a 33% drop in child mortality in the centres.

A key lesson of the Arab spring was that citizens' voice must be an integral 
part of development. It's a lesson we should heed. Investments that give voice 
to people are just as vital as money. Information and participation are as 
valuable as dollars if we want development assistance to be truly effective.

• Caroline Anstey is managing director of the World Bank 
<http://www.worldbank.org/>
 