
Amnesty International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>
 has reiterated its call for the Egyptian government to release the prominent 
photojournalist Mahmoud Abu Zeid, popularly known as “Shawkan”.

He has been in detention for more than three years since he was arrested while 
taking photographs of a sit-in by thousands of people, mainly supporters of 
ousted presidentMohamed Morsi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mohamed-morsi>
, in a Cairo square.

Amnesty has accompanied its call by launching an exhibition of Shawkan’s 
photographs, which illustrate both protests and daily life in Egypt. They will 
beon display at Amnesty’s Human Rights Action Centre 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/free-shawkan-photo-exhibition-tickets-28866417231?aff=es2>
 in Shoreditch, east London from 28 November to 16 December.

Tomorrow (Tuesday), Shawkan’s plight will be marked as part of Amnesty’s 
annual media Awards ceremony.

Shawkan has been in jail since 14 August 2013. He was photographing the sit-in 
at Cairo’s Rabaa al-Adaweya Square, which was held in protest at Morsi’s 
ousting by the military the previous month.

Security forces stormed the sit-in using bullets and tear gas, in the process 
killing more than 700 people. Shawkan – who features in Amnesty’sWrite for 
Rights <https://write.amnesty.org.uk/> campaign – pictured the events as they 
unfolded. When they discovered he was a journalist, police arrested him, tying 
his hands with plastic cables that cut through his skin, and beat him.

Shawkan now faces nine false charges, including “joining a criminal gang” and 
“murder”. If convicted, he could face the death penalty.

Amnesty International’s UK director, Kate Allen, said: “Shawkan’s arrest and 
detention is totally unjustified and a flagrant breach of Egypt’s own laws. His 
only ‘crime’ was to take photographs at a public demonstration.

“No journalist should ever be jailed for doing their job and taking 
photographs is not a crime. Shawkan’s detention is three years too long. It’s 
time for his immediate and unconditional release, and the authorities should 
drop all charges against him.

“Egypt’s crackdown on the media did not begin and end with the Al-Jazeera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> case. Tragically, scores of 
journalists remain behind bars, and Shawkan’s awful situation shows how press 
freedom is now a distant memory in Egypt.

“We reiterate our call on Egyptian authorities to immediately release Shawkan 
and all the other journalists who are behind bars inEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> simply for doing their job.”
 