
Pharmacists join their vocation because they want nothing more than to be able 
to use clinical skills to make beneficial differences to the lives of patients. 
Boots employs 6,000 pharmacists and its pharmacies dominate high streets 
throughout the UK. However, following our patient safety surveys of Boots 
pharmacists, it is apparent that large numbers feel that they have been 
severely hampered in doing so. The business culture you have recently revealed, 
which makes use of relentless and unacceptable targeting of NHS funds through 
medicine use reviews, coupled with intolerable working conditions, is a scandal 
that has caused widespread concern and anger (How Boots went rogue, 13 April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/13/how-boots-went-rogue>).

Boots UK boss Simon Roberts quits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/09/boots-uk-boss-simon-roberts-quits>
That’s why the changes in the company’s senior UK management are so important 
to its customers and to NHS patients (Boots UK boss quits, 9 June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/09/boots-uk-boss-simon-roberts-quits>
). We sincerely hope that the new Boots managing director heralds a change in 
business culture within that organisation. One that no longer relentlessly 
places targets upon its pharmacists in its pursuit of vast profits and 
double-digit growth, irrespective of the impact that it has on patients. A new 
business culture that allows Boots pharmacists to practise with professional 
autonomy and gives them sufficient time and support to build meaningful 
clinical relationships with patients. If the new managing director could 
achieve that, then she would go a long way to restoring the company’s image, as 
well as relieving the current pressures on the NHS. This would be to the 
benefit of the public, pharmacists and taxpayers.
Mark Koziol 
Assistant general secretary, Pharmacists’ Defence Association Union 
<http://www.the-pda.org>

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 