
It is one of the most beautiful and unspoiled parts of England, with rolling 
moorland, ruined castles and postcard-pretty villages. The Coquetdale valley in
Northumberland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/northumberland> national 
park has long had it all – except public transport.

All that changed this autumn, when a local man fulfilled a life-long ambition 
to launch his own bus company to link up the villages of his valley, providing 
a “lifeline” to pensioners and teens without driving licences who were 
otherwise stuck in their homes.

Bus driver Steve Hurst, 29, set up Spirit Buses 
<http://www.spiritbuses.co.uk/index.html>, having spotted a “gap that’s long 
needed filling”. Growing up in the market town of Rothbury it was impossible to 
go to the cinema in nearby Alnwick without getting a lift from his parents. 
Though just 12 miles away as the crow flies, the journey by bus took a whopping 
two-and-a-half hours, requiring a change at Morpeth in completely the wrong 
direction. Friends in the hamlets of Snitter, Alwinton and Harbottle weren’t 
even that lucky – no buses at all ran through their villages.

None of the big bus companies were interested in improving the services when 
there were fat profits to be made on busier, subsidised routes. Hurst, however, 
was undeterred by the perilous finances involved in rural transport. “It’s a 
public service,” he explained – albeit one which receives no public subsidies 
from Northumberland county council, unlikeArriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> and other big firms which 
receive tens of thousands each year. “It was never going to make me millions. I 
just wanted to revive the valley and connect all these communities up again.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthumberland-man-offers-lifeline-public-transport-steve-hurst%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F4%2F1420411667741%2Fd75270b0-b858-4751-a7da-2f7811b25bdb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20rural%20public%20transport%20company%20provides%20lifeline%20in%20Northumberland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthumberland-man-offers-lifeline-public-transport-steve-hurst%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20rural%20public%20transport%20company%20provides%20lifeline%20in%20Northumberland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthumberland-man-offers-lifeline-public-transport-steve-hurst%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F4%2F1420411667741%2Fd75270b0-b858-4751-a7da-2f7811b25bdb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Coquetdale valley’s Spirit Bus service stops at Netherton. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
With just £60,000 amassed from bank loans and personal savings, Spirit’s two 
buses made their maiden voyages in September. Now, there is a direct service 
between Rothbury and Alnwick, which takes just 20 minutes, the last bus timed 
so that customers can watch a play or a film without missing their ride home. 
Three days a week, a circular service connects Rothbury with Alwinton and all 
the villages in between on three well-spaced loops, recently voted one of the 
top ten most scenic bus routes in Britain by a coach magazine.

The services cover their costs, insists Hurst. And they don’t just carry 
passengers. “We’ve had cats, dogs, push-bikes, parcels, all sorts of things.” 
Recently a rural producer in Elsdon asked the driver to ferry boxes of 
marmalade to Rothbury shops. The buses are spotless but homely. Children 
delight in seeing the buses back at the depot each night, theirdestination 
boards 
<https://www.facebook.com/spiritbuses/photos/pb.352902134806265.-2207520000.1419345296./719051938191281/?type=3&theater>
 changed to read: “Sorry I’m Off To Bed – Zzzzzzzz.”

Hurst’s customers love him. “This service has changed my life, I no longer 
feel trapped and isolated, it’s given me the freedom to be independent again to 
go shopping and visit friends and family who have had to move away due to lack 
of transport,” said one comment on Spirit’s Facebook page. Hurst must have 
received more Christmas presents than anyone else in Coquetdale - and certainly 
more than Brian Souter, boss of giant rival Stagecoach, who famously threatened 
to“drink poison” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/21/tyne-wear-deregulation-bus> 
rather than accept a so-called public “quality contract” in nearby Tyne and 
Wear, which recently voted to press ahead with reforms that will mean a bus 
service outside London being taken back under public control for the first time 
since privatisation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthumberland-man-offers-lifeline-public-transport-steve-hurst%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F4%2F1420412010713%2Fdd3da10f-5e64-4900-a2fd-07325a1b6453-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20rural%20public%20transport%20company%20provides%20lifeline%20in%20Northumberland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthumberland-man-offers-lifeline-public-transport-steve-hurst%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20rural%20public%20transport%20company%20provides%20lifeline%20in%20Northumberland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorthumberland-man-offers-lifeline-public-transport-steve-hurst%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F4%2F1420412010713%2Fdd3da10f-5e64-4900-a2fd-07325a1b6453-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A pause in the Coquetdale circular route. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for 
the Guardian 
Local councillor, Steven Bridgett, 27, said he would be encouraging 
Northumberland county council to consider Hurst when other subsidised routes 
come up for tender in the new year. But he conceded that the council is 
unlikely to be able to subsidise Spirit in the future. “To be completely blunt, 
it’s more a time of contraction than expansion,” he said.

According to the Campaign for Better Transport (CfBT), 
<http://www.bettertransport.org.uk/save-our-buses/bus-cuts-map> Northumberland 
county council has cut bus funding by 19% (£400,000) since 2011, reducing some 
services that connected towns. Martin Abrams, public transport campaigner for 
CfBT said: “Cuts in bus funding have left many communities cut off completely 
with massive long-term impacts. So it’s very welcome to see entrepreneurs 
stepping into the breach and providing a viable bus service. This isn’t an 
isolated case – there are other small operators taking the place of bigger 
companies – but they will need help from councils and the government if they 
are to survive long term. Underfunding of the pensioners’ free travel is a 
threat to these and other rural bus services. Towns like Rothbury are also 
typical of places where if you don’t have a car you can’t get around.

“Government must address this and invest in supporting these operators. After 
recently committing to spend £15bn on new roads, it’s obviously not a question 
of funding shortfalls, but a question of priorities.”

Bridgett has nothing but praise for Hurst: “I’m probably going to get in 
trouble for saying this but I’ll say it anyway: one of the things you tend to 
get with the bigger bus companies is that as they grow, they forget the little 
people. Steve provides a tailor-made, personal service. I don’t just salute his 
entrepreneurial spirit but also his social spirit. It’s not just a business 
venture for him, but a social service for the Coquetdale valley.”
 