
The tragic series of events that have struck South Sudan and the Central 
African Republic (CAR) in recent months are of deep concern to us all. Theg7+ 
<http://www.g7plus.org/> – the group of post-conflict states I serve as general 
secretary – has felt the pain of these countries particularly keenly. All g7+ 
members have recent experience of the kind of instability and bloodshed 
afflicting South Sudan and CAR. We have first-hand experience of the maxim that 
conflict is "development in reverse", and know that a return to conflict can 
set back progress by decades.

South Sudan and CAR are pilot countries for the new deal for engagement in 
fragile states 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=7&ved=0CFQQFjAG&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.europarl.europa.eu%2Feplibrary%2FNew-Deal-for-engagement-in-fragile-states.pdf&ei=nP8yU6SfMrOg7AbqjIC4Dg&usg=AFQjCNGXlEagOG222FGauZeXTOtXsMSmJA&sig2=uzWWs8i_8moVMVGtFWeGsQ&bvm=bv.63738703,d.ZGU&cad=rja>
 (pdf), the landmark agreement endorsed by 44 countries and international 
organisations inBusan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/25/busan-explainer-aid-effectiveness>
, Korea in 2011. The new deal sets out to effect fundamental change in the way 
the international community works in countries emerging from conflict or at 
risk of it, recognising that these states have been poorly served by aid 
approaches designed for non-fragile environments.

Some have argued that, little more than two years after it was signed, the new 
deal isin crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/aug/15/apathy-over-busan-aid-effectiveness>
.

As the development community gears up for the first high-level meeting of the 
Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation 
<http://effectivecooperation.org/> in Mexico next week - a meeting that will 
potentially shape the aid landscape for decades to come - now is a good time to 
reflect on where we have travelled since Busan, and how far we still have to go.

If recent events in CAR, South Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> and elsewhere teach us 
anything, it is that the principles behind the new deal are not only sound, but 
more necessary than ever.

The new deal calls for peacebuilding and statebuilding objectives to be at the 
forefront of international efforts in conflict-affected countries. That means 
helping those countries and their governments to strengthen security and 
justice systems, supporting inclusive political settlements, and ensuring 
citizens have access to the jobs and basic services that will help rebuild 
their trust in the state. The new deal calls on international aid organisations 
to ensure that everything they do in these environments serves to reinforce 
peace and statebuilding.

The new deal also calls for donors – bilateral aid agencies, UN agencies and 
international finance institutions – to fundamentally change their modus 
operandi. Operating effectively in countries in danger of falling back into 
conflict demands risk-taking, speedy action, flexibility, persistence and even 
creativity.

The tragedy is that – as the signing of the new deal demonstrates – the 
"better angels" within development agencies know these things; they know what 
works. But the systems they work within appear stubbornly resistant to change. 
Of course, when dealing with huge bureaucracies, beholden to cautious 
taxpayers, implementing reform is difficult. But in the case of the new deal, 
behaviour change from aid organisations has so far been chimerical.

What lessons can we draw from all this? First, we must recognise that the 
reorientation of international engagement in post-conflict countries is a 
political process, and requires real political commitment on all sides. To 
achieve change on the ground, the new deal must change mindsets and shift 
priorities at the very highest levels. Yet it has too often been seen as a 
technocratic exercise, something that can be "implemented" by one or two 
ministries and their local donors. We need to bring the politics back in. This 
means building momentum and commitment to change at all levels of society, from 
the grassroots to the president.

Second, we need to practise "strategic patience", recognising that some parts 
of the new deal are going to take time. In particular, generating greater 
country ownership over the development agenda requires the undoing of years of 
established practice; it needs national voices to be heard and the resumption 
of real leadership and accountability by our weakened government institutions, 
which for years have been beholden to multiple external agendas. Country 
ownership requires new types of dialogue between donors, government actors and 
civil society, and deep consultation with our citizens on their priorities and 
aspirations. Fragile state capacity is by definition smaller than that of our 
donors. We need more time than our development partners.

Third, donors and international organisations need to resist the urge to do 
the easy things first. A desire to rush ahead with new deal processes such as
fragility assessments 
<http://www.saferworld.org.uk/news-and-views/comment/30-the-peacebuilding-potential-of-fragility-assessments>
 andcompacts <http://www.newdeal4peace.org/focus/> has arguably resulted in a 
loss of quality. Processes that were intended to enable consultation among our 
citizens have instead tended to be driven by international consultants to fit 
donor time schedules. Meanwhile, the things that donors really have within 
their power to grant – the changes to their aid and operating policies – have 
been deprioritised.

Many new deal enthusiasts mistakenly assumed this was going to be easy. A 
combination of overhyped expectations and underestimation of the difficulties 
involved has led many of us to rush to demonstrate technical results rather 
than slowly working towards real change.

Genuine statebuilding demands great investments of time, resources and 
political will, along with a willingness to accept the new risks and 
uncertainties associated with change. With the new deal, we will get out what 
we put in.

As governments and donors gather in Mexico next week, two years on from Busan, 
we should celebrate the fact that we have started this journey together, 
reflect on how much further we have to travel, and then steel ourselves for the 
long walk ahead.

Helder da Costa is general secretary of the g7+
 