
Hometown: Reading.

The lineup: Oscar Lulu (vocals, guitar), Haydn Evans (drums), Ally Baty 
(guitar) and Dom Cordell (bass).

The background: Sundara is a Sanskrit word that means “beautiful” or “noble” 
while karma is, you know, karma. This information tells you precisely zip about 
this young band, although it does express a certain boldness and brightness 
that is relevant (someone – possibly the band themselves – has described them 
as “more refreshing than sunshine 
<http://www.leedsfestival.com/line-up/artist/sundara-karma>”). 

The Hindu/buddhist allusion is a red herring – the new Kula Shaker they are 
not. They are from Reading, which, for the purposes of this article, we are 
going to pretend is the New Jersey to London’s New York – just far enough away 
from the big city to engender a simultaneous loathing of confinement and desire 
for escape. And the band make a yearning, ringing, powerfully plangent sound 
that a) is suggestive of four teens eager to flee and fulfil their dreams and 
b) seeks to solicit the approbation of a large audience. They aspire to the 
driving, rousing anthemia ofBruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen>, with big ideas about death and 
sacrifice and music up to the task of reflecting same.

This is not insular indie; rather it has the courage of its convictions, with 
choruses designed for arena singalongs. We could cite all sorts of statistics 
to confirm their stadium trajectory – three-quarters of a million Spotify 
streams, high positions in theHype Machine <http://hypem.com/> chart – when 
really all you need to do is listen to the music. Freshbloom is an early 
example of their euphoric uplift, with lyrics both poetic (“I kissed the red 
lips of the night”) and pointed (“I never want to go home … I want to live 
under the moonlight”) and a chorus that demands a response. New single Flame 
has a surging, stomping momentum all its own. Loveblood invites you to dance in 
the dark, and has a little piano motif on the back of the chorus that is the 
real hook and proves they really mean business. The Night is slower but still 
jubilant, and if you told us it was a cover of a track from Darkness on the 
Edge of Town or The River, we wouldn’t blink.

Of the new, unreleased tracks we’ve heard, As A Child is, if anything, more 
polished, cleaner, a move in the right (commercial but still corrosively 
intelligent) direction. Diamond Cutter nods to U2, like a faster With or 
Without You. Best of all is Run Away, with a brooding verse that explodes into 
a fabulous, career-defining refrain (“Push me aside and tell me I’m wonderful / 
Push me aside and tell me I’m miserable”). They’re no dunces, either. The video 
toFlame <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X5iyXHNy1_Y>, they explain, “is based 
on Plato’s Allegory of the Cave. We are basically commenting on the whole 
postmodern reality that we find ourselves living in ... the Matrix. Where 
adverts, politicians, the war on drugs, terrorism, consumerism, mass 
production, celebrity culture, social networks etc are the shadows that 
permeate our walls – and we all buy into it.”

The buzz: “Sundara Karma arrive with choruses built for arenas” – Clash. 

The truth: They give indie a good name. 

Most likely to: Flame on 
<http://nerdreactor.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/2103919-human_torch_flame_on.png>
.

Least likely to: Burn out. 

What to buy: Single Flame is released by Chess Club on 7 August. 

File next to: Arcade Fire, Bruce Springsteen, U2, Hockey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/22/hockey>. 

Links: facebook.com/SundaraKarma <https://www.facebook.com/SundaraKarma>. 

Ones to watch: Prep, Ikes, Nicky Blitz, The World Is a Beautiful Place And I 
Am No Longer Afraid to Die, Rømans.
 