
We’re part-way through Round Two of the Stanley Cup playoffs, and at least one 
team could be eliminated from the post-season by Friday. So, can the Rangers 
figure out a way to beat the Penguins? And over in Minnesota, will the Wild 
continue to win at home and tie things up with the Blackhawks? The weekend 
games are also looking good, as Montreal travels back to Boston tied at two 
games apiece, and LA looks to win one at home to stay ahead in their series 
against Anaheim.

New York Rangers vs. Pittsburgh Penguins 

Penguins lead series 3-1, next game: Friday May 9, 7pm ET

The question for New York might seem to be: How do you solve a problem like 
the Penguins? It’s not. Instead, it’s: How do you solve a problem like your own 
power play? The Rangers have been terrible this post-season with the man 
advantage. On Wednesday night, the Rangers again couldn’t capitalize with the 
extra man, going 0-for-2 on the power play, which means they haven’t scored on 
the power play now in thirty-six – thirty-six! – tries. It’s not even just bad, 
it’s wretched. Worst of all? They allowed the Penguins a short-handed goal near 
the end of the second period, that gave the lead back to Pittsburgh and 
effectively solidified the position for the remainder of the game.


But the Rangers just aren’t scoring enough, generally, let alone on the power 
play. Rick Nash? Goalless these playoffs (he has only four assists). Martin St. 
Louis? Two goals, four assists. Brad Richards? Three goals, four assists. Not 
enough. They look tired, disengaged. The only member of the squad who still 
looks like he’s paying attention most of the time is goaltender Henrik 
Lundqvist (but that’s a familiar sentence). Though, as he did in Game 3 in New 
York, even when Lundqvist bails out his team over and over, they still give him 
nothing, and eventually he lets one in. It’s only been a matter of time.


So what can New York do to turn it around? Traffic, perhaps – put some bodies 
in front of Marc-Andre Fleury and start shooting. They can get physical – in a 
smart way, which they’re perfectly capable of doing, and did pull off a few 
times in Round 1 against the Flyers. And, it’s not an impossible task against 
Pittsburgh, either. In Game 1, the Rangers scored first and early (5 minutes 
into the first period), and hung on to win it in overtime, which took 
perseverance. Where did that go?


But the Penguins seem to be occupying some seriously dangerous headspace on 
the Ranger bench. Pittsburgh has a groove going against the Rangers (and are 
being helped along, as noted above). That’s a difficult funk from which to find 
release if the goals aren’t going your way.


The Penguins can finish off the Rangers Friday night back home in Pittsburgh. 
Odds are they will, unless Lundqvist saves them.


Montreal Canadiens vs. Boston Bruins

Series tied 2-2, next game: Saturday May 10, 7pm ET

Montreal hung on in Game 1 through one extra frame and finally sealed the win 
just inside of the second overtime, thanks to P.K. Subban. It was a huge win 
for the Habs, and obviously the fans back in Montreal went totally bonkers.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh-drt540XoY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh-drt540XoY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dh-drt540XoY&media=>
 Canadiens win 
But so did Bruins fans – just in a very different way. Many of them took to 
Twitter to post idiotic, racist remarks about Subban 
<http://www.cjad.com/cjad-news/2014/05/02/bruins-react-to-racist-anti-subban-tweets>
 from the safety of their living rooms and barstools like the cowards they are. 
The Bruins fired back with a curt statement, calling the racist remarks 
“classless” and those who wrote them “ignorant”. Those people, the Bruins said 
(via president Cam Neely) 
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/sports/2014/05/02/bruins-respond-racist-comments-directed-subban/9QotpvxGGH7zhc1ndtrf5K/story.html>
 were “in no way a reflection of anyone associated with the Bruins 
organization.” Subban took it surprisingly well,urging that no blame be placed 
on the passionate, non-moronic, Bruins fans 
<http://www.montrealgazette.com/sports/Bruins+fans+praise+Subban+class+response+racist+remarks/9805962/story.html>
 (which earned grudging respect from those same people).


It was a weird moment, all in all. Bruins and Habs fans... agreeing?


Anyway, all of it, as you can see, served as somewhat of a distraction in this 
series from what’s been happening on the ice: some pretty great hockey. The 
Habs and Bruins have see-sawed in this series, trading wins on home and away 
ice – most recently Thursday night in Montreal, wherethe Bruins won the contest 
in overtime, 1-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/09/bruins-win-overtime-level-nhl-playoff-series-canadiens>
.


By and large, however, it’s looked that Montreal has had the upper hand over 
the four games. Boston has battled (and won), but the Habs are proving perhaps 
a more difficult opponent than anticipated (as have Carey Price’s goalposts, 
which have practically made as many saves as he has). Montreal has managed to 
frustrate the Bruins, keeping their heavy bodies and physical, grind-out style 
of play up somewhere near the blue line where the shots are easier to block. In 
reply, the Habs have been scoring, from a number of people and at key moments. 
That, and Price playing very well between those fortunate pipes, has allowed 
Montreal to do something else quite important: hold a lead when they get it.


The question now is whether Thursday’s win before returning to Boston will 
have done enough to change the momentum in the series. The Bruins went into 
Thursday with their lines shifted around, and brought up Matt Fraser from 
Providence to try to add something to the physical game (and it’s a good thing, 
too – he scored the winner). Oh, and did I mention Tuukka Rask looked very good 
in goal Thursday? He did.


Saturday is the beginning of the series within the series – a best of three 
games. We can completely ignore the final regular season standings now if we 
hadn’t already. These are evenly-matched squads, and this series could go the 
distance to seven games. Which would be fine.

Chicago Blackhawks vs. Minnesota Wild

Chicago leads series 2-1, next game: Friday May 9, 9:30pm ET

Two games into this series, it looked like Chicago was in the driver’s seat. 
Game 1: 5-2 Chicago. Game 2: 4-1 Chicago. And... then came Game 3, which 
through the first two periods in Minneapolis remained scoreless, until the 
floodgates opened. Just under two minutes into the third frame, Erik Haula took 
a nifty pass from Justin Fontaine and put the Wild up 1-0. Less than three 
minutes later, Mikael Granlund netted one past Corey Crawford. Then, the Wild 
went on the power play, and Zach Parise got in on the action. Another from 
Granlund, this time an empty-netter, was how it all ended, 4-0.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUticKXRctA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUticKXRctA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKUticKXRctA&media=>
 Blackhawks vs Wild, Game Three 
So what happened? The Wild hadn’t been completely out of the first two games, 
for one. They had some good chances against Chicago, especially in Game 2, but 
couldn’t capitalize (and Crawford was on his game). Part of the story in Game 3 
was Wild goalie Ilya Bryzgalov, who made (only) 19 saves on his way to his 
first ever career playoff shoutout. Another part was that Minnesota’s big guns 
(ie. Parise and Granlund) showed off the goal-scoring we’re more accustomed to 
seeing. And, of course, part of it was Chicago. Brian Bickel and Brandon Saad 
were both stand-outs for the Blackhawks in Game 2, but were unable to keep that 
going, including in the latter case in the face-off circle. Saad won only 33% 
of his faceoffs in Game 3, where he’d won exactly half of them two nights 
before.


Perhaps what can make it so difficult to win against them when the Wild are 
playing well is a common theme amongst the team's top centermen, as Dave 
Campbell at the Associated Press noted Thursday: they’re all Finns, and think 
defensively.Here’s the Wild coach on the subject of Finnish pride 
<http://www.edmontonjournal.com/sports/hockey/Wild+prepare+Blackhawks+onslaught+Game/9819868/story.html>
, something he says is common among players from that country: “Part of that 
winning attitude is every play they take pride in making it happen, whether 
it’s a blocked shot or a faceoff or shutting somebody down or whatever they can 
do to help their team win.”

The solution? Knock them off their game, make them loosen up and create holes. 
For the Blackhawks that might mean being more physical, perhaps in the neutral 
zone to force some turnovers. And, though he had one good night, Chicago knows 
it can score on Bryzgalov, so they will be looking to shoot often and, unlike 
they did in Game 3, get a few more on the net.

One more note: serial knee destroyer, Matt Cooke, will return for Game 4 
<http://nesn.com/2014/05/matt-cookes-suspension-ends-ready-to-return-for-blackhawks-wild-game-4/>
.

Anaheim Ducks vs. LA Kings

Kings lead series 2-1, next game: Saturday May 10, 9:30pm ET

Whatever other highlights this series has given us, this is by far the most 
enjoyable: Ducks’ forward Corey Perry took advantage of an unattended glove as 
Kings’ forward Jeff Carter tended to his stick. The only thing to do? Squirt 
some water into it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0gV9g-O-zKE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0gV9g-O-zKE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0gV9g-O-zKE&media=>
 What happened to Jeff Carter's glove? 
Through the first two games in this series, there were two parts to the story, 
both on the LA side of the ice. First, Jonathan Quick was on form. Over games 1 
and 2, Quick saw 72 shots come his way, and turned aside all but three, landing 
him a .958 save percentage. He was there when the Kings needed him, keeping 
them in what were, arguably, relatively tight games.

HIs play was complemented up front in a big way by the Kings’ first line, of 
Anze Kopitar, Dustin Brown and Marian Gaborik. In Game 2, Ducks coach Bruce 
Boudreau did what most coaches do, and matched his top forward line (Corey 
Perry-Ryan Getzlaf-Matt Belesky) with LA’s. But by the end of things, that was 
no longer the case. “I did it because Kopitar’s line was dominating them,”
Boudreau explained later 
<http://www.calgaryherald.com/sports/hockey/Ducks+dominated+Anze+Kopitar+leads+Kings+strong+play/9812690/story.html>
. That was a good way of putting it. Kopitar especially was a machine during 
those first two games in Anaheim (he nabbed three assists in Game 1 alone).

Game 3 was a similarly close-fought game (1-goal leads have been a 
characteristic of this series so far), but the Ducks found a way to finally 
win, taking it 3-1. It wasn’t a runaway victory, though. With the Ducks holding 
a 1-0 lead, thanks to a powerplay goal from Perry early in the first on a 
lovely play patiently set up by Getzlaf, the Kings countered on the man 
advantage roughly five minutes into the second. The tide really could have 
shifted then, but following a terrible change on the Anaheim bench during 
another power play (they somehow managed to put three defencemen on the ice), 
the Ducks got a break, emerged from their zone with the puck and Nick Bonino 
fed a nice pass to Teemu Selanne who did what he’s been doing for decades.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKYclwqrOYdQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKYclwqrOYdQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKYclwqrOYdQ&media=>
 Selanne scores 
It wasn’t all good news for Anaheim, though. Boudreau decided to start goalie 
Frederik Andersen. Perhaps it was because Jonas Hiller, the man between the 
pipes for them during the first two games, is 0-5-2 at the Staples Center in 
LA. Andersen, however, looked wobbly. Andersen left Round 1 against Dallas 
prior to Game 7, and with a mixed record in that series, backstopping two 
losing efforts on the road and getting pulled in Game 6. He left the game early 
again Thursday night, only this time with an injury. Depending how long he’s 
out, it could be trouble for the Ducks. To counter Quick at the other end, 
Hiller needs to be stellar. He’s been good – which might not be good enough.


NHL playoffs schedule <http://www.nhl.com/ice/stanleycup.htm>
 