
Unlike last season, we’ve had a full 82 games to get us to where we are now: 
the Stanley Cup playoffs. But before we get any further into predicting who’ll 
win what, a quick reminder that this year’s format is different than before. 
The first and second placed teams in each conference still play the bottom two 
as before (though the latter pair are now wildcard teams), but from there, it 
breaks into divisional match-ups, with the second- and third-placed teams in 
each facing off.

With that covered, let’s get to what really matters: the match-ups.


Eastern Conference

Boston Bruins v Detroit Red Wings

Boston is undoubtedly the heavy favourite in this Original Six series (the 
last time these two teams met in the playoffs was 57 years ago). The Bruins 
finished atop the league this year, with 117 points, and a fairly impressive 
goal differential, scoring 261 and only allowing 177. They had an amazing 
March, winning 15 of the 17 games they played that month, outscoring their 
opponents 61 to 28. But April was a bit different, where the Bruins went two 
for seven. Maybe the surge came too early? There will be a lot of pressure for 
Boston to again reach the final, and while they seem capable of it, handling 
those expectations will be difficult. Look to the usual core group – Milan 
Lucic, Zdeno Chara, and Tuukka Rask (who walks into this post-season with a 
.930 save percentage), along with Jarome Iginla, who’s had a stellar year – to 
fight hard.


Facing that, Detroit will be in tough. The Red Wings struggled this year and 
only barely made the post-season, having spent much of the last eight weeks on 
the cusp. They will have to rely on their deep defence and a few key 
performances from promising youngsters like Gustav Nyquist to compete with what 
at the moment looks like a Bruins juggernaut. But the Red Wings were in a 
similar situation last year in the Western conference, facing theAnaheim Ducks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anaheim-ducks>, and handily dispensed with 
them. So, who knows?

Prediction: Boston in five

Pittsburgh Penguins v Columbus Blue Jackets

Pittsburgh finished the year sixth overall in the league, but second in the 
East (which ought to give you some idea of the West’s relative strength). 
Likely the Blue Jackets won’t pose much of a problem for the Pens, but keep in 
mind the last time these two teams met (March 28), it was no blow-out. 
Pittsburgh walked out of Columbus with a 2-1 win, having been kept to a 0-0 tie 
until the third period (over their five meetings, for the record, the Penguins 
out-scored Columbus 16-7). That night, it might be also worth noting, Penguins 
goalie Marc-Andre Fleury faced 36 shots – probably not something Pittsburgh 
wants to test again in the playoffs over an extended period. Fleury is, and has 
been of late, a question mark for the Penguins in the post-season, particularly 
following his epic collapse in 2012. The Penguins also had trouble last year in 
the first round against the New York Islanders, another team many expected them 
to roll by with little challenge. Still, they benefit from those 
always-dangerous forward lines (Sidney Crosby, Evgeny Malkin, etc.), and are 
bolstered by the return of Kris Letang at defence.


Columbus, much like Detroit, will hope for some great performances from their 
key players, including their top forward and defensive lines, but no doubt 
mostly from Sergei Bobrovsky in net. He’s done well this year, sitting at a 
.923 save percentage with 2.38 goals against. Firing on all cylinders, 
perfectly, the Blue Jackets could steal one or perhaps even two from 
Pittsburgh. It could happen, but sustained perfection would be unexpected.

Prediction: Pittsburgh in five

Montreal Canadiens v Tampa Bay Lightning
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F15%2Fnhl-playoffs-bruins-st-louis-blackhawks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397569771660%2F38609846-00ce-467e-a379-42b7bb4f4b0f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NHL%20playoffs%3A%20expect%20Boston%20to%20go%20deep%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Blues%20to%20upset%20Blackhawks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F15%2Fnhl-playoffs-bruins-st-louis-blackhawks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NHL%20playoffs%3A%20expect%20Boston%20to%20go%20deep%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Blues%20to%20upset%20Blackhawks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F15%2Fnhl-playoffs-bruins-st-louis-blackhawks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397569771660%2F38609846-00ce-467e-a379-42b7bb4f4b0f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Montreal's Francis Bouillon and New York's Derek Dorsett go at it. Montreal 
have the edge over Tampa. Photograph: Jean-Yves Ahern/USA Today Sports 
Tampa Bay goes into this series on a four-game winning streak to end the 
season, two of which came against other playoff-bound teams (Philadelphia and 
Columbus). The Canadiens, on the other hand, had a mixed finish to the year, 
beating the Rangers in their finale, but losing a tough one in overtime to the 
Blackhawks a week ago. Overall, though, these two teams are very closely 
matched. Montreal will count on Carey Price to backstop them as well under 
pressure as he did Team Canada at the Olympics, but Price (while sometimes 
carrying the squad) is always better when he seems confident in what’s 
happening in front of him. That means he’ll rely on guys like PK Subban, for 
instance, to make smart decisions.

On the other side, the Lightning will be without the leadership of Martin St 
Louis and will look to Steven Stamkos for energy and, obviously, goals. But can 
Stamkos be the leader this team is now missing? The theory was they’d get that 
in a younger version with Ryan Callahan, but he’s so far not been as effective. 
Tampa Bay has had the better of Montreal this year, winning three of the four 
games they played against one another, but the Lightning, like the Habs will 
also have to hope their power play finally clicks, as it’s beenin the bottom 
third overall <http://www.extraskater.com/teams/on-ice?type=total&sit=5v4> this 
season.

Prediction: A close one. Montreal in seven


Philadelphia Flyers v New York Rangers

Before we go any further, let’s take a moment to remember just how awful the 
Metropolitan division was at the beginning of this season.Sean McIndoe at 
Grantland <http://grantland.com/features/why-metropolitan-division-terrible/> 
accurately re-named it the Division of Zeroes in November, calling it 
“terrible”, “horrible”, “abysmal”. At the time, the overall record for all 
eight teams in the division was 49-58-11, with only 109 points over 118 games. 
At that rate, McIndoe calculated, the entire division would have accrued only 
76 points over the season.

But now four of the East’s finalists hail from the Metro division – a healthy 
50% – including these two, the Flyers and Rangers. And, asNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl>.com helpfully points out, the “biggest 
key” to this match-up might be the road games. “In four regular-season games 
this season, the home team won each time,” the league site informs us. “The 
Flyers have won three in a row against the Rangers at Wells Fargo Center, and 
the Rangers have won eight in a row against the Flyers at Madison Square 
Garden.”

Going only on that, perhaps the money’s on New York, but Philadelphia can 
prove difficult in the playoffs. Biggest question marks: can new signing St 
Louis step up to lead the Rangers? And will Steve Mason truly prove himself as 
the Flyers’ first string between the pipes?

Prediction: Flyers in six


Western Conference


Colorado Avalanche v Minnesota Wild

No team had a bigger turn-around from last season to this one than the 
Colorado Avalanche <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/colorado-avalanche>. They 
finished last year dead last in their division. This year: first in the West. 
One could point to the leadership of Patrick Roy behind the bench to explain 
it, and maybe that’s all it took, but whatever it was, it was magical. The Avs 
are now surely the team to watch in this post-season: how could they not be 
poised to impress yet again? There have been some key factors to this run – 
namely their talent up front and the great play of goaltender Semyon Varlamov 
between the pipes. Watch for Minnesota to attempt to exploit what remains 
Colorado’s only real (though relative, really) weakness, which is its defensive 
lines. But even then, the Wild might have a tough job – the Avs swept the Wild 
4-0-1 in the season series between the two teams this year.


So that leaves Minnesota with a major challenge, and not one that will be 
easily overcome. In net, Ilya Bryzgalov has yet to prove he is a legitimate 
clutch goaltender (again, we look back to that 2012 series against the Penguins 
when he was in Philadelphia). So it means the Wild will have to lean heavily on 
that pairing they paid so much for not long ago: Ryan Suter on defence and Zach 
Parise up at forward. Those two will have to have stellar games for the Wild to 
have even a remote chance. And even then...

Prediction: Colorado in four


Anaheim Ducks v Dallas Stars
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F15%2Fnhl-playoffs-bruins-st-louis-blackhawks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397569872650%2F09271424-87f7-4755-b5e9-e6e57f662fe0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=NHL%20playoffs%3A%20expect%20Boston%20to%20go%20deep%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Blues%20to%20upset%20Blackhawks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F15%2Fnhl-playoffs-bruins-st-louis-blackhawks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=NHL%20playoffs%3A%20expect%20Boston%20to%20go%20deep%20%E2%80%93%20and%20Blues%20to%20upset%20Blackhawks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fapr%2F15%2Fnhl-playoffs-bruins-st-louis-blackhawks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397569872650%2F09271424-87f7-4755-b5e9-e6e57f662fe0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Teemu Selanne: Anaheim's star. Photograph: Gary A Vasquez/USA Today Sports 
Anaheim quietly slipped into its role as league leader very early on this year 
and calmly sat there, winning game after game, swatting away (most) comers, and 
finishing the year second only to the surging Bruins with equal wins (54) but 
just one more loss (20), and short only one point from taking the Presidents’ 
Trophy. Expect more of the same in this first round. The expectation for this 
series is a fairly simple one: Anaheim will take it, probably at a walk. The 
Ducks boast a formidable duo up front in the form of Ryan Getzlaf and Corey 
Perry, along with the Ageless Wonder, Teemu Selanne. Even their fourth line had 
a good year – Daniel Winnik and Kyle Palmieri managed to hit 30 points this 
year. This is what has led them to such great heights this season, as it did 
last year … but then, we remember last year, right?

Oh, right. 

The Ducks should have been able to take on the Red Wings pretty easily, but as 
it happened, they fell apart completely. Could the same thing happen this time?

If there’s any chance of a repeat, it’ll start in goal, where Kari Lehtonen 
has been a true star (sorry!) for Dallas. His save percentage is an impressive 
.919, with a goals-against average of 2.44. At the other end of the ice in the 
Ducks’ net will be Jonas Hiller – no slouch either (.911 save percentage, 2.48 
GAA) – but who’s only played 50 games versus Lehtonen’s 65. More importantly, 
though, is Hiller’s recent troubles. Hiller lost his last three games in net 
for the Ducks and isn’t actually expected to start Wednesday. He may be passed 
over for rookie Frederik Andersen, who has played well, but whose inexperience 
risks making him a liability.

All of which means Dallas, itself boasting some power up front in Jamie Benn 
and Tyler Seguin, could make it interesting – and have us all paying close 
attention.

Prediction: Anaheim in six

St Louis Blues v Chicago Blackhawks

St Louis was an impressive team this year for a number of reasons, but the way 
they snatched defeat from the jaws of victory as the season ended might have 
been one of the more surprising ones. The Blues finished the season with six 
straight losses, pushing them down the standings and out of first place in the 
West (handing it to Colorado). The second in that string of defeats came at the 
United Center in Chicago, to the Blackhawks – and it was one the Blues should 
have won, given they way they completely befuddled the Blackhawks for the first 
20 minutes. Though the loss was a bad one for St Louis, it was ominous, too, as 
it came to a Chicago team that lacked its two top forwards, Jonathan Toews and 
Patrick Kane. Both, as it happens, will be (or so the team says) back from 
injury for the playoffs.


Which means if you’re a Blackhawks fan, things are looking up. A full roster 
along with a rested duo of Toews and Kane bodes well for the long haul into the 
post-season. But the Blackhawks can’t take the Blues for granted – yes, they 
are on a losing skid, but those first 20 minutes in early April on home ice 
showed Chicago how tough St Louis can be, particularly on the forecheck. At the 
back end, too, the Blues are formidable opponents for the defending Stanley Cup 
champions. In arguably the biggest trade deadline deal, the Blues picked up 
goaltender Ryan Miller, who is very capable of keeping them in games they might 
otherwise find themselves out of. And, of course, there’s guys like TJ Oshie 
and David Backes up front, always capable of finding the net.

Still, Chicago has been down this road a few times lately, and been successful 
at it twice recently. They’ll rely on the stalwarts – Patrick Sharp, Marian 
Hossa, Duncan Keith, Brent Seabrook and Corey Crawford – to once again step up. 
The experience on this team can’t be ignored. They are serious contenders.

Prediction: Upset. Blues in six


San Jose Sharks v LA Kings

This is the kind of thing the NHL was going for with this new playoff format: 
close, familiar divisional rivals facing off in the post-season to stoke the 
rivalry a bit more. Not that it was really needed in this case. The Sharks and 
Kings met last year in the second round, and it was a showcase for the kind of 
hockey the Western conference is known for: tough, grinding, low-scoring but 
full of heart. The Kings and Sharks went the full seven games, with five of 
those being decided by only one goal. LA eventually won out, perpetuating San 
Jose’s reputation as perennial chokers, but there wasn’t much doubt they’d 
given it their all.

With that in mind, count on some score-settling this time. The Sharks won’t 
want to go down to a regional and divisional rival twice in two years in the 
playoffs, so will likely be even more motivated to win. Against them is an 
impressive and tough Kings team that, while not necessarily having a Season Of 
Record, nevertheless can be counted on yearly now to put up a strong showing in 
the post-season.

The keys to this series might be two names: Tomas Hertl and Marian Gaborik. 
Hertl started this season on a tear, scoring six times in his first three 
games. He continued that terrific pace until mid-December, when a knee-on-knee 
hit against Dustin Brown put an end to his season. But he’s back now, and no 
doubt looking for revenge. That could be a dangerous element in the Sharks 
chemistry in this round.

On the other side is Marian Gaborik, who joined the Kings this year from the 
Blue Jackets. Since coming aboard this winter, Gaborik has been OK (only five 
goals in his 19 starts, but with 11 assists), but can usually be counted on to 
come up with some magic.

Still, on balance, these teams are a very even match. And with plenty of 
recent scores to settle, this could be the best series of the bunch.

Prediction: Kings in seven. Again.


• This article has been amended since publication to make clear there are no 
shootouts in the playoffs, and to clarify that the Avalanche finished last in 
their division last season.
 