
In France, homeopathic treatment is widely available in the French health 
service (Editorial, 16 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/15/the-guardian-view-on-homeopathy-the-nhs-shouldnt-pay>
). GPs and hospitals there regularly refer patients to homeopathic doctors for 
treatment. Pharmacies in France have a wide range of homeopathic remedies and a 
pharmacist trained to advise patients. Far from being the “mock medicine” your 
editorial derides, people find homeopathy an efficacious treatment for a range 
of illnesses and conditions. Years ago acupuncture was regarded as magical 
thinking, but is now widely recognised as effective for a number of conditions 
and is available on the NHS. Given the tiny proportion of the NHS budget 
allocated for homeopathy, let’s say yes to keeping it in.
Dr Barbara Gwinnett
Wolverhampton

Don’t call believers in homeopathy idiots – it will push them further from 
science | Greg Dash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/17/homeopathy-idiots-science-jeremy-corbyn>
• A psychologist might be tempted to wonder why this fleabite on the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> offends so much. The history of 
medecine is littered with the ex-cathedra pronouncements of doctors which 
turned out to be wrong or passed out of fashion. There is something disquieting 
about the bullying authoritarian efforts of allopathic doctors to suppress 
something as marginal, gentle and possibly beneficial as homeopathy.

I remember, before the NHS, being taken by my mother to a homeopathic doctor, 
also, of course, a qualified allopathic doctor, and later the Queen’s 
homeopathic doctor, to discuss whether I should have my tonsils out, a very 
fashionable operation at that time, particularly popular amongst the pupils of 
Eton. On balance she thought it would be cheaper and less painful for me to 
have some homeopathic medicine fromNelson’s in Duke Street 
<http://www.nelsonspharmacy.com/contact>. I still have my tonsils. Much later 
my son fell mildly ill in Korea and in the pharmacy they asked him whether he 
wanted western medicine or Korean. Bravely he opted for Korean. The Korean 
customers laughed and applauded as he drank a foul-tasting potion. The 
following day he was better. Please let a thousand flowers bloom.
Anthony Caston
Tervuren, Belgium

The Guardian view on homeopathy: the NHS shouldn’t pay | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/15/the-guardian-view-on-homeopathy-the-nhs-shouldnt-pay>
• With any other substance used as a medicine, it is possible to use chemical 
analysis to establish the difference between a preparation containing the 
active ingredient and a placebo. With homoeopathy there is no chemical test 
that will separate the two, since, in the case of the most “powerful” 
homeopathic remedies, the dilution is so great that there is not a single 
molecule left of the substance that is said to cause the therapeutic effect. 
How can such nonsense be believed in by otherwise sane individuals who have 
been through a medical and scientific training? There is one other consequence 
of homoeopathic “theory”. Since the highest dilutions are said to have the 
strongest effect, taking nothing at all should lead to an overdose and possibly 
kill the patient.
Karl Sabbagh
Co-author, Magic or Medicine? 
<https://www.prometheusbooks.com/index.php?main_page=product_info&products_id=369&zenid=phf3cfm2b33912kaukmo2oqo54>

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 