
When it comes to television you can blame Nigel Lythgoe for almost everything. 
Reality TV? He is the man behind the first UK series of Survivor, which came 
beforeBig Brother <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother> and 
begat I'm a Celebrity. Pop Idol? He brought its forerunner, Popstars, to our 
screens. Gladiators? Him too. The crop of dance shows spreading across our 
screens like a spandex fungus? Sort of.

Lythgoe co-created So You Think You Can Dance with 19's Simon Fuller in 2005 
in the US and his new UK version for BBC1 is battling Sky 1's Got to Dance and 
ITV's new series ofDancing on Ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/dancing-on-ice> for the nation's 
sequined heart. He's enjoying the battle but is convinced he'll win because 
"after six seasons in the US I think we're about as close to the arts in a 
mainstream show as you can get."

We meet minutes after the news breaks that Jonathan Ross is to leave the BBC. 
Lythgoe says: "Michael McIntyre sounds like he's an up-and-coming guy. I'm sure 
they're looking at formats for him to replace Ross. He'd be good for a 
Generation Game format." He leans over and says: "Certain formats should never 
be forgotten, Blind Date for instance, becauseBritain's Got Talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> is really New 
Faces or The Gong Show, whilst we're basically Opportunity Knocks."

Tanned but tired

He explains how So You Think You Can Dance came about: "Back in 2004 after 
American Idol <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol> had 
become the biggest TV show ever, Simon Fuller said: 'We should do this with 
dance.'

"I said it wouldn't work. I never thought it would be successful. But we went 
away for a weekend and I was sent off down the garden with a bottle of Jack 
Daniels, then came back with half a bottle and the format," Lythgoe explains, 
looking tanned but tired from his LA to London commute.

Lythgoe is on the panel, reprising his Nasty Nigel routine from the first 
series of Popstars, where he famously told Kym Marsh: "Christmas may be gone 
but I see the goose is still fat."So You Think's first episode pulled in an 
average of 6.44 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/04/so-you-think-you-can-dance> 
viewers, peaking at 8.07 million, not quite The X Factor but pretty close to 
the recent average audience of 8.4 million in the least successful Strictly 
Come Dancing series since 2005.

Could its lack of success have anything to do with the sacking of 66-year-old 
judge Arlene Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/17/arlene-phillips-strictly-come-dancing>
 and her replacement by 30-year-old Alesha Dixon? Is that why Lythgoe recruited 
Phillips to join his panel?

"I don't know why they did that, I can't give you an answer," he says. "I 
guess they saw how successful Cheryl Cole was withThe X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> after they lost Sharon 
[Osbourne] and brought her in. Maybe they said: 'We need a pretty young face on 
our programme too'. Were they right? No, I don't think so. The jury on any 
programme should be of an age where it knows what it's talking about.

"I don't believe the poor ratings were because of the judge, I think it's that 
the stars weren't strong enough. It's always difficult isn't it? You start to 
run out of celebrities that people are interested in. Or you pay them a fortune 
to go into the Big Brother house."

He delivers his waspish comments in a dry, matter of fact tone. Having begun 
his career as a dancer, he worked his way into production as a choreographer, 
initially with the BBC's Young Generation troupe, and then with the Muppets 
("It's all these guys with their hands up these little puppets' arses. You say 
'Miss Piggy, will you go a little to your right?'") and up through LWT's 
booming light entertainment department until David Liddiment offered him the 
controller's job.

Popstars format

Once in charge at LWT, he launched a huge variety of hits from Gladiators to 
Spaced, which was created there but broadcast onChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>. The day after he started as 
controller Michael Barrymore came out. "It taught me how much of a controller's 
job is nothing to do with making programmes, but suddenly being a media expert 
on things that have nothing to do with you," he sighs. "Shortly after that I 
took Barrymore off to the US for a series of specials with his wife in tow." He 
shudders at the memory. "Nothing saw the screen."

On holiday in Australia he came across the Popstars format when his son was an 
assistant producer on the show. He brought it to the UK, cast Jonathan King as 
the nasty judge, had to rethink afterKing's prison sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/nov/21/childprotection.society>, tried the 
unknown Simon Cowell only to find his record company blocking the move, so he 
took the judge's chair himself. Fuller, the show's adviser, then created his 
own format, Pop Idol, and asked Lythgoe to be a judge.

"We took it to Fox and Rupert Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> told his team: 'You want 
Simon Cowell, he's tough. I want it to stay tough.'" Lythgoe wasn't allowed to 
do Idol because "they said it was too similar to Popstars," so he agreed to go 
back behind the camera. "Peter Waterman was utterly brilliant – he was better 
than Cowell for the first season because Simon put it on but Waterman was it. 
Simon learns very quickly though – that's his brilliance. He's a bit of a 
sponge. At first he didn't want to come to America. We twisted his arm, but he 
was worried they wouldn't like him. Amazing if you're going out to be nasty 
that you still want people to like you." He shrugs.

After so many years out, what is his view of British TV? Remarkably positive 
seems to be the answer. "It doesn't seem so tough when you look over from 
America. The UK seems to keep producing successes. Although we made sure we 
only did one season of American Idol a year – I think that in the UK once 
something's successful it's wrung out like a sponge and gets overdone. There 
were too many episodes of Strictly … there's burnout. I imagine Strictly will 
go off air, and come back in 10 or 12 years."

The one thing that has changed, he believes, is the hate flung at the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>. "It has become the newspapers' 
whipping boy, which I don't understand." He shakes his head. "There appears to 
be a whole new level of what broadcasters are allowed to say and not allowed to 
say and I'm shocked at that in a nation of free speech. The press are the worst 
of the lot – I was shocked to read some of the crits for my own show where 
Phillips was likened to Adolf Hitler. Saying she's an overrated pensioner, 
well, that's fine, so am I. Both quotes are real quotes from two crits but the 
first is so wrong I would have looked at taking them to court. So the press 
needs to be careful about who it points its finger at. Let he without sin … "

And, as his face darkens in righteous anger, you remember how he won the name 
Nasty Nigel in the first place.

CV

Age 60

Education Manor Road School and Wallasey Technical College, Merseyside; 
Hylton-Bromley School of Dance and Drama, Merseyside

Career 1968 dancer, national tour of The Merry Widow, Mr and Mrs, BBC's Young 
Generation 1971 choreographer, BBC 1980 choreographer, The Muppets, ATV 1981 
associate producer, Bud 'n Ches, ATV 1982 associate producer, Dizzy Feet (1982 
Golden Rose of Montreux winner) 1984 director, Summertime Special, Bobby 
Davro's TV Weekly, TVS 1985 producer, Blind Date 1992 producer/director, The 
Brian Conley Show, The Michael Barrymore Show, Gladiators 1995 head of 
entertainment and comedy, LWT (judge of Pop Stars, 2000) 2001 president of 
television, 19 Entertainment 2009 president, Big Red 2Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>
 