 Jack Nicholson yesterday said that he played the most miserable role of his 
life in the Cannes shortlisted tragi-comedy About Schmidt. But his performance 
may well be just good enough to win the film an award at the festival, judging 
from the enthusiastic reactions from audiences and critics.
Yesterday, the actor told journalists in Cannes that he had not enjoyed 
playing Warren Schmidt in the film. "He's a miserable man to inhabit, worse 
than any drama I've ever done. You don't get the joke when you're playing the 
character, you just have to be that guy, so it was trying in that way."

In the film, the 65-year-old actor plays a 66-year-old actuary from Omaha, 
Nebraska, who has just retired. He has a comb-over that would make Bobby 
Charlton envious, facial ticks that owe a debt to Oliver Hardy, and a wife of 
42 years whom he belatedly realises he detests. As in the Oscar winning As Good 
as It Gets, Nicholson gives a bravura, if sometimes showy, performance as a 
morally repugnant man - though here there is no facile improvement in his 
character by the end of the picture.

After his wife dies, Schmidt sets out on a journey in his 35ft mobile home 
across the midwest in order to understand his life.

It is a sometimes doleful film about loneliness, lovelessness, the proximity 
of death, the stench of personal failure, and the all too late realisation that 
you have spent a lifetime with the wrong person. But it also has some good 
waterbed and jacuzzi gags, which had audiences howling with laughter at the 
premiere.

The film, one of the more crowd pleasing pictures at the 55th Cannes festival, 
also stars Hope Davies as his daughter, and an almost unrecognisable Dermot 
Mulroney in a mullet wig. He plays Randall, her waterbed salesman fiance. It 
also stars Kathy Bates as Randall's mother; her attempt to seduce Nicholson in 
a hot tub provoked the biggest laughs.

About Schmidt <https://www.theguardian.com/film/about-schmidt> was directed by 
Alexander Payne, an independent US film-maker critically praised for his movie 
Election, about student politics. "He made it very easy," Payne said yesterday 
of Nicholson. "He was willing and able to do anything that the film required."

"This is the least vain performance I think I've ever given," Nicholson said. 

Nicholson said that he had had no regrets playing the role, the huge variety 
of the characters he had played in films from Easy Rider and Chinatown to As 
Good As It Gets made the job worthwhile. "No one really knows the real Jack 
anyway," said Nicholson, enigmatically, grinning through his beard. The 
Hollywood star failed to show up at last year's Cannes festival where he had 
been scheduled to appear to promote his performance in Sean Penn's The Pledge.

This year he flew to Cannes in his private jet accompanied by Godfather 
producer Robert Evans, who is the subject of a documentary launched at the 
festival entitled The Kid Stays in the Picture and based on his memoirs.

Â· Anthony Hopkins is to play a pope who organises a plot to kidnap a Jewish 
boy, FilmFour confirmed last night. The Welsh actor has been cast in the role 
of Pope Pius IX in FilmFour's $20m Edgardo Moratara, to be filmed in Italy in 
the autumn.

The film's story deals with a real historical incident in which the eponymous 
six-year-old Jewish boy is kidnapped by agents of the papal inquisition in 1858 
because he was baptised by a Catholic servant.

Despite protests from Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria and Napoleon III of 
France, the boy was adopted by the pope. The film dramatises this and the 
subsequent battle for the boy between the Vatican and his father, played by the 
Spanish star Javier Bardem.

The film is to be directed by Damien O'Donnell, who made FilmFour's East is 
East.
 