
Nick Clegg's weekly phone-in has helped London's LBC radio station top 1 
million weekly listeners for the first time, according to the latest official 
figures.

The deputy prime minister made radio history when he agreed to a regular 
grilling from presenter Nick Ferrari and LBC listeners in January.

And the move appears to have paid off for the Global Radio-owned station, 
which saw its average weekly audience rise 29.4% compared with the three months 
from April 2012 to 1 million, according to Rajar figures published on Thursday.

The 40-year-old talk station, which bills itself as "London's biggest 
conversation", increased its share of the capital's radio market to 4.9% after 
Clegg took to the airwaves seven months ago. Ferrari has added 129,000 average 
weekly listeners to his breakfast show over the past year, to 659,000.

Clegg's move even inspired the Mayor of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, Boris Johnson, to get behind the LBC 
microphone with his own 45-minute talkshow that debuted on 2 July.

James Rea, the managing editor of LBC, said: "To scale new heights for LBC 
97.3 in its 40th year is a spectacular performance and testament to the 
brilliant team we have.

"Under Global Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio>, the 
station is going from strength to strength with agenda-setting programmes such 
as Call Clegg and Ask Boris which puts us in a solid position for the next 40 
years."

LBC's Global sister station, Capital, held on to the London radio ratings 
crown with an average of 2.2 million weekly listeners.

Capital recorded a 5.6% rise in its weekly audience compared with the second 
quarter of 2012, as its market share increased to 4.6%. The station's breakfast 
slot, fronted by Dave Berry and Lisa Snowden, was the most popular 
early-morning show in London.

Kiss 100 was the second biggest station in the capital based on average weekly 
audience, breaking the 2 million listener barrier thanks to a 15.7% audience 
leap on last year. TheBauer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer> 
Media-owned station added nearly 400,000 listeners as its share of the London 
radio market rose to 5.2%.

Andy Roberts, group programming director of Kiss, said: "From the Kiss 
Breakfast show right through the schedule we're making sure the presenters' 
content is relevant, fun and engaging and we've worked hard on aspects of the 
brand, such as our social media, to provide content to our audience that they 
can hear, see and share. We spend a long time on music to make sure we're 
playing the right stuff and we listen to the audience all the time in terms of 
what they want to hear."

Another Global station, Heart London, increased its average number of weekly 
listeners to 1.9 million as its market share rose to 5.2%. Breakfast hosts 
Jamie Theakston and Emma Bunton were credited with helping the 10% year-on-year 
audience rise.

Bauer's Magic 105.4 was leapfrogged by both Heart and Kiss 100 in the last 
quarter as it fell to fourth place among the commercial stations in London, 
having occupied the top spot as recently as the final quarter of 2012.

Magic had a weekly audience of 1.8 million in the second quarter, down 3.9% 
compared with the same period last year. Its share of the market slipped to 5%.

The London audience of Absolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> – bought by Bauer last week 
– rose 2.6% year on year, to an average of 999,000 weekly listeners, a 3.2% 
share of the market.

Global's Gold London was the only mainstream station in the capital to report 
a double-digit drop in its audience compared with the second quarter last year, 
as average weekly listeners fell 17.3% to 273,000.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 