Unfortunately your browser does not support IFrames. 
TMZ's video of the American Idol bust-up between Nicki Minaj and Mariah Carey 
<http://www.tmz.com/2012/10/02/nicki-minaj-mariah-carey-fight-american-idol-audition/>
 has plenty to focus on. There's Minaj herself, dressed up as Grayson Perry's 
tipsy auntie, screaming "I told them, I'm not fucking putting up with Her 
Fucking Highness over there," at nobody in particular. There's Carey, 
countering with a series of ghostly "Whyyy?"s as she slashes her fingernails 
through the air. There's also Randy Jackson and Keith Urban, both wearing the 
exasperated expressions of tired dads at the end of a particularly sugar-heavy 
birthday party.

Harder to spot, though, is the figure of American Idol's executive producer 
Nigel Lythgoe. He weaves in and out of the foreground during the row, glasses 
perched imperiously on the end of his nose. It's hard to see exactly what he's 
doing in the video, but it wouldn't be too cynical to assume that he's 
gleefully rubbing his hands together. Because, in truth, this video is the best 
thing to happen toAmerican Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol> in years.

The series has been coasting for a number of seasons now. It was coasting 
beforeJennifer Lopez and Steven Tyler were initiated as judges 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/articles/1648433/american-idol-adds-jennifer-lopez-steven-tyler-judges.jhtml>
. It was coasting before Ellen DeGeneres turned up for herweird year in 2010 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2010/jul/29/entertainment/la-et-ellen-degeneres-american-idol>
. In fact, you can trace the beginnings of American Idol's rot right back to 
the moment where Simon Cowell stopped being the walking personification of evil 
in order to debut his new, ill-judged winking uncle persona. Since then, the 
show has become flabby, safe, content to rest on its laurels. But not any more, 
because get a load of this. The new judges – one of whom is actually a relevant 
pop star – actively hate each other.

Even if they no longer care for American Idol's stale formula, at least 
viewers will now get to tune in and study the chemistry between Nicki Minaj and
Mariah Carey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mariahcarey> for traces of 
lingering iciness. That'll be good for ratings. It always is. Because this is a 
trick as old as time.

Back before this year's series of US X Factor debuted, rumours were rife that 
new judge Britney Spears was being difficult – turning up late, annoying Simon 
Cowell, walking out of auditions, that sort of thing. It was the best publicity 
the show could have hoped for, especially when compared to last year's judge 
Nicole Scherzinger, a woman with all the charisma of damp towel. Maybe by 
watching X Factor, we'd all get to see Britney Spears – crazy Britney from the 
tabloids – flailing around with a looser grip on reality than ever. That didn't 
actually happen – in the first show of the series, Britney turned out to be a 
surprisingly witty young woman with a diverting array of bewildered facial 
expressions to her name – but the suggestion that it might was more than enough.

British X Factor is no slouch when it comes to exploiting the fractious 
relationships of its judges, either. Louis Walsh was sacked by Simon Cowell 
before the 2007 series,and then reinstated 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/6229690.stm>. Tabloids were quick to 
play up rivalries betweenTulisa Contostavlos and Kelly Rowland 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/tv/x_factor/3920780/X-Factor-Tulisa-I-didnt-start-it-Kelly-Rowland-did.html>
 last year. And Sharon Osbourne appeared to hate all of her co-judges without 
exception during her tenure on the show; throwing water on Walsh, quitting and 
returning between episodes and mocking Dannii Minogue's fondness for Botox on 
air. All of which were catnip for viewers, and a blessing for producers.

The song-and-dance talent show market is now more crowded than ever. Where 
once American Idol had the run of the place, it now has the likes of The Voice, 
X Factor, Dancing with the Stars and a myriad of cable-TV copycats to contend 
with. If this conveniently-timed leak of an argument between its stars helps to 
restore American Idol's supremacy, then so be it. So long as it doesn't overdo 
it, that is. Too many of these videos and the audience will get bored and drift 
away. And if that happens, nothing short of a full-on weave-ripping catfight to 
the death will ever get them back.
 