
Mariah Carey thinks Nicki Minaj wants to kill her. The singer has reportedly 
asked for increased security on the set ofAmerican Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol> after Minaj, who is 
also a judge on the show, supposedly threatened to shoot her.

Carey's claim follows leaked footage from earlier this week, which showed her 
arguing with Minaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/oct/03/nicki-minaj-mariah-carey-american-idol>
 on the Idol set. "I'm not fucking putting up with Her Fucking Highness over 
there," Minaj complained. "Why?!" Carey shrieked, gesturing for her to leave.

The dispute became even more heated, according to veteran TV presenter Barbara 
Walters. The View host said she talked to Carey on the telephone, learning new 
details of the row. Minaj allegedly declared, "If I had a gun, I would shoot 
the bitch." Carey confessed to Walters that she "doesn't feel comfortable 
emotionally" with her "unpredictable" co-judge. She "can't take a chance" with 
her safety, Carey told her, and she is now hiring extra security.

Although Minaj has stopped short of denying the "gun" comment, she observed on 
Twitter that "no camera or mic heard [it] ... Not even the producers believed u 
<https://twitter.com/NICKIMINAJ/status/253891077659054080>".

If the rapper did threaten to hurt Carey, she suggested, it was clearly a 
joke. "Lets just say [I] said smthn about a gun 
<https://twitter.com/NICKIMINAJ/status/253889487967485953>." she added. "ppl 
will believe it cuz she's a black rapper. Lmao."

Hey yAll. Lets just say nicki said smthn about a gun. ppl will believe it cuz 
she's a black rapper. Lmao. I'll then hit up Barbara n milk it

— Nicki Minaj (@NICKIMINAJ) October 4, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/NICKIMINAJ/status/253889487967485953>

Minaj and her fans spent hours on Thursday taunting Carey for her "pity party 
<https://twitter.com/NICKIMINAJ/status/253901811772182528>". "I guess it hurts 
2 have the producers tell u to ur face that nicki is the best judge we've had 
since simon [cowell],"the rapper further tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/NICKIMINAJ/status/253898947016417280>. "Awww, poor u," 
Minaj crowed. "Keep them lies [coming]."

I guess it hurts 2 have the producers tell u to ur face that nicki is the best 
judge we've had since simon. Awww, poor u. Keep them lies cmn

— Nicki Minaj (@NICKIMINAJ) October 4, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/NICKIMINAJ/status/253898947016417280>

The 12th series of American Idol, the first with Carey, Minaj and country 
singer Keith Urban as judges, will premiere in January.
 