
The Nick Xenophon Team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon-team> will attempt to 
intensify pressure for reform of the donations and disclosure system by moving 
a motion in the Senate on Tuesday calling for a wide-ranging inquiry reporting 
by March.


Pressure from the NXT on donations and disclosure comes as the Australian 
National Audit Office released the findings of a “limited scope assurance 
review” on financial transactions between the Liberal party and the software 
company Parakeelia.

Parakeelia, a company owned by the Liberal party, runs database software that 
enables MPs to develop profiles of their constituents.

John Howard says politicians have 'panicked' about donations and ban isn't 
needed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/11/john-howard-says-australia-has-panicked-about-donations-and-ban-isnt-needed>
The question of whether most of Parakeelia’s revenue began as taxpayer funding 
becamethe subject of controversy during the federal election campaign 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-mps-directing-taxpayer-funds-towards-liberal-partylinked-company-and-donor-20160608-gpe87q.html>
, prompting the ALP to ask the audit office to inquire whether the arrangements 
between the Liberal party and the software firm were above board.

The audit office found no evidence that the arrangements “contravene electoral 
and parliamentary entitlement frameworks or that Parakeelia donated any profits 
from the sale of Feedback software to the Liberal party”.

But the review did find that Parakeelia had lent the Liberal party $200,000 in 
2015-16. “Parakeelia advised that the loan was made for cash flow purposes and 
would be repaid by the Liberal party in 2016–17,” the report said.

The NXT motion, to be moved by Senator Stirling Griff on Tuesday, follows a 
week of controversy over donations, resulting inthe resignation of Labor Sam 
Dastyari from the Labor frontbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
.

It has the support of Pauline Hanson and the One Nation Senate bloc. Hanson’s 
spokesman confirmed on Monday that all four One Nation senators supported an 
inquiry.

Donations reform has some momentum among the major parties. Malcolm Turnbull 
said last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/malcolm-turnbull-says-ideally-donations-should-be-limited-to-australian-voters>
 that “ideally, donations to political parties should be limited to people who 
are on the electoral roll”.

Labor has indicated it would support banning foreign donations, lowering the 
threshold at which donations are declared, creating more timely and regular 
disclosure of donations, and boosting public funding for parties.

Australian political donations: how hard would it really be to clean up?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/10/australian-political-donations-how-hard-would-it-really-be-to-clean-up>
The NXT motion calls for an inquiry into the funding of and donations to 
political parties and candidates, with particular reference to: foreign 
political donations; sources of private (including corporate and union 
donations) and public funding and contribution limits and caps; alternative 
funding practices including consideration of comparative overseas models 
operating in Canada and the UK; transparency, accountability and reporting 
measures, limiting election expenses and any related matter.

The government has signalled the joint standing committee on electoral matters 
will also look at donations as part of a review of recent electoral 
developments but there are no terms of reference yet for such an inquiry.

Griff told Guardian Australia he was very hopeful of securing major party 
support for the motion. He said some people made political donations in 
Australia for altruistic reasons but we also had to be realistic. “Money often 
buys influence,” he said.
 