
After releasing his 2014 novel Analogue Men, Australian novelist Nick Earls 
began kicking around a few new story ideas. He assembled the best five and 
instinctively felt they would each hit the 20,000 word mark – the “novella” 
grey zone between a short story and a novel.

“My first thought was no publisher is going to welcome me knocking on the door 
with that,” Earls explains.

Earls is releasing these novellas on the first of every month under the 
umbrella title Wisdom Tree, starting with Gotham released on Monday. Audiobook 
versions are being simultaneously released on Audible, narrated by Australian 
actors Rhys Muldoon, Flynn Curry, Gyton Grantley, Michael Dorman and William 
McInnes.

The big short – why Amazon's Kindle Singles are the future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/sep/05/amazon-kindle-singles-short>
The publishing industry has never been a fan of the novella, and the reason is 
purely economical: with fixed-price overheads like printing, binding, 
warehousing, distribution and marketing, it costs almost as much to make a 
small book as it does a medium-sized one. But readers expect a slimmer copy to 
be cheaper in price.

Yet Earls was determined to write these novellas – even if that meant changing 
industry attitudes in the process. He hopes readers will stop seeing the 
novella as an “in-betweener” rather the ideal reading experience for today’s 
time-poor readers.

He was encouraged by the book industry’s ongoing migration into the digital 
space and its comparatively cheaper overheads. “In the 21st century, the game 
has surely changed,” he says. “An ebook can be whatever size it needs to be, 
and you price it as you choose to price it.”

In fact, the first-ever mass-market ebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/feb/10/stephen-king-kindle-ur> was a 
novella: 2000’s Riding the Bullet by Stephen King. It was a happy milestone 
after King’s long struggle to see his novellas published; in his 1982 
collection of four novellas, Different Seasons, one of which was adapted into 
the Academy award-nominated film The Shawshank Redemption, he called the form 
“an anarchy-ridden literary banana republic”.


The digital revolution smoothed the way for King to write and publish more 
novellas, and he has been joined by a host of big-name authors, including 
Patricia Cornwell and John Grisham, who have released Kindle Singles. The 
format was launched by Amazon’s Kindle in 2011 and isdescribed as 
<http://www.amazon.com/b?node=2486013011> “compelling ideas expressed at their 
natural length” – typically essays, short stories and novellas between 5,000 
and 30,000 words. Sometimes they are used by novelists to release nimble 
spin-offs from their existing fictional worlds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fnick-earls-author-rise-of-novella-ebook-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a8d02457f1d520b006bad2994c900cae8b2f0d3%2F0_0_1417_1890%2F1417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Earls%20on%20the%20unlikely%20rise%20of%20the%20novella%2C%20star%20of%20the%20ebook%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fnick-earls-author-rise-of-novella-ebook-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Earls%20on%20the%20unlikely%20rise%20of%20the%20novella%2C%20star%20of%20the%20ebook%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fnick-earls-author-rise-of-novella-ebook-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a8d02457f1d520b006bad2994c900cae8b2f0d3%2F0_0_1417_1890%2F1417.jpg>
 Gotham by Nick Earls. Photograph: One Green Bean 
For Earls, writing Wisdom Tree was a way to swiftly explore how men grapple 
with early 21st century life through five standalone stories, each featuring an 
Australian male protagonist of different ages. “Each looks at what we value, 
and at the things that are pitched to us by society to value like fame, 
celebrity. But at the same time this story has another current flowing deeper, 
looking at the things that actually matter in people’s lives,” he says.

So we have Gotham, an encounter between a music journalist and the young 
rapper he is interviewing called Na$ti Boi; Venice, about love and the tensions 
that pull us apart; Vancouver, featuring one man and “the giant that influenced 
his life”; Juneau, set in a former Alaskan gold-rush town; and NoHo, featuring 
Charlie and his would-be-star sister, Cassie, in Hollywood.

Earls says audio books have also been affected by the digital revolution. 
“Instead of being a $70 box of cassette tapes that were pretty cumbersome, 
they’re now something you can play on a device that just about every one of us 
carries around in our pocket or our bag.”

He has been closely watching the rise of podcasting, too. Blockbuster podcast 
Serial, for instance, is the radio equivalent of “natural-length” publishing, 
with episodes that vary between 30 minutes to over an hour long. “There really 
doesn’t need to be any size rules.”

Audiobooks are booming – and now there’s a chart to prove it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/17/audiobooks-booming-chart-bookseller-top-20>
When I suggest that we may soon see the end of even defining whether a work is 
a short story, novella or novel, Earls says for writers the distinction can 
still be meaningful. When writing a short story “you’ve got that one piece of 
business, and you’re not supposed to mess around in doing it”; both novels and 
novellas are more complex affair with multiple plot lines. It is important for 
writers to start with a vision of the size and scope of a piece, Earls says.

He is excited about the staggered release of his five novellas, which he says 
“does justice to what they are” rather than if they were bound as a single 
volume. “It actually gives people small books that says if you’ve got two to 
three hours to read, here’s something that’s for you. And there’s no compromise 
on quality, it’s just shorter than a novel.”

 * Gotham is the first novella from Wisdom Tree by Nick Earls and is available 
as anaudio book 
<http://www.audible.com.au/pd/Fiction/Wisdom-Tree-Audiobook/B01DKY6FNI> for 
free for a limited time on Audible, and as adigital book 
<http://www.amazon.com.au/Gotham-Wisdom-Tree-Nick-Earls-ebook/dp/B01EW8NC9G?ie=UTF8&keywords=gotham%20nick%20earls&qid=1462146889&ref_=sr_1_1&sr=8-1>
 or inpaperback 
<http://inkermanandblunt.com/home/projects/gotham-wisdom-tree-novella-1/>
 