
Scotland is on the brink of staging a fresh referendum on independence after 
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> 
requested talks with the EU on separate membership after the UK’s vote to leave.
Could Scotland stay in the EU? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=scotland_EU>
The first minister said she believed a second referendum on independence was 
highly likely afterScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> voted 
overwhelmingly to remain within the EU, but was unable to prevent the leave 
campaign winning by 52% to 48% across the UK as a whole.

Sturgeon said that was a “democratic outrage” and constituted the clear, 
material change in Scotland’s circumstances referred to in the Scottish 
National party’s carefully worded manifesto commitment in May to hold a second 
independence vote if needed.

“It is a significant material change in circumstances. It’s a statement of the 
obvious that the option of a second independence referendum must be on the 
table, and it is on the table,” she said.

Sturgeon announced that she was instructing Scottish government officials to 
draft fresh referendum legislation for Holyrood, only two years after her party 
lost the first independence vote in 2014, to ensure it could be held quickly if 
enough Scottish voters backed it.

UK government sources said David Cameron, who quit as prime minister after the 
referendum defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/david-cameron-resigns-after-uk-votes-to-leave-european-union>
, was anxious that his successor make sure the Scottish, Welsh and Northern 
Ireland government were closely involved in the UK’s Brexit negotiations to 
avoid increasing Scottish grievances and fuelling the case for independence.

Sturgeon’s cabinet will meet in emergency session on Saturday morning at her 
official residence Bute House, and is expected to agree plans to put forward 
referendum legislation in September’s programme for government.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdavid-cameron-political-obituary-eu-referendum-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%3A%20a%20political%20obituary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdavid-cameron-political-obituary-eu-referendum-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%3A%20a%20political%20obituary%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fdavid-cameron-political-obituary-eu-referendum-video&media=>
David Cameron: a political obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/24/david-cameron-political-obituary-eu-referendum-video>
Holyrood would need Westminster’s legislative approval to stage an official 
referendum, as it did in 2014. Cameron had previously said no UK government 
would give that again so soon, but Sturgeon said on Friday it would be 
inconceivable for Westminster to ignore a democratic vote by MSPs requesting 
that authority.

In a significant boost to her strategy, MSPs in the Scottish Green party 
indicated she could win the six Scottish Green votes in the Scottish parliament 
that she needs to ensure a Holyrood majority, as momentum behind a second vote 
sharply rose after the UK result became clear.

The most recent polls suggest independence does not yet have clear majority 
support, but SNP sources and activists within Women for Independence (WFI) said 
there had been a surge in membership requests on Friday, with people offering 
to campaign and donating money.

Nicola Sturgeon needs to keep Scotland in the EU. But how? | Lesley Riddoch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/nicola-sturgeon-keep-scotland-eu-independence>
The SNP said it had been inundated with emails from previous no voters now 
pledging their support for independence after the conclusion of the EU 
referendum. The Radical Independence Campaign, which was heavily involved in 
registering first-time and alienated working-class voters during the last 
referendum campaign, likewise reported an increase in donations. “The surge is 
back on,” said one WFI activist.

A number of prominent former no voters have declared themselves ready to 
consider supporting independence should another referendum be called. The 
novelistJenny Colgan, who wrote for the Guardian in September 2014 of the joy 
of Britishness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/13/jenny-colgan-no-scotland-fewer-walls-barriers>
, tweeted that she was weeping with relief as Sturgeon promised to fight for 
the interests of Scots who had voted to remain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Falex-salmond-second-scottish-independence-referendum-is-certain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb07f269ec8631bb706db3c133a711b860e37537%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20second%20Scottish%20independence%20poll%20highly%20likely&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Falex-salmond-second-scottish-independence-referendum-is-certain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20second%20Scottish%20independence%20poll%20highly%20likely&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Falex-salmond-second-scottish-independence-referendum-is-certain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb07f269ec8631bb706db3c133a711b860e37537%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Staff count EU referendum ballot papers at the Emirates Arena in Glasgow. 
Photograph: Robert Perry/AFP/Getty Images 
Echoing earlier remarks by her predecessor Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>, Sturgeon said it made clear 
logical sense for those powers to be in place quickly and before the UK’s exit 
from the EU was completed by an expected deadline of 2018. There will be added 
urgency to that timetable after senior European commission and parliament 
figures said they wanted the Brexit talks speeded up, and for the UK to leave 
as soon as possible to lessen the uncertainty now facing the EU.

Sturgeon said pressing ahead with an independence bill would ensure a seamless 
transition for Scotland from having EU membership as part of the UK to having 
it as an independent nation. She said her primary concern was to ensure that 
Scotland’s vote to remain in the EU, by 62% to 38%, was brought into effect.

She said she would “take all possible steps and explore all options to give 
effect to how people in Scotland voted. In other words, to secure our 
continuing place in the EU and in the single market in particular.”

Sturgeon is writing this weekend to all EU member states to set out her case 
for Scotland remaining in the EU and to press for urgent talks in Brussels with 
the European commission president, Jean-Claude Junker, during which she will 
emphasise Scotland’s strong pro-European vote.
Brexit explained: article 50 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=article_50>
Salmond said staging a quick referendum was the most obvious solution. “The 
logic would be that Scotland would have the option of remaining within Europe 
while the rest of the UK leftEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, so there would be no logic in 
saying: let Scotland go out and then come back in again,” he told BBC Radio 
Scotland.

“We proved that we are a modern, outward looking, open and inclusive country,” 
he said. “And we said clearly that we do not want to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. I am determined that we will do what it 
takes to make sure that these aspirations are realised.”

Sturgeon was careful to avoid giving any guarantee, however, that a second 
referendum would be held, stressing that the challenges of leaving the UK were 
complex and still unclear because the UK-EU negotiations had not yet begun.

The SNP would face significant economic, legal and political questions about 
leaving the UK. With the collapse in oil prices but high levels of public 
spending, it has a structural deficit of £15bn, and a weak economy hovering 
close to recession.


It would need to strike a deal with London about paying off its share of the 
UK’s £1.6tn debt. It would also face losing Scotland’s share of the UK rebate, 
having to find the cash needed for Scotland’s contribution to the EU, and 
require the EU’s agreement on its currency. EU members may expect Scotland to 
join the euro.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Falex-salmond-second-scottish-independence-referendum-is-certain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b703073425026c458ebe4a326c2623aaa2232dc%2F978_0_2044_2555%2F2044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20second%20Scottish%20independence%20poll%20highly%20likely&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Falex-salmond-second-scottish-independence-referendum-is-certain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20second%20Scottish%20independence%20poll%20highly%20likely&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Falex-salmond-second-scottish-independence-referendum-is-certain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b703073425026c458ebe4a326c2623aaa2232dc%2F978_0_2044_2555%2F2044.jpg>
 Alex Salmond says staging a quick referendum is the most obvious solution. 
Photograph: David Rose/The Daily Telegraph/PA 
'I'm now hoping for independence': Scottish readers on Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/rest-of-uk-spoken-for-us-scottish-readers-brexit-independence>
Salmond ruled out that prospect on Friday morning. Implying that work was 
under way on alternatives to retaining sterling, he said. “There are a range of 
other options obviously, such as sterlingisation, an independent Scottish 
currency linked to the pound; an independent Scottish floating currency.”

The author JK Rowling, who voted against independence, has implied she may now 
rethink her position, and Salmond said major Scottish employers and companies 
such as the whisky giant Diageo would consider whetherScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> within the EU 
would ensure their continued access to the European single market.

“There’s going to be rethinking by a whole range of companies because access 
to that marketplace is key to prosperity and one thing I’m sure Nicola Sturgeon 
won’t allow is the livelihoods of Scottish workers and their families being 
sacrificed and jeopardised by the incompetence of Westminster politicians,” 
Salmond told BBC Radio’s Good Morning Scotland.

• This article was amended on 26 June 2016. An earlier version referred to 
Sturgeon setting out her case for Scotland remaining in the UK, when the EU was 
meant.
 