
How satisfying do you find being a children’s author and what is your 
favourite thing about it?


I think it is one of the best jobs you can have. You get to let your 
imagination run wild which is good fun. It’s hard work as well but really good 
fun. The best bit actually is doing this: meeting people who read the books. 
It’s nice to get out from behind a computer and go to meet young people and 
find out what they think about my stories – especially people like you who have 
read them!

Damian Dibben's top 10 time travel books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/may/22/top-10-time-travel-books-damian-dibben>
You say that the inspiration for Sorrowline came about when you were 
researching your family tree. What was it that made you want to research your 
own family history and did you find anything unexpected while you were doing 
that?

Well it is something I have always been interested in, finding out about the 
family. On my mam’s side, there was someone who’d killed somebody once so I 
found out about that which was interesting. To be honest, there was just lots 
of people on my dad’s side who had no money and lived in terrible houses, 
didn’t live very long and looked like they struggled quite a lot. But it was so 
interesting to look into all of that and find out what life would have been 
like for them.

How much time per day would you say you spend writing? Do you have a special 
place where you prefer to write?


I have an office at home which is my writing den, so I have got a desk there, 
all of my books around me and a drawing board for drawing as well. So that’s 
all there and really good but a lot of the time it ends up being written 
wherever I am at the time. If I am working somewhere, I’ll take my laptop with 
me and do some writing. Sometimes it is nice to do some writing downstairs 
instead of being upstairs all of the time. It all depends, but officially it’s 
my writing den and it is where I should be doing my writing!

[Find out where other writers write 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/series/where-i-write>!]

Are there any writers who have particularly influenced your own writing? 

I suppose growing up the kinds of authors I was reading were…There was an 
author called John Christopher who, when I was your age, wrote lots of 
children’s science fiction stories so I think he was one of the first authors I 
read a lot of. Then I liked John Wyndham who wrote The Day of the Triffids 
which was a really scary book and HG Wells who wrote War of the Worlds. So 
things like that – those kinds of authors. Other science fiction authors I 
enjoyed were Arthur C Clarke and lots of comic writers as well.

Rhian Ivory’s top 10 books set in the past and the present
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/12/rhian-ivorys-top-10-books-set-in-the-past-and-the-present>
Which is your favourite genre of books to read?

I would say science fiction and fantasy, I think, they are my two main ones.

Do you find time to read for pleasure yourself and what are your thoughts on 
the advantages of this for young people?


I always try to make time to read for pleasure. I try to read a little bit 
every day. I think it is really important for young people to try to read as 
well. It is a really nice way to unwind and let your mind go somewhere else. 
There’s an interesting quote about you only living one life if you don’t read. 
If you read books you live lots of different lives and live the lives of other 
people by reading those stories. There has been research about people who read 
for pleasure making themselves more intelligent, more emotionally intelligent, 
by reading stories because you understand people more through reading about 
them. If you read a story, you can understand more how people think, which is 
quite clever and pretty cool!

Did you use a public library regularly as a child and did your school have a 
library?

Yes, yes, we had a library at school and the library in town. First time I 
went to the library I think I found out that you could take out 10 or 12 books 
at a time so I did, I brought them all home. I don’t think I finished reading 
them all just skipped through them and took them all back after the two or 
three weeks. I then got into the routine of taking one at a time. Yeah, we had 
quite a good school library, it’s just a shame that a lot of schools don’t have 
libraries anymore and I can see that you do have a library which is great!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fniel-bushnell-you-only-live-one-life-if-you-dont-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72670cffa4db023350660bb299e412192705f417%2F0_0_4284_2572%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Niel%20Bushnell%3A%20'you%20only%20live%20one%20life%20if%20you%20don't%20read'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fniel-bushnell-you-only-live-one-life-if-you-dont-read%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Niel%20Bushnell%3A%20%27you%20only%20live%20one%20life%20if%20you%20don%27t%20read%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F16%2Fniel-bushnell-you-only-live-one-life-if-you-dont-read%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72670cffa4db023350660bb299e412192705f417%2F0_0_4284_2572%2F4284.jpg>
 Who wouldn’t want Benedict Cumberbatch in their movie? Here he is as Sherlock, 
in the BBC production. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/BBC/Hartswood 
 If Sorrowline was made into a movie and you could choose the cast yourself, 
which actors would you personally cast to suit your characters?

 My daughter would like to play Eloise even though she is not the right age or 
even acts, but apart from that, I don’t really know. I think Jack would have to 
be someone unknown because he is just a boy. You would have to have someone 
really interesting for Rouland who is the bad guy. You could maybe have 
Benedict Cumberbatch, yeah, he’ll do, we’ll have him!

When you began writing Sorrowline, how many drafts did it take before you were 
completely happy with everything?

Oh, that’s a good question because you think you’re happy with everything but 
you always realise that there are things you would do differently. I think I 
sent it off after the third draft but the published version is the seventh 
draft. I would even maybe quite like to tweak it again if I’m honest because 
now I go into schools a lot, I read pieces of it out and you learn all of the 
time. So when I’m reading, I think I’d do that a bit differently now. So yeah, 
you could never stop really in a way, but seven drafts is what it was up to.

If you had an author superpower what would it be?

Author superpower! Oh that’s pretty cool. I suppose it would be quite nice to 
get it right first time! So that I didn’t have to do seven drafts. That would 
be quite cool to just go, “here is my story and it’s perfect in every single 
way” but I suppose then it would be just too easy wouldn’t it? So either that 
or if it was a non-related superpower to authoring, flying would be good – but 
that has nothing to do with writing!

Niel Bushnell is the author of Sorrowline, in which 12-year-old Jack discovers 
he’s a Yard Boy - someone with the ability to travel through Sorrowlines, the 
channels that connect every gravestone with the date of the person’s death.Read 
the first few chapters of Sorrowline 
<http://www.nielbushnell.com/writing/Sorrowline_extract.pdf>. Find out more 
about Niel and Sorrowline on hiswebsite <http://www.nielbushnell.com/>. Buy 
Sorrowline at the Guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sorrowline.html>
 