
Nigerian authorities have denied claims by Amnesty International  
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/11/peaceful-pro-biafra-activists-killed-in-chilling-crackdown/>
that security forces killed at least 150 activists and demonstrators who 
supported the secession of Biafra, an area in the south-east of the country.

An army spokesman told Reuters that Amnesty’s allegation, the latest in a 
series of charges levelled by the campaign group againstNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>’s military in the last year, aimed 
to tarnish the security forces’ reputation.

The police said they did not attack people holding demonstrations.

Amnesty said the military fired live ammunition with little or no warning to 
disperse members of the Indigenous People of Biafra (IPOB) group between August 
2015 and August the following year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigerian-army-accused-of-killing-biafran-independence-supporters-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigerian%20army%20accused%20of%20killing%20Biafran%20independence%20supporters%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigerian-army-accused-of-killing-biafran-independence-supporters-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigerian%20army%20accused%20of%20killing%20Biafran%20independence%20supporters%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigerian-army-accused-of-killing-biafran-independence-supporters-video-report&media=>
 Amesty International claimsNigerian army killed Biafran  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/24/nigerian-army-accused-of-killing-biafran-independence-supporters-video-report>
supporters 
The unrest in the region is another challenge for the country’s 
president,Muhammadu Buhari, who is grappling with a sharp slowdown in Africa’s 
biggest economy, as well as the bloodyBoko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram> insurgency in the north-east, 
and militancy elsewhere in the oil-rich southern Delta region.

Why Nigerian protesters still march to Radio Biafra's explosive beat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/nigerian-protesters-still-march-radio-biafra-beat>
Amnesty’s 60-page report based on interviews with 193 people, 87 videos and 
122 photographs, said troops and the police used “arbitrary, abusive and 
excessive force to disrupt gatherings”.

Local media had previously reported “massive extra judicial killings” 
<http://www.premiumtimesng.com/investigationspecial-reports/204902-special-report-inside-massive-extrajudicial-killings-nigerias-south-east.html>
 of pro-Biafra activists in Nigeria’s south-east.


Amnesty corroborated many of these claims, saying that at least 60 people were 
killed and 70 injured in two days in May after campaigners gathered for a rally 
in Onitsha , Anambra state.

Secessionist feeling has simmered since the separatist rebellion by the 
eastern Igbo people, one of Nigeria’s largest ethnic groups, led to a 
three-year civil war that ended 46 years ago. An estimated million people died, 
mostly from starvation and illness, in the conflict, which left deep scars and 
deep resentment.

Analysts say 
<http://blog.crisisgroup.org/africa/nigeria/2015/12/04/nigerias-biafran-separatist-upsurge/>
 many of the same factors which prompted earlier anger still exist, and 
describe “a cocktail of longstanding and recent economic and political 
grievances”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigeria-army-denies-killing-150-at-biafra-demonstrations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43334e1a84d80ab5f25bebffb9589173496c5b27%2F0_132_3694_2218%2F3694.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigeria%20army%20denies%20killing%20150%20at%20Biafra%20demonstrations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigeria-army-denies-killing-150-at-biafra-demonstrations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigeria%20army%20denies%20killing%20150%20at%20Biafra%20demonstrations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fnigeria-army-denies-killing-150-at-biafra-demonstrations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43334e1a84d80ab5f25bebffb9589173496c5b27%2F0_132_3694_2218%2F3694.jpg>
 A starving Biafran child in 1968, during Nigeria’s civil war. Photograph: 
Partington/Getty Images 
Now, like then, Igbos say they have been marginalised by being excluded from 
key government posts and denied vital funding for infrastructure development, 
schools and hospitals.


Anger in Biafra flared last year after the IPOB leader, Nnamdi Kanu, who was 
based in the UK, was detained on a visit toNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> and charged with criminal 
conspiracy and with belonging to an illegal society.

75,000 children in Nigeria could starve to death within months, says UN
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/75000-children-in-nigeria-could-starve-to-death-within-months-says-un>
The arrest of Kanu, who set up an underground radio station in London, which 
authorities say called for violent attacks on Nigerian security forces, 
prompted supporters to hold protests. These were dispersed with live 
ammunition, according to Amnesty.

Don Awunah, a Nigeria police force spokesman, said that officers “always abide 
by the law” and adhere to best practices. “We don’t attack people who are 
demonstrating, which every Nigerian has a right to do,” he said.

Sani Usman, an army spokesman, said Biafra separatists had behaved violently, 
killing five policeman at a protest in May and attacking both military and 
police vehicles. “The military and other security agencies exercised maximum 
restraints despite the flurry of provocative and unjustifiable violence,” said 
Usman.

Witnesses told Amnesty that some protesters had thrown stones, burned tyres 
and, in one incident, shot at the police, but added that “these acts of 
violence did not justify the level of force used against the whole assembly”.

Makmid Kamara, interim director of Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> Nigeria, said: “This 
reckless and trigger-happy approach to crowd control has caused at least 150 
deaths.”

The campaign group said their research showed a disturbing pattern of hundreds 
of arbitrary arrests and ill-treatment by soldiers during and after IPOB 
events, including arrests of wounded victims in hospital, and torture and other 
ill treatment of detainees.

One interviewee said he was shot during a protest meeting and hid in a gutter. 
When soldiers found him they poured acid on him, he said.

Nigerian troops should be prosecuted for deadly Zaria clashes – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/nigerian-troops-army-prosecuted-deaths-shia-muslims-zaria-report>
Last year Amnesty said that more than 8,000 people had died in detention 
during a crackdown on Boko Haram. The group also said soldiers killed hundreds 
of Shia Muslims in the northern city ofZaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/16/nigerian-army-killings-of-shia-muslims-to-be-investigated>
 in December 2015. A judicial inquiry in August concluded that 347 people were 
killed and buried in mass graves after those clashes.

Nigeria has at least 170 million inhabitants, split roughly equally between 
Christians and Muslims across about 250 ethnic groups, who mostly co-exist 
peacefully.

Buhari, a former military dictator in the 1980s, was a brigade major who 
commanded troops in Biafra during the war in which soldiers were accused of 
mass atrocities. Last year Buhari said he would not let any secessionist 
campaign in Biafra succeed. “We will not let that happen. For Nigeria to divide 
now, it is better for all of us to jump into the sea and get drowned,” he said.

One grievance among some who support Biafran independence is that Nigeria’s 
presidents have tended to come from the north or south-west – areas dominated 
by Hausa and Yoruba people – which, they say, has led to Igbos not being 
appointed to influential government positions.

In 2012 a surge in protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/06/nigeria-charges-biafra-activists-treason>
 led to the arrest on treason charges of more than a 100 supporters of a 
secessionist group after an independence rally in Enugu, the capital of 
Nigeria’s south-east region. The protesters included many elderly war veterans 
from the bloody 1967 conflict.

Nigeria in mourning for Chinua Achebe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/22/chinua-achebe-grandfather-african-literature-dies-aged-82>
The arrests came shortly after the renowned Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe 
wrote in the Guardian thatpersecution of Igbos still persisted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/10/chinua-achebe-biafra-review> in 
Nigeria. Achebe’smemoirs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/05/chinua-achebe-there-was-a-country-review>
 prompted renewed debate about the 1960s conflict. Most of those involved in 
the current campaign for independence for Biafra are too young to remember the 
earlier war.

Analysts do not believe those campaigning for Biafra will make common cause 
with other militants in the Niger delta.

“Most groups in the delta are demanding regional autonomy and the right to 
control their petroleum resources within Nigeria. They are fiercely opposed to 
any suggestion of joining the Igbos in a breakaway Biafra,” wrote the 
International Crisis Group last year.
 