
Peter Odemwingie scored either side of half-time as Nigeria sealed a place in 
the quarter-finals of theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> with a 3-0 victory 
over Mozambique.

The Lokomotiv Moscow forward scored in the 45th and 48th minutes, before the 
substitute Obafemi Martins added a third with a late strike to hand the 
under-fire head coach Shaibu Amodu a welcome boost.

The Super Eagles manager, whose side lost to Egypt in the opening game before 
edging past Benin, needed a win to secure their place in the next round. They 
created the first chance after just three minutes when Odemwingie and Mikel 
John Obi exchanged quick passes, but there was no one in the penalty area to 
pounce on a square ball from the Chelsea midfielder.

Minutes later sloppy play between Campira and Dario Khan saw an attempted 
clearance by the latter fall straight into the path of Chinedu Obasi, whose 
12-yard shot from the left was parried away by Joao Rafael Kapango in the 
Mozambique goal.

Despite dominating possession and displaying some slick passing, the Mambas 
failed to create many openings in the first 20 minutes with their best efforts 
coming from distance â€“ Paito first failing to trouble Vincent Enyeama with a 
wayward strike, before Genito's shot was straight at the Nigerian goalkeeper.

At the other end, Obasi missed with a header from two yards out when Danny 
Shittu nodded a free-kick into the path of the Hoffenheim striker.

Four minutes before half-time, Mozambique's Miro came closest to breaking the 
deadlock with a low strike from just outside the area that came back off the 
right post.

And just as it seemed the two sides would be level at the break, Odemwingie 
caught out Kapango with a shot from just outside the penalty area seconds 
before the interval.

The advantage was doubled in the third minute after the restart when a 
sweeping break saw Obasi play Yakubu in on the left and his cross enabled 
Odemwingie to finish from close range.

Martins wrapped up the victory four minutes from the end when another error 
saw the Mozambican defence dispossessed once more and, when Mikel's shot was 
saved, the former Newcastle United striker was on hand to apply the finishing 
touch.

Victor Obinna should have made it 4-0, but missed an easy one-on-one chance at 
the death as the Super Eagles eased into the next round alongside the Group C 
winners, Egypt.
 