
Teenage sensation Julius Aghahowa scored a dramatic double as Nigeria grabbed 
a late equalizer before overcoming the obstacle ofSenegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal>, the surprise team of the 
African Nations Cup, 2-1 in extra time to set up a semi-final clash with South 
Africa.

Having trailed for 78 minutes, the hot favourites to win the cup looked like 
falling to its first home defeat for 19 years. But 17-year-old substitute 
Aghahowa raced through Senegal's defence to make it 1-1 five minutes from the 
end of regulation time.

Aghahowa, who scored as a substitute in the first round against Morocco, again 
celebrated with his impressive acrobatic skills as the spectators went into a 
frenzy.

Two minutes into extra time, Aghahowa was first to a cross from the left and 
kept his composure to give the Super Eagles the lead. That goal sparked chaotic 
scenes as thousands of spectators - perhaps in the belief that the golden goal 
rule applied- invaded the pitch, holding up the game for more than 15 minutes.

The fans' relief came after Senegal had grabbed a seventh-minute goal and 
survived intense home pressure until Aghahowa's dramatic intervention.

The National Stadium was silenced when Bruges striker Kalilou Fadiga punished 
woeful marking to finish with superb angled volley. With the Super Eagles' 
defence lacking mobility, Henri Camara twice came close to doubling the 
visitor's lead on quick first-half counterattacks.

Nigeria stepped up a gear and piled on the pressure. Benedict Akwuegbu and 
Jay-Jay Okocha, who had earlier clipped the top of the crossbar with a free 
kick, both wasted good opportunities as The Lions looked like pulling off a 
huge upset.

In the closing seconds, Okocha was sent off for elbowing Mbaye Badji but 
Nigeria, making its first appearance in the African Nations Cup since winning 
the trophy in 1994, held on to secure a semi-final match against South Africa.

Nigeria Ike Shorunmu; Gbenga Okunowo (Sunday Oliseh, 80), Godwin Okpara, 
Taribo West, Celestine Babayaro; Tijani Babangida (Julius Aghahowa, 68), Mutiu 
Adepoju, Austin Okocha, Finidi George; Nwankwo Kanu, Benedict Akwuegbu 
(Emmanuel Amunike, 62)

Senegal  Oumar Diallo; Omar Daf (Mbaye Badji, 70), Omar Traore (Papa Daouda 
Sene, 67), Cheikh Sidy Ba, Assane Ndiaye; Papa Malick Diop, Ousmane Diop, 
Moussa Ndiaye, Pape Niokhor Fall; Henri Camara, Kalidou Fadiga (Abdoulaye 
Mbaye, 105)

Â• Defending African champions Egypt suffered a 1-0 defeat by Tunisia in the 
African Nations Cup in Kano yesterday, falling to a 22nd-minute penalty by 
Khaled Badra. Tunisia meet Cameroon in Thursday's semi-final in Accra.
 