
Nigeria's Africa Cup of Nations-winning coach Stephen Keshi has performed a 
U-turn and rescinded his resignation as manager of the Super Eagles.

Keshi announced his decision to stand down 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/feb/11/stephen-keshi-quit-nigeria-coach>
 on Monday, less than 24 hours after guiding Nigeria to their third continental 
crown with a1-0 win over Burkina Faso 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/feb/10/nigeria-burkina-faso-africa-cup-nations>
.

It had been reported that Keshi had a falling out with Nigerian Football 
Federation (NFF) officials after they booked a flight home for the squad ahead 
of their quarter-final against tournament favourites Ivory Coast, a match they 
won 2-1.

However, following a meeting with Nigeria's Sports Minister, Bolaji Abdullahi, 
late on Monday night, he has been persuaded to carry on.

A statement on Tuesday morning from the NFF, labelled as being on behalf of 
Keshi, read: "My attention has been drawn to reports in the media that I have 
resigned my appointment as head coach of Super Eagles ofNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team>. While I have had 
cause to express my displeasure over some issues that happened in the course of 
our participation in the AFCON which my team won by the grace of God, 
especially concerning my relationship with the Nigerian Football Federation.

"I have since had opportunity to discuss the various issues with all 
concerned. I am therefore pleased to say that I have reconsidered my position 
and have decided to continue with my job.

"I want to thank the Honourable Minister of Sports, Mallam Bolaji Abdullahi, 
for his swift and kind intervention."

It is a remarkable about-turn from Keshi who on Monday told a South African 
radio station that he had quit.

The 51-year-old appeared on Metro FM, part of the public broadcaster SABC, and 
said he had informed the NFF of his decision following the final.

The Metro FM presenter Robert Marawa tweeted: "Stephen Keshi has just 
announced that he handed over his resignation letter after the game exclusively 
on 083Sport@6 With Marawa on MetroFM."

Keshi is only the second man to win the Nations Cup as a player and a coach â€“ 
following Egypt's Mahmoud El Gohary.
 