
Northern Ireland’s first female leader vowed to prevent the Abortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Act 1967 being extended to the 
region, setting up a legal clash between politicians and pro-choice campaigners 
in the courts.

Arlene Foster, who will take over from Peter Robinson as first minister on 
Monday, told the Guardian she intends to maintain the Democratic Unionist 
party’s opposition to any reform of the province’s notoriously strict abortion 
laws.

After being elected DUP leader unopposed, Foster told the Guardian: “I would 
not want abortion to be as freely available here as it is in England and don’t 
support the extension of the 1967 act.”

But she conceded the Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> executive, which she will 
co-lead with Sinn Féin’s Martin McGuinness, will have to carefully consider a 
landmark judgment in which the high court ruled that denying abortions to women 
who had become pregnant through rape was a breach of British and European human 
rights laws.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F4%2F1451907768025%2FKP_1197437_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abortion%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%3A%20'Why%20don't%20we%20trust%20women%20to%20make%20the%20right%20choice%3F'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abortion%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%3A%20%27Why%20don%27t%20we%20trust%20women%20to%20make%20the%20right%20choice%3F%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F4%2F1451907768025%2FKP_1197437_crop_640x480.jpg>
Abortion in Northern Ireland: ‘Why don’t we trust women to make the right 
choice?’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/06/abortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video>
Her remarks are published a day after the Guardian reported that doctors, 
nurses and midwives said they are operating in a “climate of fear” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/northern-ireland-medics-fear-prison-abortion-advice>
, worried about the threat of imprisonment if they offer advice to women 
seeking an abortion. Abortions in Northern Irelandare only available to women 
and girls where their life or health is in grave danger; only 23 were carried 
out in 2013-14 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/northern-ireland-abortion-laws-restrictive-unclear-legal-women>
.


Northern Ireland medics fear prison over abortion advice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/northern-ireland-medics-fear-prison-abortion-advice>
Several women told the Guardian of their experiences in trying to seek an 
abortion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/05/abortion-in-northern-ireland-women-share-their-experiences>
. Women and girls seeking abortions have to travel to England and pay to obtain 
them on the NHS. Or theycan procure pills online illegally that induce a 
termination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/nagpur-to-northern-ireland-pill-pipeline-helping-women-get-round-abortion-ban>
if they are less than nine weeks pregnant.

 Despite her statement in defence of the existing law, Foster’s 
acknowledgement of the November court ruling suggests politicians in Northern 
Ireland are also preparing for judicial decisions that would force the Stormont 
assembly’s hand and potentially introduce some liberalisation.




The judge in the November case, Mr Justice Horner, balked at imposing changes 
that could have led to limited terminations taking place in the region’s 
hospitals following his ruling. His decision has put the onus on the Northern 
Ireland assembly to take on board his judgment. At present, there is no legal 
compunction on Stormont’s politicians to change the law.

Commenting on the ruling, Foster said: “It is impossible not to be moved by 
some couples’ heartbreaking experiences. Many of the cases are extremely 
complex, and increasingly so as medical practice advances. Along with executive 
colleagues I will be taking time to consider carefully Mr Justice Horner’s 
judgment.”

An alliance of evangelical Protestants, the Catholic church and a majority of 
the assembly’s politicians has ensured that Northern Ireland remains excluded 
from the legislation.

Illegal pills and trauma: how Northern Ireland's abortion ban affects women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/05/abortion-in-northern-ireland-women-share-their-experiences>
Foster declined to answer specific questions on whether she would accept 
limited exceptions to the near-total ban on abortion. She would not say whether 
she would support – as some have campaigned for – exceptions to be introduced 
for women who became pregnant through rape or incest, and those whose baby had 
fatal foetal abnormalities.
Terminations in Northern Ireland 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/abortions_nireland/giv-27167Kv3ghOuWeWAi/>
Foster pointed out that terminations did take place in certain circumstances 
and expressed sympathy for women with crisis pregnancies.

“I recognise this is a deeply personal issue for people, which deserves to be 
treated with the utmost sensitivity and compassion. The legal position in 
Northern Ireland is often misunderstood, and many don’t appreciate it can 
permit abortion when the woman’s physical or mental health is affected,” the 
DUP leader added.

From Nagpur to Northern Ireland: pill pipeline helping women get round 
abortion laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/nagpur-to-northern-ireland-pill-pipeline-helping-women-get-round-abortion-ban>
The Stormont assembly has the lowest level of female representatives out of 
the devolved parliaments, and only a fifth of members supports a relaxation of 
the near-total ban on abortions.

Last year one of Foster’s DUP colleagues, Alastair Ross, presented an 
amendment on behalf of the assembly’s justice committee that would have further 
tightened the ban. It would have banned private clinics such as Marie Stopes 
from offering non-medical terminations for women pregnant up to nine weeks. The 
combined votes of Sinn Féin, the Alliance party, the Greens and liberal 
unionist party N21 vetoed the proposal.

Earlier in 2015 Sinn Féin changed its policy to support abortions in both 
parts of Ireland in cases of fatal foetal abnormality. Its nationalist rival, 
the SDLP, is linked to the Labour party in the Republic through the Socialist 
International but has a long record of opposing abortion reform in Northern 
Ireland.

Even if more abortions were allowed in its hospitals – following legal action 
that could go all the way up to the European court of human rights at 
Strasbourg – veteran feminists and pro-choice campaigners warn this could lead 
to a new legal minefield.

Eileen Calder, co-founder of the Rape Crisis and Sexual Abuse Centre in 
Belfast, said that if abortion were permitted on the grounds of rape it could 
lead to situations where innocent men faced false rape allegations.

“I think it is totally wrong to say that perhaps we should allow for 
terminations on the grounds of rape only,” she said. “Many women in unwanted 
and crisis pregnancies might go to their GP or local hospital and say they were 
raped and demand an abortion in those circumstances.

“In these cases the onus would be on medics to then report a crime to the 
Police Service of Northern Ireland, which in turn could lead to innocent men 
who get women pregnant after consensual sex being arrested, questioned and 
possibly charged over a crime they did not commit.”

Accusing the Northern Ireland assembly of “political cowardice”, Calder added 
that “only the extension of the 1967 act and full equal rights for women like 
they enjoy in the rest of the UK” was the way forward.

 * This article was amended on 18 January 2016. An earlier version stated that 
Alastair Ross tabled a motion to further tighten the abortion ban. Ross was 
required to present the amendment on behalf of the Northern Ireland assembly’s 
justice committee, of which he is chairman. This has been clarified.  