
The end of the line could finally be in sight for the embarrassing air travel 
ritual of waiting in the aisle to go to the toilet.

Airbus, the manufacturer of the A380 superjumbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/28/airbus-a380-future-in-doubt>, 
is working on a plan to install urinals into its planes.

The company is talking to Zodiac, a French company and key supplier, about 
developing urinals and other new toilet designs for its planes, including 
disabled lavatories.


Cancellations and delays expected in airliner market at Farnborough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/09/boeing-airbus-cancellations-delays-farnborough-airliner>
Airbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> is aiming to optimise 
space and help passengers save time by reducing queues for the toilet during a 
flight. The installation of urinals could free up room for additional women’s 
toilets and disabled loos.

An Airbus source said: “Options for urinals are being developed and are being 
looked into by a number of airlines.”

Toilets have long been a dilemma for airlines and plane manufacturers because 
of the space they take up. Michael O’Leary, the boss of Ryanair,threatened to 
charge passengers for using the toilet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/feb/27/ryanair-toilet-charge> on his 
planes or even get rid of them altogether, complaining they were taking up 
space that could be used for extra seats.

Airbus has been dogged with its own toilet troubles on its new aircraft, the 
A350. Delays in the delivery of the toilets for the plane by Zodiac have led to 
slower than expected production of the A350. In an unusual move, Airbus 
publicly shamed Zodiac earlier this year for causing delays to production of 
the plane.

Urinals have been installed in the past in the first class area of some 
planes, such as Lufthansa’s A380s. However, a lack of technological 
developments has prevented their widespread use and some airlines prefer the 
privacy of traditional toilets.

 