
These are wonderful times – glorious! – for people like me who are trained for 
absolutely nothing. The worst thing you can be is an educated expert with any 
form of experience, especially if you are running for political office. So, 
given my only certification is a degree in English literature, which means I’m 
qualified to read novels, something most people manage without accreditation, 
this means I’m equipped to run a country. Vote for me: I once wrote an essay on 
Thomas Hardy and the pathetic fallacy! Presidential and prime ministerial 
candidates have been campaigning on less.

Faith in the political system, the cliche goes, has been broken – in the US by 
a series of dodgy wars, and in the UK by one particular war. Whether the 
desired result of this people’s revolution is a former education secretary 
dismissing the economists who warned that Brexit was a bad idea with the airy 
claim, “People in this country have had enough of experts 
<http://unilty.com/uk-has-had-enough-of-experts-says-gove/>”, or Andrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> suggesting that being a 
mother is a more important qualification than, say, six years as home 
secretary, is a different issue. Gosh, was that a baby I just saw flying past 
the window along with the bath water?

Perhaps Leadsom quit the race to be Tory leader because she realised 
ministerial experience is quite helpful when running for PM, perhaps because 
she made the error of beefing up her CV – that old school mistake of 
exaggerating her expertise when she should have downplayed it.Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> was the ultimate winner, but 
Leadsom’s implosion will not change the mood. Just as any flaws in leadership 
candidates for either party have been cited as proof they are not “career 
politicians”, so any failures have been seen as evidence of dark machinations 
of threatened elitists (a word that now seems synonymous with “experts”) 
running “a black ops operation”, asIain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> put it. Never mind 
that the events of the past few months have repeatedly proved our so-called 
elites can barely figure out how to coordinate their exhales and inhales, any 
criticism is dismissed as grand conspiracy.

It’s the era of the female confessional – but nobody does it like Beyoncé | 
Hadley Freeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/09/era-female-confessional-nobody-like-beyonce-hadley-freeman>
Not since the charming 1993 film Dave <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0106673/>, 
in which an innocent employment agency owner (Kevin Kline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/oct/02/patterson.culture>) takes over as 
president, has the homespun outsider been so heavily touted as the solution. 
But the real-life results have felt a little more like a clown school in chaos 
than a joyful sequel toKing Ralph <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0102216/>. 
Caring about winning elections is “Westminster-centric”, according toDiane 
Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dianeabbott>, which might come as 
news to the working classes whose livelihoods depend on the Labour party being 
able to effect laws. It’s the ultimate anti-intellectualism, a mood that values 
emotions and personality over argument and experience, and you need only look 
to America to see the endgame, whereDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> thinks understanding 
showbusiness is a political qualification. Sadly, it seems he’s not entirely 
wrong about that.

Anyway, this is the world we now live in. But if American billionaires and the 
Leave campaign, staffed by bankers and the privately educated, can claim to be 
fighting “the elites”, then so can I. If any of you are considering running for 
public office – and, these days, who isn’t? – here are my three golden rules 
for non-expert outsiders.

First, there’s no need for political experience when you have a family. 
Admittedly, this tactic didn’t work so well for Leadsom, but only because she 
contrasted her saintly motherhood with May’s suspect childlessness, which even 
Tories saw as a bit much. But politicians have been insinuating this crap for 
years, making doe-eyed references to their families, as though having had 
unprotected sex at some point is a political triumph. The only skill motherhood 
has given me is a tolerance for being peed on at regular intervals. Does that 
help with running a country? Apparently so.

Second, planning is for losers and winging it’s for winners. Boring things 
such as manifestos and policies are evidence of a political nature, which is 
unacceptable in politics now. Just make up your answers on the spot: imprison 
women who have abortions! Build a wall! Then keep the news cycle moving so 
people forget what you just said.

Third, maintain an unshakeable self-belief. Remember, in this 
Through-The-Looking Glass-with-added-doublespeak world, where ignorance is a 
virtue, experience is suspect and electability is worse, everything you do and 
say, no matter how damaging, is great. Caused the pound to nosedive? You saved 
Britain! Someone pointed out your mistake? They’re corrupt! You’re perfect, you 
massive ignoramus.

As for the rest of us, the key thing to remember is that things can always get 
worse. Think you hit rock bottom with Leadsom and the Leave campaign? So did 
America withSarah Palin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sarahpalin>, only 
for Trump to turn up. Buckle up, Britain.
 