
It was the sight of a beached whale that provided us with a hint that we might 
soon get up close and personal with one of the planet’s greatest predators. Our 
party was drifting – in Zodiac power boats – over the icy waters of Coningham 
Bay, on Prince William Island in Canada’s high Arctic – when the beluga was 
spotted lying on the shore. A couple of others were seen minutes later. 
Stripped of their skin and blubber, the beluga carcasses were the leftovers of 
an Inuit hunting party and they were providing irresistible enticement for 
another set of locals: two large male polar bears.

The pair appeared over a sand dune and lumbered down to take a munch or two of 
whale before wandering off, clearly having already gorged themselves earlier. 
One bear – a huge hill of an animal with white and yellow fur, a battered nose 
and dainty cottonwool-like ears – swam to a nearby ice floe, where he sat 
staring at us. For the next quarter of an hour, he contemplated our 
tourist-filled boats – a feast in the making from his perspective. Our pilots 
kept their engines revved for a quick escape, though the bear was obviously in 
no mood for action, just a bit of eyeballing.

It was a breathtaking encounter: the world’s largest land carnivore posing 
only a few dozen yards away against a backdrop of misty Arctic wasteland – 
though I should stress that polar bears were not the only wonders we witnessed 
in our trip through the Northwest Passage. We also saw finback whales, 
narwhals, musk ox, gyrfalcons, Arctic hare, snowy owls, any amount of gulls and 
a plethora of other seabirds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorthwest-passage-canada-arctic-going-with-the-floe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd96aa41251ad7e1a80ffdf2407b1a9990644cb0a%2F0_0_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northwest%20Passage%2C%20Canada%3A%20going%20with%20the%20floe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorthwest-passage-canada-arctic-going-with-the-floe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northwest%20Passage%2C%20Canada%3A%20going%20with%20the%20floe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorthwest-passage-canada-arctic-going-with-the-floe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd96aa41251ad7e1a80ffdf2407b1a9990644cb0a%2F0_0_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 First past the post: Sarah and Robin on Devon Island. Photograph: Robin 
McKie/Observer 
In any case wildlife is not the high Arctic’s only attraction. The landscape 
alone is worth the trip – mysterious, bleak and haunting, with islands stripped 
of any signs of life save for the thinnest strands of vegetation clinging to 
the gale-swept ground and crumbling Hudson Bay trading stations abandoned 
decades ago.

In the 19th century hundreds of men died here trying to find a northwest 
passage from the Atlantic to the Pacific, theexpedition of Sir John Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/nov/02/secrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage>
 – which disappeared in 1845 – being the grimmest, but by no means only, 
example. Today global warming is melting the Arctic’s summer ice, and ships 
with strengthened hulls can sail the passage with ease for several weeks a 
year. Hence our decision to abandon Europe’s summer to experience this land of 
ice and snow as it is transformed by climate change at a speed unmatched in any 
another other region on Earth.

Wildlife is not the only attraction: the Arctic landscape alone is worth the 
trip – mysterious, bleak and haunting

It was a deeply satisfying but surprisingly busy experience. There were 
constant lectures and talks and, with the exception of our two-day voyage 
across Baffin Bay, we had at least one shore trip a day: to Beechey Island, 
where three of Franklin’s men are buried below bleached wooden grave markers; 
to Prince Leopold Island, whose soaring cliffs provide sanctuary for tens of 
thousands of kittiwakes, fulmars and guillemots; and to the Inuit towns of 
Sisimiut and Pond Inlet.

These journeys involved the donning of thermal underwear, woollen shirts and 
heavy-duty waterproof gear – which might seem surprising given that 
temperatures rarely dropped below zero. However if you don’t have proper 
clothing, long journeys in open Zodiacs, in fierce cutting winds, can seriously 
chill the blood.

It was by no means an arduous holiday. The food on our ship, the Akademik 
Sergey Vavilov, was lavish; there was a cocktail of the day and a happy hour; a 
hot tub on deck; and yes, bars of chocolate were left on our newly made beds 
every evening.

My wife Sarah and I did have two main worries before setting off: rough seas 
and fellow passengers. Among the latter, we feared that a few loud-mouthed 
rednecks in the ship’s confines might wreck our sanity. Instead we got 
well-informed, amusing and articulate shipmates. Some were the best-travelled 
individuals I have ever encountered. Others had spent their savings just to 
make this journey, to see a land in melting transition. It was a humbling 
experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorthwest-passage-canada-arctic-going-with-the-floe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ae969404552329b94569a00d87d1fb5c6c886d%2F0_197_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Northwest%20Passage%2C%20Canada%3A%20going%20with%20the%20floe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorthwest-passage-canada-arctic-going-with-the-floe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Northwest%20Passage%2C%20Canada%3A%20going%20with%20the%20floe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F29%2Fnorthwest-passage-canada-arctic-going-with-the-floe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99ae969404552329b94569a00d87d1fb5c6c886d%2F0_197_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 Bath time: enjoying a hot tub. Photograph: Robin McKie/Observer 
As to the high seas, they didn’t materialise either. From our trip’s starting 
point at Kangerlussuaq in Greenland, across Baffin Bay’s ice floes and 
icebergs, into Lancaster Sound and south through Victoria Strait before 
reaching our 2,000km journey’s end at Cambridge Bay, on Victoria Island, the 
seas were calm. Even our journey through the Bellot Strait – which separates 
the most northerly point of mainland America from Canada’s Arctic islands and 
is rated one of the world’s most formidable sea passages – was smooth and 
restful.

Indeed that trip, on a glorious August evening, was especially exhilarating as 
we cruised through the narrow channel from Atlantic waters to those of the 
Pacific, towards the setting sun. At one point we could see a lone wolf on the 
shore watching us. Later a polar bear swam across our bows. And that is not 
your everyday holiday experience.

Essentials

Robin McKie travelled with One Ocean Expeditions on a 12-night Classic 
Northwest Passage voyage. Prices start from £6,850 per person sharing a twin 
cabin including meals and accommodation on board, Zodiac excursions, ship 
transfers and foul weather gear. Return flights are £783 from Ottawa to 
Kangerlussuaq and Cambridge Bay to Edmonton (oneoceanexpeditions.com 
<http://www.oneoceanexpeditions.com/>)
 