
Northern Ireland’s power-sharing executive has been formed, with Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> and the Democratic Unionist 
party appointing an independent unionist as the region’s new justice minister. 
The East Londonderry assembly member, Claire Sugden, will take up the justice 
portfolio, which the two big parties eschewed in order to avoid accusations of 
one community controlling the police and judicial system.

Four DUP and three Sinn Féin members will share the other ministries at 
Stormont. Sugden, 29, a former member of the Ulster Unionist party, replaces 
the Alliance party leader, David Ford, as justice minister. The four DUP 
ministers are Simon Hamilton at economy, Peter Weir at education, Paul Givan at 
communities, and Michelle McIlveen at agriculture, environment and rural 
affairs. The Sinn Féin ministers are Máirtín Ó Muilleoir at finance, Michelle 
O’Neill at health, and Chris Hazzard at infrastructure.

On the appointment of Sugden, the Sinn Féin deputy first minister of Northern 
Ireland,Martin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness>, described her as a 
“very progressive young woman who clearly understands the need to be minister 
for everybody in our community”.

Arlene Foster hails DUP's performance in Northern Ireland assembly election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/arlene-foster-northern-ireland-assembly-election-dup-stormont>
In a public display of unity with her Sinn Féin counterpart, the DUP first 
minister,Arlene Foster <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arlene-foster>, 
said: “Martin and I are delighted that Claire has agreed to be the new justice 
minister and we are very much looking forward to working with her. I hope she 
will be given the credit she deserves in stepping forward and taking on this 
ministry.”

Sugden’s appointment to the justice portfolio was crucial to the survival of 
the fledgling power-sharing executive formedjust weeks after the assembly 
elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/uk-elections-at-a-glance-the-key-points>
. A failure to nominate a justice minister would likely have led to another 
election.

However, Sugden’s appointment was criticised by the Ulster Unionist party as a 
“corruption” of theGood Friday agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1998/apr/12/northernireland1>, as ministerial 
seats should be allocated on the basis of party strength.

Mike Nesbitt, the UUP leader, referred to a speech made by Sugden last year 
when she described Stormont’s leaders as “jokers” in a falling “house of 
cards”. “We are not in favour of this, because it is a corruption of the Good 
Friday agreement,” he said. “The person who said, ‘This house of cards is 
falling, and good will come of that only if the jokers at the top come crashing 
down too and do not get up again’, is our new justice minister, who is propping 
them up again.”

Politics in Northern Ireland is changing forever as nationalism diversifies | 
Malachi O’Doherty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/08/nationalists-northern-ireland-elections-good-friday-agreement>
Sugden said taking up the post was “probably the most difficult decision I 
have had in my life”. She succeeded Ford after his party decided to enter 
opposition with the UUP and the nationalist Social Democratic and Labour party. 
The Alliance party’s move to the opposition benches was the main reason for the 
delay in reconstituting the power-sharing regional government.

Sugden’s nomination could potentially pose political problems for Sinn Féin 
given that her appointment will be held up by hardline republican dissidents as 
evidence that the policing and judicial system is still controlled by a 
pro-union politician.

 