
Norway’s government has appealed against a court ruling that authorities had 
violated the human rights of the far-right terroristAnders Breivik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik>.

The justice minister, Anders Anundsen, said the government disagreed with a 
ruling on 20 April by Oslo district court that the isolation of Breivik, who is 
serving 21 years’ prison for killing 77 people in 2011,breaches the European 
convention on human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/anders-behring-breiviks-human-rights-violated-in-prison-norway-court-rules>
.

“I have today asked the office of the attorney general to appeal the verdict,” 
Anundsen said on Tuesday. He added that further details about the government’s 
decision would be released within days.

Breivik, 37, sued the government last month, saying his isolation from other 
prisoners, frequent strip searches and the fact that he was often handcuffed 
during the early part of his incarcerationviolated his human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/24/anders-breivik-reminds-us-human-rights-never-stand-alone>
.

He is held in solitary confinement in a three-cell complex where he can play 
computer games, watch TV and exercise.

During a four-day hearing at Skien prison in southern Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway>, where Breivik is serving his 
sentence, he complained about the quality of the prison food, having to eat 
with plastic utensils and not being able to communicate with sympathisers.

The government rejected his complaints, saying he was treated humanely despite 
the severity of his crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/07/utoya-four-years-on-whats-the-mood-like-in-norway>
 and that he must be separated from other inmates for safety reasons.

“The prohibition of inhuman and degrading treatment represents a fundamental 
value in a democratic society,” the court said in its ruling. “This applies no 
matter what also in the treatment of terrorists and killers.”

It ordered the government to pay Breivik’s legal costs of 331,000 kroner 
(£28,000). However, it dismissed Breivik’s claim that his right to respect for 
private and family life was violated by restrictions on contacts with other 
rightwing extremists.
 