
We don’t know everything yet. We know Paris experienced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> its worst night since the 
second world war. We knowIslamic State claimed responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/14/paris-terror-attacks-attackers-dead-mass-killing-live-updates>
. As a survivor of theAnders Breivik massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/22/anders-breivik-massacre-one-of-us-anne-seierstad>
 in Norway, I stand with the survivors of the attacks, their families, the 
families grieving lost loved ones, the people of Paris, the people of France, 
and all those who wish to live in peace.

Tough times lie ahead. World leaders, French citizens and people all over the 
world are of course condemning theParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> attack. So am I, but it doesn’t help 
anyone to dehumanise the perpetrators, calling this the act of the devil and so 
on. In dealing with violent extremism it is important to recognise that we all 
dehumanise one another. Our ability to stop violent extremism is dependent on 
our ability to see one another as human. Let us retain that ability in the face 
of terror, and we may be on the right path.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fpresident-hollande-paris-attacks-act-of-war-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F14%2F1447501843596%2FKP_596603_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=President%20Hollande%20calls%20Paris%20attacks%20an%20%E2%80%98act%20of%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fpresident-hollande-paris-attacks-act-of-war-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=President%20Hollande%20calls%20Paris%20attacks%20an%20%E2%80%98act%20of%20war%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fpresident-hollande-paris-attacks-act-of-war-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F14%2F1447501843596%2FKP_596603_crop_640x360.jpg>
President Hollande calls Paris attacks an ‘act of war’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/nov/14/president-hollande-paris-attacks-act-of-war-video>
After the 2011 attack in Norway, in which 77 people were killed and I almost 
lost my life, the Norwegian prime minister spoke of fightinghatred with more 
love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/15/anders-breivik-norway-copes-horror>
, more democracy and more openness. Whether these ideals were followed or not 
in the case of Norway can be debated; President François Hollande is, however, 
already on a different path, vowinga ruthless fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/nov/14/president-hollande-paris-attacks-act-of-war-video>
 as response to the Paris attacks.

“Hurt people hurt people” is a commonly held phrase among those of us working 
against violent extremism. I learned it from a former violent extremist,Arno 
Michaelis <http://mylifeafterhate.org/> who has first-hand experience of the 
subject. By vowing a “ruthless fight” Hollande falls into the same pattern, a 
pattern that will only lead to further violence, more deaths and more horror.

The French are mourning, but by sticking together we can overcome | Natalie 
Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/15/france-mourning-overcome-islamic-state>
I was sitting in my apartment in Turkey as the scenes in Paris unfolded on the 
screen. When Paris is under attack it seems natural to feel affected. France is 
our neighbour, a European country from which much of our culture, our 
philosophies and beliefs originate. To place blame on anyone but the 
perpetrators seems foolish. It’s clear thatFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is the victim in this. But it’s also 
foolish not to acknowledge that these acts of violence don’t occur in a vacuum.

The world is interconnected and actions, perceptions and ideologies of hatred 
and violent extremism are international phenomena. We have to recognise that 
what’s going on, and what our politicians choose to do or not do in Syria, 
Iraq, Libya, Lebanon and the rest of the world has an impact, not just 
politically, but also in the grassroots of communities and the individuals they 
consist of. The interconnectedness, and the international nature of extremism 
is what makes it possible for kids from France and Belgium, and maybe Syria and 
other places, to apparently join forces and pull off an attack of this 
magnitude.

So how do we stop this violence? The world is seemingly bursting at its seams 
with opposing ideologies, fed and fuelled by fear and hatred stemming from 
alienation, dehumanisation and destruction. The best thing we can do is to go 
out there, recognise one another’s humanity, treat one another with respect and 
decency. Our response to hate needs to be peace. In my own struggle with 
surviving violent extremism it has been key to remain true to the principles I 
believed in. Principles that guide my work for peace, against violent extremism.

The Trollhättan killer didn’t become an extremist overnight. Somebody could 
have stopped him | Bjørn Ihler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/23/trollhattan-killer-extremist-anders-behring-breivik>
Across social media people quickly took the leap to blaming Islam and Muslims 
as a whole. They forget there are 1.5 billion of “them” in this world, and that 
they mostly wish to live their lives in peace like everyone else. We know the 
French far right is already exploiting the events, spreading hate, encouraging 
violence. We know policies will be implemented that will further divide people. 
We know attacks such as this can be steps in a strategy to divide and conquer. 
The only way to fight this is by standing together, as humans.

Parisians have shown resilience. They opened their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/paris-attacks-people-throw-open-doors-to-help>
 to one another on Friday night, helped one another, accepted one another. They 
saw one another as humans. In the darkest night, people came together and 
together they created bright spots, showing Paris as the City of Light even in 
its darkest hours. France, Europe and the world can follow the example of these 
Parisians.
 