
Nottingham Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> have 
risked an angry backlash from some of their supporters after the club's Kuwaiti 
owners appointed Alex McLeish as their new manager. The 53-year-old Scot, who 
has been out of work since he was sacked as Aston Villa manager in May, has 
taken over at the City Ground little more than 24 hours after Sean O'Driscoll 
was surprisingly sacked.

McLeish emerged as the clear frontrunner for the position earlier in the day 
when his odds tumbled on the betting markets, prompting a number of supporters 
to contact Fawaz Al-Hasawi, the club's chairman and co-owner, via Twitter, to 
express their displeasure at the possibility of the former Scotland manager 
replacing O'Driscoll. Hasawi responded to the messages he received from Forest 
supporters prior to McLeish's appointment, tweeting: "I'm grateful for the 
opinions of our fans. Please be assured I'm working hard to do the right thing 
for the club."

A few hours later McLeish was named Forest's 12th manager in less than a 
decade. He will be officially unveiled on Friday, after taking training, and 
will take charge of his first game as the club's manager when Crystal Palace 
visit the City Ground on Saturday. He inherits a side eighth in the 
Championship and a point outside the play-offs, following the 4-2 victory over 
Leeds United on Boxing Day that proved to be O'Driscoll's final game as manager.

Although McLeish won promotion from the Championship during his time in charge 
of Birmingham City and went on to secure a ninth-placed finish in the Premier 
League and win the League Cup, he also endured two relegations and has a 
reputation for playing dour and unattractive football, which is in sharp 
contrast to the style associated with O'Driscoll.

McLeish's decision to move across Birmingham and take the Villa job in the 
summer of 2011 was highly controversial and badly backfired when he was 
dismissed at the end of his first season in charge. Villa narrowly avoided 
relegation and McLeish's position became untenable.

He claimed, however, that he feels reinvigorated after a seven-month break 
from football. "I'm really looking forward to working with Nottingham Forest," 
McLeish said. "I've had time away from the game and now feel refreshed and 
ready to go. The fact that a club of Forest's magnitude has offered me a job 
excites me greatly â€“ it's a wonderful opportunity. I can't wait to get started 
and I'm looking forward to meeting the players, talking to them and taking my 
first training session."

Forest's ambitious owners, who took control of the club in July, are desperate 
to win promotion to the Premier League this season and believe McLeish is the 
right man to deliver on that objective. They will make significant funds 
available to McLeish when the transfer window reopens next week.

"I'm delighted to welcome Alex to our club and look forward to working with 
him," Hasawi said. "Alex took Birmingham to promotion from the Championship and 
has great experience of working in the Premier League. He's hungry for more 
success and I believe he's the man who can help us fulfil our ambition of 
making it to the Premier League."

Earlier in the day Roy Keane, a former Forest player, had been strongly linked 
with the post, although Roberto Di Matteo was the supporters' favourite for the 
position. It always seemed unlikely, however, that Di Matteo, who won the FA 
Cup and European Cup with Chelsea only seven months ago, would be willing to 
drop into the Championship. McLeish had no qualms on that front and will 
immediately set about trying to win over the dissenting voices.
 