
This autumn you can get into bed with Tim Key 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/14/tim-key-single-white-slut-review-standup>
, supply a title forJason Byrne’s show <http://www.jasonbyrne.ie/gigs-archive/> 
or sit on stage playing Jenga for half ofAlex Horne’s set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/21/alex-horne-monsieur-butterfly-review-edinburgh-festival-2014>
. On the Edinburgh fringe last month, I spent five minutes on stage with my 
head up comedian Paul Currie’s jumper, and another five wincing as Luke McQueen 
tried to smoke me out and rope me intohis act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/14/luke-mcqueen-edinburgh-festival-2014-review-standup-comedy>
. I saw audience members made to recreate the pottery scene from Ghost, 
improvise a horror story about a haunted goat, and enact a dialogue in which 
the words “paedo” and “Speedo” are confused to hilarious effect. It’s not 
always clear as a comedy-goer these days whether to laugh or demand a cut of 
the profits.

It’s a conspicuous phenomenon – the displacement of audience participation in 
comedy from the margins to the spotlit centre stage. In traditional standup, 
two or three people in the front row get lightly ribbed, then we all relax and 
enjoy the show. But that was before Adam Riches, Doctor Brown and Sam Wills 
(aka the Boy With Tape on His Face) – a trio of outrageous and very successful 
comedy acts, all of whom built not just the first five minutes, but the whole 
of their shows around no-hiding-place public involvement. That’s now 
commonplace: if you’re a shrinking violet with an attachment to your anonymous 
place in the back rows, live comedy is not the place for you.

Theses could be written about how this relates to the boom in interactive 
theatre, and what it all says about our impatience with passivity and desire 
for real connection in a mediated age. Or I could just refer you to the title 
of an event last weekend at Chelsea theatre in London (curated by sometime 
Guardian writer Ben Walters),the Not Television festival 
<http://www.nottelevision.net/>. This celebration of for-one-night-only 
liveness was kicked off by two comedy shows.Josh Ladgrove’s Come Heckle Christ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/05/come-heckle-christ-stewart-lee-comedy-diary-edinburgh-2014>
 depends for its effect on a gung-ho audience pitching amusing questions and 
catcalls at Ladgrove-as-Jesus, whileEric Davis’s coercive 
clowning-meets-self-help act, Red Bastard <http://www.redbastard.com/>, asks 
not only that you participate, but that you publicly expose your most gaping 
psychic wounds.

There are plenty of opportunities this autumn for those of you eager to star 
on the glamorous side of the footlights. Interactive-theatre shows coming your 
way includeATC’s Blind Hamlet 
<http://www.atctheatre.com/productions/blind-hamlet>, which has no performers, 
but invites audience members on stage to reinterpret Hamlet as a game ofwink 
murder <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wink_murder>. Paines Plough’s Every 
Brilliant Thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/08/edinburgh-festival-2014-every-brilliant-thing-review-depression>
 is an uplifting solo show casting audience members as bit parts in a story 
about a boy (played by comedian Jonny Donahoe) whose mother suffers from 
depression. At the more experimental end of the spectrum, BAC hostsBest 
Festival Ever 
<https://www.bac.org.uk/content/34632/see_whats_on/shows/shows/best_festival_ever_how_to_manage_a_disaster_scratch>
, which “places the audience in charge of programming and managing their very 
own music festival”, while performance artist Greg Wohead (whose last show cast 
one unlucky punter as serial killer Ted Bundy) stages his eventThe Backseat of 
My Car (and Other Safe Places) 
<http://gregwohead.com/the-backseat-of-my-car-and-other-safe-places/> – for one 
audience member only – at Reading’s Sitelines festival.

Interactive theatre can move its audience, foster their spirit of play, or 
give them the sense of being an agent in an unfolding drama. Interactive 
comedy, meanwhile, ridicules you for the amusement of a paying public. Riches 
is the scarifying overlord of participative comedy – he won the Edinburgh 
Comedy award in 2011 fora show that dragooned punters on stage to play Swingball
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/24/adam-riches-review>(“the 
winner is the one who arrives in accident and emergency second!”), kiss and 
feed one another mouth-to-mouth “like starlings do”. (Women are usually safe: 
Riches’ “audience-baiting” – his phrase – is targeted at men.) His new show 
comes to Soho theatre in the New Year; in the meantime, you’re probably not at 
risk listening tohis Radio 4 series The Guns of Adam Riches 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04g8kch> (but I wouldn’t count on it).

You can see double act The Pin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/06/edinburgh-festival-2014-review-the-pin-improv>
 at Soho theatre in November: their high-concept sketch show takes a detour via 
some Riches-esque audience tomfoolery, involving that “paedo” pun and a made-up 
sub-tennis ballgame that uses an audience member as a net. Ventriloquist Nina 
Conti –who also gigs this autumn 
<http://store.unionchapel.org.uk/events/4-oct-14-live-at-the-chapel-with-nina-conti-union-chapel/>
 – has a show-stopping routine where she invites audience members on stage, 
dresses them in Mad magazine-style face masks with yapping jaws, and puts words 
in their mouths. Whencharacter comic Catriona Knox 
<http://www.catrionaknox.com/> confirms her autumn dates, you can make your bid 
to become her favoured stooge, who gets to perform cookery with a racist chef, 
finger-paint at nursery school with Prince George and improvise rap at a 
revivalist prayer group.

Of course, you may not always be in the mood to be centre stage: the latter 
stages ofAussie comic Steen Raskopoulos’s set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/27/steen-raskopoulos-review-soho-theatre-london>
, where he threatens to press-gang the whole audience into a boogie on stage, 
had me pining for the duller days of audience passivity. Sometimes, making a 
member of the public do silly things is a poor substitute for wit or insight. 
But at its best – in Riches’ hands or in the beautiful silent comedy of Doctor 
Brown and Sam Wills – audience participation is an art form in itself, one that 
reinvigorates the browbeaten inner child and celebrates the funny in all of us. 
Good luck with finding such shows this autumn. You have nothing to lose but 
your dignity.
 