
The New South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> corruption 
watchdog’s ability to hold public hearings is set to be scrutinised, just a 
week after it handed down the findings of its explosive investigation into 
banned political donations.

The state parliamentary committee charged with overseeing the Independent 
Commission Against Corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/independent-commission-against-corruption>
 (Icac) will hold a two-day hearing examining the organisation’s powers 
following a controversial report from its inspector, David Levine, earlier this 
year.

The former supreme court judge called for an end to Icac’s public proceedings 
in his May report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/13/temptation-for-flamboyance-sweeping-changes-recommended-for-icac>
, arguing it would stop “the undeserved trashing” of people’s reputations.

The NSW premier, Mike Baird, commissioned the report after the damning high 
court ruling that found Icacdid not have the power to pursue its ill-fated 
investigation into crown prosecutor Margaret Cunneen. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/24/margaret-cunneen-will-not-be-charged-says-nsw-solicitor-general>

Operation Spicer proves we need Icac. Any half decent government would restore 
its funding | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/operation-spicer-proves-we-need-icac-any-half-decent-government-would-restore-its-funding>
Levine also called for the exoneration of people’s reputations if Icac’s 
corruption findings are later not upheld by courts.

But Icac later criticised the inspector for not consulting with the commission 
on “any of the important issues canvassed in the report”.

Since being tasked with the review, Levine has been involved in a bitter 
public feud with Icac commissioner Megan Latham.

In a scathing report last year, he described Icac’s investigation into Cunneen 
as the “low point” in the organisation’s history and accused Latham of 
overseeing an operation that at times constituted “unjust, oppressive 
maladministration”.

Latham meanwhile accused Levine of bias and a lack of professional respect in 
a series of parliamentary hearings into that report.

It is expected proceedings will be equally fiery when Levine fronts Icac 
parliamentary committee’s two-day hearing into his most recent report on 
Thursday.

It comes just over a week after Icac handed down the findings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/icac-recommends-criminal-charges-against-joe-tripodi-and-chris-hartcher>
 of its long-awaitedOperation Spicer 
<https://www.icac.nsw.gov.au/investigations/current-investigations/investigationdetail/203>
 investigation, which led to 10 state Liberal MPs joining the crossbench or 
quitting politics after it began in 2014.

 