
Cracked and weather-beaten, a salty little piece of literary history has 
emerged for sale at auction.

The original oak tiller bar from Arthur Ransome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/arthur-ransome?INTCMP=SRCH>'s yacht Nancy 
Blackett <http://nancyblackett.org/about/history/> – named after the pirate 
captain in his Swallows and Amazons series of children's books – is expected to 
prompt the interest of fans across the world.

Ransome, who died in 1967 aged 83, worked as a war correspondent for the 
Manchester Guardian during the first world war.

He bought the yacht in 1934, four years after the publication of Swallows and 
Amazons, the first book in the series of 12.

He named the craft after the adventurous and energetic captain of the pirates' 
boat.

He sailed the boat while living in East Anglia and it provided him with the 
inspiration for another of his books, We Didn't Mean to Go to Sea (1937), in 
which it is named Goblin.

In that book the four "Swallows" – John, Susan, Titty and Roger Walker – sail 
in the Goblin from the east coast of England to Flushing in the Netherlands.

Ransome undertook such a voyage on Nancy Blackett as research for the book and 
wrote some of it while aboard.

He also enjoyed sailing Nancy Blackett around the Walton Backwaters in Essex 
and used his experiences there for another of the Swallows and Amazons series, 
Secret Water (1939).

Ransome sold the boat in 1938 and the vessel had five owners over the next 
half century before being found in near-derelict condition in 1988 in 
Scarborough harbour.

It was taken back to East Anglia and restored then sold to its present owner, 
theNancy Blackett Trust <http://nancyblackett.org/>, in 1996.

The tiller bar – which controls the rudder – was part of the original yacht 
but in 1990 cracked while on its moorings in the river Orwell and was deemed 
unsafe to use. The bar is now mounted on to a section of the original hull 
planking.

Lionel Willis of auctioneers Bonhams said: "The boat was bought by Arthur 
Ransome <https://www.theguardian.com/global/arthur-ransome> in 1934.

"After Swallows and Amazons he wrote other books including We Didn't Mean to 
Go to Sea and the boat in that was based on the Nancy Blackett … there are a 
number of very keen Arthur Ransome fans who would love to own part of his own 
yacht."

The tiller bar will be sold at Bonhams 
<http://www.bonhams.com/eur/auction/19619/lot/360/> in its Gentleman's Library 
sale in London on 18 January and is expected to fetch between £500 and £700.
 