
They said “No”.

It’s a now-common refrain of President Obama’s stump speeches, including his 
speech on Wednesday in Kansas City – even as the Housepassed 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/house/213859-house-votes-to-sue-obama> a bill to 
sue himover his executive actions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/15/gop-suing-obama-john-boehner-lawsuit>
 to extend some of the deadlines under the Affordable Care Act.

They have not been as constructive as I would had hoped.

The most original thing about Wednesday’s speech was the idea – presented as 
the suggestion of a young letter-writer to the White House 
<http://www.boston.com/news/nation/2014/07/30/young-girl-obama-why-women-currency/n3X6syjTnYTPfscb0XPsgM/story.html?hootPostID=f04e0b27aebf15117de0c522acf280e3>
 – that women should appear on US currency. Obama called it “a good idea” – and 
it’s one that he could make happen by executive order. It would be a great 
war-on-women gimmick. (And if he really wanted to troll Republicans, he could 
put Harriet Tubmanon a trillion-dollar bill 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/wp/2013/01/09/trillion-dollar-coin-the-new-nuclear-option/>
.)


Introducing a bill with a woman on it – rather than passing one – epitomizes 
both the current limits on the president’s powers and the way he’s using the 
powers he has: to please liberals with surface changes that infuriate 
conservatives.

We hold the best cards. Things are getting better.

That strategy – part defiance, part condescension – has been disappointing if 
you assume that the ultimate goal of his second term is to make broad, lasting 
policy changes. The executive actions Obama has taken are certainly meaningful, 
and have concrete impact on people’s lives, like the “closing of the gap” on 
same-sex couples’ rights or almost anything he’s done on immigration.

But all of them can be reversed the instant a new executive takes office in 
2017 
<http://www.thelegality.com/2008/12/11/executive-orders-the-power-of-the-presidents-pen/>
.

Imagine how much further along we’d be – how much stronger our economy would 
be – if Congress was doing its job, too.

So why not keep mocking John Boehner and the Republican efforts to sue or 
impeach the president? Democrats are certainly reaping the benefits: 
fundraising groups have sent at least – at least! –21 fundraising emails on the 
subject 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/07/21-emails-from-the-democratic-party-about-impeachment/375244/>
 since July 23, and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committeeraised $2.1m 
last weekend 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2014/07/28/dccc-pulls-in-2-1-million-weekend-fundraising-haul-using-impeachment-pitches/>
 by referencing the GOP’s legal efforts (the best four-day haul of this 
election cycle). It won’t change any Republican minds, but it’s not intended to 
– the derision is just fun for the whole progressive family.

Still, Democrats should beware: Obama’s executive orders – and the way they 
play into conservative efforts to portray him as angry, sarcastic and arrogant –
are more useful getting Republicans elected than Democrats 
<http://www.people-press.org/2014/07/24/gop-has-midterm-engagement-advantage/>, 
according to a recent Pew poll. The poll also shows that 45% of those planning 
on voting Republican report being “more enthusiastic about voting this year 
than in prior elections”, while just 37% of Democrats say the same thing. 
Republicans also seem to respond more passionately to Obama criticism than 
Democrats rally to support him: half of Republicans say that they will consider 
their vote in the midterms as one “against” Obama, according to Pew. Meanwhile, 
only 36% of Democrats say they see their midterm vote as one “for” Obama – down 
from 44% in2010 
<http://www.people-press.org/2014/07/24/gop-has-midterm-engagement-advantage/>.

Money can be helpful to candidates, but at some point, the message matters.

You don’t have time to be cynical. Hope is a better choice.

Obama’s rhetoric has the most success in simply validating the general 
consensus that Congress is terrible.Its latest approval rating is 28%, and a 
record 55% say the current Congress has “accomplished less than usual” 
<http://www.people-press.org/2014/07/24/gop-has-midterm-engagement-advantage/>. 
More of the people who say that Congress has accomplished less than usual blame 
Republican leaders rather than Democratic leaders – 44% to 28% – but that might 
just be the result of logical voters rather than Democratic rhetoric.

Getting voters to hate Congress is, at best, a Pyrrhic victory for Democrats. 
Even if they get more of their base to the polls, the GOP will get yet more of 
its supporters to turn out – and those that aren’t aligned will just throw up 
their hands and stay home.

Stop being mad all the time. Stop just hating all the time. Let’s get some 
work done together.

But I don’t buy into the Wise Men of Washington argument 
<http://www.salon.com/2010/11/24/hack_list_4/> that the solution is bipartisan 
legislation for the sake of bipartisan legislation.


Rather, perhaps Democrats and Obama could put their own principles into 
action. Stop bashing Republicans and make cogent arguments for sane – and 
progressive – legislation. (Some of which Republicans might even pass. Even 
blind squirrels find nuts sometimes.)


The truth is that far-reaching legislation (and political action in general) 
often comes in response to specific crises rather than some happy congruence of 
ideals and people to vote for them: thusthe relatively speedy Veterans Affairs 
bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/30/house-approves-veterans-affairs-healthcare-overhaul>
, andthe stutter-step attempts to reign in the NSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/29/obama-surveillance-reform-bill-us-senate>
. (Of course, crises also produce really bad legislation – the Patriot Act, the 
Iraq Invasion – so, you know, be careful what you wish for.)


But for the biding-our-time gambit to work, we progressives have to not screw 
anything up too badly ourselves and wait for the GOP to implode rather than 
imploring them ad nauseum to do so. Missouri’s last senate race – Claire 
McCaskill v Todd “Legitimate Rape” Akin – provides a case study of how well 
that can work.

I know that’s not a real plan: it’s a combination of faith in 
post-old-white-men demographics and conservative hubris. Then again, 
considering the rate at which conservative hubris is backfiring and their 
overreach is falling short … maybe it’s not such a bad plan after all.
 