
I have come home from a long stay in Mexico to find - because of the 
presidential campaign, and especially because of the Obama-Clinton race for the 
Democratic nomination - a new country existing alongside the old. On any given 
day we, collectively, become the goddess of the three directions and can look 
back into the past, look at ourselves just where we are, and take a glance, as 
well, into the future. It is a space with which I am familiar.

When I joined the freedom movement in Mississippi in my early 20s, it was to 
come to the aid of sharecroppers, like my parents, who had been thrown off the 
land they'd always known - the plantations - because they attempted to exercise 
their "democratic" right to vote. I wish I could say white women treated me and 
other black people a lot better than the men did, but I cannot. It seemed to me 
then, and it seems to me now, that white women have copied all too often the 
behaviour of their fathers and their brothers. In the south, especially in 
Mississippi, and before that, when I worked to register voters in Georgia, the 
broken bottles thrown at my head were gender-free.

I made my first white women friends in college; they loved me and were loyal 
to our friendship, but I understood, as they did, that they were white women 
and that whiteness mattered.

I am a supporter of Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> because I believe he is the 
right person to lead the United States at this time. He offers a rare 
opportunity for the country and the world to do better. It is a deep sadness to 
me that many of my feminist white women friends cannot see him, cannot hear the 
fresh choices toward movement he offers. That they can believe that millions of 
Americans choose Obama over Clinton only because he is a man, and black, feels 
tragic to me.

When I have supported white people, it was because I thought them the best to 
do the job. If Obama were in any sense mediocre, he would be forgotten by now. 
He is, in fact, a remarkable human being, not perfect but humanly stunning, 
like King was and like Mandela is. He is the change America has been trying 
desperately and for centuries to hide, ignore, kill. The change it must have if 
we are to convince the rest of the world that we care about people other than 
our (white) selves.

True to my inner goddess of the three directions, however, this does not mean 
I agree with everything Obama stands for. We differ on important points, 
probably because I am older; I am a woman and person of three colours (African, 
Native American, European); I was raised in the south; and, when I look at the 
world after 64 years of life, there is not one person I wish to see suffer.

I want a grown-up attitude to Cuba, for instance, a country and people I love. 
I want an end to the war immediately, and I want the soldiers to be encouraged 
to destroy their weapons and drive themselves out of Iraq. I want the Israeli 
government to be made accountable for its behaviour to the Palestinians, and I 
want the people of the US to cease acting as if they don't understand what is 
going on. But most of all I want someone with the confidence to talk to anyone, 
"enemy" or "friend", and this Obama has shown he can do.

It is hard to relate what it feels like to see Mrs Clinton (I wish she felt 
self-assured enough to use her own name) referred to as "a woman" while Barack 
Obama is always referred to as "a black man". One would think she is just any 
woman, but she is not. She carries all the history of white womanhood in the US 
in her person; it would be a miracle if we, and the world, did not react to 
this fact. How dishonest it is, to try to make her innocent of her racial 
inheritance.

I can easily imagine Obama sitting down and talking to any leader - or any 
person - in the world, with no baggage of past servitude or race supremacy to 
mar their talks. I cannot see the same scenario with Clinton, who would drag 
into 21st-century US leadership the same image of white privilege and distance 
from others' lives that has so marred the country's contacts with the rest of 
the world. But because Clinton is a woman and may be very good at what she 
does, many people (some in my own family) originally favoured her. I understand 
this, almost. It is because there is little memory, apparently, of the 
foundational inequities that still plague people of colour and poor whites.

When I offered the word "womanism" many years ago, it was to give us a tool to 
use, as feminist women of colour, in times like these. These are the moments we 
can see clearly, and must honour devotedly, our singular path as women of 
colour in the US. We are not white women, and this truth has been ground into 
us for centuries. But neither are we inclined to follow a black person, man or 
woman, unless they demonstrate considerable courage, intelligence, compassion 
and substance.

We have come a long way, sisters, and we are up to the challenges of our time, 
one of which is to build alliances based not on race, ethnicity, colour, 
nationality, sexual preference or gender, but on truth. Even if Obama becomes 
president, our country is in such ruin it may be beyond his power to lead us to 
rehabilitation. If he is elected, however, we must, as citizens of the planet, 
insist on helping him do the best job that can be done; more, we must insist 
that he demand this of us. And remember, as poet June Jordan and Sweet Honey in 
the Rock never tired of telling us: We are the ones we have been waiting for.

Â© 2008, Washingtonpost.Newsweek Interactive and TheRoot.com 
<http://TheRoot.com>. All rights reserved. 
A longer version of this article can be found at theroot.com/id/45469 
<http://www.theroot.com/id/45469>
 