
Conservative critics of Barack Obama's foreign policy are right: it's vague 
when articulated and contradictory when enacted. He refuses to act decisively 
and tunes out the rhetorical bravado of foreign leaders. And if the United 
States is to avoid another round of pointless bloodshed in the Middle East, 
that's the kind of foreign policy our country needs right now. Indeed, it's the 
one we want.

On Sunday's Meet the Press 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/meet-the-press/meet-press-transcript-june-15-2014-n131601>
, Mitt Romney added tothe existing critique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/15/iraq-crisis-us-iran-republican-talk-obama-isis>
 of Obama as feckless-bordering-on-fey. The president, his former challenger 
asserted, was not just ineffectual in his stance toward Iraq and Syria – he was 
also ignorant. The president, said the former one-term governor of 
Massachusetts, has "repeatedly underestimated the threats" posed by chaos in 
Iraq – or "Russia or Assad or Isis or al-Qaida itself".

The terror that has gripped Iraq over the past week is, no doubt, horrific. 
When militantsclaim they've massacred 1,700 soldiers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/16/world/middleeast/iraq.html>, it would be 
foolish not to give yourself options bymoving an aircraft carrier here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/14/aircraft-carrier-iraq-isis-strike-persian-gulf>
 andtoughening up an embassy there 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/06/15/world/meast/iraq-photos-isis/index.html> – which 
Obama has done, actively, not through"neglect" 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/15/opinion/sunday/ross-douthat-changing-maps-in-the-mideast.html>
 or"a nap" 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory/boehner-obama-taking-nap-iraq-24107015>
, as still more critics claimed over the weekend.

But let's remember the way we got in too deep: it wasn't by underestimating 
the threatIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> posed to US interests, 
it was byoverestimating it.

"Overestimating" may even be too generous. We created a threat when there was 
none, not out of whole cloth so much as a web of pride, avarice and insecurity. 
Obama's haters on the right – and maybe even someformerly hawkish apologists on 
the left <http://nymag.com/news/frank-rich/iraq-war-2014-6/> – need a refresher 
course on just how much of the Iraq invasion hinged on ego and imagined taunts. 
It wasn't all about revenge for Daddy's loss. Don't forget the perception in 
the Bush White House that the president was "weak" in the immediate aftermath 
of 9/11:the frozen look 
<http://s.mcstatic.com/thumb/7621307/20777067/4/flash_player/0/1/fahrenheit_9_11_2004_my_pet_goat_part_2.jpg?v=4>
 as he read from My Pet Goat, the hours of hop-scotching around the country, 
out of sight, as the carnage and panic continued to unfold.

It was Bush's improvisation of macho defiance – in those moments following his 
9/11 lapse into visible doubt – that created the blueprint for these wars that 
have refused to end. The declaration that the US would"make no distinction 
between the terrorists who committed these acts and those who harbored them" 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/09/12/us/a-day-of-terror-bush-s-remarks-to-the-nation-on-the-terrorist-attacks.html>
 was made in a speech givenless than twelve hours after the first tower was 
hit. Today, we call that formulation the Bush Doctrine, though anything so 
hastily conceived hardly merits the title of "doctrine".

Governments are supposed to be slower to act than people. They are supposed to 
filter our instinctive desires, not jump on them. It is probably not a 
coincidence that support for the death penalty in Americais at a record low as 
well 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/livewire/support-for-death-penalty-hits-40-year-low-in-new-poll>
. The state's power to take a life is democracy's most dubious gift. We have 
learned that the hard way.

That the Bush administration misled the American people about the reasons for 
invading Iraq is now all but common knowledge; what we talk about less is why 
Americans were moved so easily from concern about possible attacks from 
overseas into almost pornographic nationalism.

Clearly, we were intoxicated by some heady perfume of testosterone and saddle 
leather that pulled along George W Bush by the nose. When the Iraq war began,
nearly 80% of Americans 
<http://www.foxnews.com/story/2003/04/10/poll-public-unites-behind-war/> 
thought it was a good idea.Almost as many 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/8038/seventytwo-percent-americans-support-war-against-iraq.aspx>
 approved of how the president was handling it. Irrational exuberance is not 
just for markets.

How we have sobered since then! 

A record high number of people (53%) 
<http://www.people-press.org/2013/12/03/public-sees-u-s-power-declining-as-support-for-global-engagement-slips/>
 believe that America is "less powerful and less important than it was ten 
years ago";the percentage of those who believe that America should "mind its 
own business internationally" (52%) 
<http://www.people-press.org/2013/12/03/public-sees-u-s-power-declining-as-support-for-global-engagement-slips/>
 is the highest it’s been in 50 years. And support for specific foreign 
interventions is as wobbly as the reasoning for undertaking them:only 25% 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/08/28/syria-poll_n_3832395.html> of 
Americans supported air strikes on Syria;just 14% approved 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/05/06/ukraine-intervention-poll_n_5267452.html>
 of a Nato-led military action in the Ukraine.

The existing members of the GOP leadership, whether visiting Romney's weekend 
retreat or a Sunday show set on their way to re-intervention, might well wonder 
where that reliably woozy patriotism has gone. Certainly, Republicans haven't 
developed a tolerance. They sniff the air and howl: "This is another 9/11 in 
the making," Lindsey Grahamsaid Sunday on CNN 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/livewire/graham-iraq-another-9-11>, three days 
after saying 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2014/06/john-mccain-iraq-criticize-barack-obama-107780.html?hp=r2>
 "we've got another Benghazi in the making here". House Armed Services 
Committee Chairman Buck McKeonblustered 
<http://armedservices.house.gov/index.cfm/press-releases?ContentRecord_id=D2B6162E-5043-4EA8-9791-5DE01C935F1B>
: "The White House has a history of 'considering all options' while choosing 
none."

Would that Bush have been so indecisive.

The mistake by Republicans – and it is one they make in all sorts of 
situations – is that they confuse a desire for small government and more 
individual freedom with a government that acts like an individual. They project 
onto government the desires and fears that animate a person; in the imagination 
of Republicans "the government" wants all kinds of things: your guns, for 
instance. And when Republicans have one of their own in the White House, it 
pleases them to think that he doesn't just represent the country butis the 
country.

Perhaps it is a function of having a president who is so radically (including, 
yes, racially) different from all the ones who came before that Americans seem 
comfortable with – or at least have accepted the fact of – some distance 
between who they are, who the president is, and that for which the country 
stands. It is most certainly a function of having seen so many lives lost, but 
the American people are comfortable with inaction. Barack Obama's foreign 
policy is less of a doctrine than a stance – guarded but cautious, careful but 
alert ... just like us.
 