
The White House has announced that is expanding public access to 
federally-funded research. The move was heralded as a "landmark" by open-access 
advocates.

A new directive issued on Friday states 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2013/02/22/expanding-public-access-results-federally-funded-research>
 that federal agencies which spend more than $100m in research and development 
must develop a way to make the results of such federally-funded research 
publicly available within one year of publication. This is similar to the 
National Institute of Health's policy, which requires its research to be 
publicly available a year after it is published.

"I think at the core of this executive order is a real understanding by the 
administration of the value of enhancing access to scientific information," 
said Kenneth Crews, director of Columbia University's copyright advisory office.

The government invests billions of dollars in research and Crews said the 
directive will have major benefits for researchers and regular citizens. "Most 
of the important research today in the US is the result of federal funding," he 
said. "The taxpayers definitely have an interest in having access to it."

Public support for open-access issues increased after the open-internet 
advocateAaron Swartz killed himself in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/12/aaron-swartz-hacking-reddit-dies>
. At the time of his death, Swartz was facing up to 35 years in prison and a 
$1m fine, for downloading academic journal articles from the JSTOR database.

Open-access advocates have campaigned for legislation for nearly a decade. 
FASTR, a bill that would require federal agencies to make research public 
within six months of the publication date, was reintroduced in Congress last 
week.

"We're happy to see the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> take some direct 
action to move it forward more quickly than would have been feasible had it 
moved through the congressional process," Crews said.

The White House said it has been looking into the issue for some time, and 
that an online petition on itsWe The People site 
<https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/require-free-access-over-internet-scientific-journal-articles-arising-taxpayer-funded-research/wDX82FLQ>
 was one of many factors that influenced the administration's decision.

A White House statement said 
<http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2013/02/22/expanding-public-access-results-federally-funded-research>
: "The final policy reflects substantial inputs from scientists and scientific 
organizations, publishers, members of Congress, and other members of the public 
â€“ over 65 thousand of whom recently signed a We the People petition asking for 
expanded public access to the results of taxpayer-funded research."

Nancy Sims, a copyright librarian at the University of Minnesota and a lawyer, 
has been hoping for a directive that applies to all federal agencies for 
several years. "This is definitely something that the University of Minnesota 
libraries, and I think a lot of research libraries, have been working towards 
for a long time and its great to see action at the White House level," she said.

She said the Swartz case had added momentum to the open-access campaign. "I 
think that made the research-access question of greater interest to people who 
would not have been paying attention otherwise and to some politically active 
people who would not have been paying attention otherwise," she said.

Heather Joseph, executive director of SPARC, a group that works to broaden 
public access to scholarly research,said in a statement 
<http://www.arl.org/sparc/media/sparc-applauds-white-house-for-landmark-directive-.shtml>
 that the directive was a "watershed moment".

"The directive will accelerate scientific discovery, improve education, and 
empower entrepreneurs to translate research into commercial ventures and jobs," 
Joseph said. "It's good for our nation, our economy, and our future."
 