
About three weeks ago, I left the United States for Europe for a spell, hoping 
to take a bit of a break from reporting on the horrors of American violence, 
mass gun deaths, racism and police killings. Right before I planned to go 
offline entirely, I got an email from one of my editors asking me a question 
along the lines of, “Can you write something onBaton Rouge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/protests-in-baton-rouge-after-louisiana-police-shoot-alton-sterling-dead>
,Black Lives Matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement> and the 
police shootings?”

Concerned that not taking my scheduled news break might harm my mental health, 
I declined and took my vacation as planned. Not that my travels were exactly 
free from news, however: I started out in post-Brexit England, days after the 
vote left my black, immigrant and Muslim friends feeling vulnerable. Then, I 
went on vacation to the south of France, where I spent Bastille Day at outdoor 
festivitiesnot exactly in the city of Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/lorry-rams-bastille-day-crowd-in-nice-killing-at-least-70>
, but not so far from it, either.

We must equally care about the children made into orphans when a cop kills 
their parent

This left me on edge, but what really disturbed me was when I landed back in 
New York City on Sunday and got an email from the very same editor asking me, 
once again, if I could write something on Baton Rouge, Black Lives Matter and 
the police shootings. There had been yetanother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jul/17/baton-rouge-police-officers-shooting-louisiana>
 police shooting in Louisiana, he explained – though this time towards the cops.

Nothing, it seemed, had changed in America at all in the few weeks I’d been 
away. Not a damn thing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fminnesota-police-shooting-black-man-shot-dead-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minnesota%20police%20shooting%3A%20the%20scene%20after%20a%20black%20man%20is%20shot%20dead%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fminnesota-police-shooting-black-man-shot-dead-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minnesota%20police%20shooting%3A%20the%20scene%20after%20a%20black%20man%20is%20shot%20dead%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fminnesota-police-shooting-black-man-shot-dead-video&media=>
Minnesota police shooting: the scene after a black man is shot dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/07/minnesota-police-shooting-black-man-shot-dead-video>
I had been out of the country as the anger regarding Alton Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/15/alton-sterling-funeral-fatal-police-shooting-black-lives-matter>
 andPhilando Castile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philando-castile-shooting> had risen, and 
that seemed to have changed nothing. Even the horrifying death of the latter on 
live video did not stop American police from killing abouttwo dozen more people 
since 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
. Will the violence police are facing themselves make them act more peacefully, 
or just lead to more violence?

Certainly nothing has changed with how president Barack Obama has approached 
police violence. While I waited in the passport control line, I found it 
jarring that Obama was on one TV greeting visitors to the US with a recorded 
welcome message; at the same time, he was on a CNN monitor just a few feet 
away, scaring the hell out of visitors as headdressed the latest American mass 
shooting and declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/17/baton-rouge-police-shooting-alton-sterling>
: “Attacks on police are an attack on all of us and the rule of law that makes 
society possible.”

What made me especially sad was that Obama won’t also say that attacks by the 
police on black people are also “an attack on all of us and on the rule of law 
that makes society possible”. He certainly doesn’t seem to have changed much on 
this over the course of his presidency. I was also out of the country during the
“beer summit” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/31/barack-obama-beer-summit> of 
2009, when Obama had Harvard professor Henry Louis Gates and the white cop 
who’d arrested him outside Gates’ own home to the White House for drinks. At 
the time I thought thisPR stunt 
<http://www.vcstar.com/opinion/gates-affair-as-witnessed-from-abroad-ep-371407588-350688691.html>
 was cheapening the serious issue of racial profiling by police.

But over the years, as Obama seems tortured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/25/obama-ferguson-prosecutor-politicians-protesters-get-it>
 whenever he has to talk about police violence, I began to think his failure to 
change how he thinks and talks about police violence is a disaster. He has no 
trouble condemning the killing of police officers, and eulogises the slain 
Dallas police officers even as he’snever done so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/14/barack-obama-us-racism-police-brutality-failed-victims>
 for victims of police killing across the nation.

Another deadly day in Baton Rouge. Will we heed the warning? | Barrett Holmes 
Pitner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/17/baton-rouge-deadly-race-guns-republican-convention>
Yet at the same time, when he’s confronted about police violence, Obama says 
things like, “Black folks and Latino folks also carry some assumptions.” In his 
recent town hall meeting, the president further went on toequivocate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/15/barack-obama-supports-both-protesters-and-police-in-questions-about-shootings>
 that, “You may see a police officer who’s doing everything right, and you 
already assumed the worst rather than the best in him, and we have to guard 
against that as well” – as if civilians wield the same power as police.

If we are to end this cycle of violence, we must cease this fiction that 
somehow the feelings of the oppressed or their protest tactics are the real 
problem and not that which they are protesting: the systematic killing of black 
people made manifest by police violence.

This has to change.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Fi-cant-breathe-eric-garner-chokehold-death-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716974828%2Fcrop_KP-47437_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20can't%20breathe'%3A%20Eric%20Garner%20put%20in%20chokehold%20by%20NYPD%20officer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Fi-cant-breathe-eric-garner-chokehold-death-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20can%27t%20breathe%27%3A%20Eric%20Garner%20put%20in%20chokehold%20by%20NYPD%20officer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F04%2Fi-cant-breathe-eric-garner-chokehold-death-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716974828%2Fcrop_KP-47437_640.jpeg>
‘I can’t breathe’: Eric Garner put in chokehold by NYPD officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2014/dec/04/i-cant-breathe-eric-garner-chokehold-death-video>
Similarly, we cannot only look at the children made into orphans 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation-now/2016/07/17/baton-rouge-victims-included-new-father-who-wondered-if-city-loves-me/87232438/>
 when their cop parent is killed: we must equally care about the children made 
into orphans when a cop kills their parent. I was reminded of this when I 
realised that Sunday also marked two years sinceEric Garner <http:> was 
subjected to a prohibited chokehold here in New York,said “I can’t breathe” 11 
times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2014/dec/04/i-cant-breathe-eric-garner-chokehold-death-video>
, and died byhomicide 
<http://time.com/3618279/eric-garner-chokehold-crime-staten-island-daniel-pantaleo/>
. Garner left behind six children and three grandchildren who have never seen 
justice – and we must care about them no less.

This has to change.

We also have done shamefully little to change the violent flow 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/evanmcsan/washington-bails-on-police-demilitarization?utm_term=.ol4zmW3lQ#.hrJ0VBbz2>
 of military war equipment to local police departments, nor havewe done anything
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/16/smith-wesson-gun-sales-boosted-profits-50-percent-mass-shootings-fear>
 to change the proliferation of guns into the hands of the American public.

This, too, has to change.

I was naive to think anything would change in the few weeks I was away. But if 
we don’t start urgently asking new, bigger questions, we are going to be stuck 
with the same stories of violence – happening within the same cities – until 
too few of us are even left alive to read or write about them.
 