
The Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> has warned the US 
will need to deal with a wave of “climate refugees” as the Arctic continues to 
warm, joining with the Canadian government to express alarm over how climate 
change is affecting indigenous communities.


Sally Jewell, US secretary of the interior, painted a stark picture of 
communities relocating and lives disrupted in her first official visit to 
Canada. The Arctic, which is warming attwice the rate of the global average 
<http://www.livescience.com/53111-arctic-warming-fast-in-2015.html>, has just 
recorded its lowest recorded peak ice extent after what’s beencalled a “warm, 
crazy winter” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/28/arctic-sea-ice-record-low-winter>
.

Obama declares disaster as Marshall Islands suffers worst-ever drought
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/28/obama-marshall-islands-drought> 
“We will have climate refugees,” Jewell said. “We have to figure out how to 
deal with potentially relocating villages. There’s real tangible support we 
need to do from a government basis, working alongside indigenous communities as 
they make very difficult choices about what is right for them.

“We can’t turn this around. We can stem the increase in temperature, we can 
stem some of the effect, perhaps, if we act on climate. But the changes are 
under way and they are very rapid.”

The escalating Arctic temperatures, diminishing ice and rising sea levels are 
having consequences for humans as well as other animalssuch as polar bears and 
walruses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/15/arctic-noaa-report-record-high-temperatures-diminishing-sea-ice>
. The ability to catch fish and travel – or even to hold thefamed Iditarod dog 
sled race in Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/24/iditarod-climate-change-sled-dogs-winter-alaska>
 – is at risk.

Jewell said the remote town of Kivalina in Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> is “washing away”. The coastal 
town, located around 80 miles above the Arctic circle, has been visited by 
Barack Obama following warnings its 400-strong population will have to be moved 
due to thinning ice that exposes the town to crashing waves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fclimate-change-refugees-arctic-obama-administration-warning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34cd27ed20ccfa7b09ed718ba473166c1665975f%2F0_34_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20administration%20warns%20of%20%E2%80%98climate%20refugees%E2%80%99%20due%20to%20rapid%20Arctic%20warming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fclimate-change-refugees-arctic-obama-administration-warning%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20administration%20warns%20of%20%E2%80%98climate%20refugees%E2%80%99%20due%20to%20rapid%20Arctic%20warming&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fclimate-change-refugees-arctic-obama-administration-warning%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34cd27ed20ccfa7b09ed718ba473166c1665975f%2F0_34_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The village of Kivalina, Alaska, seen from Air Force One, the president’s 
plane. Photograph: Jonathan Ernst/Reuters 
It’s a problem that is expected to be replicated elsewhere in Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/interactive/2013/may/14/alaska-villages-frontline-global-warming>
 and in Canada. Jewell said political leaders need to “act and support” efforts 
to make communities more resilient to climate change. US Republicans have, so 
far, opposed any funding to protect or relocate Alaskan towns.

“The changing climate isn’t just about melting permafrost, it’s having a huge 
impact upon cultures,” said Catherine McKenna, Canada’s environment minister, 
who met with Jewell in Quebec. “When your ice highway has gone, communities 
can’t interact. It’s having a huge impact upon food and food insecurity.”

McKenna said there is a “huge commitment to do more” from Obama and Justin 
Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister. The two leadersmet in Washington DC in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/10/us-canada-promise-lead-world-low-carbon-economy-obama-trudeau>
 to agree to help lead the world to a low-carbon economy and to bolster efforts 
to protect the Arctic and the people who live there.

Scientists expect the Arctic to be completely ice-free for at least a few days 
during the summer by the 2040s. The area of summer ice has shrunk by around 3m 
sq km since 1980.

The disappearance of this ice is set to open up new opportunities for shipping 
lanes through previously inaccessible areas, raising concerns over oil spills 
and further disruption to indigenous livelihoods.
 