
Barack Obama addressed on Saturday the sniper attack in Dallas that killed 
five officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/how-dallas-protest-shooting-night-unfolded>
 and its relationship to the broader movement against police violence, 
declaring: “We cannot let the actions of a few define all of us.”

Speaking from Warsaw, Obama added that the Dallas shooter was a “demented 
individual” who did not represent black Americans, any more than a white man who
killed nine black people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/18/what-happened-at-the-charleston-south-carolina-church-shooting>
 at a church in Charleston, South Carolina, last year represented white people.

It is the third time in as many days that the president has spoken from afar 
on the police shootings in Baton Rouge and Minneapolis, which have reignited 
protests across the country.

Dallas shooting deepens America's unhealed wounds of race and policing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/09/dallas-shooting-police-race-protests-obama>
“There is sorrow, there is anger, there is confusion” about how the US will 
move forward, Obama said. “But there’s unity in recognizing that this is not 
how we want our communities to operate. This is not who we want to be as 
Americans, and that serves as the basis for us being able to move forward in a 
constructive and positive way.”

During a peaceful Black Lives Matter march over the deaths of Alton Sterling 
and Philando Castile,a gunman, Micah Johnson, a 25-year-old black veteran, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jul/07/dallas-protest-police-shooting-live>
 began a vicious and planned attack on Dallas officers from an elevated 
position. In addition to the five killed, Johnson injured another seven 
officers and two civilians. On Friday police announced that, before he was 
killed, Johnson had said he was “upset about Black Lives Matter” and had 
expressed a desire to kill white officers.

“Americans of all races and all backgrounds are rightly outraged by the 
inexcusable attacks on police, whether it’s in Dallas or anyplace else,” Obama 
said at a press conference during a Nato summit.

“That includes protesters. It includes family members who have grave concerns 
about police conduct and they’ve said that this is unacceptable,” Obama added. 
“There’s no division there.”

Obama said he would visit Dallas “in a few days” to pay respects and mourn 
with the stricken Texas city.

The president also confirmed he planned to convene a White House meeting next 
week with police officers, community and civil rights activists and others to 
talk about next steps. He said the “empathy and understanding” that Americans 
have shown in responding to the events of the past few days, including among 
Dallas police officers as they came under attack, had given him hope.

“That’s the spirit that we all need to embrace. That’s the spirit that I want 
to build on,” Obama said.

It will not be the first time Obama has held such a gathering at the White 
House during his two terms, which have been marred by racially inflammatory 
incidents such as the killings of Trayvon Martin in Sanford, Florida, and Mike 
Brown in Ferguson, Missouri. Most recently, in February, the presidenthosted a 
meeting with leaders from multiple generations of civil rights activism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/18/black-lives-matter-meet-president-obama-white-house-justice-system>
 to address issues such as police brutality and criminal justice reform.

Obama also made it clear that he would continue to speak out about the need to 
tighten access to guns in the United States,steps the Republican-controlled 
Congress has refused to go along with. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/democrats-gun-control-vote-republicans-mental-health-bill-paul-ryan>

“I am going to keep on talking about the fact that we cannot eliminate all 
racial tension in our country overnight,” he said. “We are not going to be able 
to identify, ahead of time, and eliminate every madman or troubled individual 
who might want to do harm against innocent people. But we can make it harder 
for them to do so.”

 He added that the prevalence of guns in US society was one factor behind the 
violence, and the fact that there was a gun in the car contributed to the 
shooting of a black Minnesota man last week.

“In Minneapolis, we don’t know yet what happened, but we do know that there 
was a gun in the car that apparently was licensed but it caused, in some 
fashion, those tragic events,” the president told reporters.

“We can’t just ignore that and pretend that that’s somehow political,” he 
continued. “It is a contributing factor – not the sole factor – but a 
contributing factor to the broader tensions that arise between police and the 
communities where they serve.”
 