
A BBC interview with the French far-right presidential candidate, Marine Le Pen
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>, has been cleared by the 
media regulator over complaints that it was inappropriate and disrespectful to 
air it on Remembrance Sunday.

The interview, shown on BBC1’s The Andrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> Show on 13 November, prompted a 
small protest by an anti-racism group outside Broadcasting House in central 
London during the programme. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, briefly 
addressed the demonstration.


It also led to criticism on social media and 11 members of the public lodging 
complaints with the regulator,Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom>, 
that showing an interview with the Front National leader on Remembrance Sunday 
was disrespectful to those killed fighting against fascism.


Marr was forced to defend the interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/13/andrew-marr-defends-remembrance-sunday-marine-le-pen-interview-french-far-right-bbc>
, saying in the light ofTrump’s US presidential election victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/far-right-first-to-congratulate-donald-trump-on-historic-upset>
 and with Le Pen “under some circumstances” thepotential next French president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/year-of-electoral-tests-may-end-european-union-as-we-know-it>
, it was the right time to look at therise of radical rightwing politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/the-ruthlessly-effective-rebranding-of-europes-new-far-right>
.


“What does that mean?” he said. “In the end, we are a news programme and I 
don’t think that the best way to honour the fallen is to fail to report on the 
next big challenge to western security.”

The Andrew Marr Show (@MarrShow) 
.@AndrewMarr9 <https://twitter.com/AndrewMarr9>: Why I interviewed Marine Le 
Pen#marr <https://twitter.com/hashtag/marr?src=hash> https://t.co/cplBTZCHa8 
<https://t.co/cplBTZCHa8>
 <https://twitter.com/MarrShow/status/797738083726684160> November 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MarrShow/status/797738083726684160> 
On Monday, Ofcom said it had assessed the complaints against the broadcasting 
code (pdf) 
<https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0024/49308/Ofcom-broadcast-code-May-2016.pdf>
 to see if a full investigation into a potential breach of rules relating to 
harm and offence was warranted.


However, the regulator decided that given the context of world events and the 
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> challenging Le Pen’s views, there 
were no grounds to pursue a full investigation.


“We assessed 11 complaints that an interview with Marine Le Pen should not 
have featured in this programme on Remembrance Sunday,” an Ofcom spokesman 
said. “In our view, the interview included appropriate challenges to Marine Le 
Pen’s views and was justified by the context.”

 