
Global oil prices will remain under pressure this week after Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> said it was ready to add half a 
million barrels a day to crude exports just hours after international sanctions 
were lifted this weekend.

Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani, hailed a “glorious victory” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/sanctions-against-iran-to-be-lifted-after-compliance-with-nuclear-deal>
 as his country relished reconnecting to the global economy following the 
formal announcement late on Saturday that sanctions were ending thanks to moves 
by Tehran to scale back its nuclear programme.


Why the falling oil price may not lead to boom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/17/why-falling-oil-price-not-mean-global-economic-boom>
Iran returns to international oil markets with prices hovering near 12-year 
lows because of a supply glut and waning global demand as economic growth 
falters. The prospect of Iran flooding the market with more crude had already 
dented prices last week, pushingBrent crude below $30 a barrel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/17/oil-price-slump-true-cost-uk-economy>
.

Echoing Friday’s sell-off on commodity and global stock markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/15/us-stock-markets-fall-dow-oil-prices-china>
, shares in the Middle East tumbled on Sunday. Saudi Arabia’s Tadawul index was 
down more than 6% as the latest drop in crude prices intensified worries over 
the economic outlook for the major oil producer. In Egypt, shares extended last 
week’s losses on broader worries over emerging markets and the EGX 30 index was 
down 3%.

The lifting of sanctions includes an end to an EU embargo on imports of 
Iranian oil and on Sunday the country confirmed it was geared up to raise 
exports.

“With consideration to global market conditions and the surplus that exists, 
Iran is ready to raise its crude oil exports by 500,000 barrels a day,” the 
deputy oil minister, Amir Hossein Zamaninia, was quoted as saying by the Shana 
news agency.


But Rouhani also suggested the new era could reduce Iran’s dependence on oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/17/rouhani-targets-economic-boom-for-iran-as-he-hails-golden-nuclear-deal>
. He described the deal as a “turning point” and an opportunity for Iran’s 
economy to cut its “umbilical cord” to oil while prices were low.

Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> prices have almost halved in 
the last six months amid worries about oversupply and softening demand on the 
back of a weaker global economic outlook and a downturn in China, the world’s 
biggest energy user.

Analysts noted that the return of Iran to oil markets could have relatively 
little impact on prices over coming days given it was largely anticipated.

“Oil could stabilise as the lifting of Iran sanctions is surely now reflected 
in the low price and increasingly the focus will turn to the prospect of 
further cuts in non-Opec supply, particularly from the US,” said Caroline Bain 
and Julian Jessop at the consultancy CapitalEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>.

The ending of sanctions also means Iranian banks will soon re-establish links 
with the European financial system, and its businesses can trade with overseas 
partners.


The UK’s foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, highlighted the potential economic 
impact as he welcomed the nuclear deal with Iran and the lifting of sanctions.

“The UK has played a central role, and I hope British businesses seize the 
opportunities available to them through the phased lifting of sanctions on 
Iran. The future is as important as the landmark we’ve reached today,” Hammond 
said in astatement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/foreign-secretary-welcomes-implementation-of-nuclear-deal>
.

The French-listed aircraft maker Airbus also looks set for a significant boost 
from the sanctions ending. Iran said on Saturday that itplanned to buy 114 
civil aircraft from the company 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-iran-nuclear-airbus-group-idUKKCN0UU0W4>. A 
deal for 114 planes would be worth more than $10bn at catalogue prices, 
depending on the type of aircraft, news agency Reuters reported.
 