
A prominent Russian journalist has named thethree men he says nearly beat him 
to death in 2010, and said they had been charged.

In an article 
<http://kashin.guru/2015/09/07/tri-milliona-trista-ty-syach-rublej/> on his 
personal website, Oleg Kashin said Danila Vesyolov and Mikhail Kavtaskin were 
charged in June with attempted murder and with committing an “unfinished 
grievous crime” – allegations that carry up to a life sentence.

The attack they are accused of left Kashin in hospital with a broken jaw, 
fractured skull, broken leg and broken fingers, one of which later had to be 
amputated. None of his valuables were taken.

The authorities are searching for a third suspect, Vyacheslav Borisov, who is 
hiding in Belarus, wrote Kashin,who says <http://zona.media/agenda/kashin-guru/>
 he has seen case materials.

Russian journalist attacked with iron bar regains consciousness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/12/attacked-russian-journalist-regains-consciousness>
Although Russia’s main investigating authority has declined to confirm or deny 
information on the case, Kashin’s lawyers and the former editor of the 
Kommersant newspaper where he worked at the time of the attack have said the 
news of the charges is true. Investigators previously said they had suspects in 
the case,the newspaper Kommersant reported 
<http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/2804894>. 


In security camera footage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=l2X4J2arnYE> of the 
attack on 6 November 2010, a man with a bouquet of flowers stopped Kashin at 
the gate to his apartment complex in central Moscow and knocked him down. An 
alleged accomplice then beat the journalist more than 50 times with a steel rod.

The brutal assault was widely covered in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and eventually drew the attention of 
then-president Dmitry Medvedev, who said in 2011 he was taking the case under 
his personal control and would “tear off the head” of those responsible.

According to Kashin, although the men who allegedly carried out the crime had 
now been charged, no one has been accused of ordering the hit. In past cases, 
such as that of the murdered investigative journalistAnna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>, the trigger men were 
convicted but no mastermind was ever brought to justice.

Kashin claims the three suspects are employees of a factory in St Petersburg 
owned by Leninets, which is controlled by the family of the governor of Pskov 
province, Andrei Turchak. Kashin claimed the suspects told investigators that 
they had been paid 3.3m roubles (then about £60,000) to commit the crime.



Turchak has declined to comment on news of the murder charges.

How hallucinations of eccentric KGB psychic influence Russian policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/15/russia-kgb-psychic-oleg-kashin> 
Whether anyone would be punished for ordering the attack is a “political 
decision” that would be made at the highest levels of the Kremlin,Kashin told 
TV Rain 
<http://m.tvrain.ru/articles/peskov_delo_kashina_budet_dovedeno_do_kontsa-393903/>
.

One of Russia’s best-known journalists, Kashin made his name with acerbic 
coverage of both pro- and anti-Kremlin activists.

Kashin and others had originally suspected that members of a pro-Kremlin youth 
group, angered by his critical coverage, had carried out the attack in 2010, 
but on Monday the journalistsaid he was ready to personally apologise 
<http://lenta.ru/news/2015/09/07/kashinapologies/> to their leader. 
 