
At the age of 89, Dame Angela Lansbury picked up her first Olivier theatre 
award on Sunday night, winning for her portrayal of eccentric medium Madame 
Arcati in Noel Coward’s Blithe Spirit.

Lansbury won the best supporting actress prize at a ceremony which also 
brought particular success for theYoung Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/young-vic> and its pared-down production of 
A View From The Bridge; and the Hampstead theatre’s Kinks musical Sunny 
Afternoon.

There was a loud standing ovation of genuine warmth as Lansbury accepted the 
award for what was her first West End play in around 40 years.

She recalled her first London theatre role, a play which also starred Peggy 
Ashcroft. “I can’t remember the title … I can’t remember a lot of things these 
days, except I can remember my lines!

“I’m creeping up to 90 and feeling like a million dollars because I’m in 
London.”

Lansbury, best known for many as Jessica Fletcher in Murder She Wrote, has 
five Tony awards but this was her first Olivier.

A View From the Bridge, which ended its West End run on Saturday but may be 
heading to Broadway, won best revival, best director forIvo van Hove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ivo-van-hove>, and best actor for Mark 
Strong.

Olivier awards 2015: all the winners – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/apr/12/olivier-awards-2015-winners-in-pictures>
It is not a typical West End play: there is no set, no interval, no props, not 
even shoes on the actors but it has thrilled critics and audiences alike.

David Lan, the Young Vic’s artistic director said he hoped the play’s success 
would encourage the west end to stage “more adventurous work that is more 
truthful and deeper and more complex”.

Van Hove said the wins were totally unexpected. “I’m very happy that what is 
called avant-garde theatre has found such a great, big audience. That for me 
has been a mission. The public is ready for this, there is no doubt about it.”

Strong’s performance as Eddie Carbone, a Brooklyn docker with an unhealthy 
interest in his 17-year-old niece, won him the best actor award from a 
shortlist that also had James McAvoy, Tim Pigott-Smith andRichard Armitage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-armitage>.

Accepting the award, Strong said it showed the continuing relevance of live 
theatre. “What has been amazing is the young people who came to see it, they 
all wanted to talk about what they were seeing. A 12-year-old boy asked me what 
is the purpose of theatre – I’ve never been in a production people wanted to 
talk about more.”

Mike Bartlett won the award for best new play for King Charles III which began 
life at the Almeida before transferring to the Wyndhams. It travels to Broadway 
in autumn.

The Olivier awards 2015 red carpet – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/apr/12/olivier-awards-2015-red-carpet-dresses-in-pictures>
Afterwards he too spoke of the importance of the UK’s subsidised theatre 
sector. “Audiences in this country are craving new, they are craving 
experimental, they are craving things they have never seen before. In order to 
build those things we need subsidy because no-one knows if it will work.”

He said, on paper, no-one would have bought into his play. “It’s the sort of 
thing that would be on Channel 5, it can only be proven in a subsidised 
environment and we have got this brilliant mixed model that is the strength of 
British theatre.”

Bartlett ended the night a double winner after his play Bull, at the Young 
Vic’s theatre’s small Maria stage, won outstanding achievement in an affiliate 
theatre.

Sunny Afternoon gathered four awards: best new new musical, best actor for 
John Dagleish and best supporting actor for George Maguire. Ray Davies was 
given the award for outstanding achievement in music for the score.

Accepting the prize, Davies said it was people who were the source of his 
material. “So the next time you’re sitting in a park somewhere and you see 
someone like me looking at you … don’t phone the police, I’m just writing about 
you.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fview-from-the-bridge-scoops-three-olivier-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F12%2F1428856382384%2F08cf0e3d-fdda-4a52-b930-468003bb455c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olivier%20awards%202015%3A%20Angela%20Lansbury%20reigns%20while%20View%20from%20the%20Bridge%20wins%20three&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fview-from-the-bridge-scoops-three-olivier-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olivier%20awards%202015%3A%20Angela%20Lansbury%20reigns%20while%20View%20from%20the%20Bridge%20wins%20three&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fview-from-the-bridge-scoops-three-olivier-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F12%2F1428856382384%2F08cf0e3d-fdda-4a52-b930-468003bb455c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sunny Afternoon won awards for best new musical, best actor in a musical and 
best supporting actor in a musical, and Ray Davies was given the award for 
outstanding achievement in music for the score. Photograph: /Tristram Kenton 
Sunny Afternoon won ahead of Memphis and Beautiful which had headed the 
nominations with nine and eight respectively. Beautiful, based on the life and 
songs of Carole King, won Katie Brayben best actress in a musical and Lorna 
Want, who played songwriter Cynthia Weil, best supporting actress. Memphis won 
awards for choreography and set design.

Penelope Wilton was named best actress from a strong shortlist that included 
Gillian Anderson’s Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire; Kristin Scott 
Thomas’s Electra; and Imelda Staunton for Good People.

It was Wilton’s sixth nomination and first win, triumphing for her portrayal 
of a mother who stands up to the Nazis in Taken at Midnight. The Guardian’s 
Michael Billington was among the critics praising her performance writing: 
“Wilton increasingly reminds me of the great Peggy Ashcroft in her ability to 
convey moral authority without any ostentatious display of acting technique.”

Nathaniel Parker’s Henry VIII in the RSC production of Hilary Mantel’s Thomas 
Cromwell novels won him the best supporting actor award over David Calder, 
Richard Goulding and John Light.

One of the surprise West End hits of the last year has been The Play That Goes 
Wrong which began life in a room above a pub. The physical and silly comedy, 
about a polytechnic drama society ineptly staging a 1920s murder mystery, last 
week had its run extended to February 2016. It won best new comedy ahead of 
Handbagged and Shakespeare in Love.

The Donmar Warehouse <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/donmar-warehouse> 
production of the film noir celebrating City of Angels won two awards – best 
musical revival and best lighting.

Olivier awards 2015: who’s missing from the nominees?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/09/olivier-awards-2015-missing-nominees-ben-miles-ballyturk>
While it was a good night for smaller subsidised theatre, it was a terrible 
one for the biggest subsidised theatre. TheNational Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre> came away from the evening 
empty-handed after it gathered a meagre three nominations for the Imelda Marcos 
musical Here Lies Love.

In the opera awards, the troubled English National Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> had the biggest reason to be 
cheerful. The company has had a torrid year backstage with bitter infighting, 
resulting in the departure of its chairman and executive director, and being 
placed in special funding measures by Arts Council England.

On stage its productions are winning rave reviews and the opera director 
Richard Jones won the outstanding achievement in opera awards for three 
productions at the Coliseum. The Mastersingers of Nuremberg won best new opera 
production.

In dance, the best new dance production category was shared by Mats Ek’s 
Juliet and Romeo at Sadler’s Wells, and 32 Rue Vandenbranden by Peeping Tom at 
the Barbican.

There were two special award winners. Kevin Spacey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kevinspacey> received one from Dame Judi 
Dench in recognition of his 11 years as artistic director of the Old Vic.

Prima ballerina Sylvie Guillem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sylvie-guillem>, currently on her farewell 
tour, was given her special award by Sir Anthony Dowell.

The one award voted on by the public, for long-running musicals, went to 
Wicked.

Award organisers had promised a surprise ending to the ceremony. It came in 
the form of Spacey, removing his jacket to give a nightclub singer performance 
of Simon & Garfunkel’s Bridge Over Troubled Water.













 