
The Olympic Park’s Orbit tower is losing money and costing Londoners £10,000 a 
week, a senior Labour member of theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> assembly has said.

Len Duvall, member for Greenwich and Lewisham, claimed that 
<http://www.cityhalllabour.org/boris_olympic_orbit_tower_losing_10_000_a_week_as_visitor_numbers_fall_well_short_of_forecasts>
 the ArcelorMittal Orbit tower had lost £520,000 – or £10,000 a week – based on 
its2014/15 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/~/media/lldc/accounts/audited%20lldc%20statutory%20accounts%20201415.pdf>
 report, despite having forecast a profit of almost £1.2m in its business plan.

The attraction, however, has lost around half a million pounds after only 
124,000 people visited between April 2014 and March 2015, Duvall found in his 
analysis of costings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Folympic-parks-orbit-tower-costing-taxpayer-10000-a-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F20%2F1445360236946%2F9e3ecd37-1af5-4261-a7ec-9a12d2be7a30-1355x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympic%20Park's%20Orbit%20tower%20costing%20taxpayer%20%C2%A310%2C000%20a%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Folympic-parks-orbit-tower-costing-taxpayer-10000-a-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympic%20Park%27s%20Orbit%20tower%20costing%20taxpayer%20%C2%A310%2C000%20a%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Folympic-parks-orbit-tower-costing-taxpayer-10000-a-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F20%2F1445360236946%2F9e3ecd37-1af5-4261-a7ec-9a12d2be7a30-1355x2040.jpeg>
 Olympic Park’s ArcelorMittal Orbit tower during construction. Photograph: Alamy
Orbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/may/11/orbit-tower-drunken-party-animal>
, the UK’s tallest sculpture at 114.5 metres, and which has two observation 
platforms, was expected to generate a profit of almost £1.2m during its first 
12 months.

Annual forecasts for the sculpture, designed by Sir Anish Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kapoor>, have been cut from 350,000 
to 150,000 visitors.

The sculpture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sculpture>, which 
resembles a helter skelter, wascommissioned by mayor Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/mar/31/anish-kapoor-olympics-london-2012> 
in 2008 with £3.1m of taxpayers’ money invested in its construction.

The designers had compared their creation with the Tower of Babel, as painted 
by Pieter Bruegel the Elder – which depicted a tower spiralling towards heaven 
from a bulging base on Earth, built by humans who were united and monolingual.

Duvall, however, described it as a “Boris Johnson vanity project of towering 
proportions”. “Instead of paying back some of the three million [pounds] of 
taxpayer investment, the Orbit is actually losing £10,000 a week, an awful 
record even by Boris’s standards.

“The Olympics was meant to be a grand celebration of sport, not an excuse to 
build pointless monuments at vast taxpayer expense,” Duvall said.

He added: “When you look at the Mayor’s record on projects like this, it makes 
you wonder whether otherprojects like the garden bridg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/24/london-garden-bridge-project-in-jeopardy-amid-funding-row>
e are really as good a deal as he would have us believe.”

The London Legacy Development Corporation (LLDC), which oversees regeneration 
of the 2012 Games site, claims another 76,000 visitors have been to the 
installation since March this year.

“The ArcelorMittal Orbit was one of the standout successes of the 2012 Games 
and has seen almost 200,000 visitors since reopening in 2014, which is a 
tremendous achievement,” a spokesman said.

Visitors have abseiled from the top of the red sculpture, the spokesman said, 
while plans for the world’s longest and tallest tunnel slide were approved this 
summer, with construction expected to finish in 2016.


The LLDC had revised its estimate of visitor numbers down from its original 
forecast of 350,000 a year to 150,000, but said it was “constantly looking at 
ways to enhance the experience to attract more people”.
 