
Australia's sports minister has conceded she is likely to be forced to endure 
cheery humiliation at the hands of her British counterpart at the conclusion of 
the London 2012Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>, 
after losing a bet that her country would be placed above the host nation in 
the medal table.

Kate Lundy will wear a Team GB shirt and be made to row at Eton Dorney after 
losing a bet with Hugh Robertson, the minister for sport and the Olympics. 
Robertson, perhaps with a canny eye on likely media exposure, promised that if 
Australia won more medals thanTeam GB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/team-gb> he would play hockey inside 
Australia House, the Australian high commission in the Strand, London â€“ a 
significantly less exposed location than Eton Dorney.

Lundy may have felt her team stood a good chance of outstripping the home 
athletes, but with Team GB currently in third place in the medal table with 48 
medals and 22 golds while Australia only has 26 medals and five golds, it is 
not looking good for the minister.

"If Australia got more gold medals, then Hugh was going to put on a hockey 
T-shirt and dribble the ball around Australia House," she told ITV's Daybreak. 
"But if Britain gets more gold medals, I'm wearing the GB shirt and rowing a 
length at Eton Dorney. I have cheerfully conceded that I think I will be rowing 
this time around."

It has been a troubled performance for the uber-competitive Australian team, 
with Lundy describing her nation's performance at London 2012 as a shock. "I 
think a lot of Australians are looking at the result and saying 'Where are 
we?'. But can I say all credit to the British athletes who are having a 
fantastic Olympic Games."

Asked if it was the best-ever Games, Robertson said comparisons were not 
useful, before adding, inevitably: "I think London will reset the dial for 
Games to come."
 