
Casablanca used a flashing lighthouse, To Catch a Thief set off bursting 
fireworks, Gone with the Wind featured a disappearance behind an emphatically 
slammed door. What's going on off screen? Sex, of course.

Now we are less constricted. The era of Whitehouse-type sensibilities is long 
past. But as the newLovelace <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lovelace> film 
brings the controversy that surrounded Deep Throat – the film that made Linda 
Lovelace's name – to the screen, we're reminded that this was not always the 
case. What about all those films that operated under a censorship code or were 
bound by prevailing moral standards to be less explicit? How did they manage to 
do sex … without showing sex?

In the forties and fifties, the clue that a couple had done the deed was the 
post-coital cigarette. Think of the scene inDouble Indemnity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36162/double.indemnity> in which the 
calculating femme fatale Phyllis Dietrichson (Barbara Stanwick) and the venal 
insurance salesman Walter Neff (Fred McMurray) kiss passionately before the 
screen fades to black. The next scene sees Phyllis repairing her makeup while 
Neff lolls on a couch smoking. Cigarettes have become almost as unacceptable 
pre-watershed as sex in recent years and have been replaced by the 
coming-down-to-breakfast trope (a family film favourite). Often the couple 
appears in a towelled dressing gown – just in case we think they spent all 
night sleeping chastely side by side with their clothes on.

For those brought up on television of the fifties, a night of passionate 
chastity might not seem such an absurd proposition. After all, it used to 
contravene the television censorship code to show a married couple in the same 
bed. The American sitcom I Love Lucy had Lucy and her husband sleeping in twin 
beds. It took Lucy getting pregnant for the viewer to find out that they'd been 
living as anything other than brother and sister. The pregnancy trick was, of 
course, a favourite of Victorian sensation novelists. In East Lynne, Ellen Wood 
tells the story of one Lady Isabel Carlyle who leaves her handsome bourgeois 
husband for a sexy aristocrat. Could the sweet, innocent Isabel really have 
partaken in an adulterous liaison? Would she have even known how? Wood quickly 
dispels lingering doubts: Isabel has a baby. However, the baby is killed off 
almost as soon as it appears. Poor mite, it had served its sexual purpose. Had 
it stayed any longer it would have got in the way of the plot.
 The power of suggestion … Joe Wright's 2012 Anna Karenina is revealing in 
what it leaves out 
When done well, implied sex can be more revealing (in one sense at least) than 
shots of the act itself. Perhaps director Joe Wright overdoes it, but those 
fiercely pumping pistons in his 2012 film ofAnna Karenina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149093/anna-karenina> were the perfect 
substitute for scenes of Vronsky and Anna getting down to it, combining her 
sexual transgression and its suicidal result in one potent image. The BBC's 
1967 adaptation of the Forsyte Saga cuts away from Soames's imminent rape of 
Irene to the street outside. There an elderly and grotesque organ grinder 
cranks away while he rocks rythmically back and forth. What better way to 
convey the brutality of the assault? One of the most famous examples of sexual 
analogy appears in the 1951 film ofA Streetcar Named Desire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78196/streetcar.named.desire>, starring 
Vivien Leigh. Rather than show Stanley's rape of Blanche, we see Blanche's face 
reflected in a cracked mirror and then we see a street cleaner spurting water 
outside. The metaphors are too multidinous to explore here; needless to say, 
students of film love it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpDYhUKrGD7U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpDYhUKrGD7U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpDYhUKrGD7U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
If pumping pistons, jangling bells and fireworks are too subtle, why not spell 
it out to your audience? That's what the animators of the Lion King are 
rumoured to have done. In one night scene a swirl of dust in the skylooks 
suspiciously close to spelling out sex 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pDYhUKrGD7U>. Disney claims it spelled SFX. As 
if.

Implied off-screen sex makes the viewer a collaborator. It's a shared joke. A 
small cock-a-snook at censorship and prudery that is often more fun than 
showing the real thing.
 