
Born in Chicago in 1986, the musician and songwriter Ezra Furman 
<http://ezrafurman.com/> played in the four-piece indie band Ezra Furman and 
the Harpoons <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G0HvpwTS1xc> between 2006 and 
2011, before releasing his solo debut in 2012 with money raised onKickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/ezrafurman/be-a-part-of-the-new-ezra-furman-record-it-will-be>
. The release of his third solo album,Perpetual Motion People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/05/ezra-furman-perpetual-motion-people-review-outsider-not-acquired-taste>
, in 2015 brought him widespread critical acclaim and drew comparisons to the 
Velvet Underground and Jonathan Richman. Furman’s effervescent, melodic 
power-pop frequently addresses his depression, Jewishness and gender-fluid 
identity. He will release a new EP in the summer, will be performing at 
Glastonbury, and will tour the UK in October.

1 | Book


The Argonauts by Maggie Nelson
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/27/the-agronauts-maggie-nelson-observer-review>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff34750c865a7037c087683e6fa9501d13761f940%2F0_82_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Ezra%20Furman%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Ezra%20Furman%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff34750c865a7037c087683e6fa9501d13761f940%2F0_82_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘It doesn’t have to be a political betrayal to be domestic’: on Maggie 
Nelson’s Argonauts. Photograph: Deirdre O'Callaghan for the Guardian 
This is a memoir but also academic queer theory: it’s about a woman dating a 
trans man, and they’re trying to figure out if it’s OK that they want to settle 
down and have a child – are they joining “the other side”? It’s really 
emotional and personal. I think there’s a large worry in queer communities 
about imitating straight people, when queerness has its own identity and maybe 
can be a radical force that should be dismantling stuff that locks people into 
structures. But at the same time, everyone wants to be able to live their life, 
and it doesn’t have to be a political betrayal just to be domestic. And there’s 
something kind of misogynist about the way some of Maggie’s friends disdain 
motherhood. I may be somehow reacting to this, being off tour for a couple of 
months, at home with my significant other, tidying up, cooking – it’s like, “Am 
I still cool right now?”

2 | Band


Slang <https://slangatlanta.bandcamp.com/>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd987974e054dd109f67700b565f5dffa0245dc79%2F17_49_1235_741%2F1235.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Ezra%20Furman%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Ezra%20Furman%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd987974e054dd109f67700b565f5dffa0245dc79%2F17_49_1235_741%2F1235.jpg>
 ‘Terrifying and insane’: Atlanta’s Slang. 
Slang are from Atlanta, Georgia and they opened for us when we played there. 
They’re a four-piece rock’n’roll outfit, but the singer plays the character of 
a southern Baptist preacher, and it’s terrifying and insane and he writes 
amazing songs. When they were playing, Sam, my drummer, leaned over to me and 
said, “This might be the best band I have ever seen,” and I was like, “I know.” 
They have a self-titled album and every song is stunning. Nobody knows about 
this band and they’re incredible.

3 | Documentary


The Dog <https://vimeo.com/ondemand/thedogmovie>, directed by Allison Berg 
and Frank Keraudren

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9de6aebc004a5136f184164a49407aa6bb305b2%2F20_129_1361_1008%2F1361.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Ezra%20Furman%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Ezra%20Furman%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9de6aebc004a5136f184164a49407aa6bb305b2%2F20_129_1361_1008%2F1361.jpg>
 ‘He’s really into his own legend of being a gay outlaw’: The Dog by Allison 
Berg and Frank Keraudren. Photograph: Drafthouse Films 
This is the real-life story of the guy [John Wojtowicz 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Wojtowicz>] from the movie Dog Day Afternoon
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ne6KMHLTvik>, where Al Pacino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/nov/05/al-pacino-the-godfather-of-broadway-in-pictures>
 robs a bank to pay for his lover’s sex-change operation. The story and the 
real person are way more over the top than in the movie. It was one of the best 
documentaries I’ve seen. He’s a really compelling person: he’s out of touch 
with reality and is really into his own legend of robbing a bank and being a 
gay outlaw. When he got out of prison, his plan was to go to work at the bank 
he had robbed, as a security guard. He would show up there with a shirt that 
said, “I robbed this bank”, and sign autographs, and he was like, “I’m the guy! 
From the movie!” He did not get that job, unsurprisingly.

4 | Podcast


Sound Opinions <http://www.soundopinions.org/>


I listen to this a lot. It’s these two celebrated Chicago music critics and 
writers, Greg Kot and Jim DeRogatis. Part of it is just taking comfort in their 
Chicago accents. You’d think these two middle-aged nerdy white guys would not 
be into experimental music and a bunch of hip-hop and soul, but they’re totally 
adventurous in their listening. Like when Prince died: they don’t just give you 
the hits, they look at the stuff that people don’t usually talk about. When my 
debut record came out in 2007, we got our first bad review from one of those 
guys – and I like getting a bad review, that’s helpful to me. They kind of make 
me mad, but I’m still like, yeah, you know what, that could have been better.

5 | Web series


Horace and Pete <https://louisck.net/show/horace-and-pete>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cb91bcca1c7335c4c4fbded29d0be4164ca9216%2F66_0_1603_962%2F1603.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Ezra%20Furman%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20my%20radar%3A%20Ezra%20Furman%E2%80%99s%20cultural%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fon-my-radar-ezra-furman-cultural-highlights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cb91bcca1c7335c4c4fbded29d0be4164ca9216%2F66_0_1603_962%2F1603.jpg>
 ‘Incredible acting and writing’: Steve Buscemi, Louis CK and Edie Falco in 
Horace and Pete. 
I’m a big fan of Louis CK <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/louis-ck> 
– I think he’s a master of standup. He told the network, FX, doing his showLouie
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dd5-j_BbH4I> that he was going to go do 
something else. So, totally self-financed and without any approval from anyone, 
he made this 10-episode show,Horace and Pete, and released it on his website. 
It’s dramatic and there’s honestly not much comedy in it. I’ve seen six or 
seven episodes and it seems like a tragedy – horrible things happen. It’s 
exciting to see someone who’s popular and doing well take a left turn and do 
something that’s totally not what people like them for. It’s like theatre – 
there’s some incredible acting and writing. One of the episodes is a 45-minute 
conversation sitting at a table, and nothing else. It’s compelling storytelling.

6 | Blog


loveletterstorocknroll.com <https://loveletterstorocknroll.com/>


This is a pretty new blog. The idea is that it’s all positive reviews – anyone 
can write about anything related to rock’n’roll or pop music. I wrote a couple 
things for it. I really enjoy its approach as an outlet for gushing about 
music. I love it when people write rapturously about music they love. I like 
that it’s pure love letters – most of them are in the form of letters to the 
actual people who made the music, or to a record store, or to a piece of music 
equipment. I love obsessive fandom because I’m an obsessive fan who flips out 
over music.
 