
Born in Dublin in 1968, Aidan Gillen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aidan-gillen> made his professional acting 
debut in 1985, appearing in short films, TV series and plays. In 1999, he 
landed one of his best known roles as Stuart Alan Jones in the Channel 4 series
Queer as Folk, and in 2004-2008 he starred in the critically acclaimed TV drama 
The Wire. Gillen is currently playing Petyr "Littlefinger" Baelish in HBO's 
popularGame of Thrones. His most recent film, Calvary, a drama starring Brendan 
Gleeson as a provincial Irish priest, will be available on DVD, Blu-ray and 
download from tomorrow.

Film: Boyhood <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ys-mbHXyWX4> 
 Boyhood. Photograph: IFC Films/Everett/REX 
For anyone who doesn't know, this is a Texas-set drama about growing up and 
growing pains shot over 12 years with the same actors, some of whom start very 
young and who age on screen before our eyes. It's as much about the heartbreak 
of being a parent as that of growing up – and that without the moments of real 
connection between parents and children, siblings and friends, a lot of us 
would be lost. We don't know when or where these moments are going to come from 
and we make wrong turns and choices all along the way. Patricia Arquette as the 
mom who tries hard but keeps picking the wrong man is really good in this. It's 
ultimately uplifting but doesn't let on that it's necessarily an easy ride and 
all the more interesting for that. It's always been fascinating seeing kids 
grow up in dramas (eg AJ and Meadow inThe Sopranos or Arya and Sansa in Game of 
Thrones) but I've never seen so many years condensed into such a short 
time-space while still feeling there's lots of breathing space in the film. The 
fact that it's made byRichard Linklater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater> who's so good with actors, 
picture and soundtrack of course adds loads.

Book: The Bandini Quartet 
 The Bandini Quartet. 
A collection of, yes, four works by John Fante. Rereading this at the moment. 
Fante is the man who inspired Bukowski and it'd be hard not to see how great 
that influence is as Bukowski said: "Fante was my God." Anyway it was that 
comment by CB that led me to Fante who I prefer as a writer if I had to pick. 
The crab-shooting passage ofThe Road to Los Angeles will stay with me for ever 
andAsk the Dustcorrect, a doomed Los Angeles romance is just fantastic. Robert 
Towne directed afilm version of this 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yX_ugu2-mbc> a little while back. It's an 
admirable misfire but he did use the novel previously as a template for the LA 
of hisChinatown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3aifeXlnoqY> screenplay. The 
quartet also includesWait Until Spring, Bandini and Dreams of Bunker Hill.

Music: Sun Kil Moon <http://www.sunkilmoon.com/>
 Sun Kil Moon. Photograph: Taylor Hill/Getty Images 
I've been listening to a lot of Sun Kil Moon, aka Mark Kozelek – his last two 
are very good but particularlythe one with Desertshore 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_QpP2nc9R48>. There are also a few good tracks 
on Joseph Arthur's recentBallad of Boogie Christ, notably I Miss the Zoo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2F-SqOitvrc>" – a stream-of-consciousness 
paean to a wilder life, and Junkies and Limosuines. On the live front I saw the 
Jesus and Mary Chain last night. I have to say, it's rare nowadays I listen to 
an album from start to finish and it's a while since I bought an actual CD. 
Because everything is accessible now I'll listen to as much old stuff as new. 
So it's been Sandy Denny, tracks such asIt'll Take a Long Time 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=28zG4ZVgsQM> or Gene Clark or Gram Parsons or 
whoever.

Technology: 8mm Vintage camera 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/8mm-vintage-camera/id406541444?mt=8>
 8mm Vintage Camera 
I shoot all my video through this and it's so good, particularly with the 
1970s filter and shadowy edging. Very good for screencapping images from the 
movies then. If I'm travelling around I'll usually try to make some travelogue 
film edited and soundtracked in iMovie. It's mad that you can do all this on a 
phone. I like using all this gadgetry but my favourite thing with all the 
technology and phones etc is when you're somewhere far away from electricity 
and you run out of power, preferably for days, or weeks. That's the best.

Place: Curzon Soho <http://www.curzoncinemas.com/cinemas/soho/> cinema 
 The Curzon Soho. 
There's always something good on and I've seen many modern classics here over 
the years. An especially welcome escape on blistering summer days. And the 
locale is crammed with relevance – personal (loitering and imagining the area 
in 1958 for the stage and screen versions ofMojo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=832PPfEeFW8> in the 90s) and otherwise 
(writers, artists, trannies, actors, criminals, ghosts etc).

DVD: L'Atalante <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vzTN0YnKmOs>
 L'Atalante. 
I recently picked up Jean Vigo's dreamy 1934 story of a honeymoon couple 
heading to Paris on a barge. It's still startling and would have been way out 
on its own in 1934. Also included on the Artificial Eye DVD is his earlier short
Zéro de conduite which was banned for years in France. An anarchic tale of kids 
taking over a boarding school. You can see how much Truffaut picked up from 
here and it was a direct influence on the 60s Lindsay Anderson filmIf 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z9JL8Dae_yQ>. Vigo died young and L'Atalante 
was his only complete feature.
 