
Rosie (formerly known as Roadkill Rosie) was at the wheel, giving instructions 
in a cut-glass English accent that seemed at odds with her frontierswoman 
demeanour – and the fact she was gunning the 4x4 down a dirt track in the South 
Australia outback. We were racing to get back to camp before sunset; it was 
that dusky time when kangaroos start their day – and tend to cross the road 
without looking. Rosie told me to watch the bush flats on the left, and my 
safari companion, Teresa, to watch the right: "And if you see anything, shout 
'Roo!' "

That Roadkill nickname came not from squashing creatures on the highway, but 
from the way she would retrieve carcasses for use in her artworks. Her full 
name is Rosemary Woodford Ganf, and she's a noted wildlife artist (and now also 
a guide with Gawler Ranges Wilderness Safaris).

As a teenager in the West Country, she scouted locations for (and appeared in) 
the 1963 movieTom Jones <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0057590/> with Albert 
Finney; as a 21-year-old in Uganda she not only danced ("in a white 
mini-dress") withIdi Amin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2003/aug/18/guardianobituaries>, but agreed to 
paint his portrait: "One couldn't say no. And I also thought it best not to say 
I only did animals."

"Doing animals" barely covers her talent: she produced all 100-plus 
illustrations for the definitive book of Australia's wildlife,A Fragile 
Balance: The Extraordinary Story of Australian Marsupials 
<http://www.amazon.com/Fragile-Balance-Extraordinary-Australian-Marsupials/dp/0226146308>
. But one of her more unusual works is Kangaluna Camp, and in particular its 
"swagon", in which I slept for three unforgettable nights.

The swagon is a cross between a traditional swag (bedroll) and a wagon. Like 
Kangaluna itself, it's a cross-fertilisation of ideas from Rosie and her boss, 
Geoff Scholz, owner of the camp and director of Gawler Ranges WildernessSafaris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/safaris>, which specialisies in intimate 
encounters with the natural world.
 The swagon is the brainchild of Rosemary Woodford Ganf and Geoff Scholz 
Kangaluna sits on the wildly beautiful Eyre peninsula 
<http://http://uk.southaustralia.com/regions/eyre-peninsula.aspx>, west of 
Adelaide, just outside theGawler Ranges national park 
<http://www.environment.sa.gov.au/parks/Find_a_Park/Browse_by_region/Eyre_Peninsula/Gawler_Ranges_National_Park>
. It's the base for three- or four-day, small-group expeditions, and has three 
two-bedroom tents and one swagon. The tours can compare to an African safari, 
but the big five here are koalas, kangaroos, emus, wombats and eagles.

The camp is called Kangaluna – "a new Aboriginal word for bureaucracy" – 
because of the red tape Geoff had to face from local officials. But once it was 
established, in 2004, Geoff brought in Rosie. What might have been a basic 
tented site became something magical thanks to her touches, from bedcovers with 
images of wildlife, a dining table inlaid with a kangaroo portrait, and wombat 
hot-water bottle covers.

The swagon is a recent addition. Geoff said: "We'd had an increase in solo 
travellers, and they can get hit hard with single supplements.

"We had also had a number of people who wanted to try sleeping in a swag. But 
snakes are nocturnal, and scorpions can be a problem, so it's better not to be 
lying on the ground. Then I remembered seeing an old wagon in the bush …"

The wagon, made in 1902, was used for carting grain and hay until the 1940s. 
In its new incarnation, it offers a night under the stars as if you were 
sleeping rough – but a few feet off the ground and with a double mattress.

The genius of the swagon is that its cover can be peeled back as much or as 
little as you like. If you want the full sleeping-with-the-Milky-Way 
experience, you strip it right back. If it gets chilly, you can let it back 
down. Its rustic "bathroom" has a shower head appearing from the bough of a 
myall tree, and a towel rail made from an antique horse yoke.
 'Roo do you think you are? Kangeroos keep an eye on the safari tourists. 
Photograph: Nigel Summerley 
After long days on safari, I nodded off in the swagon watching the stars. 
I woke before dawn to see the silhouettes of eucalyptus trees against a pallid 
sky, then felt the approach of the sun, and heard the chorus of wrens, magpies 
and crows

This safari was filled with surprises and serendipity. We'd been warned that 
wombats are a rare sight. You see their burrows (like giant molehills) and 
their cube-shaped dung – but they emerge only at night to graze.Yet on our 
second day we passed one sunbathing outside its home. Lisa, our cool, calm 
guide, couldn't stop herself squealing with delight as she brought the 4x4 to a 
halt. Our wombat soon realised he'd been spotted and was down his burrow before 
our cameras were half-raised.

But on the six-mile drive through the grassy Nukey valley, our cameras barely 
stopped clicking. If small groups of kangaroos weren't stopping to check us 
out, mobs of emus were scuttling across the plains. We saw green flashes ofPort 
Lincoln parrots <http://www.avianweb.com/portlincolnparrots.html> among the 
trees, and silhouettes of wedge-tailed eagles with six-foot-plus wingspans.

At Mikkira Station <http://www.mikkirakoalas.com/>, home to the peninsula's 
only wild koalas, we stood in wonder beneath the trees as the creatures 
perfected the art of doing almost nothing. Apart from the long business of 
digesting leaves, the koalas' most energetic activity – be warned – is to hang 
their bottoms over a branch and defecate. And atBaird Bay 
<http://www.bairdbay.com/>, on the west coast, we had the trip-closing bonus of 
visiting a sea lion colony and swimming with dolphins.

An outback safari is as much about land as wildlife. Walking on water is not 
something I'm accustomed to, but atLake Gairdner 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lake_Gairdner> I took to it right away. This 
white expanse of salt flats, covered in an inch of water, is 100 miles long and 
up to 30 miles wide. And you're not just walking on the water; with the heavens 
reflected below, you also appear to be walking in the sky.
 Walking on salt flats at Lake Gairdner. Photograph: Nigel Summerley 
Lake Sturt offered views of rocks spread out in amalgams of red, purple, 
yellow and white, often decorated with mosaics of pebbles. The scene is as 
random as the surface of an alien planet, and as filled with startling images 
as a contemporary art gallery. Even Rosie agreed nothing could match the 
artistry of nature.

• The trip was provided by Wexas Travel (020 7838 5874, wexas.com 
<http://www.wexas.com/>) which has seven-night tailor-made tours with Gawler 
Ranges Wilderness Safaris (gawlerrangessafaris.com 
<http://www.gawlerrangessafaris.com/>) from £2,796pp, based on two sharing, 
including all flights, transfers, accommodation and some meals. More 
information fromsouthaustralia.com <http://southaustralia.com>
 