
I hate running. To me, it's always been the most pointless of the things that 
humans have co-opted from an evolutionary use (running away from that 
sabre-tooth tiger) into some bizarre leisure activity. I mean, why? If nothing 
else, running hurts like hell. Smacking the ground with a force around seven 
times your own body weight with every step can't be good for your knees, can 
it? And didn't I hear somewhere that long-distance running is really lonely?

Of course, it could be that I'm just scared. The first ever marathon runner, 
Pheidippides, ran 26 undulating miles from Marathon to Athens in 490BC to 
deliver the news that the Athenian army had defeated the Persians. Then he 
dropped dead with exhaustion.

Truth be told, I've never been any good at running. Any other form of exercise 
- whether it's cycling, swimming, rowing, walking or darts - I can and have 
enjoyed. But the last time I did any serious running was the enforced torture 
of games lessons at school.

My memories of long-distance runs at school mostly involve exploding away from 
the starting line in an attempt to get the damn thing over with as soon as 
possible and then doubling up with a stitch and gasping for breath a maximum of 
10 steps later. Crawling over the finish line in those days (last, of course) I 
remember thinking that, of all the things to do when I was a grown-up, running 
would probably never be one of them.

Obviously, none of this stops the thousands of people who don their hooded 
sweatshirts and pound the pavements and treadmills of Britain on a daily basis.

Running <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/running> friends of mine 
tell me that there's nothing like it for not only staying healthy but feeling 
good. The release of serotonin after a long run can get addictive, they tell me.

Until now, I have politely ignored what I've considered to be a frankly 
freakish side to their personalities. But, as a staunch believer in rash, 
bet-in-the-pub experimentation, I want to now confront my fear of running head 
on. Not by myself, mind. I want the very latest sports science know-how by my 
side.

We always hear about the latest physical, mental and nutritional science that 
the Paula Radcliffes, Dwain Chambers and Johnny Wilkinsons of this world rely 
on to get their edge, their ability to shave seconds off their personal bests 
and run, jump or kick their way to world records.

But forget the elite athletes of this world for just a second. What can the 
experts and their cutting-edge science do with a mere blubbery mortal like me? 
Could they turn a running-phobe into a marathon master?

"If someone is in reasonably good health and fitness, then I believe you could 
run them into a marathon in six months, yes," says Tom Cudmore, a sports 
scientist who is manager of the Human Performance Unit, a consultancy set up by 
the University of Essex department of biological sciences. Which is useful, 
because I have just under six months to go before the challenge I've set myself 
- taking part in next April's Flora London Marathon. It is the world's most 
popular running event, and among the 45,000 or so participants are a range of 
runners - from professional athletes to those whose primary goal is to mix the 
running with some walking and to raise money for worthy causes by dressing up 
as chickens or spacemen, and who just about want to make it around the course.

But my task is all about the running which, depressingly, isn't all that easy. 
"The aim should always be to get someone to run the entire distance. To be able 
to run the whole thing and not die after 20 miles, then you do need to work on 
that. You can't get away with just turning up on the day," says Cudmore.

Ideal marathon runners are skinny and use a very efficient running technique 
to maximise the use of oxygen in their bodies. These are things that enable 
them to endure the pain of a long-distance run.

I'm certainly not skinny and I really don't know how to run properly, never 
mind efficiently.

There lies the challenge for my sports scientists. I want them to tell me 
exactly what running shoes to wear, what food to eat and how long and how hard 
to train.

If that sounds like something that any half-decent gym instructor could do, I 
want to take it further and understand why I'm doing each technique. And I want 
to look into the genetics of human performance and find out what limits 
people's ability.

My own challenge is enshrined in seven words Cudmore warns me that all 
marathon runners need. "The ability to suffer for long periods," he says. 
Personally, I think I'm already a dab hand at the first four words. It's the 
last three I'll need to work on.

Â·  You can keep up to date with Alok's progress towards the London Marathon in 
fortnightly columns which will appear in Life and on this site
 