
Seconds before the start of the race, I was nervously sizing up the people 
around me. The youngest were in their teens, the oldest well past retirement. 
But age, as I was to discover, was no indicator of performance.

This was my first ever race - a 10km run in Regent's Park organised by the 
Mornington Chasers. My scientists needed to know how fit I was and they figured 
a 10K would be the best way to find out. They had explained, however, that I 
was almost certainly not ready and that I might not be able to finish.

Butterflies had kept me awake the night before so I decided to get there 
early. As a running newbie, I had no idea what people did before a race. So I 
just followed the others waiting next to the registration desk by the boating 
lake. I went to the toilet (twice), did a warmup run, smeared Vaseline on my 
lips and nipples, did some awkward stretching exercises and bluffed my way 
through some talk about race tactics. Then, I joined the back of the group of 
runners that had condensed behind the start line.

The first moments of the race were a blur but I remember clearly the clip-clop 
of hundreds of feet pounding the ground. It was unexpected, yet soothing. My 
training runs had been a silent, solitary activity. Being among a group all 
doing the same thing somehow calmed a little of the dread.

The first lap went surprisingly well if you ignore the fact that I was 
overtaken within the first few hundred metres by people running with their dogs 
and a woman pushing a pram. But the pain wasn't far away. About 5km in, my mind 
was posing some awkward questions: "You can see how uncomfortable all this is. 
Why don't you just sit down for a minute - look, there's a bench!"

By 6km, I had started walking. It was a dangerous, rookie mistake: restarting 
the run after even a short walk was torture. But my last 3km was dotted with 
little walks and I felt worse as I restarted each time.

The winner of the race managed the distance in 33 minutes and 42 seconds. My 
goal was to finish, but if I could do so in under an hour I'd be ecstatic. Less 
than 150m from the end, someone shouted out the time. I had a minute left. 
Everything left went into a frantic sprint to the finish. My time? 60min, 5sec.

Â· Alok is running the London marathon next year
 