
It has weathered storms of controversy over sexy adverts that bordered on porn 
and accusations that its flamboyant founder sexually harassed his young 
employees, but in the end money, not sex, has proved the undoing ofAmerican 
Apparel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel>. Unable to ride 
out a terminal collapse in sales the company warned this week it may go 
bankrupt within months.


American Apparel granted a restraining order against founder Dov Charney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/02/american-apparel-granted-restraining-order-dov-charney>
The clothes retailer known not just for its lurid marketing but also for 
making all of itsdisco shorts 
<http://store.americanapparel.net/the-disco-short_rsaah301>, hot pants and tank 
tops in the USA,warned investors this week 
<http://investors.americanapparel.net/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=927937> that 
it won’t have enough cash to “sustain operations for the next twelve months”. 
Which raises “substantial doubt that we may be able to continue as a going 
concern”.

Some analysts said it was ironic that American Apparel, which has grown to 
operate from 260 stores in 19 countries, had reached its nadir so soon after 
investors succeeded in their long-fought battle to oust founder Dov Charney 
from the company he has led since he first hit upon the idea in his Tufts 
University dorm room in 1989.

“After everything this company has been through, it could be all over by 
October,” said Howard Davidowitz, chief executive of retail consulting and 
investment banking firm Davidowitz & Associates. “Through all the sex, and the 
sex scandals they survived, but now the writing is really on the wall it comes 
down to economics if you can’t make money you won’t survive.”

American Apparel, which is based in downtown Los Angeles, where it makes most 
of its products, reported a $19.4m loss in the second quarter – its 10th 
consecutive quarterly loss – as sales dropped 17%.

Davidowitz said American Apparel has come back from the brink of collapse 
several times but the emergency cash injections had always been secured by the 
charismatic Charney.

“In the past, believe it or not, it has always been him that has secured the 
miracle rescue package,” Davidowitz said. “How he did it, I’ll never know, with 
all the things he did … I could never figure it out, but somehow he was able to 
pull the rabbit out of the hat. Without him I don’t think they will be able to 
do it.”

Charney, a 46-year-old Canadian, who had said he hoped American Apparel would 
become a heritage brand and would “live beyond my lifetime”, was sacked in 
December following an internal investigation into the latest in a string of 
sexual harassment allegations from employees and former staff.

The allegations, which included claims that he made an 18-year-old sales clerk 
his“sex slave” 
<http://nypost.com/2014/06/20/american-apparel-ceo-ouster-linked-to-sex-slave-case/>
, became so serious and numerous that the company could no longer afford to pay 
for legal insurance against more expected lawsuits against him.

Charney, who had conceded that he is his “own worst enemy”, is suing his 
former company for $100m in damages. American Apparel’s legal costs ran to 
$3.6m in the last quarter alone.

Under Charney, many of American Apparel’s problems came down to sex – either 
the sexual activities he was getting up to,including masturbating eight times 
in the presence of a female journalist 
<http://www.claudineko.com/storiesamericanapparel.html> profiling him and 
sending explicit texts to employees, or the sexual nature of its adverts. 
American Apparel ads have been banned in various countries, including the UK, 
for being offensive and for appearing to sexualise children.

Charney’s line has always been that: “Sex is inextricably linked to fashion 
and apparel. It has been and always will be. And our clothing is connected to 
our sexual expression.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fonce-sexy-american-apparel-looks-impotent-impending-doom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac56c6c480a471bb65b1a6343a7aa420b49f3ab7%2F0_179_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Once-sexy%20American%20Apparel%20looks%20impotent%20in%20face%20of%20impending%20doom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fonce-sexy-american-apparel-looks-impotent-impending-doom%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Once-sexy%20American%20Apparel%20looks%20impotent%20in%20face%20of%20impending%20doom&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fonce-sexy-american-apparel-looks-impotent-impending-doom%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac56c6c480a471bb65b1a6343a7aa420b49f3ab7%2F0_179_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 American Apparel’s founder, Dov Charney, was ousted as CEO after allegations 
of sexually inappropriate behaviour against him. Photograph: Bloomberg via 
Getty Images 
However, now that he’s gone, sex is off the table in the boardroom and its 
adverts. American Apparel’s new CEO, Paula Schneider, a veteran fashion 
executive, has banned sex in all its forms and vowed to“recast the brand in a 
positive, inclusive, socially inclusive light” 
<http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1336545/000110465915043837/a15-13700_1ex99d1.htm>
.

Nicky Baird, an analyst at Retail Systems Research, said being sexy was 
“originally very successful for American Apparel but then turned into something 
icky”.

“When the allegations that he was sexually inappropriate arose it turned 
something that was fun and exciting into something creepy,” she said.

Baird said it was good that American Apparel had cooled down the sex but 
warned that it was “a bit too little too late”. She said structural problems 
with the company were of a greater concern. “It is a company that has built 
itself on basics, when some of those basics moved into athleisure [the new term 
for athletic wear that is nice enough to wear to a bar even if you’ve got no 
intention of going to the gym],” Baird said.

She said American Apparel might have been able to survive the bad publicity 
surrounding its ads and its founder’s alleged inappropriate activities, if it 
had actually been able to keep up with consumers’ changing demands, but in the 
end it hasn’t done either. “There is definitely enough bad press about it,” she 
said. “Especially in an age of social media, it has a big impact – people on 
the street know about it.”

Rival brand Abercrombie & Fitch has also vowed to stop hiring topless male 
models in an attempt to improve its image and halt a decline in sales.

Does it mean sex no longer sells? “I’m not sure if you could universally say 
sex doesn’t sell any more,” Baird said. “[But] as soon as the brand loses that 
genuine claim to be something fresh and representing its customers, it has got 
to find something else to pitch itself as, and I’m not sure American Apparel 
has.”

Marshal Cohen, chief industry analyst at NPD Group, said American Apparel had 
lost the total trust of the consumer and building that back will be hard slog. 
But he said the company’s real problem has been taking its eye off the ball 
while it dealt with the fallout from Charney’s antics. “My biggest concern for 
the company is that a slew of competitors are ready to eat its lunch,” he said. 
“Before they were the leaders to go after, now they are playing catch-up.”
 