
At the recent Open Government Partnership summit in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/open-government-london-2013>
, Sierra Leone applied for membership and participating governments made fresh 
announcements, such as Tanzania's President Kikwete committing to enact a 
freedom of information law.

Nonetheless, the impression given by civil society is that a tremendous amount 
remains to be done to ensure that this framework contributes towards genuine 
improvements in service delivery and an actively engaged citizenry that feels 
listened to by its leaders.

In Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, few countries meet the 
eligibility criteria for joining the partnership, despite the bar being 
relatively low. For those that do, many are concerned that government promises 
lack ambition and wonder whether government commitment is genuine or if joining 
is merely a tick-box exercise to improve a country's international reputation. 
Furthermore, despite weak commitments, many countries are struggling to achieve 
their self-defined criteria.

Many representatives from African civil society believe that the new rhetoric 
around Pan-Africanism in the political sphere is likely to take priority over 
global initiatives. Many government representatives still view the OGP as a 
Western concept and seek frameworks that give Africa greater independence.

So what would real accountability look like? And what does real government 
participation actually mean?

First, there is a need to ensure that governments are releasing the right type 
of data in a timely manner, that the data are of high quality and are truly 
open, meaning that anyone is able to use, reuse and redistribute them. It is 
also important that datasets are machine-readable and inter-operable so that it 
is easy to compare data from different countries, sectors and sources.

Releasing top-level data such as national budgets is also usually insufficient 
to enable civil society to truly scrutinise governments' actions. William 
Perrin, of Indigo Trust, has proposed an accountability stack which outlines 
some of the critical data that all governments should be readily releasing at 
national, regional and local level.

Data must also be presented in a manner which is meaningful to the public. 
BudgIT in Nigeria is a fantastic case in point. It has developed infographics 
that enable the public to understand important issues surrounding Nigeria's 
budget, such as fuel subsidy payments, the police and oil revenue sharing.

It sounds obvious, but critical information also needs to reach citizens, many 
of whom aren't online. Traditional media, including community radio stations, 
have a role to play here and, crucially, initiatives using mobile phones – 
which are becoming ubiquitous globally – should be adopted. There's a thirst 
for this information in Africa, with a Nigerian constitution application having 
been downloaded 840,000 times.Walinet <http://www.walinet.org/> has also 
developed a hotline enabling citizens in Kenya to access critical information 
on water services via SMS.

Most importantly, civil society needs to be supported and strengthened so that 
it is able to utilise government information to demand improved services. 
Citizen reporting platforms now exist which enable citizens to report everyday 
challenges in service delivery via SMS from basic feature phones. Examples 
include initiatives in northern Uganda and Ghana, which enable citizens to 
report challenges in health service delivery.

Pilot initiatives in this space have highlighted challenges, including how to 
incentivise citizens to submit reports and, crucially, a need for committed 
government partners or civil society organisations to ensure that reported 
issues are actually tackled. Initiatives such asLungisa 
<http://www.lungisa.org/> in South Africa, which enables citizens in the 
impoverished Khayelitsha to report blocked drains and broken street lights, 
have been strengthened by genuine commitment from the city council to respond 
and engage.

Loren Treisman is executive director of the Indigo Trust 
<http://indigotrust.org.uk/>

• Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com. 

To get our articles on policy and leadership direct to your inbox, sign up to 
the Guardian Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> now. 

Looking for your next role? See our Guardian jobs site 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/> for senior executive jobs in government and 
politics 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>. 

• For the latest on public services leadership, follow us: @Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
 