
In an act of extraordinary bipartisanship, the Senate appropriations committee 
approvedalmost doubling 
<http://www.appropriations.senate.gov/news/majority/fy2017-labor-hhs-and-education-appropriations-bill-cleared-for-senate-consideration>
 funding to fight the opioid epidemic on Thursday, clearing the way for a full 
Senate vote.

The legislative branch is notable for how polarized it has become during the 
Obama administration, but Republicans and Democrats come together on opioid 
abuse prevention and treatment in a way that they haven’t for other issues 
arguably of equal importance, like Zika or the cancermoonshot 
<http://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/moonshot-cancer-initiative>. 
Congress passed theComprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act (Cara) 
<https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/524/text> this spring 
by an overwhelming majority and, last fall, under thelooming threat of HIV and 
hepatitis outbreaks <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1507252> fueled 
by injection drug abuse, lawmakers repealed the ban on federal funding for 
needle exchange programs.

Addictions are harder to kick when you're poor. Here's why | Maia Szalavitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/01/drug-addiction-income-inequality-impacts-recovery>
This rare consensus in addressing opioid use stems, I’d argue, from efforts to 
assuage angry, white, less educated, working-class Americans: the Donald Trump 
demographic.

Almost 90% of new heroin users <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24871348> 
in the past decade were white. Eighty percent of representatives and 94% of 
senatorsare white 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2015/01/05/the-new-congress-is-80-percent-white-80-percent-male-and-92-percent-christian/>
. As opioid abuse has become an overwhelmingly white problem, the country’s 
power-brokers have found it easier to empathize. Accordingly, our vocabulary 
has changed. Instead of talking about “dope fiends” and “junkies”, we now talk 
about substance abuse as a chronic medical illness.

It was easier to call for zero-tolerance policies and mandatory minimum 
sentences for drug-related infractions when these applied to marginalized 
inner-city residents. But as opioid addiction has moved into the mainstream, 
those touched by it have been more vocal in demanding compassionate solutions 
that go beyond warehousing people, instead helping them recover.

Republicans haven’t been similarly compassionate in re-evaluating drug laws on 
marijuana or crack cocaine, which come downharder on African Americans 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2013/06/04/the-blackwhite-marijuana-arrest-gap-in-nine-charts/?tid=a_inl>
 than whites. They don’t want to look soft on crime.

There are many theories about what led to the explosion and mainstreaming of 
opioid addiction 
<http://www.newyorker.com/currency-tag/who-is-responsible-for-the-pain-pill-epidemic>
 in this country: aggressive marketing of opioid pain pills by the 
pharmaceutical industry, inappropriate prescribing by clinicians or the 
widespread availability of cheap heroin.

But other factors include a shrinking middle class, loss of manufacturing and 
other decent-paying jobs and diminishing opportunities for social and economic 
advancement.

White Americans are self-medicating with opioids, trying to numb not just 
physical but also psychic pain. Racial stereotypes of blacks as drug addicts 
and dealers may have led some doctors to be less likely to prescribe opioids to 
black patients. And while black Americans, too, have suffered from economic 
trends, they didn’t feel the same violation of our social contract as have 
whites, who have been accustomed to upward mobility with each generation.


Trump supporters include the cross-section of America most affected by opioid 
abuse. While House and Senate Republicans have been advised by their party 
leadership to distance themselves from Trump and focus on keeping control of 
Congress, they must appeal to this constituency.

Vulnerable Republicans like Senator Rob Portman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XM8fw1mBAPY> of Ohio, Senator Pat Toomey of 
Pennsylvania and Senator Kelly Ayotte and Representative Frank Guinta, both of 
New Hampshire, are campaigning on the opioid abuse issue.

What opioid hysteria leaves out: most overdoses involve a mix of drugs | 
Chelsea Carmona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/jun/08/opioid-epidemic-drug-mix-overdose-death>
But even Portman, who has a long track record of sponsoring legislation to 
combat substance abuse, is vulnerable to attack on this issue. Though he 
advocated for inclusion of substance abuse treatment and prevention funding in 
the $1.1tn omnibus bill that Congress passed in December, his opponent, former 
Ohio governor Ted Strickland, has called him hypocritical forvoting against 
that very same bill 
<http://www.cleveland.com/open/index.ssf/2016/01/sen_rob_portman_touts_anti-heroin_measures_even_though_he_voted_against_their_funding.html>
. Portman and Ayotte, along with Illinois Republican senator Mark Kirk, crossed 
the aisle to support emergency funding earlier this year.

Even in states that will remain safely in the Republican column come November, 
there’s acknowledgement there needs to be a greater emphasis on drug abuse 
prevention and treatment. But where Republicans continue to fall short is in 
going beyond policy debates to actually funding programs that combat opioid 
abuse. Their electorate is tired of empty promises and will grow only more 
disaffected if they fail to green-light needed funding.
 