
Between the 1998 and 2013, the Baltimore Orioles spent a total of nine days in 
first place during the month of August. In 2014, they were tops in the American 
League East for all of its 31 days 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/BAL/2014-schedule-scores.shtml>, 
carrying that momentum straight through to Tuesday when they became AL East 
champs for the first time in 17 years afterbeating the Toronto Blue Jays 8-2 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_09_16_tormlb_balmlb_1&mode=recap_home&c_id=bal>
. Now the division flag flies over Charm City, a revitalized baseball town 
fired up for the impending postseason.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
Talk about character – the Orioles have it from the manager down. Buck 
Showalter kept B’more steady throughout. When they started the season without 
phenom Manny Machado andlost him again to a freakish August injury 
<http://www.camdenchat.com/2014/8/27/6075905/manny-machado-knee-injury-surgery-orioles-news>
. WhenAll-Star catcher Matt Wieters 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24590237/matt-wieters-to-undergo-season-ending-tommy-john-surgery>
 suffered a season-ending elbow injury. When Chris Davis was suspended for 25 
games (though he’sstill contributing in other ways 
<http://ftw.usatoday.com/2014/09/chris-davis-motorist>) after testing positive 
for amphetamines last week.Unheralded journeymen such as Steve Pearce 
<http://www.numberfire.com/mlb/news/3142/is-baltimore-s-steve-pearce-the-most-underrated-player-in-baseball>
 emerged, others such as Delmon Young, Nick Hundley and Caleb Joseph adequately 
filled vacated roles while Baltimore just continued to play, continued to win, 
continued to thrive on adversity, all while their long-time nemesis New York 
Yankees sank in the standings. Now they’ve made that big first step, and what 
seemed like an impossible dream for a franchise seemingly forever stuck in the 
mud is a fact – Baltimore are division champs once more,with a sizzling defense 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24703344/orioles-also-winning-with-defense>
, a no-name pitching corps and just enough offense. Despite their personnel 
issues, they’re a real threat to reach their first World Series since 1983, and 
can you imagine what it would be like if they played …


National pride

… the club 40 miles down the road, the Washington Nationals? Watching two 
teams embroiled in acomplex squabble 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/nationals-journal/wp/2014/09/04/nationals-orioles-to-meet-in-december-over-over-masn-dispute/>
 over television dollars and regional supremacy would be pretty damn good 
actually, and a blood-on-the-floor Beltway World Series came a lot closer to 
reality when the Nats beat the Atlanta Braves 3-0 Tuesday, clinching the 
National League East title.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
Washington looked a sunken outfit in late May, a shadow of the team that 
roared to the playoffs in 2012, much closer to the ballclub that stumbled a 
season later. Then someone flipped a switch and the Nats became a force,with 
rookie manager Matt Williams’ men 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2014/09/17/matt-williams-guided-the-nationals-to-the-nl-east-division-title/15757867/>
 taking over first place in June with three months of torrid play that shot 
them to their second division title in three seasons, something the franchise 
has never accomplished.

The Nationals have scored the second most runs in the NL, with Adam LaRoche, 
Jayson Werth and Anthony Rendon leading the offensive production. Now, after an 
injury-riddled, somewhat controversial campaign, one that featured selfishness, 
insubordination and a propensity to speak too much, Bryce Harper seems to be
finally allowing his bat to do the talking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/03/mlb-bryce-harper-washington-nationals-a-rod-yankees>
. He’s coming around, making slow and steady progress from a miserable June 
towards the postseason where he’ll have an opportunity to be that franchise 
player.

Meanwhile, Washington’s vaunted pitching staff has recovered from its 2013 
drop-off, putting together the best team ERA in the National League. Starters 
Stephen Strasburg, Doug Fister and Jordan Zimmermann have been filthy this 
month, and so have relievers Drew Storen, Aaron Barrett, Craig Stammen and Ross 
Detwiler, all of whom haven’t allowed a single run in a combined 19.1 innings 
pitched in September 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/team/stats/pitching/_/name/wsh/cat/gamesPlayed/order/true/split/45/washington-nationals>
, which is ridiculous. The arm-strong Nats match-up well with all comers and 
are a dangerous club heading into October.

Angels soar once more

Mike Scioscia must have felt good on Monday night, watching his Los Angeles 
Angels celebrate becoming thefirst team to clinch a playoff berth 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/angels/la-sp-angels-20140916-story.html> with an 
8-1 win over Seattle.

Since their last playoff appearance, in 2009, Scioscia had seen his team 
flounder and underperform, all while suffering through rumor after rumor about 
job securityor, more aptly, his lack of it 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/angels/la-sp-angels-elliott-20140915-column.html>
. Had he forgotten how to manage? Had Scioscia gone stale? Did his message run 
its course after 15 years? Well, if you’re in the camp thatbelieves managers do 
have an impact on performance, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/10/angels-all-star-break-yankees-tanaka-disabled-list>
 then the answer is officially a resounding no.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
Scioscias’ 2014 edition of the Halos surprised many by ripping through the AL 
en route to what will likely be the best record in baseball once the standings 
are sealed for the season. What happens in October is another story entirely, 
one yet to be written.

Regardless of what happens then, these Angels have already shown their grit – 
with scrappy starters including thebanged up Matt Shoemaker 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/sportsnow/la-sp-sn-angels-matt-shoemaker-injury-20140916-story.html>
, credited by Scioscia for saving their season, ensuring the group didn’t skip 
a beat afterlosing Garrett Richards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/22/mlb-angels-season-marred-injury-garrett-richards>
 to a devastating late-season injury. A remade relief core are holding down 
late leads with regularity and the AL’s best offense, one that has taken the 
bulk of the heat over the past two seasons, with the highly criticized mega
contracts to Albert Pujols 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/2014/09/15/albert-pujols-leaves-game-hamstring-injury/15701559/>
 and Josh Hamilton scrutinized again and again. Now they’re at the head of the 
class, propelled to the postseason off the back of their shining 
all-everything, Mike Trout.

Talk about bang for your buck – the All-Star center fielder led the AL’s best 
offense inalmost all aspects of production 
<http://www.rantsports.com/mlb/2014/09/15/los-angeles-angels-mike-trout-will-win-the-2014-al-mvp/>
 in what for him can be considered a down season, and all for the bargain 
basement price of $1m, considerably less than the dinged up duo of Pujols and 
Hamilton. Now Trout, who at 23 has a Rookie of the Year award and a pair of 
near-MVP seasons, is about to perform in the postseason for the first time, at 
a point where baseball badly needs a star who resonates outside the sport. Can 
he lead LA to theirfirst World Series title since 2002 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MOOe78Kdxrc> this fall?

NL wild-card update

The National League seems pretty straight forward. While the San Francisco 
Giants stillhave a shot to beat out the Los Angeles Dodgers 
<http://www.dailynews.com/sports/20140915/dodgers-can-zero-in-on-nl-west-title-after-avoiding-giants-disaster>
 for the NL West title, they are more likely to take the first first wild-card 
spot. That means that if the season ended today the Giants would host the 
second-place team, currently the Pittsburgh Pirates, in a one-game playoff. 
With two weeks left in the regular season, the Buccos hold a 1.5 game advantage
over the Milwaukee Brewers 
<http://www.twincities.com/sports/ci_26543485/milwaukee-brewers-final-12-games-against-division-foes>
, who are trying to pull out of a deep stall amounting to one of their most 
most morbid stretches of play sincethe franchise entered MLB back in 1969 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-d9u0MPRWv8E/TyOmpMD_msI/AAAAAAAADwc/BiKUh5YTyrQ/s1600/70pilotbaitpart2.jpg>
.

After a mind-numbing 1-12 stretch, they’ve won five of their last six games. 
The teams will begin a vital three-game set in the Steel Citystarting on Friday.
 <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/PIT/2014-schedule-scores.shtml> 

AL wild-card update

The American League playoff situation is far more complex. We know the Orioles 
in the east and the Angels in the west (most likely) are division champs. After 
that it gets messy.

The Detroit Tigers are desperately trying to hold off the Kansas City Royals, 
who are one game back in the AL Central Division race. Kansas City are bidding 
to win a first division flag since 1985 – they have suffered thelongest ongoing 
postseason drought in the sport 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Major_League_Baseball_franchise_postseason_droughts>
. The loser of that Midwestern brawl is part of a three-team mix with the 
Oakland A’s and the Seattle Mariners for two AL wild-card spots. So someone has 
to go, and as it stands at this very moment the situation is wide open. The 
Athletics occupy the first spot,KC the second 
<http://www.foxsports.com/kansas-city/story/thanks-to-seattle-s-schedule-royals-still-in-good-shape-for-wild-card-091514>
, both by slim margins with the Mariners a game behind the Royals. Key dates 
include the Tigers visiting the Royals for three games starting Friday.

Oakland seem to have the easiest schedule, with nine of their remaining 12 
games <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/OAK/2014-schedule-scores.shtml> 
coming against the injury riddled Texas Rangers and the Philadelphia Phillies, 
a team that these days ismostly known for the testicles 
<http://www.csnphilly.com/baseball-philadelphia-phillies/jonathan-papelbon-suspended-7-games-and-fined-mlb>
 of its (future ex?) closer, Jonathan Papelbon.
Your browser does not support iframes. 
Click here for the Major League Baseball standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/index.jsp?tcid=mm_mlb_standings>
 