
There’s a torture scene in Headlong theatre’s 1984 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/22/1984-review> that is predictably 
disgusting and shocking. Winston – before he even gets to room “one-oh-one” – 
has his fingernails sliced off, his teeth extracted. He spews blood and later 
slips in the blood. The audience isn’t spared.

The intimation of violence is there even before the pliers appear. When 
someone is placed bound on a chair with plastic sheeting on the ground, you 
know it cannot end well. In this atmosphere of dread, the plastic sheeting is 
more sinister than the pliers.

1984 – review
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/22/1984-review> 
Headlong’s production – running until 25 October at the Melbourne festival – 
is completely brilliant. It uses conceits that work better on the stage than on 
the page: lots of large video screens so that we – the audience – become Big 
Brother. Spying on moments of fleeting, dangerous tenderness between Julia and 
Winston only adds to our sense of voyeurism and complicity.

Yet the rats and the blood and the betrayal aside, the lingering, acrid 
aftertaste of Big Brother is political. It makes us reflect on our own 
government here in Australia.

Orwell’s story has always had an uncanny ability to be relevant to whatever 
politics is on foot in different parts of the world, at different moments in 
history. 1984 does not reflect politics – it’s politics that reflects 1984.

Sitting here in the Playhouse in Melbourne, it is like Orwell wrote the story 
just last year, giving it a polish perhaps in early 2015. It has to be about
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, doesn’t it? The setting 
could be Raqqa, with its bombed-out quarters, slum districts and ministry 
buildings with blacked-out windows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Forwells-nightmare-vision-of-1984-is-always-right-here-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1eafba0a8bcf5a384251d7c54cf52ba6c9ace0a%2F0_0_2078_1383%2F2078.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orwell's%20nightmare%20vision%20of%201984%20is%20always%20right%20here%2C%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Forwells-nightmare-vision-of-1984-is-always-right-here-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orwell%27s%20nightmare%20vision%20of%201984%20is%20always%20right%20here%2C%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Forwells-nightmare-vision-of-1984-is-always-right-here-right-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1eafba0a8bcf5a384251d7c54cf52ba6c9ace0a%2F0_0_2078_1383%2F2078.jpg>
 The pen or the pliers: Headlong Theatre’s 1984. Photograph: Manuel 
Harlan/Headlong 
It is all here on stage – the whole Isis apparatus: the thought and morality 
police, the state of constant combat to secure the fronts, the denial of all 
love (except for God and the leader), the dissident’s hopeless dreams of 
escape, the broadcast speeches and rallies, the dreadful public executions laid 
on as children’s entertainment, the Inner-party and constant surveillance.

But when Headlong were rehearsing it only last year, they were haunted by the 
revelations of Edward Snowden, the NSA and the trial of Chelsea Manning.

“There’s so much of the text that resonates in particular with today’s society 
and political climate,”said producer Robert Icke in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/07/new-theatre-production-orwell-1984-chillingly-relevant>
. “It is a text that has a fundamental anxiety about technology, but also about 
trust, that you can’t trust what you read, what you’re told, what you are told 
by the news.”

 Co-producer Duncan Macmillan even feared the state was listening in on his 
calls. “I got my entire email shut down at one point and one of the actors Tim 
Dutton was saying he started talking about something to do with NSA and GCHQ 
surveillance on the phone and the line went dead,” he told the Guardian.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Forwells-nightmare-vision-of-1984-is-always-right-here-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3b231380c85dd1b8c823a1a7000475c04864971%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orwell's%20nightmare%20vision%20of%201984%20is%20always%20right%20here%2C%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Forwells-nightmare-vision-of-1984-is-always-right-here-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orwell%27s%20nightmare%20vision%20of%201984%20is%20always%20right%20here%2C%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Forwells-nightmare-vision-of-1984-is-always-right-here-right-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3b231380c85dd1b8c823a1a7000475c04864971%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 US whistleblower Edward Snowden appearing via video link from Moscow. 
Photograph: Andrew Kelly/Reuters 
“Obviously it’s complete coincidence – well, hopefully it is – but we have got 
much more paranoid certainly.”

There are parallels with North Korea, too. The late Christopher Hitchens wrote 
in Slate 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/fighting_words/2005/05/worse_than_1984.html>
: “George Orwell’s 1984 was published at about the time that Kim Il-sung set up 
his system, and it really is as if he got hold of an early copy of the novel 
and used it as a blueprint.”

1984 is also about the Stasi, it’s about the communists, it’s about the 
Australian immigration and detention industrial complex, it’s about Facebook, 
it’s about Guantánamo Bay. As part of the festival, local writers read the book 
out loud in sections at the Victorian parliament on Saturday.

One of those readers, Graeme Simsion, author of the Rosie Project, commented: 
“Orwell could not have imagined the powers of surveillance he ascribed to the 
elite might one day be in the hands of marketers, busybodies and our quotidian 
enemies, and be deployed against the state as well as in its service.

“Today’s choices are, if anything, more complicated, but the image of Winston, 
broken by the exploitation of his private fears, should be in our minds when we 
make them.”

Europe must not mimic Australia's tough talk on asylum seekers | Ben Doherty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/10/europe-must-not-mimic-australias-tough-talk-on-asylum-seekers>
Orwell anticipated the future better than Brave New World author Aldous 
Huxley, said Erik Jensen, editor of the Saturday Paper.“Less sex, less soma. 
[Orwell] saw better than Huxley the power of language, the corrosive effect of 
an idiom stripped of meaning. This is a cruel legacy,” Jensen told Guardian 
Australia. Outside of Kafka, no single author’s name is so misused, he added.

“A press release can’t be drably specious without being Orwellian. When we 
call our immigration system Orwellian, for example, we paper over its obscene 
reality. We damn the system and hint at its cynicism, but we miss the blood of 
it: the way we take people’s hope, drive them mad with heat and deprivation and 
physical abuse. The phrase is too neat, too clinical, too useful. The word has 
become its own kind of Newspeak.”

A fellow Guardian writer remarked on immigration minister Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton> speaking on ABC Radio 
National this week, in which he described people in a Nauru camp as 
“transferees” (a name implying motion) for people indefinitely stuck in a camp. 
“It is Newspeak of the highest order,” he said.

 I thought of Isis when I saw 1984 on Friday night. But I also thought of 
Australia and how we have been speaking in this country for a long time now.

The 100 best novels: No 70 – Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell (1949)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/19/100-best-novels-1984-george-orwell-nineteen-eighty-four-robert-mccrum>
Orwell’s novel was always a love song to language. A central part of the 
political regime in 1984 was the removal of words to reduce their force and 
shrink our imagination. The more dehumanised the citizens of Orwell’s Oceania 
became, the more their vocabulary withered. Syme, the character in charge of 
updating the 11th edition of the regime’s dictionary, enthused: “Every year 
fewer and fewer words, and the range of consciousness always a little smaller.”

Since Paul Keating really 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/21/paul-keating-lets-rip-again-indigenous-recognition-could-make-australia-great>
, Australian political language has shrunk to “fewer and fewer words”. The last 
Labor government reduced its entire audience and constituency to one group – 
“working families” – and repeated the phrase ad nauseum until it became a 
meaningless drone (its more sinister implication being that if you weren’t 
“working” or in a traditional family set-up, you were an “unperson” who was not 
to be served by this government).

Then came “going forward”, “we are us”, “stop the boats”, “core- and non-core 
promises”.

Former speechwriter Don Watson wrote  
<http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2004/10/29/1099028198595.html>of this new 
political language in the post-Keating years: “This is language without 
possibility. It cannot convey humour, fancy, feelings, nuance or the varieties 
of experience. It is cut off and cuts us off from provenance – it has no past.”

Our last prime minister was so deficient in language – and so distrusting of 
it – he actually memorably ran out of words on occasion (when interviewed by 
Mark Riley over saying “shit happens” about the death of an Australian soldier).
The wordless interview <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wtTGFat6Xus> is beyond 
even the wildest dreams of Big Brother, who also favoured slogans of three 
words such as “freedom is slavery”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Forwells-nightmare-vision-of-1984-is-always-right-here-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F394b5da829ba939472e2ff5eaf843a6d1dcefabc%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Orwell's%20nightmare%20vision%20of%201984%20is%20always%20right%20here%2C%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Forwells-nightmare-vision-of-1984-is-always-right-here-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Orwell%27s%20nightmare%20vision%20of%201984%20is%20always%20right%20here%2C%20right%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Forwells-nightmare-vision-of-1984-is-always-right-here-right-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F394b5da829ba939472e2ff5eaf843a6d1dcefabc%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
 ‘Stop the Boats = Go Die Somewhere Else’: protesters at an End All Detention 
march in Sydney in October 2015. Photograph: Richard Milnes/Demotix/Corbis 
Funny that the collective feeling about Malcolm Turnbull’s leadership is some 
degree of relief that we may now get to add more words to our national 
conversation. And with more words come more nuanced and sophisticated ideas. At 
least that was Orwell’s great hope for language.

After Turnbull was elected by the party room, one Liberal frontbencher told 
reporter Samantha Maiden 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/opinion/samantha-maiden-malcolm-turnbull-is-a-primal-force-of-nature/story-fni0cwl5-1227535262030?sv=f6802f0cfc1fa9363841096cbb45646c>
: “It feels like we are now able to speak in full sentences and have ideas … 
It’s very exciting.’’

We shall see. No doubt next time 1984 tours Australia we will have a new set 
of anxieties and issues that are drawn out – yet again – by Orwell.

• 1984 <https://www.festival.melbourne/events/1984/> is at the Arts Centre 
Melbourne as part of Melbourne festival until 25 October
 