Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FA9Wlp1sTnoY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FA9Wlp1sTnoY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FA9Wlp1sTnoY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The International Paralympic Committee has revealed that Oscar Pistorius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius> expressed concerns over the 
blade length of another athlete weeks before he was beaten in dramatic 
circumstances by the Brazilian Alan Oliveira in the T43/44 200m final.

The IPC communications director, Craig Spence, said Pistorius had phoned him 
when he was having dinner with his parents to express concerns over one 
particular athlete, who was not named.

Spence said the claims were investigated but that the athlete was found to be 
within the rules. He said the point was raised again two weeks ago by 
Pistorius's representatives and the IPC suspected it might come up during the 
Games.

Immediately after the final, Pistorius said Oliveira and Blake Leeper, the 
American bronze medallist, were racing on blades that were "unfair" because 
they added four inches to their height. He claimed they were recording 
"ridiculous" times.

He later apologised for the timing of his comments but not the content and the 
IPC agreed to meet him to discuss his concerns.

"He shared his views. He was very emotional. We agreed we would take his 
comments away and raise his concerns in a less hostile environment. The 
cauldron of the Olympic Stadium was not the place to go into the rules and 
regulations," said Spence.

The IPC has confirmed that the blades of all eight athletes were within the 
legal length, according to a formula that estimates the height of the athlete 
and adds 3.5% to allow for the fact that they run on their toes rather than 
their heels.

"We measured all eight athletes in the call room prior to the race. All eight 
were legitimate to race. The measurement is based to proportionality of the 
body. Clearly, we don't want athletes running on stilts. There are rules in 
place regarding the prosthesis size," said Spence.

The IPC said it would look into whether there should be a change in the rules 
so that athletes had to race on the same height of blades consistently. It has 
been suggested that Oliveira changed the height of his blades between the 
semi-final and final â€“ something he denied after the race.

"We will listen to Oscar's questions on whether variation in that height is 
something we need to look upon. At the moment, the rules go with the maximum 
allowed height. When these formulas were developed they were discussed with 
athletes and coaches and feedback collected," said Spence.

He denied Pistorius was a special case in light of his high profile and said 
the IPC had a good relationship with all of its athletes.

"Oscar phoned me six or seven weeks ago to express concerns about one athlete 
and his blade length. We replied within five hours and said the athlete in 
question was within the regulations," he said.

Spence added: "The original conversation he had with me six weeks ago was 
about the blade length of one particular athlete. Last night, whether he was 
questioning the formula we don't know."

The IPC's medical and scientific director, Peter van de Vliet, conceded that 
harmonising rules across disabled and non-disabled sport was difficult.

Pistorius runs on blades that are shorter than the maximum allowable height 
under IPC rules, because he must run on a specific set that have been approved 
by the International Association ofAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federations (IAAF) for use in 
non-disabled competition including the Olympics.

The South African waged a legal battle with the IAAF to be able to compete 
alongside able-bodied athletes after proving the blades gave him no additional 
advantage.

"Ultimately, we have two governing bodies involved and it becomes quite a 
challenge to harmonise rules in this regard. We do have our own technical rules 
that are independent of other governing bodies," said Van de Vliet.

Spence said it was good for Paralympic sport to see rivals emerging to 
challenge the supremacy of Pistorius, who had not lost a 200m race in nine 
years. He said it would be unfortunate if the row overshadowed Oliveira's 
victory.

"Alan has not just come out of nowhere and won Paralympic gold. He won bronze 
in the 100m at the world championships and was very competitive in the 200m. He 
is a good and strong athlete. He has not come out of nowhere and surprised us," 
he said.
 