
Oscar Pistorius came second in the T44 200m. So what's his problem?

The South African has been worried about the length of his rivals' prostheses 
for some time. Six weeks before the Paralympics began, he took the unusual step 
ofpersonally phoning the IPC's director of communications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/03/oscar-pistorius-blade-length-ipc>
, Craig Spence, to report rumours that a particular competitor was running with 
illegally long prosthetic limbs. The IPC investigated the runner in question – 
who was not Alan Oliveira, the 20-year-old Brazilian who stunned Pistorius to 
win gold in the 200m – and assured Pistorius that his rival was not flouting 
the IPC's regulations. The IPC says it believed that was the end of Pistorius's 
complaint but shortly before the Paralympics began, one of Pistorius's PR team 
warned the IPC that the South African would go public with his unease over the 
prosthesis rules during the Games. Oliveira's blades are legal, according to 
the IPC – but the Brazilianhad them lengthened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/03/alan-oliveira-taller-blades-pistorius>
 recently.

What are the IPC's regulations for prostheses and blades?

Prostheses are "adaptive equipment" according to Peter Van de Vliet, the IPC's 
medical and scientific director: they are designed to restore a loss of 
function, not artificially enhance body length or performance. Asits rules 
<http://www.paralympic.org/sites/default/files/document/120831090842500_2011_2012_IPC_Athletics_%2BRules_Regulations_updated_Mar%2B2012_0.pdf>
 make clear, the IPC is committed to preventing the use of prostheses that lead 
to an "unrealistic enhancement of stride length".

How does the IPC calculate the acceptable lengths of prosthetic legs and feet?

Since 2007, the IPC has used a formula to calculate the permitted length of 
prostheses for its athletes. For double amputees such as Pistorius and 
Oliveira, this is based on measuring each athlete's body and arm span, and 
using this data to estimate their overall height if they had legs. Athletes are 
allowed prosthetic limbs and feet that make them up to 3.5% taller than their 
estimated height including the blade at the end of their prosthesis. Many 
able-bodied athletes are unusually long-limbed and this margin allows for 
natural variations in body types as well as the fact that athletes stand taller 
– on their toes – when they run.

Is this formula controversial?

Not until this week. According to Van de Vliet, athletes are routinely 
measured to check they are within the regulations, and to his knowledge there 
has never been a complaint about the current system.

How do Pistorius and Oliveira match up?

Pistorius runs at 1845mm (just over 6ft) but could under the IPC rules extend 
his prosthesis so he would stand 1935mm tall. For all the controversy over 
Oliveira's apparently height-enhancing prostheses, the Brazilian is not pushing 
at the upper limit of the IPC's rules. He now runs at 1810mm but could still 
extend to 1845mm under the IPC's formula.

Pistorius has stuck with the 'Cheetah' blades he is familiar with. Is he now 
at a disadvantage because of a sudden leap in prosthetic technology?

Both Pistorius and Oliveira use blades made by the same manufacturer, Ossur 
<http://www.ossur.co.uk/>. Athletes can use prostheses made by any manufacturer 
but Van de Vliet says there has not been any recent technological revolution. 
Pistorius has stuck with his blades because he has declared he is happy with 
them but also because he fought so hard to get them approved by the
International Association of Athletics Federations 
<http://www.iaaf.org/mini/oly12/index.aspx>. If he switched blades for the 
Paralympics, he would be open to accusations that he believes that they can, in 
fact, confer a physical advantage.

What advantage could a runner gain from longer prostheses?

Pistorius has claimed that Oliveira's extended prostheses gave him longer 
stride lengths and helped him record "ridiculous" times – and beat the South 
African in the 200m. According toone blogger's count 
<http://www.sportsscientists.com/2012/09/oscar-pistorius-counting-strides-as.html>
, however, Pistorius took 92 steps in the race to Oliveira's 98 steps. Of 
course, Oliveira's stride may well now be longer than it was before he extended 
his Ossur running feet but his victory was not built on a longer stride length 
than Pistorius's.

Do longer prostheses make athletes quicker?

They can, by increasingly the stride length, but it is not as simple as that. 
Shorter prosthetics can, in theory, also give a runner an advantage over 
longer-limbed rivals: making him or her quicker out of the blocks at the start. 
The IPC agrees that more research is needed on the impact of different 
protheses over the duration of a race and has already agreed to meet Pistorius 
and discuss his concerns. Its formula for prothesis length may well be changed 
before Oliveira can defend his 200m title in his home country in 2016. The 
battle over the blades is far from over.
 