
Steve McQueen is on course to become the first black winner of the best 
director Oscar after the nominations for the 86th Academy awards were announced 
yesterday. His universally acclaimed drama12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156376/12-years-a-slave> picked up nine 
nominations in total, including best actor for Chiwetel Ejiofor, but was pipped 
in the race for total nominations byAmerican Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle>, the 70s-set 
con caper directed by David O Russell, andGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156058/gravity>, Alfonso Cuarón's space 
walk thriller, which both scored 10.

McQueen is already only the third black director to even receive a nomination, 
after John Singleton with Boyz 'n the Hood (1992) and Lee Daniels withPrecious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/130015/precious> (2009), and, if 
victorious, would also be the only winner of the Turner prize for visual arts 
(which he was awarded in 1999) and an Oscar.

Acclaim for McQueen's achievement was immediately forthcoming. Tessa Ross, 
controller of film and drama at Channel 4, who were early backers of 12 Years a 
Slave said: "This is a very exciting day – Steve is already acclaimed as one of 
the worlds' leading contemporary visual artists and is now being recognised as 
a truly visionary feature film-maker on the international stage."

12 Years a Slave remains odds on to win the best picture Academy award; 
however, it by no means has a clear run to Oscar night triumph. American 
Hustle, which took home three Golden Globe awards last weekend to Slave's one, 
has achieved more nominations, including in all four acting categories, with 
Amy Adams and Christian Bale up for best actress and actor, and Bradley Cooper 
and Jennifer Lawrence for best supporting. This represents a remarkable success 
for Russell, who pulled off the same four-way feat last year with his romantic 
comedySilver Linings Playbook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148764/silver-linings-playbook>.

12 Years a Slave has also been edged out by the blockbuster Gravity, whose 
$615m (£375m) worldwide box office makes it one of those unusual films that 
appeal to both mass audences and Oscar voters. Unsurprisingly, Gravity's 
pioneering 3D visuals has seen it clean up in nominations for the technical 
categories, including best cinematography, best visual effects, and best 
editing, but it also scored nods for Sandra Bullock for best actress andAlfonso 
Cuarón <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfonso-cuaron> for best director.

These three films form the headline act, but just below them Captain Phillips, 
the Tom Hanks-starring piracy drama, and Dallas Buyers Club, the Aids 
medication drama featuring Matthew McConaughey, put in unexpected shows of 
strength. Though not achieving nominations for either Hanks or director Paul 
Greengrass,Captain Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154515/captain-phillips> still managed 
six nods, led by the hitherto unknown Somalian-born Barkhad Abadi, in the best 
supporting actor category.

Six nominations also came the way of Dallas Buyers Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156634/dallas-buyers-club>, which had 
put in a strong showing at the Golden Globes, winning best actor (drama) for 
McConaughey and best supporting actor for Jared Leto, who were both nominated 
in the same categories here. Leto told the Guardian: "I'm very pleased, I was 
on jury duty yesterday, and to wake up to this ... I knew it was special the 
moment I got the script. You feel lucky to get an honour like this – not for 
myself, but because it shines a light on these kind of difficult, challenging 
films, and hopefully leads to more getting made."

Philomena <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156219/philomena>, the 
forced-adoption comedy-drama, was the main British hope, and it took four 
nominations, including best picture, best actress for Judi Dench, and best 
adapted screenplay for Steve Coogan and Jeff Pope. Dench said: "This is just 
the loveliest news. I'm so happy for everybody involved, and so proud to have 
been part of [a] wonderful experience." Christine Langan, head of BBC Films and 
one of Philomena's principal backers said: "The recognition … is a thrilling 
testament to Philomena's amazing story and the film-makers' ingenuity and 
humanity in the telling of it."

The Oscars also have retained their capacity to surprise. There were a number 
of big name omissions, including Hanks for both his talked-up roles this year 
in Captain Phillips andSaving Mr Banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156373/saving-mr-banks>, as well as 
Robert Redford as a lone yachtsman inAll Is Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155232/all-is-lost>, Emma Thompson as 
crotchety author PL Travers in Saving Mr Banks, and Joaquin Phoenix in Spike 
Jonze's oddball love storyHer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156796/her>. The Coen brothers' Cannes 
prize-winnerInside Llewyn Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154516/inside-llewyn-davis> only 
managed two minor nominations, while the popular British car race movieRush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156181/rush> was ignored entirely. On 
the other hand,Jackass Presents: Bad Grandpa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/157953/jackass-presents> was deemed 
worthy of a nod for best hair and makeup.

More pertinently, this year also marks the first Oscar nomination for British 
actor Sally Hawkins for her supporting role inBlue Jasmine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155586/blue-jasmine>, while Bruce Dern, 
nominated for best actor forNebraska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155224/nebraska>, last troubled the 
Oscar voters in 1979 for the Hal Ashby-directed Vietnam vet drama Coming Home. 
And while Harvey Weinstein's capacity as a supreme Oscar campaigner has 
questioned, he still managed to get Hong Kong martial arts epicThe Grandmaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146655/grandmaster>, directed by Wong 
Kar-wai, two entirely unpredicted nominations, for best cinematography and 
costume design.

The Academy award ceremony takes place in Los Angeles on 2 March.

• Peter Bradshaw: 12 Years a Slave must clean up. But that doesn't mean it will
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscars-2014-12-years-a-slave>
• News: Gravity and Hustle on 10, Slave on nine
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscar-nominations-2014-12-years-a-slave-gravity>
• Gallery: nominees by nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2014/jan/16/oscars-2014-nominations-in-pictures>
• Liveblog: as it happened
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jan/16/oscars-nominations-2014-liveblog-academy-awards>
• Full list of nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscars-2014-academy-awards-nominations-full-list>
• Tom Shone: why Oscar snubs are just a myth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscar-snubs-critics-myth-academy-award-picks>
 