
#OscarsSoPolitical

Everyone expected the night to be defined by jokes and references to the lack 
of diversity within this year’s nominees. But we were less prepared for the 
ripple effect that might have on other political issues.

The night saw two impassioned speeches about the environment (from Leonardo 
DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/leonardo-dicaprio-wins-best-actor-oscar-for-the-revenant>
 and costume designer Jenny Beavan) …
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fdicaprio-calls-for-action-on-climate-change-in-oscar-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DiCaprio%20calls%20for%20action%20on%20climate%20change%20in%20Oscars%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fdicaprio-calls-for-action-on-climate-change-in-oscar-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DiCaprio%20calls%20for%20action%20on%20climate%20change%20in%20Oscars%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fdicaprio-calls-for-action-on-climate-change-in-oscar-speech-video&media=>
… a shoutout to the LGBT community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/sam-smith-i-want-to-dedicate-my-oscar-to-the-lgbt-community>
 (courtesy of Sam Smith), a performance of a song about rape preceded by a 
direct call for change (Lady Gaga introduced by Joe Biden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/lady-gaga-performs-with-survivors-of-sexual-assault-oscars-2016-joe-biden>
) and a passionate address to Pope Francis to stress the importance of 
eradicating child abuse within the Catholic church (Spotlight producer Michael 
Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/spotlight-wins-best-picture-oscar>
). Now the floodgates are opened, the controversy may never end.

The winners are even harder to poll than UK general elections
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb6ebbf719b2747ac07cc2bc3bdc86e113164332%2F0_156_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb6ebbf719b2747ac07cc2bc3bdc86e113164332%2F0_156_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
 Genuine shock … the Spotlight team. Photograph: Mark Ralston/AFP/Getty Images 
Coming into the race, The Revenant had everything – even maths – going for it. 
Joining the glowing reviews and the strong word-of-mouth was the 
number-crunching say-so of statisticians like Ben Zauzmer, a Harvard grad who, 
whilemaking his Oscar predictions for the Hollywood Reporter 
<https://twitter.com/BensOscarMath/status/704115881308082176/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
, had Alejandro González Iñárritu’s epic down with a 51.5% chance of taking 
best picture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e71aabe224146b8f2a59289428de5ed5221365c%2F0_171_1920_2396%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e71aabe224146b8f2a59289428de5ed5221365c%2F0_171_1920_2396%2F1920.jpg>
 Rylance and Oscar. Photograph: Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images 
Zauzmer’s system, based on a prediction model he calls “Oscarlytics” 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/02/26/statistician-uses-mathematics-to-predict-oscar-winners.html>
, relies on accumulated data from other awards, critic scores and betting odds. 
But, if there are no certainties in life, there are, increasingly, even fewer 
in predicting Oscar wins. Spotlight – only 25.5% likely to win best picture, 
according to Zauzmer – stomped all over The Revenant’s hunting ground come the 
last award.

Factor in a surprise win for Mark Rylance  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/mark-rylance-wins-best-supporting-actor-oscar-for-bridge-of-spies>
in the best supporting actor category (just behind the favourite, Sylvester 
Stallone, according to Zauzmer), plus the victory of a complete outsider in the 
VFX category (Ex Machina) and guesstimating Oscar winners starts looking shaky.

With a 75% hit rate (down 10% from last year) systems like Zauzmer’s are far 
from useless. But it’s hard to work out what’s really going on in an Oscar 
voter’s head. Even when you ask them,they’re liable to change their mind 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/topic/brutally-honest-oscar-voter-ballot>. 
Until we know for sure, the surprises – and the upsets – look set to continue.

The Oscar for least expected beef goes to Jenny Beavan and Alejandro González 
Iñárritu

At the Baftas, Mad Max’s award-winning costume designer came to the stage, 
made a gracious speech, walked off without outstaying her welcome – and was
called a bag lady by the host 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/stephen-fry-hits-back-at-criticism-of-baftas-bag-lady-joke-she-got-it-derrr>
 for her troubles. (The fallout from the incident causedStephen Fry to quit 
Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/15/stephen-fry-deletes-twitter-account-after-baftas-bag-lady-offence>
.) At the Oscars, she got even less love – no applause at all from the 
aisle-side guests as she strode down in trademark biker jacket and woolly 
scarf. Alejandro González Iñárritu even crossed his arms just to prove he 
wasn’t clapping [see footnote].
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FigWT9HBUnXp&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FigWT9HBUnXp>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FigWT9HBUnXp&media=>
They all look her up and down disapprovingly, Iñárritu’s missus rolls her eyes 
and chews her gum and some people even appear to snigger. Lucky Beavan doesn’t 
turn round to see them … but, actually, that’s exactly what she does, clocking 
the full horror and striding on regardless. The vine of their collective 
discourtesy is gathering traction – and adding some tarnish to Iñárritu’s 
silverware.

The internet remained largely unbroken

With each year, the Academy appears to be following the lead of US chat show 
hosts in aiming to create a smattering of YouTube-friendly moments, to be 
easily shared, trended and lolled at. WhileEllen’s selfie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/03/ellen-degeneres-selfie-retweet-obama>
 still safely holds the record for the most talked-about Oscars event since 
Twitter became a thing, this year provided a number of attempts to go viral.The 
SNL-esque montage <https://twitter.com/TheAcademy/status/704148273255157760> of 
black actors cropping up in nominated films was a highlight; the decision to 
troll audiences with the appearance of controversial actor turned Fox News 
punditStacey Dash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/stacey-dash-shock-oscars-appearance-race-message>
 landed with a thud. Likewise the endless cookie-selling schtick.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJerPfHYro1U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJerPfHYro1U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJerPfHYro1U&media=>
Most disappointingly, one of Rock’s skits, which involved him going to speak 
to black cinemagoers <https://twitter.com/TheAcademy/status/704146129999376385> 
about their thoughts on the nominees, wasalmost identical to a piece he did 
during his last stint as host <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JerPfHYro1U>. 


We like our blockbusters cheap and feminist

Don't knock CGI: it's everywhere – you just don't notice it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/feb/25/dont-knock-cgi-its-everywhere-you-just-dont-notice-it>
Before the nominations, as Star Wars: The Force Awakens was triumphant at the 
box office, it was mooted that the panache of JJ Abrams’ hit could sweep it 
into the best picture nominations – and surely dominate the technical 
categories. Ridley Scott’s The Martian meanwhile picked up an impressive six 
nominations alongside its $624m global box office. But in the end, each went 
home with nothing, as the Academy instead championed some underdog genre 
pictures.

The demented energy of Mad Max: Fury Road – an action flick for an era of 
Bechdel and climate change – barrelled it into six wins. The visual effects 
winner meanwhile was not Star Wars but Ex Machina, Alex Garland’s feature 
debut. The effects are solid, particularly for a film that only cost $15m, 
which makes it thecheapest visual effects winner since Alien in 1979 
<https://twitter.com/olilyttelton/status/704138715019526144>. But this was 
perhaps a case of voters wanting to reward a film as a whole – like Mad Max, it 
too is a study of the clash between strong women and violent misogyny, and 
that, along with its wondrous dance sequence, has made it a word-of-mouth indie 
hit.

Leo didn’t sleep inside a horse, eat raw bison liver, get cold, etc, for 
nothing
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1886761b7cd8cff2a051916539b61e14c222567b%2F0_552_2396_2996%2F2396.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1886761b7cd8cff2a051916539b61e14c222567b%2F0_552_2396_2996%2F2396.jpg>
 They like him, they really like him … Leonardo DiCaprio. Photograph: AARON 
POOLE / AMPAS / HANDOUT/EPA 
The best actor category can tend to be given as a lifetime achievement award. 
Colin Firth, Matthew McConaughey and Jeff Bridges have all won in recent years 
with solid performances transmuted into Oscar wins by their overlooked work in 
previous years. And no actor had more goodwill in the bank thanLeonardo DiCaprio
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>, whose grand yet 
vulnerable performances in The Great Gatsby, Wolf of Wall Street, The Aviator 
and more had all been worthy; he is also one of a now-miniscule number of truly 
bankable actors; and he singlehandedly made The Revenant’s arthouse cadence 
palatable to multiplex audiences.

His trajectory from Pussy Posse doofus to dogged environmental campaigner has 
further boosted his stock. So the stars aligned, and this was, finally, Leo’s 
night. The internet erupted in joy, but so did the Dolby theatre in Los 
Angeles, with a standing ovation. But this wasn’t another case of a lifetime 
achievement award – the warmth towards him was also for a performance inThe 
Revenant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant> that showed how deep 
he can go, showing profound spiritual doubt in the crinkle of an eyebrow.

Chris Rock really hates Will Smith

Chris Rock’s zingers in 2005 occasionally tipped into cruelty – why kick Jude 
Law when he was down, post-Alfie? – and the host won’t have wanted to 
overshadow his diversity material by nastily skewering the undeserving. He also 
needed something to leaven the #OscarsSoWhite tone so it didn’t utterly 
dominate, or seem self-pitying. So he needed to lampoon a black star, and it 
had to be someone who really deserved it … enter the former Mr July himself,
Will Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/film/willsmith>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fchris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Rock%20tackles%20Oscars%20diversity%20row%20head%20on%20during%20opening%20monologue%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fchris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Rock%20tackles%20Oscars%20diversity%20row%20head%20on%20during%20opening%20monologue%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fchris-rock-faces-oscars-diversity-row-head-on-opening-monologue-video&media=>
Rock slayed him with a wisecrack about Wild Wild West 
<https://twitter.com/WorldofIsaac/status/704119099010383872>, and took down his 
wife Jada Pinkett Smith too with perhaps thebest line of the evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/oscars-host-chris-rock-diversity-controversy>
: “Jada boycotting the Oscars is like me boycotting Rihanna’s panties – I 
wasn’t invited!” Will was the target too in the Black History Minute skit, 
where Angela Bassett apparently heralded him as the star of Shark Tale, Enemy 
of the State and a certain musical duo – only to actually be praising Jack 
Black.

How must Smith be feeling? Concussion was the issue movie that was meant to 
take him to Ali-level respect in the wake of mega-bomb After Earth, and its 
legacy is of him doing a slightly dodgy Nigerian accent. The reason why Rock’s 
wisecracks were so satisfying is that they were valid – the gulf between the 
Smiths’ opinion of themselves and their relevance in 2016 is sizeable, and ripe 
for satire.


Keeping geeks sweet is of utmost importance
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13b27232d2851d67e8c6a83af9be32d17a5ab558%2F0_101_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13b27232d2851d67e8c6a83af9be32d17a5ab558%2F0_101_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 BB-8, R2-D2 and C-3PO invade the stage at the Oscars. Photograph: Chris 
Pizzello/Invision/AP 
While a superhero film is still to receive a best picture nomination (Birdman 
doesn’t count), the Academy seemed determined to offer up something for the 
increasingly important, and lucrative, geek contingent during this year’s 
ceremony. The night boasted a number of super-powered presenters with Henry 
Cavill, Chris Evans, Chadwick Boseman, Olivia Munn, Margot Robbie and Jared 
Leto all giving out awards – as well as an unfunny Star Wars skit with C-3P0 
and R2-D2 on stage, a tribute to Andy Serkis and his mo-cap skills, and a set 
of awards for fan favourites Mad Max: Fury Road and Ex Machina. We’re probably 
not going to see Deadpool up for the big awards next year – but the Academy 
knows who to keep on side.

John Williams shouldn’t be used to paper the crack between rape and the 
Holocaust (though he’s probably better than Wagner)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fsam-smith-dedicates-oscar-for-best-original-song-to-lgbt-community-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Smith%20dedicates%20Oscar%20for%20best%20original%20song%20to%20LGBT%20community%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fsam-smith-dedicates-oscar-for-best-original-song-to-lgbt-community-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Smith%20dedicates%20Oscar%20for%20best%20original%20song%20to%20LGBT%20community%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Fsam-smith-dedicates-oscar-for-best-original-song-to-lgbt-community-video&media=>
Before Chris Rock has even made his first diversity joke, the musical choices 
of the night had already caused a fuss, with starrier original song nominees 
edging out performances from transgender singer Anohni and South Korean star 
Sumi Jo. There were further unpopular decisions, such as the jubilant Indiana 
Jones theme chosen to bridge Holocaust drama Son of Saul winning best foreign 
language film and Lady Gaga performing a ballad about college rape. Plus, this 
year’s “playing off” song was the entirely unsubtle Ride of the Valkyries by 
Wagner, played miles too early for poor best director winnerAlejandro González 
Iñárritu <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu> – and 
downright inappropriate when it came to Son of Saul’s László Nemes. Overall, 
the score was low.

Is it because I is back?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e257f8c396cbfe0bbead95d65b87fdfd0936b81%2F0_75_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202016%3A%2010%20things%20we%20learned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F29%2Foscars-2016-10-things-we-learned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e257f8c396cbfe0bbead95d65b87fdfd0936b81%2F0_75_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Sacha Baron Cohen and Olivia Wilde. Photograph: Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP 
Sacha Baron Cohen has had a good week. Grimsby got a slew of unexpected 
four-star reviews in the UK (Telegraph, Evening Standard, Sunday Times) – and
even locals have greeted it with fondness not ferocity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/28/grimsby-residents-review-grimsby-film-sacha-baron-cohen>
. And he was, officially, the funniest thing at the Oscars: while Chris Rock 
had unlimited airtime to skewer the #OscarsSoWhite controversy, Cohen, 
resurrecting Ali G, managed it in a couple of lines.

He was, he said, there to represent all the overlooked people: “Will Smith. 
Idris Elbow. And of course that amazing black bloke from Star Wars — Darth 
Vader.” He then introduced a clip from Room, the kidnap thriller starring Brie 
Larson as a mother incarcerated in a small shed with her son, as “a movie about 
a room full of white people”.

Cohen’s biggest win? He so annoyed Ryan Seacrest four years ago (when he 
pretended to empty Kim Jong Il’s ashes over him) that, this year, he didn’t 
have to talk to him on the red carpet.

• The following footnote was appended on 3 March 2016: after this article was 
published, Alejandro González Iñárritu issued a statement pointing out that, 
while he was not clapping asJenny Beavan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jenny-beavan> walked down the aisle past him 
and other guests, he did applaud her as she ascended the stairs to the stage.
 