
Is this year's Oscar race a straight three-way split – with David O Russell's 
black comedyAmerican Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle> and Alfonso 
Cuarón's space thrillerGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156058/gravity> getting 10 nominations 
apiece, and Steve McQueen's slavery-era drama 12 Years a Slave just behind with 
nine? It might, in fact, have revealed itself to be a two-candidate race, a 
straight-up competition between Entertainment and Seriousness, with the 
Entertainment vote liable to be fatally split between Gravity and American 
Hustle, leaving 12 Years a Slave likely to pick up most of the Oscars on the 
night?

Or maybe there will be a cunningly managed last-minute propaganda blitz, or 
cutely spun news controversy and there will be a landslide for one of the 
un-Serious films, leaving the Steve McQueen supporters (including myself) 
utterly outraged. Of course, even thinking in these crude competitive 
"scoresheet" terms is a very un-Serious thing to be doing, and the admirers of 
12 Years a Slave may have a sinking feeling that it will not be properly 
rewarded in the tinselly, meretricious, un-Serious Oscar world. For Sean 
Bobbitt not to get a nomination for cinematography is very perplexing and a 
very bad omen. Notoriously, Brokeback Mountain lost out to the moderate drama 
Crash in 2005 – although it is Brokeback which is still now hugely admired and 
Crash largely forgotten, confined to the DVD dumpbin of history.

Can it really be true that 12 Years a Slave – far and away the best film on 
this year's Academy award nomination list – will fail to get the historic 
clean-sheet it deserves, and may even get humiliatingly overshadowed by the 
likes ofAmerican Hustle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-hustle> or 
Dallas Buyers Club? If that is the case, will it reveal the Academy to be 
guilty of bad or even reactionary taste?

It is very difficult to tell. But perhaps there was a moment during the recent 
Golden Globes ceremony which was a straw in the wind: Amy Poehler's joke on the 
subject. She said that after 12 Years she would "never look at slavery in the 
same way again". The presenters were careful to top this gag off by getting 
Tina Fey to give a stunned look at Amy, to make sure we realised the joke was 
about her goofy naivety, not any supposed obviousness or hectoring on the part 
of the film itself. But what was a joke could be a potential serious problem 
selling this movie to Academy voters who may not get round to watching 12 Years 
on their DVD screener copies. The media commentariat may be a lot more young, 
diverse and liberal than this electorate, which the Los Angeles times last year 
revealed to be 94% Caucasian and 77% male with a median age of 62.

I say all this to pre-empt ill-fortune: I'm still hopeful that the first 
eventuality I outlined will prevail, that a combination of inadvertent tactical 
voting and aesthetic justice will mean triumph for Steve McQueen's remarkable 
and, I think, historic film.

Otherwise, there are some interesting points: Philomena is in the running for 
best adapted screenplay and for Dame Judi herself as best actress, although it 
is disappointing that Paul Greengrass did not get a best director nomination 
for Captain Phillips. The nominations for Nebraska: Best Director (Alexander 
Payne), Best Film, Best Actor (Bruce Dern) and Best Supporting Actor (June 
Squibb) are very heartening, and reflect in what esteem this excellent film is 
held. In many ways, it would be great to see June Squibb get an Oscar and 
pastiche her speech in the aggressive style of her gloriously foul-mouthed 
character.

• News: Gravity and Hustle on 10, Slave on nine
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscar-nominations-2014-12-years-a-slave-gravity>
• Gallery: nominees by nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscars-2014-academy-awards-nominations-full-list>
• Liveblog: as it happened
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jan/16/oscars-nominations-2014-liveblog-academy-awards>
• Full list of nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscars-2014-academy-awards-nominations-full-list>
 