
Gravity and American Hustle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-hustle> 
lead the pack heading into this year's Oscars, earning 10 nominations apiece, 
ahead of Steve McQueen's 12 Years a Slave, which came away with nine.

Today's nominations suggest that the the 2014 Academy Awards may see a similar 
three-way race as was witnessed at last Sunday's Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/12/12-years-a-slave-golden-globes>, 
where McQueen's film took best drama, while American Hustle went home with best 
musical or comedy and Gravity best director.

There was joy for Dallas Buyers Club, which as well as expected nominations in 
best actor and best supporting actor picked up best screenplay and best picture 
nominations, taking its final total to six. That's the same as the number 
earned by Paul Greengrass's Captain Phillips - despite that film missing out on 
best actor and director - and for Alexander Payne's Nebraska.

Meanwhile, Martin Scorsese's The Wolf of Wall Street and Spike Jonze's Her 
both scored five nominations. Meryl Streep earned her 18th nomination for 
August: Osage County, but that film's only other nod was for Julia Roberts in 
best supporting actress.

The Weinstein Company's other main runner and rider fared better: Philomena 
secured nominations for best picture, best actress (for Judi Dench), best 
adapted screenplay (Steve Coogan and Jeff Pope) and best original score (for 
Alexander Desplat).

Last year David O Russell was applauded for scoring acting nominations in 
every possible category for his cast (Silver Linings Playbook's Jennifer 
Lawrence, Bradley Cooper, Robert De Niro and Jacqui Weaver). Twelve months on, 
he has repeated the trick, earning Cooper and Lawrence supporting nominations, 
alongside lead nods for American Hustle co-stars Christian Bale and Amy Adams.

Surprises in the list included Sandra Bullock, who had been seen as an outside 
contender in the best actress race for her role inGravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gravity>, and Jonah Hill, who many tipped to 
miss out on the chance for a best supporting actor nomination (for his work in 
The Wolf of Wall Street).

Those who came away without a nomination were Tom Hanks (in both the lead and 
supporting actor categories), fellow best actor hopeful Robert Redford and Emma 
Thompson. She had been predicted to score a nod for Saving Mr Banks, while 
Kelly Marcel had also been tipped for original screenplay. In the event, the 
film had to make to with best original score.

Sean Bobbitt misses out on a chance at best cinematography for 12 Years a 
Slave, perhaps edged from contention by Roger Deakins' lensing on Prisoners. 
Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom showed up only via U2 in the best song category.

Inside Llewyn Davis, the Coen brothers musical drama about a struggling singer 
in 1960s New York, had to make do with two nominations.

The Act of Killing and the Square were amongst a shortlist of documentary 
contenders that followed predictions (though there was no room for Blackfish), 
while The Great Beauty and The Hunt turned up in the best foreign language 
nominees.

The awards were announced by Rush and Thor star Chris Hemsworth and Academy of 
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences president Cheryl Boone Isaacs. This year's 
host, Ellen DeGeneres will compere the show, which takes place on 2 March in 
the Dolby theatre in Hollywood.

• Full news story
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscars-2014-nominations-12-years-a-slave-american-hustle>
• Tom Shone: why Oscar snubs are just a myth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscar-snubs-critics-myth-academy-award-picks>
• Peter Bradshaw's reaction: Slave should win. That doesn't mean it will 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscars-2014-12-years-a-slave>
• Full list of nominations
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/oscars-2014-academy-awards-nominations-full-list>
• As it happened: Hadley Freeman liveblogs the announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jan/16/oscars-nominations-2014-liveblog-academy-awards>
• Nominees in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2014/jan/16/oscars-2014-nominations-in-pictures>
 