
Just as the only blockbusters now made in any number are those that form part 
of a franchise, so too most serious dramas require prior brand identification 
in order to be greenlit. This means biopics of people the audience have either 
already heard of, or behind-the-scenes yarns about newsy subjects so familiar 
they won’t feel out of their comfort zone (three Boston Marathon movies are 
currently in the pipeline).

For this year’s awards contenders, then, it’s the same old story – which is to 
say: very few original stories. There are biopics of Steve Jobs and Dalton 
Trumbo, Hank Williams and Edward Snowden, Whitey Bulger and Miles Davis. Of the 
first person to undergo gender reassignment (The Danish Girl) and the woman who 
invented the Miracle Mop (Joy). There are historical yarns like Suffragette and 
Bridge of Spies and Argo-ish explainers such as Truth (about political 
interference on the Dan Rather CBS talkshow), Spotlight (journalists under a 
Catholic paedophile ring) and Everest (people die while hiking). Most are based 
on biographies or on long-form journalism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdocumentary-remakes-the-walk-the-program-our-brand-is-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441386285655%2F1ab561a1-a1af-4a5a-b59e-5b7635fc4ce2-2060x1288.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscar%20bait%3A%20why%20the%20glossy%20documentary%20remake%20rules%20this%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdocumentary-remakes-the-walk-the-program-our-brand-is-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscar%20bait%3A%20why%20the%20glossy%20documentary%20remake%20rules%20this%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdocumentary-remakes-the-walk-the-program-our-brand-is-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441386285655%2F1ab561a1-a1af-4a5a-b59e-5b7635fc4ce2-2060x1288.jpeg>
 Johnny Depp in Black Mass. Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros 
But there’s also a new model in town: the remade documentary. Three major 
movies this year take their cues, either directly or more discreetly, from 
recent non-fiction films. The Walk, Robert Zemeckis’s movie about Philippe 
Petit’s illegal tightrope walk between the twin towers in 1974, owes its brand 
identification to the 2008 Oscar-winning documentary Man on Wire, made by James 
Marsh. The Program, Stephen Frears’s rise and fall of Lance Armstrong film 
necessarily follows the same events detailed in 2013’s The Armstrong Lie – a 
high-profile documentary by Alex Gibney (although Frears’s film is technically 
adapted from an exposé about the case). And Our Brand Is Crisis, a Sandra 
Bullock-starring public-relations satire about advising the Bolivian 
government, takes as its template a 2005 documentary called … Our Brand Is 
Crisis.

That was a little-seen movie, so the logic of a direct reworking seems 
perfectly sound. But with the others, it’s more curious: do such stories really 
need fictionalisation? And if they do, quite so soon?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdocumentary-remakes-the-walk-the-program-our-brand-is-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441380307821%2Fcc833fb2-b6db-4aa7-a2fa-80f759fefccd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscar%20bait%3A%20why%20the%20glossy%20documentary%20remake%20rules%20this%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdocumentary-remakes-the-walk-the-program-our-brand-is-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscar%20bait%3A%20why%20the%20glossy%20documentary%20remake%20rules%20this%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fdocumentary-remakes-the-walk-the-program-our-brand-is-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441380307821%2Fcc833fb2-b6db-4aa7-a2fa-80f759fefccd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ben Foster as Lance Armstrong in The Program. Photograph: Allstar/StudioCanal 
The answer is probably yes. It’s not just studios who now like their stories 
picked apart and psychologised as fast as possible. In an age in which almost 
all of us have immediate access to the facts, it’s those places Google can’t 
reach we long to travel to. We want an insight into that which non-fiction 
can’t show us, to decode the thought processes and to examine (or infer) the 
backstage soap. Putting ourselves in Petit’s shoes as he tried not to look down 
is an irresistible sell (Zemeckis shot the film in 3D). We don’t just want to 
study Lance Armstrong’s eyes as he semi-fessed-up in real life on Oprah. We 
want to see what was hidden for so long: the manipulation and the monster. The 
self-denial and the switched blood bags.
 