
Oscar voting has closed. The winners have been chosen. But – #OscarsSoWhite 
aside – this year’s race is notable for being one of the most unpredictable in 
recent memory. Here’s how I think the major categories are stacking up ahead of 
Sunday’s ceremony.

Best picture 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fspotlight-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453983455154%2FKP_1520749_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spotlight%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fspotlight-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spotlight%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fspotlight-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F28%2F1453983455154%2FKP_1520749_crop_640x480.jpg>
This year, the biggest award of the night is also the biggest question mark. 

Spotlight, Tom McCarthy’s journalistic thriller, was pegged as an early 
frontrunner by the tradesas soon as it was unveiled in Venice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/03/spotlight-review-catholic-church-child-abuse-film-decently-tells-an-awful-story>
. It’s a timely, passionate and expertly executed work that boasts an exemplary 
cast. In other words, it’s the type of film the Academy is known for rewarding.

It suffered a blow at the hands of Room, Lenny Abrahamson’s small-scaled 
adaptation of Emma Donaghue’s beloved novel, when the dramabeat Spotlight to 
net Toronto’s coveted audience award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/20/room-wins-toronto-film-festivals-peoples-choice-award-tiff>
, which in past years has gone to eventual best picture winners like The King’s 
Speech and Slumdog Millionaire. But that loss didn’t seem important enough to 
truly derail its chances.

Oscar nominees weigh in on lack of diversity: 'there’s an elephant in the room'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/08/oscars-so-white-diversity-issues-protests-sylvester-stallone-creed>
Enter The Big Short <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-big-short>, Adam 
McKay’s damning comedy-drama about the Wall Street crash of 2008. It premiered 
as the closing-night film of the AFI film festival in November, receiving 
generally strong notices, but didn’t attract immediate awards buzz like 
Spotlight and Room.

As soon as The Revenant, Alejandro G Iñárritu’s brutal survival thriller 
fronted by Leonardo DiCaprio, screened, it too entered the best picture fray. 
This despite the negative press the project courted during its tumultuous shoot 
(some of the crewcalled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/24/director-defends-leonardo-dicaprios-the-revenant-as-crew-call-shoot-a-living-hell>
 the making of it a “living hell”).

As the race stands now, the four aforementioned films are the clear 
frontrunners for the main prize, with The Revenant leading the charge following 
a picture and directortriumph at the Baftas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/baftas-2016-full-list-of-winners>
, and a recent Directors Guild win. Both awards serve as strong Oscar 
indicator, as many of the voters overlap.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Foscars-2016-predicted-winners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55ca5175d05da966295d6e0ad675f7f03747e2c4%2F137_395_2611_1566%2F2611.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscars%202016%3A%20the%20winners%20and%20losers%20on%20the%20campaign%20trail&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Foscars-2016-predicted-winners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscars%202016%3A%20the%20winners%20and%20losers%20on%20the%20campaign%20trail&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Foscars-2016-predicted-winners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55ca5175d05da966295d6e0ad675f7f03747e2c4%2F137_395_2611_1566%2F2611.jpg>
 Glory be? Christian Bale in The Big Short Photograph: Jaap Buitendijk/AP 
Chomping at the bit are The Big Short and Spotlight: the former was the 
surprise winner of the Producers Guild’s top film honour, besting The Revenant; 
the latter nettedthe Screen Actors Guild award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/30/sag-awards-2016-diversity-idris-elba-viola-davis-uzo-aduba-queen-latifah-spotlight-leonardo-dicaprio>
 for outstanding cast in a motion picture days after, which serves as the 
union’s equivalent of the Oscar for best picture.

Working in Room’s favour is the fact that Hollywood’s most influential guilds 
can’t seem to agree – meaning it could potentially slip through and claim the 
prize. The Academy loves the film, evidenced by its surprise director 
nomination for Abrahamson, who beat out favorites Ridley Scott and Todd Haynes. 
It’s also rumoured to have screened like gangbusters for members who watched 
the nominated films from the comfort of their own homes; unlike its 
competitors, it plays just as strongly on the small screen. And don’t rule out 
the power of Jacob Tremblay, the film’s scene-stealing nine-year-old child 
actor, who’s been a fixture on the circuit this season at key events like the 
Governors awards and the annual nominees luncheon. Should the Academy go for 
the emotional vote,Room <https://www.theguardian.com/film/room> could surprise.

Best director
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthe-revenant-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-leonardo-dicaprio-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F6%2F1452087866730%2FKP_1234901_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Revenant%20director%20Alejandro%20Gonz%C3%A1lez%20I%C3%B1%C3%A1rritu%3A%20'So%20much%20pain%20was%20implanted%20in%20that%20time'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthe-revenant-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-leonardo-dicaprio-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Revenant%20director%20Alejandro%20Gonz%C3%A1lez%20I%C3%B1%C3%A1rritu%3A%20%27So%20much%20pain%20was%20implanted%20in%20that%20time%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthe-revenant-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-leonardo-dicaprio-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F6%2F1452087866730%2FKP_1234901_crop_640x360.jpg>
Regardless of The Revenant’s fate, it’s safe to assume that Iñárritu is all 
but assured to win the Oscar for best director for a second year in a row, 
following his triumph last year for Birdman. Only seven DGA winners have lost 
out on the award. If he indeed does collect the prize, andThe Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant> fails to claim the top honour, 
it would be the third time in four years the Oscars have been split between 
picture and director.

Also working in Iñárritu’s favor is the narrative The Revenant’s been 
parlaying all season, with both him and DiCaprio going out of their way in 
recent months to stress just how difficult the film was to complete in harsh 
outdoor conditions.

Should he win, Iñárritu will be the third film-maker to net back-to-back best 
director Oscars: John Ford won for The Grapes of Wrath (1940) and How Green Was 
My Valley (1941), and Joseph L Mankiewicz for A Letter to Three Wives (1949) 
and All About Eve. He could make history, however, if The Revenant wins the 
main award, as no one has ever helmed consecutive best-picture winners.

Best actor 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-hugh-glass-the-revenant-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20and%20Tom%20Hardy%20star%20in%20The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-hugh-glass-the-revenant-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leonardo%20DiCaprio%20and%20Tom%20Hardy%20star%20in%20The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fleonardo-dicaprio-hugh-glass-the-revenant-video&media=>
The surest lock The Revenant has is for its leading man.

Ever since the project was first granted a release date, the award was 
DiCaprio’s to lose – the general consensus being among industry members that 
it’s about damn time. Beloved by his peers and fans, DiCaprio has been 
nominated four times previously, but has never won. The actor is known for 
going to great lengths for his grandiose performances; for The Revenant, he 
went to extreme ones - including eating raw bison liver on set. “I can name 30 
or 40 sequences that were some of the most difficult things I’ve ever had to 
do,” he toldYahoo! Movies 
<https://www.yahoo.com/movies/leonardo-dicaprio-on-fighting-a-1281529422913590.html>
 in October.

He’s won basically every precursor award, delivering charming victory speeches 
at the Baftas, the Golden Globes and the SAG awards – and is sure to give a 
strong one should he win Sunday.

Best actress
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Froom-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791566827%2FKP_1372121_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Room%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Froom-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Room%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Froom-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791566827%2FKP_1372121_crop_640x480.jpg>
Brie Larson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brie-larson> is as much of a 
lock as DiCaprio this year, despite no prior nominations.

For her devastating performance as a kidnapped mother in Room, Larson, like 
DiCaprio, has won every major precursor award, including a Bafta, Golden Globe, 
and SAG award. And like DiCaprio, she’s proven to be an expert campaigner, 
using her breaks from filming Kong: Skull Island to mingle with voters at 
private screenings, and attend major events like the Governors Ball and the 
nominees luncheon. She’s been a mainstay on the circuit despite her commitments.

Saoirse Ronan was once considered to be rival competition for her work in the 
immigration dramaBrooklyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/05/brooklyn-review-saoirse-ronan-shines-in-nick-hornby-colm-toibin-drama>
, but has failed to net any major awards. Ditto Charlotte Rampling, who may 
have nixed her chances with hercontroversial comments regarding #OscarsSoWhite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/22/oscars-2016-charlotte-rampling-diversity-row-racist-to-white-people>
.

Best supporting actor 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcreed-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791186576%2FKP_1372112_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creed%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcreed-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creed%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcreed-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791186576%2FKP_1372112_crop_640x480.jpg>
Favoured to win was Idris Elba for his volcanic turn in Beasts of No Nation – 
that was until he failed to net a nomination, despite winning the equivalent 
SAG award.

Now it’s appearing likely that Sylvester Stallone will take home the honour, 
following two previous nominations for Rocky in 1976. Similar to DiCaprio, 
Stallone courts an immense amount of goodwill wherever he goes. Accepting his 
Golden Globe in January, the industry’s finest leapt to their feet to 
congratulate the actor. Backstage at the nominees luncheon, the press openly 
fawned over the actor.

Mark Rylance could provide an upset for his subtle work in Bridge of Spies, 
which netted the actor a Bafta award. But unlike Stallone, he’s been largely 
absent all awards season. For voters, face time matters.

Best supporting actress
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthe-danish-girl-alicia-vikander-tom-hooper-transgender-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F30%2F1451473066994%2FKP_1058391_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Danish%20Girl's%20Vikander%20and%20Hooper%3A%20'History%20has%20a%20tendency%20to%20hard-bake%20in%20its%20own%20prejudices'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthe-danish-girl-alicia-vikander-tom-hooper-transgender-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Danish%20Girl%27s%20Vikander%20and%20Hooper%3A%20%27History%20has%20a%20tendency%20to%20hard-bake%20in%20its%20own%20prejudices%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F30%2Fthe-danish-girl-alicia-vikander-tom-hooper-transgender-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F30%2F1451473066994%2FKP_1058391_crop_640x360.jpg>
For whatever reason, the best supporting actress race is known for being the 
officialOscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> wildcard. Past years 
have seen major surprise wins from Marcia Gay Harden for Pollock in 2002, Tilda 
Swinton for Michael Clayton in 2008, and Juliette Binoche who beat frontrunner 
Lauren Bacall in 1996 for her work in The English Patient. And who can forget 
Marisa Tomei’s win for My Cousin Vinny in 1992? Her victory came as such a 
shock that for years afterwards, there was a mean-spirited rumour that Jack 
Palance, who had read her name out, had simply announced the wrong winner.

Alicia Vikander is favored to go home a winner for The Danish Girl following 
her SAG award win, but Kate Winslet has proved to be a formidable opponent, 
most recently netting a Bafta for her supporting work in Steve Jobs. Both 
actors have been on the campaign trail all season long on behalf of their 
performances, as have their fellow nominees, Rachel McAdams (Spotlight), Rooney 
Mara (Carol) and Jennifer Jason Leigh (The Hateful Eight). Every nominee would 
be wise to prepare a speech.

And the other major catergories
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fson-of-saul-exclusive-trailer-for-oscar-nominated-holocaust-drama-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F26%2F1453806136871%2FKP_1501309_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Son%20of%20Saul%3A%20exclusive%20trailer%20for%20Oscar-nominated%20Holocaust%20drama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fson-of-saul-exclusive-trailer-for-oscar-nominated-holocaust-drama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Son%20of%20Saul%3A%20exclusive%20trailer%20for%20Oscar-nominated%20Holocaust%20drama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fson-of-saul-exclusive-trailer-for-oscar-nominated-holocaust-drama-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F26%2F1453806136871%2FKP_1501309_crop_640x480.jpg>
The Revenant won’t be winning any awards for its script. The film was shut out 
of the adapted screenplay category, where the clear frontrunner is The Big 
Short, which recently won the Writers Guild of America equivalent honor. It’s 
dense but light on its feet, distilling a challenging book into an engaging 
narrative.

Spotlight, winner of the WGA’s best screenplay honour, is likely to repeat its 
win at the Oscars, especially if snubbed for best picture. Think of it as a 
consolation prize. Inside Out could potentially upset its victory, butSpotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spotlight> has tremendous goodwill going into 
the ceremony, with major nominations across the board.

However, the Pixar film will no doubt net the best animated feature Oscar over 
Charlie Kaufman’s stop-motion wonder Anomalisa, which many had pegged as a true 
contender for the award, until it failed to net a screenplay nod like Inside 
Out.

As for the documentaries, all signs point to Asif Kapadia’s Amy, which 
recently claimed a Bafta. The Academy loves a solid music documentary: 
Searching for Sugar Man and 20 Feet From Stardom most recently prevailed. 
Kapadia has also been campaigning tirelessly since the film’s premiere at 
Cannes in May, putting in appearances at countless events over the season.

Less sure is the best foreign-language film race. Son of Saul has netted a 
slew of medals since debuting to rapturous reviews at Cannes, but it’s by no 
means an easy film to watch. France’sMustang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/19/mustang-review-the-virgin-suicides-in-istanbul-is-a-turkish-delight>
 is tonally the complete opposite of Son of Saul: a true crowdpleaser, that 
boasts a big emotional payoff. The family drama has already won a handful of 
awards, and audiences adore it, making it a formidable contender in the 
notoriously unpredictable category. It’s also the only feature directed by a 
woman to be nominated - something the Academy would be wise to consider.
 