
The actor Oscar Isaac made a surprise appearance at a Letters Live event on 
Sunday to read out correspondence written by his Star Wars forebearAlec Guinness
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alec-guinness>, in which he called his 
co-star Harrison Ford a “languid young man”.

Guinness, who played Obi-Wan Kenobi, wrote that he was not enjoying the 
production of the 1977 film, Star Wars: A New Hope – the first of the films to 
be made.

In the letter to his friend Anne Kauffman, written during production of the 
film and read aloud to an audience by Isaac on Sunday, Guinness wrote: “New 
rubbish dialogue reaches me every other day on wadges of pink paper, and none 
of it makes my character clear or even bearable.”

Guinness said he was off to the studio to work with “Mark Hamill and Tennyson 
(that can’t be right) Ford. Ellison? No! Well a rangy, languid man who is 
probably intelligent and amusing”.

Isaac, who plays Poe Dameron in Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>, joked to the audience 
at Freemasons’ Hall in London that he would not even attempt an impression of 
Sir Alec as he read out the correspondence.

Benedict Cumberbatch <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>
, who took part in the event alongside his wife Sophie Hunter, channelled 
former Sherlock Holmes actor William Gillette as he read out a letter by Mark 
Twain.

Gillette played the famous detective on stage in 1899 and made a Sherlock 
Holmes silent film in 1916.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Foscar-isaac-surprises-audience-at-letters-live-event-in-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d6acfdf84051c7cd88d9f4b892c39594ac649c7%2F0_263_3376_4343%2F3376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oscar%20Isaac%20surprises%20audience%20at%20Letters%20Live%20event%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Foscar-isaac-surprises-audience-at-letters-live-event-in-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oscar%20Isaac%20surprises%20audience%20at%20Letters%20Live%20event%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Foscar-isaac-surprises-audience-at-letters-live-event-in-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d6acfdf84051c7cd88d9f4b892c39594ac649c7%2F0_263_3376_4343%2F3376.jpg>
 Louise Brealey and Sophie Hunter performing Letters Live in London Photograph: 
James Gourley/Rex/Shutterstock 
While no voice recording of Twain has survived, there is a recording of his 
former neighbour Gillette doing his best impression of the author in 1934. 
However, 39-year-old Cumberbatch, who stars in the BBC’s Sherlock, said he 
would not follow this guideline too closely.

The letter from Twain to the American poet Walt Whitman paid tribute to all 
the changes he had witnessed in the world over the course of his lifetime.

Cumberbatch and his Sherlock co-star Louise Brealey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/louise-brealey> then performed letters 
between Bessie Moore and Chris Barker – two sweethearts separated by the second 
world war.

Cumberbatch has been at the heart of Letters Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/letters-live> since the first event was held 
in 2013, embracing the challenge of performing others’ correspondence.

Sunday evening’s performance also saw a reading by theatre and opera director 
Hunter, 37, who has previously taken part in Letters Live events at Hay 
Festival alongside her actor husband.

She left the audience moved as she read out a letter from deaf and blind woman 
Helen Keller to the New York Symphony Orchestra, thanking them for the music 
which she had experienced through the radio by feeling the vibrations.
 