
Worried about his children’s future and angry about the diminishing level of 
citizen participation in politics, the Australian entrepreneur Adam Jacoby 
decided to stop moaning on Twitter and do something about it. He foundedMiVote 
<http://www.mivote.org.au/interview_adam_a_jacoby_founder_of_mivote>, a tech 
startup that is creating a form of super-democracy.

Mob rule: Iceland crowdsources its next constitution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/09/iceland-crowdsourcing-constitution-facebook>
When an issue is raised in parliament, citizens are asked to participate in 
the decision-making. Rather than voting yes or no, MiVote’s users are asked a 
far more nuanced question that takes a long-term view.

When I interviewed him, Jacoby explained this concept in more detail, using 
the issue of immigration as an example: “The vote would be, ‘Would you like the 
government, the country, to take a primarily humanitarian approach to asylum 
seekers or immigration? Would you like it to take security approach? Would you 
like it to take a financially pragmatic approach? Or would you like it to take 
an international diplomacy approach?,’” he said.

The platform presents a range of research sourced in partnership with 
universities and other advisers. Typically, it outlines four different 
positions. Citizens can then vote for as many or as few as they want to.

MiVote is totally neutral regarding the decisions made. This is what I call 
MiVote’s “non-ideology ideology”. And that is because its creators understand 
the ways in which the system we use now aren’t equipped to deal with nuance. 
They understand that informed constituencies can make direct decisions, rather 
than just electing somebody to elect somebody to make decisions for them.

I would like to see a conversation emerge not about the decisions, but the 
process by which these decisions are made

This is not to say that I envisage a future without any elected 
representatives. It may well be that the future of politics doesn’t need 
politicians. I don’t know. What I do know is that technology can create more 
direct forms of democracy in which citizens are more deeply involved.

MiVote belongs to a new breed of organisations and projects looking to move 
democracy into the 21st century. These organisations includepol.is 
<https://blog.pol.is/pol-is-in-taiwan-da7570d372b5#.o6qiab1hr>, an 
artificial-intelligence powered tool that has helped involve large numbers of 
people in Taiwan in shaping legislation; andDemocracyOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/24/could-online-democracy-lead-to-governance-by-trumps-and-trolls>
, an Argentinian platform that has had a party represented in government, 
making decisions based on the public’s will through an online platform.Iceland 
“crowdsourced” its constitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/09/iceland-crowdsourcing-constitution-facebook>
, involving more than 40,000 people in the process and receiving an approval 
rating of over 70%. InEstonia the platform e-Residency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/26/estonia-offers-e-residency-to-world-what-does-it-mean>
 has changed several laws in just a few months by listening to the feedback of 
citizens around the world.

In our digital age, we need to upgrade our democratic operating system. In the 
wake of the contradictory and surprising decisions we’ve seen taken this year, 
I would like to see a conversation emerge not about the decisions, but the 
process by which these decisions are made.

Estonia offers e-residency to foreigners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/26/estonia-offers-e-residency-to-world-what-does-it-mean>
Of course technology hasn’t always helped our democracies to function. Filter 
bubbles and fake news have been blamed for recent events including the vote for 
Brexit and the election of Donald Trump. But this is a problem to be fixed, not 
an excuse to hold on to an old system we’ve had for hundreds of years purely 
because that’s the way things are. To me, the events of this year are signs 
that our antiquated system is in desperate need of an overhaul, because it 
doesn’t allow us to express ourselves other than in binary terms: red v blue; 
in v out; him v her. The complexity of the modern world is lost in a democratic 
process dominated by political parties wedded to pre-determined ideologies, 
rather than to enacting the will of the people.

Pre-internet, when pen and paper were the pinnacle of democratic technology, 
it made sense to outsource our decisions to “experts”, but in 2016 we have far 
more sophisticated tools that can cope with the complexity of the modern day. 
The existence of this technology requires us to rethink the different roles in 
our systems of government. As Jacoby says: “There is no excuse in 2016, when 
you can have a many-to-many and many-to-one conversation, not to have a 
conversation with our electorate on every issue. There is just simply no excuse 
for it.”

Democracy has seen little change since Sir Tim Berners-Lee founded the World 
Wide Web 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/aug/24/internet-lost-its-way-tim-berners-lee-world-wide-web>
 25 years ago, and it is time for a change: to a more direct, more frequent, 
more human-centred, more participatory, more informed form of democracy.

 * Jon Barnes is the author of Democracy Squared: A digital revolution that’s 
about to democratise democracy <http://www.democracysquared.io/>  