
China was always the Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> of public money. 
Finance ministers with an infrastructure problem would sneak off to Beijing for 
a quickie billion and return with smiles on their faces. The Chinese seemed 
willing and no one need know. George Osborne and David Cameron have done it for
HS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> and Hinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/02/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-project-workers-face-layoff-power-station-investment-edf>
. Boris Johnson can’t keep his hands off Chinese skyscrapers. Nowsomething 
dreadful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/aug/24/global-stocks-sell-off-deepens-as-panic-grips-markets-live>
 has happened. Someone has told the Chinese people where their savings have 
been going. Does it matter? Of course it matters. Any student of economic 
history knows that when a swiftly urbanising economy exports its surplus 
savings – as Britain did in the late-19th century – it loses touch with reality 
and goes into recession. Money is tipped into African railways, Brazilian mines 
and Russian bonds.China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has been 
tipping cash into worthless transport and energy projects around the world, or 
storing it in empty London towers. It encourages reckless governments to get 
involved with stupid projects that no sane banker would support.

Boris Johnson can't keep his hands off Chinese skyscrapers

Any bubble stock market is a danger to all. As Shanghai’s prices more than 
doubled it was clearly going to burst. When the regime is as dirigiste as 
China’s, that doubles the risk to others. China’s sovereign wealth can be 
withdrawn as quickly as it was splurged. Whether the Chinese market crash can 
single-handedly return the west to deflation is doubtful, but that is the risk.

The west became so scared of inflation in the 20th century that it has yet to 
handle deflation, the greatest menace facing the world economy. People stop 
spending and firms stop investing. Governments lose revenue but can borrow 
cheaply and duly pile up debt. That is met by austerity, which merely feeds 
deflation. The level of spending in the economy collapses. Look atGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>.

China's 'Black Monday' sends markets reeling across the globe - as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/aug/24/global-stocks-sell-off-deepens-as-panic-grips-markets-live>
The old solution of quantitative easing failed to channel spending power into 
the economy, merely into banks. On this Labour’sJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> is right. In a time of 
deflation, money should be printed and spent, not printed and saved. It should 
boost transfers and cut taxes. Get goods and services moving. Let the markets 
decide what needs investment and what does not. If you need more 
infrastructure, subject it to due Treasury scrutiny.

Going to China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> to beg for what is 
essentially political investment for vanity projects that no European would 
touch is no route to economic recovery. British chancellors should stay true to 
good capitalist investors, and avoid temptation from the east.
 