
British design is undergoing an undeniable renaissance. Following the recent 
Department for Culture, Media and Sportreport 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/creative-industries-economic-estimates-january-2015/creative-industries-economic-estimates-january-2015-key-findings>
 that revealed the creative industries are worth £76.9bn in terms of gross 
value added, even the government is taking notice. We believe we are a nation 
of inventors. Innovation courses through our veins, ready to be tapped at any 
commercial opportunity that presents itself, wherever it is in the world.

Not only does our design heritage sell well overseas, the strength of British 
design and innovation also means that businesses here attract the best global 
talent. There’s always been a mix of nationalities working in our studio – 
people often attracted to London by the excellent design schools. AtJBS Studio 
<http://www.jasonbruges.com/> we recruit for roles of all sorts, from 
industrial designers and architects to lighting and programming wizards. We 
also look internationally for candidates.

But success can easily breed complacency. With the emerging nations swiftly 
absorbing many of the service industry skills we prize (see the rendering farms 
in China that make high intensity design processing a snip, or the excellent 
architecture coming out of India) how do we maintain an upper hand when we 
might very well be hanging on by our fingernails?

Our education system is the key to maintaining that strength and we must 
protect it at all costs. Our excellent schools and universities attract 
international student talent. This has the additional effect of encouraging 
talent to stay, but many alumni also travel back to their home countries and 
still want to work with British designers. The reputation of our brains travels 
well. We must keep that up. Immigration and a reasonable openness to our 
borders are key to engendering this success. We’d do well to remember that in 
an election year.

The key thing about British design education is not only that it teaches the 
technical skills of design, it also teaches process and thinking. The way we 
are taught is critical, not just what we are taught. My postgraduate masters 
was about lateral thinking. Mentors such asStephen Gage 
<https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/browse/profile?upi=SGAGE30>, professor of 
innovative technology at University College London, and Sir Peter Cook of 
avant-garde architectural groupArchigram 
<http://archigram.westminster.ac.uk/personhome.php?id=5> taught people the 
process of creative problem solving to encourage disruption and new approaches 
to technology.

In that environment, architecture was taught in very loose terms, which 
created a multitude of hybrid practices and talents, including ground-breaking 
flavour-based experience designersBompass & Parr <http://bompasandparr.com/>, 
andAsif Khan <http://www.asif-khan.com/> (we built an installation in his 
Olympic Beatbox Pavilion 
<http://www.asif-khan.com/project/coca-cola-beatbox-pavilion/>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Feducation-system-key-britain-strength-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428926510610%2Faaa4ce18-24a9-455d-b225-2ce7def08611-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20education%20system%20is%20key%20to%20ensuring%20Britain's%20strength%20in%20design&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Feducation-system-key-britain-strength-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20education%20system%20is%20key%20to%20ensuring%20Britain%27s%20strength%20in%20design&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Feducation-system-key-britain-strength-design%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428926510610%2Faaa4ce18-24a9-455d-b225-2ce7def08611-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The Digital Double No 10 door 
What else? Private enterprise must support our university system if we’re to 
ensure graduates are fit for purpose for the jobs available to them. More 
studios should collaborate and partner with universities to give back to the 
education system. It’s an excellent way of sourcing exciting new talent too. 
It’s an ecosystem that benefits everyone involved.

There are also issues with size, geography and disruption. We’ve just returned 
from a trade delegation in China with theGreat campaign 
<https://www.gov.uk/britainisgreat>. The speed of innovation there is 
startling. We must keep up by staying nimble and ensuring the quality of our 
output remains world beating. In the future, disruptive businesses will be a 
lot smaller.


Collaboration between these companies is also key. We recently created the 
Digital Double 
<http://www.jasonbruges.com/projects/international-projects/digital-double> 
project for No 10 Downing Street in which we replaced the iconic door with a 
version that transferred light. The work, commissioned by the Great campaign, 
saw us combine our tech skills with those of the master craftsmen atBenchmark 
<https://www.benchmarkfurniture.com/#!div51>, a UK firm considered one of the 
world’s best bespoke furniture manufacturers. Other small but mighty tech 
leaders includeBare Conductive <http://www.bareconductive.com/> and Technology 
Will Save Us <http://www.techwillsaveus.com/>. 

Britain does premium, quality goods better than anyone, so let’s leave mass 
and crass for those that have the scale to compete.

So we need an unholy mix to succeed: the highest-quality education and skills; 
great people; favourable economic winds; and initiatives to promote British 
creative talent overseas. It’s a lot to wrangle. But if the London Games proved 
anything, it’s that we’re not just a nation of inventors; we’re a nation of 
organisers, which will go a long way in ensuring British design survives and 
thrives.


Jason Bruges is founder of JBS Studio <http://www.jasonbruges.com/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>
 