
Dov Charney is trying to buy back American Apparel, the fashion chain he was 
chief executive ofuntil he was sacked following a series of sexual harassment 
allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/21/once-sexy-american-apparel-looks-impotent-impending-doom>
.


Charney, who had led the company since he first hit upon the idea in his Tufts 
University dorm room in 1989 until he was forced out in a 2014 boardroom coup , 
has teamed up with private equity firms Hagan Capital Group and Silver Creek 
Capital Partners in a $300m (£206m) bid for the troubled retailer.

If the bid is accepted, it will allow American Apparel to escape bankruptcy, 
and Charney to be reinstalled as CEO. “Dov’s creativity, entrepreneurialism and 
dedication are the cornerstone ofAmerican Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel>,” Chad Hagan, managing 
partner of Hagan Capital, said. “Removing him from the company’s board and 
leadership was a shortsighted mistake, and we are seeing the results of this 
error unfold in the declining performance of the company today.”

The investors said they would inject $130m, which would allow the company to 
exit bankruptcy protection with about $160m of liquidity and new equity 
compared with about $75m under its debtors’ plan.

Hagan said the debt holder’s plan was “not feasible and will lead to poor 
long-term recoveries for the company’s stakeholders and put thousands of 
manufacturing jobs in Los Angeles at risk”.

A spokesperson for the company said “American Apparel evaluates all bids 
consistently” but was focused on completing its debt restructuring proposal 
before the US bankruptcy court on 20 January.

Charney, who denies the sexual harassment allegations which include claims 
that he made an 18-year-old sales clerk his“sex slave” 
<http://nypost.com/2014/06/20/american-apparel-ceo-ouster-linked-to-sex-slave-case/>
, has accused the company of running a “grotesque” and “hateful” campaign 
against him.

While American Apparel was challenged towards the end of Charney’s reign, it 
got even worse after he left. The company’s losses in the six months to the end 
of June (the latest available) more than doubled to $45.8m on sales of $259m.
 