
1. Ain’t No Thang <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bsg-q0JdgWU>

Though they would reach the mainstream of global pop culture as fully formed 
psychedelic futurists, OutKast’s recorded life began with a sense of them as 
followers, even if there were hints that they would become leaders. Their debut 
album, Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik, contained more than average amounts of 
individuality and iconoclasm for its era, but the 1994 release found André 3000 
and Big Boi still wearing a few influences proudly on their sleeves. That 
befits the album’s status as the work of two high-schoolers who couldn’t quite 
believe their luck – a chance meeting with the Organized Noize production team 
and an impromptu rap session held outside Rico Wade’s car, the pair freestyling 
to the instrumental of A Tribe Called Quest’s Scenario, led to a guest 
appearance ona remix of a single by local stars TLC 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8lmEvSn1cuY>. That in turn introduced OutKast 
to Atlanta’s LaFace label and won them their deal. By the time they knuckled 
down to their first LP, the pair felt different enough from their schoolfriends 
to wear the name OutKast like a badge of honour, but they were still in thrall 
to the styles and sounds of the day. As such, the album is a take on the 
G-funk/gangsta style, executed with plenty of Georgia swagger and the pair’s 
innate determination to express their individuality. Nevertheless, it is a 
remarkable and vivid genre piece: the first stirrings of the style their 
friends Goodie Mob would soon end up naming Dirty South. Ain’t No Thang is a 
standout from what remains a very good record. The lyric is filled with 
menacing imagery (“.357 to yo’ fo’head / There’ll be mo’ dead / ’cos I’m a pro, 
kid”) intercut with the playful chorus that’s designed to add chills by making 
murder sound complacent, but which also serves to remind you that these were 
still schoolboys playing at gangsta rap.

2. Babylon <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TW3h3tk3iME>

OutKast’s second album, ATLiens, is at once the duo’s most individual and 
perhaps also their least successful. As if determined to wrestle free of any 
influences at all, Big and Dré succeeded in crafting a record that stood 
defiantly alone, off to one side of everything else that was going on – not 
just in rap but in music generally. Their singular style came at a cost: a 
concept album recasting the pair as sci-fi superheroes (the CD booklet is a 
comic book that lays out some of the album’s themes), ATLiens works as a dense 
and cohesive whole, but only if the listener can submit to the totality of its 
moods and sound. Elevators (Me and You) was chosen as a single, and is the 
track from the album that has come to stand for this period in the band’s 
evolution. More representative, perhaps because of how it foreshadows future 
themes and approaches, is Babylon, a meditation on drugs, crime, sex and the 
loss of childhood innocence, laced with a sense of both men struggling to 
reconcile the heart and the head, the sacred and the profane, and their 
competing loves for both gangsta/street rap and a more intellectually nuanced 
kind of consciousness-raising music.The Organized Noize production team 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ZIHqeAA_5Y> provide evocatively disconcerting 
backing, sepulchral hums over a descending bass motif and the ghost of a 
chicken-scratch guitar riff, music designed to stalk the subconscious in the 
same way as the irresolvable conundrum of a lyric does. OutKast hadn’t yet got 
to where they would eventually go, but it’s clear they were on the march.

Grace Jones – 10 of the best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/13/grace-jones-10-of-the-best>
3. Aquemini <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2pjHlizcXI8>

On the third album things all finally clicked into gear, and the idea of two 
individuals uniting as something greater than the sum of their parts was pushed 
to the front of the OutKast narrative. The title track melds the pair’s star 
signs to form what they profess will be an unbreakable new whole (“Nothing is 
for sure, nothing lasts forever, nothing is for certain / But until they close 
the curtain / It’s him and I / Aquemini”), but the record also marked the point 
of maturation of the period of searching through antecedents, and 
experimentation with the new, that were the respective hallmarks of the first 
two LPs. The group were starting to produce themselves: they’d learned from 
Organized Noize and – working as a trio called Earthtone III which incorporated 
David “Mr DJ” Sheats – they built this album in the same way, live musicians 
meshing with drum programming to create organic and richly textured tracks 
which nevertheless adhere to hip hop’s loop-and-sample aesthetic. The title 
track seems to coalesce from an aural mist rather than be built brick by brick 
from earth-bound foundations, and finds Big and Dré taking what were already 
their signature styles, rhymes slathered over beats like sauce ladled on to 
spaghetti, and transcending lyrics to produce sparkling shards of poetry. 
“Let’s walk to the bridge now, meet me halfway,” raps André, conjuring crack 
wraiths looking for a way out. “Now you may see some children dead off in the 
pathway / It’s them poor babies walkin’ slowly to the candy lady / It’s lookin’ 
bad – need some hope like the words ‘maybe’, ‘if’, or ‘probably’.”

4. Rosa Parks <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ObU2ghqWtB4>

Aquemini’s first single got the band into trouble when the civil rights icon 
it was named after launched a lawsuit against them, claiming the record sought 
to trade off her name. The opposite was the intention: the song was meant as a 
doff of the cap, and wasn’t about Parks or the bus boycott she inspired, but 
uses the image of that historic moment as a metaphor to illustrate OutKast’s 
combination of principles and iconoclasm. “It was basically a braggadocious hip 
hop song,” André told me in 2003. “It had nothing to do with Rosa Parks. It was 
just a new symbolism. It was another way of saying, ‘Get out of my way.’” The 
production is perhaps the group’s most obviously rustic and redolent of their 
deep south roots – an insistent, almost flamenco, guitar figure gives way to a 
middle eight in which André’s pastor stepfather plays a harmonica solo while 
the musicians stomp on the wooden studio floor to create yet another new 
sub-genre – porch-stoop country hip hop.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdrsQLEU0N1Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdrsQLEU0N1Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdrsQLEU0N1Y&media=>
 Rosa Parks by Outkast. 
5. B.O.B. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lVehcuJXe6I>

The first single from the fourth album Stankonia has been interpreted as an 
anti-war polemic and would acquire a veneer of dread prophecy as the Bush 
administration’s wars pitched America into a terrifying 21st century. But at 
its heart, it’s a song about André’s dissatisfaction with the music of the late 
90s and his and Big Boi’s attempts to pull their atrophying genre back to life. 
“The song was a title before it was anything,” André told me in that 2003 
interview. “It had no music or lyrics, I just wrote ‘Bombs Over Baghdad’ down 
on a piece of paper and put it in my pocket, because I knew it was a dope 
title.” The group had been touring in the UK when the Clinton administration 
took potshots against Saddam Hussein in 1998. “It had nothing to do with the 
war: it was symbolism,” he said. “Warning shots – that’s what ran round my 
head. I felt that’s what people in music were doing. Everybody was kind of 
playing around, too easy and too calm: everything was smooth, everybody was 
cool. So it was a reaction to that. I wanted to hear something fierce and 
urgent. Bombs Over Baghdad was really like a slap in the face – kind of wake 
everybody up. ‘Don’t pull your thang out unless you came to bang’ [the song’s 
hook] was like: ‘Hey, don’t get in the ring unless you want to do it.’” The 
track – production is credited to Earthtone III, but André says it was mostly 
his own work – adopts the high-speed attack of the drum’n’bass OutKast had 
encountered in Britain, adds a histrionic, hyperventilated guitar solo, then 
rushes in to a coda where a chant of “Power, music, electric revival” responds 
to the rappers’ breakneck verse calls. Nothing in even this band’s catalogue of 
eclectic excess had adequately prepared their audience for it: its effect was 
indelible and its impact considerable. It would be their next single – the far 
more conventional, if no less singular,Ms Jackson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MYxAiK6VnXw> – that became a big hit, but 
B.O.B. is arguably OutKast’s greatest moment.

6. The Whole World ft Killer Mike <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YCLIPwLSUUA>

One of three new songs added to a best-of, The Whole World arrived late in 
2001 and, while it may have been recorded beforehand, it stands as one of pop’s 
first and most astute responses to the 9/11 attacks. From André’s shout-out to 
laid-off airport workers to Big Boi’s reference to black boxes, the allusions 
to those terrible events are typically quotidian: despite their sci-fi 
dalliances, OutKast have always been a group whose focus has been on the human 
dimension of the situations their writing describes. As ever, though, this 
isn’t a song about only one thing: indeed, the primary topic appears to be a 
coming to terms with and response to the fame the group had found after Ms 
Jackson propelled them to the pinnacle of pop stardom, and the way that 
celebrity culture feeds off the foibles and failures of the famous. The 
broken-down beat gives the whole piece a feel of the archaic – a deliberate 
musical reaction to the futurism of the record that gave them that elevated 
place in the public’s consciousness, perhaps. As if to emphasise its sense of 
uneasy dislocation, both Big and Dré rap across the syncopated beat as if 
delivering lyrics over a standard 4/4 track: Killer Mike, in an early 
appearance long before he found fame in Run the Jewels, approaches the task 
with a markedly different attitude, constructing his verse in bouncing 
groupings of syllables of a kind not seen in rap since Chuck D’s second verse in
 Bring the Noise <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l_Jeyif7bB4> more than a 
decade earlier.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DudmTfK6_aM8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DudmTfK6_aM8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DudmTfK6_aM8&media=>
 Outkast – The Whole World ft Killer Mike. 
7. Dungeon Family – Trans DF Express 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LEwSJM3hQh0>

With OutKast established stars, Goodie Mob widely eulogised cult artists and 
other members of their extendedAtlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta> family getting solo deals, 2002 
seemed like a good time for a collective album. Even In Darkness presented 
Dungeon Family as a Dirty South Wu-Tang Clan, a bewildering array of lyrical 
techniques and vocal styles from rappers attempting an extended conceptual 
metaphor that likened their rap styles to medieval swordplay (the kung-fu 
references are replaced here by a knights of the round table conceit) given a 
unifying musical backdrop courtesy of Organized Noize. Big and Dré are 
prominent on the record but, tellingly, never overbearingly so: duties were 
shared out democratically, with everyone from the collective being given their 
chance to shine. The Kraftwerk-referencing first single was the only exception 
– to try to give the project the biggest possible commercial push, the track 
united the most prominent and popular of the DF MCs (Cee-Lo, André, Goodie 
Mob’s Big Gipp and Big Boi).

Belle and Sebastian – 10 of the best
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/03/belle-and-sebastian-10-of-the-best>
8. GhettoMusick <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EAgfrE28gpc>

The indivisibility they’d trumpeted on Aquemini was always going to be a tough 
trick to pull off indefinitely, and by the time a fifth album was ready, in 
2003, the duo had surrendered to the inevitable. Rather than two parts of the 
same whole, OutKast now presented themselves as interdependent individuals, and 
the album – Speakerboxxx/The Love Below – was essentially two solo albums stuck 
together with a deliberate lack of effort at concealing the fact. In truth, 
André’s portion (The Love Below) was a genuine solo affair, while Big’s disc 
included a few moments where the pair had worked in the same collaborative 
manner as before. As such, GhettoMusick was among the double disc’s few genuine 
OutKast songs – the beat was crafted by André, with him providing ad libs and 
the chorus, while the rapped verses are left to Big Boi. The only other way it 
links to previous OutKast records is in its rejection of all templates and 
preconceptions: it’s breathtaking in both its pace and in the contempt it 
appears to hold all of the music that has come before it in. The main part of 
the track is a frenetic buzz, punctuated by André’s lines about trying to find 
a way to fit in and to get the music out; a series of ruptures rend this 
disconcerting continuum, the first highlighting an electronic organ buried deep 
in the mix, the next two inserting huge chunks of Patti LaBelle’sLove, Need and 
Want You <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NZ_oKq8jwu4>, with no attempt made to 
hide the fact that it’s a far slower track with no obvious connection to the 
new piece into which it’s stitched, Frankenstein’s monster-like.

9. Hey Ya!

The nearest André’s The Love Below gets to a genuine OutKast song is Roses, 
which Big Boi co-wrote and -produced. But even though it’s all his own work – 
he plays all the instruments, as the cheeky and hugely entertaining video 
implies – Hey Ya is the song for which OutKast are best known. There’s an 
argument to be made for Big having a part in it even by his absence: few other 
professional partnerships would have been strong enough to permit each member 
the freedom to work individually while still remaining part of the collective. 
So in that sense Hey Ya is testament to Big Boi’s open-mindedness and his 
ability to enable and encourage his bandmate’s experimentation. The track had a 
lengthy gestation – this writer’s first exposure to it was in demo form, played 
on repeat from a CDR in a photo studio in New York in November 2001, while 
OutKast, Goodie Mob, other Dungeon Family members and Bootsy Collins posed for 
a session for Dazed & Confused magazine. Even at that stage the lyrics were 
finished, and there was talk that the track might be included as one of the new 
songs on the best-of that included The Whole World. “I was just talking to my 
homeboy, he say: ‘How you make a song like that, man? It’s jammin’, but you 
from the hood! How you make a song like that?’,” André said, explaining the 
philosophy behind what he considered a Beatles-influenced track to Collins. “I 
mean, white people, they been imitatin’ black music for so long because they 
like it so they want to do it. But flip it around! We imitate their music and 
funk it up! It’s all one cycle. Jimi learned from Bob Dylan. It really ain’t no 
black and white thing – it’s in the music.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPWgvGjAhvIw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPWgvGjAhvIw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPWgvGjAhvIw&media=>
 Outkast – Hey Ya! 
10. Morris Brown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHNSmlZ9Rwo>

The original plan for Speakerboxxx/The Love Below had been for the album to be 
the soundtrack to an OutKast film. That idea wasn’t cancelled, just postponed – 
until 2006, when Idlewild emerged. Both film and soundtrack album struggle 
these days to climb out of the shadow of the group’s earlier work, but there’s 
much to commend on what remains, as of this writing, the band’s last album. 
André doesn’t appear on the second single, Morris Brown, but produced it: 
apparently recorded during the Speakerboxxx sessions but shelved, it emerges 
here as a typically acerbic piece, a forced marriage between vaudeville, rap 
and marching band music (the title comes from the Atlanta college, whose band 
features on the song) that no group other than OutKast would have ever dared 
attempt. Following Idlewild’s release, the band went on hiatus. Big Boi 
released two solo albums as André contributed a string of cameos to other 
people’s records while building an acting CV. In 2014 they reunited for a 
number of festival gigs around the globe, and apparently still work together 
from time to time – but any suggestions that a new record is in the works have 
been strenuously and emphatically denied.
 