
Owen Farrell <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/owen-farrell> will make his 
first start at fly-half under Eddie Jones after George Ford was dropped for 
England’s opening Test against Australia on Saturday.

Australia not worried by England’s ‘Bodyline’ threats, says Michael Cheika
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/09/australia-not-worried-by-england-bodyline-threats-michael-cheika-rugby-union>
Farrell, who has been in outstanding form for double winners Saracens, will 
act as playmaker-in-chief at Suncorp Stadium after playing every match of the 
recentgrand slam triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
 at inside-centre. England fielded Ford at fly-half throughout the Six Nations, 
but he must now settle for a place among the replacements.

Luther Burrell fills the No12 shirt vacated by Farrell despite having been 
called into the touring party only once Manu Tuilagi wasruled out by a 
hamstring injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/manu-tuilagi-hamstring-injury-england-six-nations-leicester>
.

In a surprise selection on the left wing, Marland Yarde has been preferred to 
Jack Nowell, another of Jones’ grand slam heroes and a player who has impressed 
all season. “We have picked a side to win in Brisbane. As always selection was 
tight and naturally players are disappointed, but we’ve gone with a 23 that has 
a good mix of experience and youth,” Jones said.

The pack is unchanged from the eight that took the field against France in the 
final match of the Six Nations, with Dylan Hartley at the helm of a team 
containing 539 caps.

Jones has opted for two second rows on the bench in Joe Launchbury and 
Courtney Lawes, where they are joined by Nowell, with Jack Clifford dropping 
out of the squad altogether. Alex Goode, the newly-crowned Premiership player 
of the season, has been left out of the 23 with Mike Brown poised to win his 
50th cap.

England are targeting a first series victory in Australia having won just 
three of their 17 Tests in the country.

“We aim to win every game we play and I am pleased with our preparation since 
we landed in Australia. The group have acclimatised well, trained hard and 
there’s a buzz around the camp,” Jones said. “If you look at England’s record 
in Australia it’s pretty ordinary. We’ve only ever won three games in Australia 
so it’s a great opportunity to put down a marker and create history.

“We’re excited to be playing against a strong Australian team in their back 
yard. The Wallabies are ranked second in the world and have the World Rugby 
coach of the year, so that’s why they start as favourites. There’s a lot of 
expectation on them to win the series convincingly.”

He added: “We have a young squad with an average age of 24 so we are still 
developing and improving. It’ll be a great challenge for us and one we’re 
looking forward to meeting head on.”

England team to face Australia in Brisbane on Saturday

15 Mike Brown, 14 Anthony Watson, 13 Jonathan Joseph, 12 Luther Burrell, 11 
Marland Yarde,10 Owen Farrell, 9 Ben Youngs, 8 Billy Vunipola, 7 James Haskell, 
6 Chris Robshaw, 5 George Kruis, 4 Maro Itoje, 3 Dan Cole, 2 Dylan Hartley 
(capt),1 Mako Vunipola.
 