
Oxford University’s two most senior figures have offered competing visions of 
the institution’s recruitment policies and the legacy of its traditions during 
a ceremony to installOxford’s first female vice-chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/05/oxford-vice-chancellor-louise-richardson-university-admissions>
 in its nearly 800-year history.

The woman taking that role, Louise Richardson, and Chris Patten, the 
Conservative grandee who serves in the ceremonial post of chancellor, gave 
subtly differing views on how the university can maintains its success, with 
Richardson saying it must not let its traditions fossilise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-louise-richardson-tradition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5979819c8c6f9a74219e166d43ccb46bdcc0758a%2F24_318_4904_2943%2F4904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oxford's%20leaders%20present%20competing%20views%20of%20university%20and%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-louise-richardson-tradition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oxford%27s%20leaders%20present%20competing%20views%20of%20university%20and%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-louise-richardson-tradition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5979819c8c6f9a74219e166d43ccb46bdcc0758a%2F24_318_4904_2943%2F4904.jpg>
 The chancellor and new vice-chancellor process along Broad Street, Oxford. 
Photograph: David Hartley/Rex/Shutterstock 
Richardson, an Irish-born former Harvard professor and principal of the 
University of St Andrews, argued that one of Oxford’s biggest challenges was in 
identifying and attracting talented scholars. “In an increasingly complex 
world, the best may not be those who look and sound like ourselves. They may 
not be those who naturally think of coming to Oxford,” she said. “Those with 
the greatest potential may not be those who have already attained the most. We 
need to go out and seek them.”

She added that said the university’s rich traditions “must not become an 
immutable bundle passed like a sealed package from one generation to the next”. 
“If we permit our traditions to become a legitimisation for the exclusion of 
others, we do these traditions a disservice. We cherish our traditions, but we 
must not allow them to become a rationalisation for the protection of 
privilege,” she added.

Oxford vice-chancellor: ‘Tackling elitism can be done. I mean, I went to a 
rural school in Ireland’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/05/oxford-vice-chancellor-louise-richardson-university-admissions>
Her comments were countered by Patten, the former Hong Kong governor, who 
criticised recent suggestions that Oxford’s admissions rules should be widened 
to encourage students from state schools and disadvantaged backgrounds. “We 
should not be harried into ill-considered actions ... actions, moreover, which 
may cast doubt on the ability of some who study here to gain a place at this 
university on their own merits,” Patten said.

“I fear that some conceivably well-intentioned efforts to make progress in 
these areas may have the effect of deterring applications from exactly the sort 
of young men and women whom we want to welcome to our university in larger 
numbers.”

Patten delivered remarks that appeared to be aimed at protests over the 
university’s continued honouring ofCecil Rhodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/12/cecil-rhodes-scholars-reject-hypocrisy-claims-amid-row-over-oriel-college-statue>
, the controversial colonial-era benefactor who endowed the prestigious Rhodes 
scholarship programme. “Our history is not a blank page on which we can write 
our own version of what it should have been according to our contemporary views 
and prejudices,” Patten said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-louise-richardson-tradition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dc8a312b3f6a54702c69cdf979ef0737a4a6751%2F0_160_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oxford's%20leaders%20present%20competing%20views%20of%20university%20and%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-louise-richardson-tradition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oxford%27s%20leaders%20present%20competing%20views%20of%20university%20and%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-louise-richardson-tradition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dc8a312b3f6a54702c69cdf979ef0737a4a6751%2F0_160_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Louise Richardson’s specialist area of study is terrorism. Photograph: David 
Hartley/Rex/Shutterstock 
Patten also decried recent controversies over free speech on campuses, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/13/ban-germaine-greer-universities-free-speech>
 saying: “Because we value tolerance, we have to listen to people who shout – 
at a university, mark you – about speech crimes and ‘no-platforming’. [But] one 
thing we should never tolerate is intolerance. We do not want to turn our 
universities into drab, bland suburbs of the soul where the diet is 
intellectual porridge.”

In his opening address to the university’s congregation at the Sheldonian 
Theatre, Patten welcomed Richardson as “the 272nd vice chancellor, or 
thereabouts, since 1230”. “I know you would wish to be judged primarily not on 
the glass ceilings you have smashed, but on your achievements as an academic 
leader on both sides of the Atlantic.”

Oxford and Cambridge condemned over failure to improve state school access
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/12/oxford-cambridge-state-school-admissions-failure>
Richardson, an expert on terrorism, responded that she was “in truth, daunted” 
by her new post, before criticising what she saw as rising levels of government 
oversight within higher education. “The ever increasing cost of compliance with 
ever more bureaucratic, ever more intrusive and ever less useful regulation – 
much of it, paradoxically enough, designed to ensure value for money – instead 
diverts resources, both financial and intellectual, from the central tasks of 
research and teaching. Strikingly, there is little or no effort to measure the 
effectiveness of these measurements.”

But Oxford cannot rely on state funding to compete with the “eye-watering 
endowments” of US universities, she warned.
 