
An Oxford University college is piloting a scheme to recruit students from 
disadvantaged backgrounds – and discover potential graduates who would not 
otherwise win admission.

The scheme launched by Lady Margaret Hall <https://lmhfoundationyear.com/> 
(LMH) – headed by the former Guardian editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger – is 
based on a programme used by Trinity College Dublin to broaden its 
undergraduate admissions, and will initially offer 12 students a year of 
intensive study on a foundation course.

If successful, the foundation-year students will be admitted by the college to 
take a three-year undergraduate honours degree at Oxford.

The plan was welcomed by the Labour MP David Lammy, who has previously been a 
fierce critic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/dec/06/the-oxbridge-whitewash-black-students>
 of Oxford and Cambridge’s admissions procedures and their failure to recruit 
black and other ethnic minority undergraduates.

“I have long argued that we need to increase diversity at Oxford University 
and action of this sort is long overdue,” Lammy said. “It is exactly the sort 
of thing that needs to be done. I will be following the scheme’s progress in 
supporting talented students from disadvantaged backgrounds progress to Oxford 
with great interest.”

The move follows a call by Oxford’s new vice-chancellor, Louise Richardson, 
for the university to show “agility and generosity in trying to ensure that 
children with the greatest potential have the chance to study at Oxford”.

Richardson welcomed the LMH pilot, saying: “One of the many advantages of the 
collegiate system is that it allows us to engage in a small scale pilot like 
this to help us identify innovative ways to recruit under-represented groups. I 
wish the programme at Lady Margaret Hall every success.”

Les Ebdon, director of the Office for Fair Access university admissions 
watchdog, praised the pilot as “innovative and important”.


Oxford has been bruised in recent months following high-profile criticism 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/article1662889.ece> of its admissions 
record by David Cameron, theSocial Mobility and Child Poverty Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/12/oxford-cambridge-state-school-admissions-failure>
 – headed by the former Labour minister Alan Milburn – and the Sutton Trust, in 
part for its continuing recruitment of a high percentage of students from 
independent schools.

Under the LMH scheme, potential foundation-year students will be recruited 
using similar criteria to the university’s access scheme, which targets 
disadvantaged areas and neighbourhoods with low university participation and 
state schools where few pupils apply to Oxford.

Twenty-one Oxbridge colleges took no black students last year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/dec/06/oxford-colleges-no-black-students>
The initial costs of the pilot have been covered by donations from two LMH 
alumni, Neil Simpkins and Michael O’Sullivan, and the scheme will be aimed at 
students from the London borough of Haringey, as well as Herefordshire and 
Gloucestershire, and Monmouthshire, Powys and Ceredigion local authorities in 
Wales.

“This pilot scheme will enable young people from under-represented groups to 
access the transformative opportunity of an Oxford education, while also 
enhancing the diversity of our student body,” Rusbridger said.

After running a similar scheme for 17 years, Trinity College Dublin said more 
than 90% of its foundation-year students progressed to taking full 
undergraduate degrees, performing as well as students admitted via conventional 
routes.

In a blog on LMH’s site 
<http://www.lmh.ox.ac.uk/Academic-community/The-Principal/Hell-s-Passage/April-2016/Insert-Title.aspx>
, Rusbridger said: “Like many good ideas, this one started in a pub [during a 
discussion with the provost of Trinity, Paddy Prendergast].”

Foundation year access courses have been successful in the UK and the US, and 
are well established at universities such asDurham 
<https://www.dur.ac.uk/foundation.centre/> and Cardiff. The LMH scheme is the 
first of its kind at Oxford.

 