
The discovery this week of “unusual” bacteria in the bones of Pablo Neruda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/pablo-neruda> has reopened the possibility 
that one of the 20th century’s greatest poets was poisoned in a Chilean 
hospital.

The announcement was made by a forensic team in Spain four months after a 
Chilean judge declared that the investigation had run its course and the body 
should be reburied.

Neruda, who won the 1971 Nobel prize for literature, died on 23 September 
1973, just 12 days after GeneralAugusto Pinochet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet> seized power in a military coup. 
Neruda’s chauffeur, Manuel Araya, told the Mexican magazine Proceso in 2011 
that the poet, a longtime member of Chile’s communist party, had been murdered 
by an injection to his stomach by political enemies as he lay in his hospital 
bed in the country’s capital, Santiago.


Pablo Neruda poems 'of extraordinary quality' discovered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/19/pablo-neruda-poems-20-unseen> 
Mario Carroza, the judge in charge of the case, ordered the exhumation of 
Neruda’s body from his grave at his house at Isla Negra, on Chile’s Pacific 
coast, on 8 April 2013. His bones were examined inChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile>, North Carolina in the United States, 
Murcia in southern Spain and, more recently, Switzerland. In November 2013, 
forensic experts announced that they had found no evidence of poisoning, 
although the investigation was not formally ended.

The Chilean government reopened the case in January this year, ordering new 
tests designed to look for protein damage caused by chemical agents, and a 
month later – in the absence of any signs of poisoning – Carroza ordered that
Neruda’s body should be returned to his grave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/23/poet-pablo-neruda-body-reburied-chile>
 in front of his beloved coastal home.

 However, the forensic team in Murcia has announced it has found three types 
of protein. Two of these could be explained by Neruda’s advanced prostate 
cancer, but the source of the third protein, staphylococcus bacteria, was 
unclear. Dr Aurelio Luna, a member of the Murcia team, said: “We have to be 
cautious when examining the data. At the moment, all possibilities are open. I 
very much doubt that this was due to an infection incurred during hospital 
treatment. It was either a provoked infection or it was the result of an 
endogenous process which the poet was carrying inside him and which was 
accelerated by the decreased defence mechanism caused by the tumour process.”

 Dr Luna added that further forensic tests would show whether the bacteria 
were of the kind that most individuals carry as pathogens or whether the 
bacteria had been “modified to increase their virulence”. Asked whether Neruda 
could have received an injection by a “third party”, Dr Luna replied: “It’s one 
option, but to reach a definitive conclusion, we must first determine the 
genetic characteristics of the bacteria. At the moment, we are not excluding 
any possibilities.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpablo-neruda-poisoning-doubts-fuelled-by-new-forensic-tests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433430886916%2Fb4990501-ff10-43ec-9bb5-691bb65ac517-2060x1393.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pablo%20Neruda%20poisoning%20doubts%20fuelled%20by%20new%20forensic%20tests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpablo-neruda-poisoning-doubts-fuelled-by-new-forensic-tests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pablo%20Neruda%20poisoning%20doubts%20fuelled%20by%20new%20forensic%20tests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjun%2F05%2Fpablo-neruda-poisoning-doubts-fuelled-by-new-forensic-tests%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433430886916%2Fb4990501-ff10-43ec-9bb5-691bb65ac517-2060x1393.jpeg>
 From left: Chilean president Salvador Allende – who died during Pinochet’s 
1973 coup – with Pablo Neruda and communist politician Volodia Teitelboim. 
Photograph: Bloomsbury 
 There are various problems for those investigating the poisoning allegations, 
most significantly the absence of medical records or any convincing evidence as 
to who had access to Neruda in his dying moments in the Santiago hospital. “We 
are dealing with many pieces of a puzzle,” said Dr Luna. “We need to gather all 
possible information to be able to reconstruct what happened in the poet’s 
final six hours.”

 Supporters of the poisoning theory point out that on 22 September 1973, the 
day before his death, Neruda had been offered safe passage out of Chile to 
Mexico, from where he would have represented a serious political threat to the 
military junta in Santiago. The poet chose to delay his departure.

 It has also been noted that another political opponent of the regime, former 
presidentEduardo Frei Montalva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/08/murder-chile-president-frei-montalva>
, died in the same Santiago hospital, the Santa María Clinic, in 1982 after 
expressing his opposition to the military dictatorship. Frei’s death was 
initially attributed to septic shock during a routine operation, but a 2006 
investigation proved that he had been assassinated with mustard gas and 
thallium.

 The Neruda Foundation in Santiago insists that, more than two years after the 
initial exhumation of the poet’s body, his remains must be reburied as a matter 
of urgency. However, some surviving members of Neruda’s family refuse to accept 
that the matter is closed, forcing a postponement of the reinterment which was 
originally meant to happen in April.

The family remain divided. One nephew, Bernardo Reyes, has consistently 
ridiculed the poisoning claims, while another, Rodolfo Reyes, takes the 
accusations seriously and is urging that all possible tests must be conducted 
before Neruda’s body is finally returned to his resting-place alongside his 
third wife, Matilde Urrutia.

 * Adam Feinstein’s biography, Pablo Neruda: A Passion for Life 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/pablo-neruda-9780747571919/>, was reissued in an 
updated edition by Bloomsbury in 2013
 