
The last day of the fifth Test always looked like it would be a formality and 
so it proved this morning. By the time Jimmy Anderson fell to Glenn McGrath, 
the result of the match and the series had been known for a long time.

So rather than pore over Australia's domination, the press Down Under chose to 
pay tribute to the men wearing the baggy green for the last time. As she saw 
Shane Warne trudge off the SCG pitch, the Sydney Morning Herald'sChloe Saltau 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/news/what-do-you-get-a-retired-spinner-who-has-everything/2007/01/05/1167777280390.html>
 wondered what you get for the spinner that has everything. The answer? "A way 
to replace the intangible, exhilarating rush he used to get when his captain 
tossed him the ball and when he, in turn, tossed his floppy white hat to the 
umpire and loosened up his right shoulder."

Peter Lalor 
<http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,20867,21016914-5001505,00.html> 
in the Australian, meanwhile, says that during his long career, Justin Langer 
has epitomised Australia's fighting spirit: "You want to smell the spent 
passion? Stick your nose in Justin Langer's sports bag and get a whiff of that 
faded baggy green."

While other journalists were taking in the heady scent of Langer's sweat, Greg 
Baum 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/news/ashes-legends-take-final-bow/2007/01/05/1167777283665.html?page=2>
 had an eye on the future. "During yesterday's lap of honour, Ponting took 
Michael Clarke aside and urged him to absorb the scene," he writes. "If it was 
to be repeated next Ashes series, he said, it was now up to them. So did an era 
end. So, perhaps, did an era begin."

Trevor Marshallsea 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/news/more-history-awaits-ponting/2007/01/05/1167777280396.html>
 puts part of Australia's fearsome drive in the series down to the hurt of 
their Ashes defeat in 2005: "Australia has hit back with unstoppable force 
after its shame in coughing up the urn it had come to regard as its own."

But unfortunately for the Barmy Army, the Australian's Andrew Ramsey 
<http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,20867,21016917-5001505,00.html> 
doesn't think England's players looked like they would carry that drive into 
the next Ashes. "Perhaps it was due to the vastly different scoreline - 
Australia held hopes of levelling the 2005 series until the final session, 
while England was a beaten team with two Tests remaining - but there did not 
appear to be the same steeliness in the England players' eyes yesterday," he 
writes.

Anyway, Australia have got other things to think about now, adds Ramsey. 
Forget the Ashes, the real enemy lies across the Tasman Sea: "What's really 
worth toasting is the imminent arrival of some new opposition. Ring in the New 
Year.Bring on New Zealand 
<http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,20867,21016793-5001505,00.html>."
 