
How many full-time symphony orchestras are there based in London? Five, of 
course: the London Symphony, the BBC Symphony, the London Philharmonic, 
Philharmonia and Royal Philharmonic. Easy! But that’s not quite the whole 
truth: two of the finest orchestras in the city are the orchestras of English 
National Opera and the Royal Opera House. On Monday 4 May, after a long 
struggle to release them from the pit,Antonio Pappano will conduct his Royal 
Opera House musicians 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/antonio-pappano-and-the-orchestra-of-the-royal-opera-house-by-orchestral-concert>
 in a symphonic concert in which they will take centre stage at Covent Garden 
for a programme of Chausson, Bernstein, Scriabin and Ravel.
 Emerged from the gloom … the Royal Opera House orchestra. Photograph: Johann 
Persson/ROH 
The ROH players do occasionally have the chance to emerge from the gloom to 
reveal the faces behind the opera house’s musical brilliance, above all on 
their visits to the Proms, but Pappano wants to make this symphonic concert a 
regular fixture of the Covent Garden calendar – and quite right, too. His 
orchestral players are the unsung heroes of the Royal Opera’s success over the
12 seasons of Pappano’s time in charge 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/news/watch-antonio-pappano-in-conversation-if-youre-the-musical-boss-of-the-house-you-have-to-stick-your-nose-into-all-corners-of-the-repertory>
, and they have the potential, I think, to challenge the country’s orchestral 
hierarchy on the concert platform as well as in their underground operatic 
lair. After all, the ensemble known as theVienna Philharmonic 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b_3VwD7bmZE> plays, for most of the year, as 
the orchestra of the Vienna State Opera, and Daniel Barenboim’sStaatskapelle 
Berlin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jNiy4WN31Js> is really his orchestra of 
the Berliner Staatsoper.

As Pappano pointed out when he launched the Royal Opera’s 2015-16 season last 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/15/royal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season>
, the ROH orchestra is, of course, also a dance orchestra, playing for the 
Royal Ballet as well, and Monday’s programme reflects their rhythmic prowess in 
Bernstein’s Fancy Free. But the rest of the programme is cunningly designed to 
reflect and amplify the fantastical, orgiastic soundworld of the score of 
Polish composerKarol Szymanowski’s opera King Roger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/apr/29/szymanowski-krol-roger-roh-dangerously-intoxicating>
, whichCovent Garden is staging for the first time this month (it opens tonight 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/krol-roger-by-kasper-holten?gclid=CNzs3pjNnsUCFQzJtAodIHwAiw>
).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fpappano-puts-his-royal-opera-orchestra-centre-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430414616149%2F4a56dff5-050a-4a6a-b26b-18faf88787c8-2060x1455.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pappano%20puts%20his%20Royal%20Opera%20House%20orchestra%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fpappano-puts-his-royal-opera-orchestra-centre-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pappano%20puts%20his%20Royal%20Opera%20House%20orchestra%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fpappano-puts-his-royal-opera-orchestra-centre-stage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430414616149%2F4a56dff5-050a-4a6a-b26b-18faf88787c8-2060x1455.jpeg>
 Antonio Pappano. Photograph: David Rose/Rex 
There’s a close connection between Szymanowski  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LIWgw5Q-JSg>and Ravel and Scriabin, and 
Pappano said that he wants to continue the symbiosis between the concert 
programme and their operatic work next year, with a programme of Russian music 
to complement their production of Mussorgsky’sBoris Godunov 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/boris-godunov-by-richard-jones> already 
announced for 2016’s concert.

These are projects that mean a lot to Pappano, who wants to show off the 
all-round magnificence of his musicians. The coming concert could well prove to 
be the moment when the ROH Orchestra began its journey to become recognised as 
a great symphonic as well as operatic ensemble.
 