
Don't miss


No question what's the event of the day, as Oscar Pistorius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius> and Alan Oliveira square up 
again in the T44 100m final, four days after the Brazilian triumphed in the 
200m, enraging Pistorius who claimed he had a technical advantage. Neither man 
will start the event as favourite, however - the fastest man in the field is in 
fact 19-year-old Briton Jonnie Peacock, who became the quickest amputee 
sprinter ever when he broke the world record in June. American Blake Leeper, 
the only other competitor to have broken 11 seconds, is also worth keeping an 
eye on.

9.24pm

Sport of the day: sailing


A big day in Weymouth, when all three of the sailing competitions reach their 
conclusion after six days of competition. Competitors sail singly, in pairs or 
in a team of three, all in keel boats to reduce the chances of capsizing. 
Britain hasn't won a medal in sailing since the event was admitted to the 
Paralympic programme in Sydney in 2000, with Germany and the US the leading 
nations to beat. Helena Lucas, the only woman among 16 competitors in the 
single person 2.4mR keelboat was guaranteed silver and looked good for gold 
going into the final day of competition. Duo Alexandra Rickham and Niki Birrell 
are guaranteed bronze or better.

From 10am

Britons to watch


Time to dust off all that new-found road racing expertise, thanks to 
Armitstead, Cavendish, Wiggins et al, as ParalympicsGB's golden girl Sarah 
Storey goes for her fourth win of these Games, and Jon-Allan Butterworth aims 
to top his three silvers, in their respective road races. Brands Hatch and 
surrounding roads provide the course.

Men's individual C4-5 road race, 10.30am; Women's individual c1-3 road race, 
10.32am

Weather


Mostly sunny
 