
"Don't focus on the disability," Oscar Pistorius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius> told the world before these 
Games. "Focus on the ability." In the end there was no room for sentimental 
thoughts or emotional considerations. The T44 200m final was not a procession, 
nor a coronation, but a race, raw and fast. And Pistorius lost. He was beaten 
to the line by Brazil's Alan Fonteles Cardoso Oliveira winning in a time of 
21.45sec.

Pistorius was .07sec behind him. He reacted angrily, saying "we are not racing 
a fair race". He claimed that Oliveira's running blades were too long, breaking 
regulations, and calling for the International Paralympic Committee to 
investigate.

Pistorius was furious that he had been denied the hat-trick of titles. He has 
come along way since he won this title for the first time in 2004, and this was 
supposed to be his peak. Back then he was, in his own words, "a young kid with 
braces and curly hair". He had only been running for a year or so, having been 
forced to give up rugby after he shattered his knee while playing in a school 
match. He has changed more still since he won it for a second time, in Beijing 
in 2008. He is leaner, sharper, and faster, having lost 11kg.

Early in 2009 Pistorius was badly injured in a boating accident. He spent five 
days in intensive care. It changed his attitude. Before that, he had only 
dreamed of being an elite athlete. After it, he started to live and train like 
one. He is not the only one. Oliveira, 20, had his legs amputated at an early 
age.

Around them, behind them as he crossed the line, were six other men, each with 
their own stories and struggles. At least one of them wouldn't have been here 
at all had it not been for Pistorius. Germany's David Behre, running in lane 
one, was hit by a freight train at a level crossing in September 2007. He was 
cycling home from a party, late at night. The doctors at the Duisburg Trauma 
Centre amputated both his legs. The day after the operation, Behre watched a 
documentary about Pistorius as he lay in his hospital bed, and he thought to 
himself "maybe I can do that too". When he first heard that story, Pistorius 
says he thought: "I wish that hadn't happened to you." Not out of pity, he 
explained, but because "he is quick, and quite a threat in the 200m."

There is a little truth in that joke. The only labels Pistorius wants to claim 
for himself are those of "athlete", and "champion", he has never wanted to be 
known as disabled, differently-abled, a role model, an inspiration, or any 
other of the many tags people have given him in his career. He rejects the idea 
that he is a pioneer.

"I have just been hard working and talented enough to compete on an 
international level," he says. "I did not do this to open the doors. The doors 
have always been open."

And others have been through them. He is not the first Paralympian to cross 
over into the Olympics, only the most famous. Back in 2006, when Pistorius was 
competing in the International Paralympic World Cup, obituaries were being 
written for Neroli Fairhall, who died that year, aged 61. She was a paraplegic 
who competed in archery for New Zealand at the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles.

There have been others too. The partially-blind runner Marla Runyon finished 
eighth in the 1,500m for the USA at the 2000 Olympics. Natalia Partyka, a table 
tennis player who was born without a right forearm, represented Poland at the 
Olympics in both 2008 and 2012. And Pistorius' own teammate Natalie du Toit, 
who lost her left leg after being hit by a car, swam in the open water marathon 
in Beijing.

None of them were blessed with the rewards that Pistorius has found. Estimates 
suggest that he is earning around $2m a year in sponsorship, through his deals 
with BT, Nike, Oakley, and others. That ranks him fifth on the list of his 
sport's highest earners, a long way behind Usain Bolt but pretty much on a par 
with anyone else. Other than the fact that he has a savvy agent and a 
photogenic smile, the difference between Pistorius and those who came before 
him is that the governing body of his sport, the IAAF, tried to stand in his 
way.

For four months, between December 2007 and March 2008, the running blades 
Pistorius uses were illegal in able-bodied competition. The decision was 
apparently borne out of genuine doubt about whether or not he had an unfair 
advantage. Aimee Mullins, a double amputee herself and the chef de mission of 
the USA's Paralympic team at these Games, was just one who suspected that other 
motivations were at work. "If we allow a person who we view as our inferior to 
play with us, and then that person beats us, what does that say about us?" The 
controversy catapulted him on to the front pages. But Pistorius turns surly 
when the topic comes up now. After all the hours spent arguing his case in 
laboratories and courtrooms, he has no desire to restate his case now. The 
blades he uses now are the same ones he was on then, though the manufacturer 
has given improved models, explicitly designed to cope with running around 
bends, to his rivals. It was an ironic twist that he responded to this defeat 
by attacking his rival, just as others once attacked him.



â€¢ This article was amended on 3 September 2012. The original said that 
Oliveira was born without fibula bones. That is true of Pistorius, not Oliveira.
 