
The parents of a British-Australian man killed in a road accident during last 
year’s controversial European Games in Baku have called onBernie Ecclestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone> and Formula One’s 
governing body to do more to improve road safety in the city before its first 
grand prix in June.

The race will take place almost a year after 23-year-old Micah Maxwell-Milne, 
who was working for the company staging the opening and closing ceremonies at
the European Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-games-2015>, was 
killed after the Mercedes in which he was travelling collided with a Ford 
Transit in central Baku. Three other technicians involved in the same incident 
were airlifted to Turkey with serious injuries.

Azerbaijan has one of the worst road safety records in Europe and Micah’s 
mother, Jennifer Maxwell-Milne, saidFormula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> and the FIA had a duty to try to 
do something about the situation.

“Bernie Ecclestone, the Azerbaijan government and all Formula One stakeholders 
owe it to the fans and people of Azerbaijan to do more to ensure the safety of 
the many thousands of visitors to Baku this year,” she said. “We have been told 
that driving licences are for sale on the streets of Baku. Surely more must be 
done to protect those travelling toAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> this summer.”

The FIA runs a range of road safety programmes and says on its website 
<http://www.fia.com/road-safety> it is “dedicated to improving the safety of 
everyday road users throughout the world”.

An FIA spokesman said that the organisation’s president, Jean Todt, serves as 
theUN Secretary General’s Special Envoy for Road Safety 
<http://www.unece.org/un-sgs-special-envoy-for-road-safety/un-sgs-special-envoy-for-road-safety.html>
. “In that capacity, he plans to hold meetings with Azeri government officials 
to encourage them to make road safety a priority and sign-up to the relevant UN 
conventions governing road traffic,” he said.

“While the key responsibility for road safety lies with governments, the FIA 
campaign also encourages motorists to follow the rules of the road and be 
respectful of other road users. The campaign is promoted in all FIA 
Championships, including Formula One, through key trackside messaging, and also 
by the drivers themselves.” .

According to the World Health Organisation, the reported number of road 
traffic deaths in Azerbaijan is 1,256 a year – arate of 10 per 100,000 of the 
population 
<http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/road_safety_status/2015/country_profiles/Azerbaijan.pdf?ua=1&ua=1>
. In the UK, the equivalent figure is 2.9 per 100,000.

The Foreign and Commonwealth Office website warns: “Many cars are poorly 
maintained and the standard of driving is erratic. Accidents are common, mainly 
due to poor or reckless driving and inconsistent enforcement of traffic rules.”

An inquest into Maxwell-Milne’s death recorded a verdict of death by road 
traffic collision and the driver of the Transit was sentenced to nine years in 
prison following a criminal trial. Maxwell-Milne’s parents are also taking 
civil action against the company that employed the driver of the van.

Jennifer Maxwell-Milne said she had appealed to the Azerbaijani first lady, 
Mehriban Aliyeva, to try to force action over road safety in her son’s name but 
had heard nothing back.

“I have tried to appeal to the first lady. My son died on her streets. My son 
died working for her event. The only reason he was there was for that. I’ve 
sent her letters twice, we’ve heard nothing,” she said.

Her late son, who had dual British and Australian citizenship, had worked on 
seven Olympic ceremonies and was also a production co-ordinator for Harvey 
Goldsmith Productions in the UK.

His mother praised the UK embassy for their assistance but was critical of the 
Azerbaijani government and the European Olympic Committee, the organisation 
behind the European Games that is led by the Irish International Olympic 
Committee member Patrick Hickey.

“The Azeri authorities offered no help whatsoever and neither did the European 
Olympic Committee,” she said.

The inaugural European Games last June were mired in controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/26/silence-european-games-azerbaijan-grim-future>
. The death of Maxwell-Milne came only days after threeAustrian synchronised 
swimmers were seriously injured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/11/teenage-swimmers-hit-shuttle-bus-european-games>
 when an official Games shuttle bus knocked them down just before the opening 
ceremony.

The president, Ilham Aliyev, spent billions staging the multi-sport event, 
including underwriting the costs of competing countries, but any boost in the 
country’s profile was negated by coverage of an accompanying crackdown on civil 
liberties in which scores of critical journalists, activists and lawyers were 
imprisoned.

Several prominent prisoners of conscience have recently been released, 
including the lawyer Intigam Aliyev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/31/azerbaijan-democracy-imprisoned-political-prisoners-president-america>
 and thehuman rights campaigners Leyal and Arif Yunus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/azerbaijan-leyla-yunus-release>. 
Others, including the investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova, remain in 
prison.The Guardian was banned from covering the Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/11/azerbaijan-bans-guardian-european-games-baku-2015>
 as a result of highlighting the associated human rights crackdown.

As well as its inaugural grand prix in June, Azerbaijan will host matches 
during the continent-wide Euro 2020 football tournament. Asked last year about 
the addition of Baku to the Formula One calendar, Ecclestone said: “Baku? No 
problem. That’s going to be another good race.”

Asked about the human rights situation, Ecclestone said: “I think everybody 
seems to be happy. Doesn’t seem to be any big problem there.”
 