
Monday

The first and only rule of making a political announcement is: make sure you 
don’t clash with someone else’s. So when Theresa May released a press note 
saying she was launching her Tory leadership bid in Birmingham at 11am,Angela 
Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/im-here-to-win-angela-eagle-launch-labour-leadership-bid>
 made sure to delay her own tilt at Jeremy Corbyn’s job until midday. That way 
both could make the lunchtime news bulletins. Neither had banked on Andrea 
Leadsom sending out an SOS at 11.30 saying she would be making a statement of 
her own. Up in Birmingham, every journalist immediately stopped listening to 
Theresa and went through the futile exercise of wondering if it was possible to 
get back to London in half an hour. Having chosen to go to Angela’s event, my 
task was a bit easier. I just upped and left and took a cab to where Andrea was 
self-destructing. I’m told by someone who stayed at Angela’s gig that it was a 
bit like the Mary Celeste. “Any questions?” asked Angela. Silence. “Anyone from 
the BBC here?” Silence. “Anyone from ITV here?” Silence.

Tuesday

Just to prove the Conservatives don’t have the monopoly on making a fool of 
themselves, Labour organised a meeting of theNational Executive Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/relief-gives-way-to-celebration-for-jeremy-corbyns-inner-circle>
 to determine whether Jeremy Corbyn would require the 51 votes of MPs and MEPs 
that he definitely wouldn’t get to take part in a leadership election. The NEC 
was supposed to be taking place under conditions of lockdown security but 
almost every one of the 32 people taking part was busy leaking events in real 
time. First we discovered there was a vote taking place over whether to have a 
vote to conduct the vote under a secret ballot. Then Corbyn refused to leave 
the room when asked and there had to be yet another non-binding vote on whether 
he should be made to leave. After much delay, Corbyn did leave the room, only 
to reappear on the balcony outside trying to look in through the window. To 
complete the comedy of errors, the NEC waited for Corbyn to go home before 
taking a vote on the qualifying period for eligibility to vote in the election. 
The Corbynistas lost by one vote.

Wednesday

Boris Johnson’s appointment as foreign secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/philip-hammond-appointed-chancellor-as-george-osborne-exits>
 has not gone down well in those parts of the world he has insulted over the 
years. Which is almost everywhere except Greenland. A matter of time, no doubt. 
It also hasn’t gone down too well with his publishers, Hodder & Stoughton, who 
shelled out £500k for The Riddle of Genius, his book on Shakespeare that was 
due to come out this year to coincide with the 400th anniversary of Will’s 
death. The book is still listed on Amazon with a publication date of 20 October 
but as Boris has yet to deliver a manuscript and is unlikely to have much spare 
time in the coming months, this is almost certainly more an expression of hope 
than anything else. The bigger headache for Hodder now is whether to demand 
Boris repay the advance. This won’t be the only financial headache for Boris, 
as continuing to trouser £250k a year for his weekly Daily Telegraph column 
would not be a good look for Theresa May’s “Social Justice” Conservatives. Poor 
Boris. Become foreign secretary and end up broke.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fparty-games-tories-and-labour-compete-to-make-fools-of-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32da7e92ab08d27f2e7617c4d9abb843d678a80e%2F0_0_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Party%20games%3A%20Tories%20and%20Labour%20compete%20to%20make%20fools%20of%20themselves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fparty-games-tories-and-labour-compete-to-make-fools-of-themselves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Party%20games%3A%20Tories%20and%20Labour%20compete%20to%20make%20fools%20of%20themselves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fparty-games-tories-and-labour-compete-to-make-fools-of-themselves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32da7e92ab08d27f2e7617c4d9abb843d678a80e%2F0_0_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 Johnson sings the French national anthem at a reception at the French 
ambassador’s residence in London on 14 July. Photograph: Daniel 
Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
Thursday

Though not at Lords in person for the first Test match between England and 
Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/14/england-v-pakistan-first-test-day-one-live>
, at least something of me was. Back in 1992, I was contracted to write a book 
about the fast bowlers Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis and part of the deal was 
that I got to spend six weeks travelling round Australia and New Zealand with 
the Pakistan team for the Cricket World Cup. There were many great moments; 
getting to bowl in the nets at Perth, Auckland and Melbourne and claiming the 
scalps of two Test batsmen in the process was one. Interviewing a stark-naked 
Imran Khan, who was mid-massage, was more of a mixed blessing. I didn’t quite 
know where to look. But the highlight was being in the dressing-room at the 
Melbourne Cricket Ground with the Pakistan team after they had just beaten 
England in the final and joining in the celebrations. I asked Wasim Akram for a 
souvenir and he gave me the short-sleeved sweater he had been wearing in his 
man of the match performance. After lying at the bottom of my cupboard for the 
best part of 25 years, the sweater is now on show at the Lord’s museum for the 
rest of the summer. Get in there quickly if you want to see it. At the end of 
the year I am going to auction it, with the proceeds going to a Pakistan 
educational charity.

Friday

As Theresa May attended to the final touches of her cabinet reshuffle, it was 
hard to tell if the new prime minister is a modern day Machiavelli or a woman 
with a great sense of humour. Apart from making Boris foreign secretary, she 
has put David Davis, a man who has managed to fall out with almost anyone he 
has ever negotiated with, in charge of Brexit, and Liam Fox, who resigned after 
showing up with his mate on trade missions, in charge of trade. To add to the 
fun, Theresa has put Priti Patel, who once pledged to get rid the Department 
for International Development (DfID), in charge of DfID, and Andrea Leadsom, a 
woman who seems tohate the countryside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/andrea-leadsom-repeal-fox-hunting-ban-climate-change>
 – the only picture anyone can find of her outdoors is of her standing 
uncomfortably by a gate, and she thinks sheep hill farms should be turned into 
butterfly sanctuaries; that’s before we get on to Andrea’s views on climate 
change (“are you sure it’s real?”) and male nannies (“could be paedophiles”) – 
as environment secretary. Andrea’s first job will be to explain to the farmers 
she encouraged to vote for Brexit why they might now be worse off. All five of 
these appointments were prominent Brexit campaigners. All five have been given 
jobs in which there are high odds of them failing.

Digested week, digested: Snakes and ladders
 