
Paul Collingwood <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-collingwood> has 
spoken to Andrew Strauss about a potential return to the England set-up, 
revealing he would be open to a role in the new regime but that he remains 
committed to playing for Durham.

Collingwood captained England to the World Twenty20 title in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/may/16/england-australia-world-twenty20-final>
 and was an assistant coach withScotland at this year’s World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/03/paul-collingwood-scotland-2015-cricket-world-cup>
. He also worked under Ashley Giles who was England’s limited-overs coach 
before the arrival of Peter Moores, who has since departed and will be replaced 
by theAustralian Trevor Bayliss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/30/trevor-bayliss-new-coach-england-australia>
.

While still captaining and performing well for Durham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/durham>, the 39-year-old admitted a role 
within England’s new establishment under Strauss, the director of cricket, 
would be extremely tempting. Informal talks have already been held as Strauss 
looks to form an advisory panel to help significantly improve England’s one-day 
performances.

“I’ve spoken to Straussy but there’s nothing concrete as yet,” said 
Collingwood. “He knows my position, that I’m still enjoying playing. I love 
England, England is my passion. The experience of playing for England for so 
many years, that’s where you feel you belong, in that dressing room wearing the 
three lions. You’re never guaranteed a job when you come out of cricket but if 
there was a role they wanted us to play somewhere it would be hard to turn down.

“The thing with playing for Durham is that through the off season you get the 
opportunity to go and have a look at different avenues. I would have thought 
I’d have another year of playing, I’m still enjoying it and love trying to help 
develop the youngsters up at Durham who are coming through.”

Collingwood, who has also worked as a fielding consultant with the UAE, backed 
the recent form of his county team-mates Ben Stokes and Mark Wood as extremely 
pleasing, but the former all-rounder was scathing in his description of
England’s ODI performance at the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/09/england-crash-out-cricket-world-cup-bangladesh>
.

“I think everybody has probably said what they need to say over the past few 
months,” he said. “It was obviously pretty prehistoric in terms of the way they 
went about things. You could see that in the results that they got. I think 
everybody knows there has to be a new direction in the one-day thinking and it 
seems that things have been put in place for that.”

On Bayliss’s appointment, Collingwood added: “I like the fact that he has been 
to the IPL and the Big Bash and all that kind of stuff. Hopefully, his 
experience will put him in good stead for bringing the next generation of 
cricketers through.”
 