
Ayn Rand <http://www.atlassociety.org/> is the high priestess of undiluted 
capitalism and a champion of looking after number one. With an estimated 25m 
copies of her books in print, including Atlas Shrugged and The Fountainhead, 
her ideas about small government and unfettered markets still resonate in 
conservative circles, with a young Paul Ryan, the Republican vice-presidential 
candidate, being a big fan.

"I just want to speak to you a little bit about Ayn Rand and what she meant to 
me in my life and [in] the fight we're engaged here in Congress. I grew up on 
Ayn Rand," Ryan told an audience in 2005. 
<http://m.theatlanticwire.com/politics/2012/04/audio-surfaces-paul-ryans-effusive-love-ayn-rand/51711/>
 "I grew up reading Ayn Rand and it taught me quite a bit about who I am and 
what my value systems are, and what my beliefs are."

The Russian-born American author, a refugee from Soviet communism in the 
1920s, wrote at a time when collectivism was widely seen as a blueprint for the 
future. However, her vision was for a free society where the strong flourished 
and egoism ruled over altruism. In Rand's world, material achievement had 
spiritual value and unproductive citizens were "parasites," "looters" and 
"moochers". There are no state benefits, no national healthcare.

She believed that humans are rational and self-interested, thriving if left to 
their own devices. Rand said, : "Making more money means we are making more use 
of our brains." Admiration of the rich only stopped with those who inherited 
their wealth, whom she viewed as living well from cronyism and nepotism.

Rand argued her theories with almost messianic passion, winning a coterie of 
acolytes , including eminent members of the Reagan administration (notablyAlan 
Greenspan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan>, the former 
Federal Reserve Chairman, who became a lifelong fan.) Another devotee is the 
influential conservative talk radioshock jock Rush Limbaugh.
 