
When I was a teenager, my American girlfriend at the time gave me Ayn Rand's 
cult novel Atlas Shrugged to read. It changed her life, she said. It changed 
mine, too. She was not my girlfriend by the morning. It was the most unpleasant 
thing I'd ever had the misfortune to read.

As a work of literature, Atlas Shrugged is drivel, and not simply because it 
is so up itself with its own perceived radicalism; fundamentally, all 
propaganda is drivel, even if it is propaganda in a good cause. Rand's cause 
was to celebrate what she called "the virtue of selfishness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/mar/05/new-right-ayn-rand-marx>
", to denigrate the poor as scroungers and to celebrate the muscular 
individualism of the creative heroes of capitalism. Altruism, she contends, is 
"complete evil". The question she poses: what would happen if all the bankers 
and captains of industry went on strike? What would happen if these Atlas-like 
gods, who hold up the world, decided one day to shrug and refuse to support 
everyone else? Then the world would be buggered, she contends. Atlas Shrugged 
is cheap pornography for the nastiest side of capitalism.

"The reason I got involved in public service, by and large, if I had to credit 
one thinker, one person, it would be Ayn Rand,"said Mitt Romney's now running 
mate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/11/paul-ryan-mitt-romney-vp-live?newsfeed=true>
 Paul Ryanfour years ago 
<http://www.atlassociety.org/ele/blog/2012/04/30/paul-ryan-and-ayn-rands-ideas-hot-seat-again>
. He also admitted he made all his interns read Atlas Shrugged, dishing them 
out as Christmas presents.

But here's the political problem for Ryan. Many were queasy when George Bush 
cheesily described Jesus as his favourite philosopher, but at least he knew his 
market. In contrast, few books can be as hostile to the Christian faith as 
Atlas Shrugged. For Rand, the good Samaritan was not simply a chump: he was in 
fact doing something wicked. We are saved only by selfishness. So how can an 
American politician, who has described himself as a "staunch Catholic" and in 
what is supposed to be an electorate dominated by Christian values, side with 
one who so thoroughly rejected all the teachings of Jesus?

Ryan has now predictably backtracked 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/articles/297023/ryan-shrugged-robert-costa>. "I 
reject her philosophy. It's an atheist philosophy. If somebody is going to try 
to paste a person's view on epistemology to me, then give me Thomas Aquinas." 
By the way, this is the same Thomas Aquinas who insisted that, "Man should not 
consider his material possession his own, but as common to all, so as to share 
them without hesitation when others are in need," thus espousing the very 
collectivism that Rand so loathed.

Words are cheap, especially on the campaign trail. By your deeds shall you 
know them. And Ryan's deeds, and in particular his budget plan for slashing the 
role of the state, are pure Rand,as a group of Jesuits from Georgetown 
University have insisted 
<https://docs.google.com/a/theguardian.com/document/d/1JRLM7Jh9PnrxptafWYENXdAmxnXd4gQJMYTu3H4TFHA/edit?pli=1>
: "Your budget appears to reflect the values of your favourite philosopher, Ayn 
Rand, rather than the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Her call to selfishness and her 
antagonism toward religion are antithetical to the Gospel values of compassion 
and love." The US Catholic bishops' conference, not well-known for its 
progressive politics,has said much the same 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/paul-ryans-faith-based-lesson/2012/04/27/gIQAH76TlT_story.html>
.

It feels odd to be arguing that there ought to be more religion in US 
politics. In many ways, I'd prefer there to be a lot less. And certainly a lot 
less of the hard-right hogwash that borrows the wardrobe ofChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> but has no intention of being 
subject to its moral values. Jesus said nothing whatsoever about homosexuality 
or abortion. He said a great deal about poverty and our responsibility for the 
vulnerable. Which is why Paul Ryan is little more than Ayn Rand in Christian 
drag.

Ironically, he is a "second-hander" – Rand's terminology for those who take 
their values, prêt-à-porter, from others. The trouble is that Christianity in 
the US has become so widely hijacked by the right that not enough people will 
actually notice. As the Ryan case aptly demonstrates, the Christian right is 
neither: that is, Christian nor right.
 