
Though he’s fallen out spectacularly with his publisher, Seth Grahame-Smith  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/31/pride-and-prejudice-and-zombies-author-sued-by-publisher-hachette-seth-grahame-smith>
at least has the consolation of joining a stellar club of writers whose deals 
for much-anticipated books were terminated. It emerged this week that 
Grahame-Smith, the man behindPride and Prejudice and Zombies and Abraham 
Lincoln: Vampire Hunter, is being sued in the United States for breach of 
contract by Hachette, which wants half his $1m advance for a two-book deal 
returned. Hachette claims the second book’s typescript was eventually submitted 
“34 months” late, and was too short and substandard, “in large part an 
appropriation of a 120-year-old public domain work” (unnamed, but presumably 
1897’sDracula).

Among Grahame-Smith’s new confrères are the 12 non-fiction authors including 
Elizabeth Wurtzel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/mar/03/biography.features2> sued four 
years ago by Penguin USA, which sought to recoup the advances plus interest for 
books it said they had failed to deliver;Withnail And I writer-director Bruce 
Robinson, whose missed deadlines during his 15-year quest toidentify Jack the 
Ripper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/03/they-all-love-jack-busting-ripper-bruce-robinson-review-withnail-i>
meant his original publisher cancelled his contract and asked for its advance 
back (although he found a new one andThey All Love Jack appeared in 2015); and 
the award-winning novelist and poet Vikram Seth, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/10/vikram-seth-a-suitable-girl-suitable-boy>
 who was at loggerheads with Penguin after it lost patience with his writer’s 
block while gestating the sequel to his vast Indian love story, 1993’s
A Suitable Boy.

Julian Assange belongs to this club too, but only as a rogue fringe member as 
both he and his publisher handled the crisis unusually when tensions arose. The 
WikiLeaks founder (who had inconveniently come to believe “all memoir is 
prostitution”) sought to cancel his contract with Canongate for a memoir after 
reading a draft produced by his ghost-writer Andrew O’Hagan based on extensive 
interviews. His £500,000 advance, however, had reportedly already been spent on 
legal fees; and, instead of axing the deal, Canongate secretly went ahead and 
published it in 2011 asThe Unauthorised Autobiography, leading Assange to 
disown it and denounce them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fpay-back-time-for-publishers-authors-advances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6ae0d4905362f4f4eb97e617c9897f764899165%2F0_293_2872_1723%2F2872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pay-back%20time%20for%20publishers%3A%20authors%20forced%20to%20return%20their%20advances&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fpay-back-time-for-publishers-authors-advances%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pay-back%20time%20for%20publishers%3A%20authors%20forced%20to%20return%20their%20advances&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fpay-back-time-for-publishers-authors-advances%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6ae0d4905362f4f4eb97e617c9897f764899165%2F0_293_2872_1723%2F2872.jpg>
 Vikram Seth’s sequel toA Suitable Boy, published in 1993, should be out in 
2017 or 2018. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
When celebrities and publishers agree to divorce, in contrast, the parting of 
the ways tends, in public at least, to be friction-free, minimising loss of 
face on both sides. Either on the star’s initiative or by mutual agreement, 
Robert Downey Jr (grounds unknown), Ian McKellen (“it was a bit painful, I 
didn’t want to go back into my life”) and Billy Joel (realised, three years 
after signing a $3m deal to talk about his past, that he was “not all that 
interested in talking about the past”) have handed back all or part of 
seven-figure advances. Mick Jagger and his former wife Jerry Hall have pulled 
out of memoir deals almost 30 years apart on broadly similar grounds: the 
Stones frontman has said he gave back a hefty advance in the 80s because the 
publisher wanted the book to “divulge all these secrets” and “it was so 
depressing and boring having to scrape over your past”; Hall returned hers when 
HarperCollins was disappointed by the lack of revelations (especially about 
Jagger) in what she submitted.

Publicly aired grievances appear even rarer when it comes to politicians’ 
efforts, with publishers reluctant to deter future grandees (whether by 
cancellations or letting it be known that anodyne offerings are unacceptable). 
Hodder, for example, limited itself to stating in July that Boris Johnson’s 
Shakespeare book, due in November, “will not be published for the foreseeable 
future” - reports suggested the new foreign secretary agreed to return a 
£500,000 advance in the same week as giving up his £275,000-a-year newspaper 
column - though one imagines this was spoken through gritted teeth, the book 
McKellen pulled out of having been with the same publisher.

Pride and Prejudice and Zombies by Jane Austen and Seth Grahame-Smith | Book 
review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/dec/06/pride-prejudice-zombies-grahame-smith>
While the best that such authors can usually hope for is to minimise grief, 
there have been some winners. Joan Collins was victorious in a high-profile, 
televised courtroom battle in 1996 when Random House sought the return of a 
$1.2m advance for two novels that were delivered but deemed unpublishable (she 
kept it and was awarded a further $1m, since her contract only required 
“completed” works, not the usual “satisfactory”). With her career on the rise 
and the market in comedians’ memoirs booming,Amy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/02/amy-schumer-interview-trainwreck-judd-apatow>
 terminated a $1m contract with HarperCollins in 2014, returning the advance 
with interest; this enabled her 18 months later (“I thought I would make more 
money if I waited”, she has said) to sign a deal with Gallery Books estimated 
as between $8m and $10m for herThe Girl with the Lower Back Tattoo, published 
last week.

As for Seth, he may be able to have his cake and eat it, by resurrecting his 
book deal but also enjoying revenge. His sequelA Suitable Girl is expected 
in 2017 or 2018 from Orion, where he moved after repaying part of his advance, 
but another project in the works, partly a memoir, will voice his grouses about 
Penguin. It will be calledGuano!, he revealed last year, a word for birdshit 
that in this case specifically means penguin poo.
 