
Peace campaigners are to stage a demonstration outside the Science Museum in 
London on Saturday afternoon in protest at sponsorship byAirbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus>, the aerospace firm, which sells 
weapons to a number of regimes implicated in human rights abuses.

Airbus, the world’s seventh biggest arms manufacturer, is funding the museum’s 
new Leonardo da Vinci exhibition,The Mechanics of Genius 
<http://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/visitmuseum/plan_your_visit/exhibitions/leonardo>
.

From 2pm, activists linked to the Campaign Against Arms Trade (CAAT) will 
gather outside the Science Museum in South Kensington to raise public awareness 
of the role played by Airbus in the Yemen conflict.

Philip McMahon, a member of the CAAT’s London branch, said: “Arms companies 
like Airbus use public institutions such as the Science Museum to gain 
legitimacy, and distract from their otherwise abhorrent business practices.

“We want the Science Museum to end its relationship with Airbus, and create an 
ethical sponsorship policy to prevent any future sponsorship by weapons 
companies.”

As part of the Eurofighter consortium, Airbus makes and maintains fighter jets 
used by Saudi Arabia in its war inYemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>. The firm also has a stake in 
Bedford-based MBDA, which in recent years has supplied 450 Storm Shadow cruise 
missiles and 1,000 Brimstone air-to-surface missiles to the Saudi regime.

According to a UN panel, Saudi forces have conducted “widespread and 
systematic” attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/un-report-into-saudi-led-strikes-in-yemen-raises-questions-over-uk-role>
 on civilian targets, including refugee camps, schools, hospitals and 
residential areas. Even after that damning assessment, and a call from MPs to 
stop the sale of British arms to Saudi Arabia,David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> boasted of his efforts to 
help sell “brilliant things” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/david-cameron-brilliant-uk-arms-exports-saudi-arabia-bae>
 such as Eurofighter Typhoons to the country.

Other Airbus clients include the United Arab Emirates, part of the Saudi-led 
coalition bombarding Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/05/uae-forces-retaliate-50-coalition-troops-yemen-missile-attack>
, and Kazakhstan, a strategically located dictatorship whose leader last year 
extended his 25-year rule afterwinning an election with 97.7% of the popular 
vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/27/kazakhstans-president-nursultan-nazarbayev-returned-with-977-of-vote>
.

The Airbus sponsorship deal is not the first time that the Science Museum has 
worked with arms companies. In 2014, it hosted a reception for arms dealers and 
buyers as part of the Farnborough airshow – an annual event described by peace 
campaigners as “like Glastonbury for arms dealers”. Boeing, United 
Technologies, Rolls Royce and Boeing have also held events there.

Other UK institutions that have hosted events for arms manufacturers include 
the Barbican Centre, Edinburgh Castle, the Tower of London, the Imperial War 
Museum, the London Transport Museum and the Natural History Museum.

The Imperial War Museum, which often holds exhibitions highlighting the 
horrors of war, accepts sponsorship from BAE Systems, Boeing, Northrop Grumman 
and Lockheed Martin, the world’s biggest arms maker.

The National Gallery ended its sponsorship deal with Finmeccanica in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/oct/10/arms-manufacturer-national-gallery-sponsorship>
, a year early, after a campaign by CAAT. It was also forced to drop a 
reception linked to the Farnborough airshow after a public outcry over an event 
for attendees at theDefence Systems and Equipment International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/15/court-dismisses-charges-against-london-arms-fair-protesters>
 arms fair in 2011.

The Science Museum protest comes ahead of International Conscientious 
Objectors Day 
<http://www.ppu.org.uk/nomorewar/a_conscientiousObjection/coDay2.html> on 
Sunday. The Peace Pledge Union is urging people to mark the day by challenging 
militarist values and attitudes in everyday life, such as military visits to 
schools and army recruitment adverts aimed at vulnerable teenagers.

Symon Hill, coordinator of the Peace Pledge Union, said: “A hundred years ago, 
conscientious objectors were imprisoned in horrifying conditions for taking a 
stand against war. Today, in countries around the world, hundreds of people 
remain in prison for refusing to fight.

“In Britain, our bodies are no longer conscripted. But our taxes are 
conscripted to pay for the fifth-highest military budget in the world. Our 
minds are conscripted as we are taught from an early age that violence is the 
solution to conflict and that unquestioning obedience is something to be 
admired. Even our language is conscripted, with preparations for war described 
inaccurately as ‘defence’ and ‘security’.

“As everyday militarism becomes more and more visible, we need to resist it 
with everyday objection.”
 