
A member of the house of Lords has written to Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> questioning whether Bauer Media is a 
fit and proper company to own broadcasting licences in Britain because it 
publishes the military magazine Der Landser, which is said to glorify second 
world war German soldiers who were guilty of war crimes

Lord (Monroe) Palmer has complained to the broadcasting regulator as it 
considers Bauer's acquisition ofAbsolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> (formerly Virgin Radio).

His letter follows one sent by the media banker and analyst Bruce Fireman, 
which I reported on last month. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/aug/08/ofcom-bauer> And 
another peer, Lord (Greville) Janner is, according to his assistant, also 
considering following suit.

Fireman was interviewed during a segment on Today programme this morning 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-23927620> in which reporter Steve Evans 
reported on Der Landser's controversial content.

"Bauer Media owns 25% of commercial listening in the United Kingdom and it 
will add another 5-6% when it acquires Absolute Radio," said Fireman.

"The question arises whether it's right that this company should be allowed to 
continue to profit by studiously avoiding mentioning the truth about the people 
who are honoured in its magazineâ€¦ Should it be trusted with a licence?"

Evans also interviewed Deidre Berger, director of the Ramer institute for 
German-Jewish relations. She said the magazine encouraged young people "to have 
an affinity for world war two. They're glorifying the war, and leaving out 
completely any mention of Germany's responsibility for the holocaust."

She added: "Der Landser is a magazine that writes about Germany's role in the 
war as if the people about whom it writes were not war criminals, and some of 
them were."

A journalist with the German daily newspaper, Die Welt, described Der Landser 
as "a comic for simple minds."

Bauer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer> told the BBC that the magazine 
complied with German law. It neither trivialised nor glorified war crimes.
 