
The Los Angeles Kings, the defending Stanley Cup champions, advanced to the 
second round of theNHL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> playoffs with a 
2-1 win over theSt Louis Blues on Friday, boosting its hopes of back-to-back 
titles. In other games, theDetroit Red Wings beat the Anaheim Ducks to stay 
alive and force a Game 7, while theToronto Maple Leafs won at the Boston Bruins 
to cut the series deficit to 3-2 and theWashington Capitals downed the New York 
Rangers to go ahead 3-2.

LA's Dustin Penner scored the tiebreaking goal in the final second of the 
second period, while Jonathan Quick made 21 saves and Drew Doughty scored his 
first goal of the postseason for the Kings, who came back from a 2-0 deficit in 
the series to win it 4-2. Penner put the Kings ahead with his latest big 
playoff goal, ripping a slap shot from just inside the blue line past Brian 
Elliott right before time expired. Elliott stopped 14 shots and Chris Porter 
scored his first career playoff goal for the Blues, who were eliminated by Los 
Angeles for the second straight season.

Detroit's Henrik Zetterberg scored his second goal 1:04 into overtime to give 
the Red Wings a 4-3 win over Anaheim. Detroit blew a two-goal lead in the last 
3Â½ minutes of regulation time, sending the team to a fourth OT in a series for 
the first time in franchise history. Anaheim's Emerson Etem and Bobby Ryan 
scored 51 seconds apart late in regulation to pull the Ducks into a 3-3 tie.

Zetterberg, who scored earlier in the third period, had a shot to win it with 
about a minute left. However his shot hit the right post and slid across the 
crease, but he made up for it with the overtime winner. The second-seeded Ducks 
will host seventh-seeded Detroit on Sunday in the deciding game.

Toronto's Tyler Bozak and Clarke MacArthur scored to give the Maple Leafs a 
2-1 win at Boston, staying alive in their series. Maple Leafs goaltender James 
Reimer stopped 43 shots to preserve the win for Toronto, which will host Game 6 
before a switch back to Boston if there is a Game 7. Boston has won both games 
in Toronto in the series and has not lost on the Leafs' home ice in the 
playoffs since 1959.

Zdeno Chara scored for Boston to cut the deficit to it 2-1 with 8:48 left. The 
Leafs killed off a delay-of-game penalty in the last four minutes and then 
protected the lead when the Bruins pulled their goalie for an extra attacker 
with 1:11 left.

Only once in their history have the Leafs come back to win a playoff series 
after falling behind 3-1: the 1942 Stanley Cup finals win over Detroit. The 
Bruins are 15-2 in playoff series after taking a 3-1 lead, but they blew a 3-0 
lead against Philadelphia in the 2010 Eastern Conference semifinals.

Washington's Mike Ribeiro scored in overtime to give the Capitals a 2-1 win 
over the New York Rangers and the momentum in the series. Ribeiro put in the 
puck after Troy Brouwer deflected a shot from the blue line. Game 6 is Sunday 
in New York.

The home team has won every game in the series, with Washington taking the 
first two and New York pulling even in Games 3 and 4. The Capitals have been 
fighting history along the way: the franchise has lost eight playoff series in 
which it has held a two-game lead. Brian Boyle scored for New York in the first 
minute, but that was it for the Rangers, with Joel Ward tying it in the second 
period.
 