
Labor has stepped back from its parliamentary pursuit of the Abbott government 
over alleged payments to people smugglers after conceding money might have 
changed hands inIndonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> during 
the previous government.

The party did not ask any questions in the House of Representatives on Tuesday 
about claims that a total of US$30,000 (A$39,000) was paid to the captain and 
five crew members of an asylum-seeker boat that was intercepted at sea to 
return to Indonesia in May.

But it did pose questions in the Senate about government-sanctioned leaks 
regarding intelligence matters, and the upper house passed a motion demanding 
theCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> hand over 
documents about the claims.

Labor never paid crew members to turn back boats, says Bill Shorten
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/16/labor-never-paid-money-to-people-smugglers-says-bill-shorten>
Such orders to produce documents are routinely ignored, with the government 
having previously invoked a “public interest immunity” defence to avoid 
disclosing details of Operation Sovereign Borders.

On Tuesday evening, Fairfax Media published photos 
<http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/world/people-smuggler-cash-stacks-police-say-were-paid-to-send-asylum-seekers-on-a-suicide-mission-20150616-ghpa36.html>
 of thousands of US dollars which Indonesian police said was “the evidence” of 
bribes.

The six crew members swore under oath that they received about US$5,000 from 
an Australian official to return to Indonesia, General Endang Sunjaya, the 
police chief of Nusa Tenggara Timur province, told Fairfax Media.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fasylum-seeker-account-people-smugglers-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434435737641%2FAsylum-seeker-Kupang-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asylum%20seeker%20says%20he%20was%20on%20boat%20paid%20by%20Australian%20authorities%20to%20turn%20back%20to%20Indonesia%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fasylum-seeker-account-people-smugglers-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asylum%20seeker%20says%20he%20was%20on%20boat%20paid%20by%20Australian%20authorities%20to%20turn%20back%20to%20Indonesia%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fasylum-seeker-account-people-smugglers-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434435737641%2FAsylum-seeker-Kupang-001.jpg>
 Footage released by Reuters on Tuesday showed a Sri Lankan man in Indonesia 
detailing allegations of payments.Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jun/16/asylum-seeker-account-people-smugglers-video>
Labor did not ask questions in the lower house on Tuesday after reports 
emerged that Australia might have paid people smugglers in Indonesia for 
information and to prevent departures when the party was last in government.

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, said he had been 
informed “that Labor did not pay people smugglers to turn around boats”. Labor 
has long opposed the Coalition’s policy of turning back boats as part of 
Operation Sovereign Borders.

But when asked directly whether Labor had made any payments to people 
smugglers on land, Shorten said he could not comment on security matters.

Tony Abbott accuses media of 'promoting discord' with Indonesia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/16/tony-abbott-accuses-media-of-promoting-discord-with-indonesia>
“I’m certainly not aware of that but what I would say to you is this: when it 
comes to national security matters ... we don’t talk about that. No serious 
leader does,” he said.

The foreign affairs minister, Julie Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/julie-bishop>, who last week denied 
payments but on Monday cited operational secrecy to avoid parliamentary 
questions, accused Labor of double standards.

In the Senate, Labor asked whether the government had authorised the 
disclosure of classified intelligence material in stories in the Australian and 
Daily Telegraph.

“The Australian government never authorises the release of classified 
intelligence material,” the attorney general, George Brandis, replied.


The Australian reported that spies and police working in Indonesia on behalf 
of Australian had been paying informers in people-smuggling rings as far back 
as 2001. The Daily Telegraph said it had been told by a “senior intelligence 
source” that the Australian Secret Intelligence Service (Asis) may have made 
payments.

The alleged involvement of Asis officers carries legal implications. 

Legal experts said payments to people smugglers were likely to be in breach of 
Australian domestic laws outlawing people smuggling or assisting people 
smuggling. However, Asis officers are “not subject to any civil or criminal 
liability for any act done outside Australia if the act is done in the proper 
performance of a function of the agency”, according to the Intelligence 
Services Act.

Tony Abbott said he was “absolutely confident that at all times Australian 
agencies have acted within the law”.

But he again refused to confirm the allegations, and accused some media 
outlets of being “more interested inpromoting discord  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/16/tony-abbott-accuses-media-of-promoting-discord-with-indonesia>
than in celebrating all the constructive things” that happened between 
Indonesia and Australia.

Brandis also dismissed questions from Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, about 
the Indonesian government’s demands for an explanation about the alleged bribes.


The attorney general said he was familiar with the Indonesian government’s 
remarks but “unlike when you were a member of the cabinet … the Indonesian 
people smugglers have gone broke because they have no business and the reason 
they have no business is because they have no customers because the Abbott 
government stopped the boats”.
 