
The plans of Australia’s immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton>, for a decades-long 
offshore detention relationship with Nauru are “woefully ignorant” of the 
reality of life on the island for asylum seekers, according to Human Rights 
Watch.

On Thursday Dutton told a Canberra thinktank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/asylum-seeker-processing-at-nauru-will-continue-for-decades-says-dutton>
 that Australia’s regional processing relationship with Nauru would continue 
for “decades”.

He described Australia as a “migration super power” that had secure borders 
and also provided for people “in a humane way”.

Asylum-seeker processing at Nauru will 'continue for decades', says Dutton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/asylum-seeker-processing-at-nauru-will-continue-for-decades-says-dutton>




The looming United Nations general assembly and a migration summit hosted by 
the US president, Barack Obama, had led to some speculation that Australia 
might soften its stance but those hopes were largely dashed on Thursday after 
Dutton’s address.

The Australia director of Human Rights Watch, Elaine Pearson, said Australia 
was known for its “cruel, selfish policies” to deter asylum seekers.

“Dutton’s claim that the relationship with Nauru on regional processing ‘will 
last for decades’ is woefully ignorant of the reality on the ground for 
refugees in Nauru,” she said. “People have been driven to the depths of despair 
as the high rates of self-harm and suicide attempts show, people have been 
attacked and assaulted by locals and many refugees onNauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> suffer serious health conditions that 
haven’t been properly treated.

“Nauru is no place for refugees short or long term. In any case, Nauru has not 
even agreed to allow people to stay longer than 10 years so it is hard to 
understand how the policy could last for decades.”

Amnesty International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>
 Australia’s refugee campaign co-ordinator Ming Yu Hah said the minister’s 
comments were “hugely misleading” of what the Australian people were 
increasingly demanding from the country’s asylum policies.

“He has framed it as activists that are opposing the detention regime on Nauru 
but, as we’ve seen in the last year alone, people across Australia ... a wide 
cross section are no longer tolerating the Australian government’s abusive 
offshore detention regime,” she said.

“We know that the Australian people expect thorough security measures in place 
and Amnesty supports that. But the Australian people also expect people will 
provide a robust human rights framework.”


She also said his comments were also “out of step at the global level” and 
Obama’s summit showed the need for greater and more humane responses to the 
movement of people across the globe.

Peter Dutton open to refugees on Nauru being resettled in New Zealand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/peter-dutton-open-to-refugees-on-nauru-being-resettled-in-new-zealand>
The comments follow other remarks made by the president of the Australian 
Human Rights Commission on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/australias-refugee-impasse-rights-commission-suggests-ways-forward>
, before Dutton’s address. The commission launched a new report canvassing 
regional alternatives to Australia’s detention regime, which said Australia had 
reached an “impasse” on asylum seeker policy.

In a separate interview with al-Jazeera Dutton appeared to leave open the door 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/peter-dutton-open-to-refugees-on-nauru-being-resettled-in-new-zealand>
 to asylum seekers held on Nauru to being resettled in New Zealand.

The New Zealand foreign affairs minister quashed this, stating that the 
country would not enter into any separate deals with Nauru’s government 
directly to take refugees.

Iain Lees- Galloway, immigration spokesman for New Zealand’s opposition Labour 
party, said Australia’s detention centres were an “inhumane way of dealing with 
refugees” and that the party would be open to working with Australia on taking 
some refugees from Nauru.

However, he dismissed as “completely inappropriate” Dutton’s apparent desire 
to “take Australia out of the equation entirely”.

“These refugees are Australia’s responsibility. The decision to put them on 
Nauru was Australia’s. Australia has a role in their future and their 
settlement. It is quite inappropriate for Minister Dutton to say Australia will 
step back and leave New Zealand and Nauru to work it out,” he said.

The Guardian’s publication of the Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-2000-leaked-reports-reveal-scale-of-abuse-of-children-in-australian-offshore-detention>
 has put the treatment and conditions of asylum seekers held on the Pacific 
island back into the spotlight. The 2,000 incident reports contained detailed 
allegations of the abuse of asylum seekers, particularly children held by 
Australia on Nauru.

A parliamentary inquiry has been launched into allegations of abuse of Manus 
Island and Nauru. The inquiry will also examine what steps Australia has taken 
to resettle refugees held in the offshore detention centres.
 