
Phife Dawg, AKA Malik Taylor, doesn’t feature on many 
greatest-rapper-of-all-time lists – but you have to wonder if he might had he 
been a solo act. As it was, in A Tribe Called Quest, he naturally received less 
attention than the group’s charismatic founderQ-Tip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/nov/15/q-tip-urban-music-hattie-collins>
, but even though he didn’t join ATCQ fully until their second album, he was a 
long, long way from being just a sideman. In the most straight-upmusical rap 
act of all time, it was the interplay of Phife’s bouncing enunciation and Tip’s 
sly drawl that gave them their identity, just as much as their sophisticated 
jazz and soul sampling, or their Afrocentric boho image.

Phife, like so many movers and shakers in hip-hop’s early days, from Kool Herc 
to KRS-One, came from a Caribbean immigrant family – Trinidadian in his case – 
and wore this on his sleeve. “To Jah I give thanks, collect my banks, listen to 
Shabba Ranks,” runs a typically upbeat line on Jazz (We’ve Got) from 1991’s Low 
End Theory, his first album as a full member. Throughout his lyrics you can 
hear the skippetty triplet runs of 80s and 90s dancehall exemplified by Shabba: 
a signature that would be echoed by many MCs in the mainstream rap of the 90s.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcxN4nKk2cfk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcxN4nKk2cfk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcxN4nKk2cfk&media=>
The rise of ATCQ in the late 80s, as part of the Native Tongues collective 
with artists such asDe La Soul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/02/de-la-soul-shepherds-bush-empire-review>
, the Jungle Brothers and Queen Latifah, seemed to signal an openness in 
hip-hop. They represented scholarship, complicated lyricism, musical 
eclecticism and internationalism (as in Phife’s Caribbean twang) rather than 
street-corner parochialism; what hip-hop scholar and professor of global 
studies at New York University Jason King calls “the rise of a European, 
classically influenced concept of the artist in hip-hop; the rapper as more 
than a showman but a philosopher, individualist, soul-searcher”.

While Chuck D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/22/chuck-d-public-enemy-we-battled-the-mainstream-we-battled-our-company-we-fought-every-goddamn-minute>
 hailed him a “true-fire social narrator”, Phife was never a rapper to let 
seriousness take over anything. For all the reverence that is rightly given to 
ATCQ, especially from ageing rap bores who hold them up as exemplars of 
meaningfulness in order to knock what they see as the modern nonsense of, say, 
Lil Wayne or Young Thug, the group were always rooted deep in hip-hop’s origins 
as party music. It’s no wonder that Low End Theory’s closing posse cut Scenario 
can still cause riotous scenes in clubs to this day. And the best of Phife’s 
verses always tended to be based in rowdy, bawdy expression.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6TLWqn82J4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6TLWqn82J4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6TLWqn82J4&media=>
“I like my beats hard like two-day-old shit,” he says in the rumbustious and 
club-demolishing Oh My God on 1993’s Midnight Marauders. Elsewhere,women are on 
his mind, as on Electric Relaxation from the same album, where you can 
practically hear the wink as he raps: “I like ’em brown, yellow, Puerto Rican 
or Hatian / Name is Phife Dawg from the Zulu Nation”. This might look cheesy on 
paper, but on record Phife’s flow has incredible, hypnotic, energising power, 
his Caribbean-tinged delivery constantly pushing the good vibes. It’s not all 
love, scatological humour and sauciness, however, and there are some 
problematic lyrics – Phife’s dancehall rhetoric stretched to calling himself 
“the anti-battyboy”, for example. But 99% of the time, the balance between grit 
and jollity was struck perfectly.

ATCQ will always be best known for the run of albums they released in the 
early 90s, but the group never made a bad record, even when Phife and Tip’s 
personal chemistry was disintegrating amid jealousy and music-biz politicking 
towards the end of the decade. The tragically small amount of solo work Phife 
released stands up brilliantly, too. Like his collaboratorsJ Dilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jan/27/j-dilla-suite-ma-dukes> and Pete 
Rock, he was able to make a distinctly 90s strain of “boom bap” hip-hop sound 
fresh in the 00s, thanks in part to a constantly exploratory approach, but 
perhaps more so because of his instinctive drive to make rap tracks that slam 
out of the speaker and grab you by the crotch.

Notwithstanding the false dichotomies of old v new or conscious v gangsta, 
Phife’s influence is found in every part of rap. ATQC had a clear influence on 
the more creatively expansive hip-hop auteurs of today – you can hear their 
echoes in Kanye West and Kendrick Lamar for starters. But you can bet your 
bottom dollar that any wilfully dumb party rapper of today – say, DJ Khaled – 
will be able to recite reams of their lyrics, and that any rap fan asked for 
their favourite lines is as likely to pull out one of Phife’s untold 
“quotables” as they are Tip’s laid-back poetics.

“Yo, microphone check, one, two, what is this? / The 5ft assassin with the 
roughneck business,” he rhymed, announcing his arrival on Low End Theory’s 
Buggin’ Out. Again, it looks simple, but in his delivery, in its immediacy and 
its signalling of the torrent of rhymes that are about to come, it’s one of the 
greatest opening couplets in the whole of hip-hop, and it still reverberates 
through global culture as such.
 