
Behind the consensual language of partnership lies an uneasy relationship 
between state and private organisations based on very different attitudes and 
cultures. The worlds of philanthropic foundations and official donors have been 
evolving in parallel, and there is often misunderstanding of each other's 
methods as well as a tendency to keep one another at arm's length.

Less than a decade ago, philanthropy was seen as a sideshow in global 
development. When I left the Department for International Development (DfID) in 
early 2007 to writePhilanthrocapitalism 
<http://www.amazon.com/Philanthrocapitalism-How-Giving-Save-World/dp/B004A14W5E/ref=tmm_pap_title_0?ie=UTF8&qid=1367584277&sr=1-1>
, most of my colleagues wondered why I was interested in such a marginal issue.

The Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness of 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/18/paris-declaration-aid-effectiveness-necessary>
, for example, made no reference to philanthropy. Why should it? Pledges of 
extra aid money made at the G8 summit in Gleneagles that year meant signatories 
had little need to partner with private donors.

Those hopes of plentiful official aid flows were dented by the financial 
crisis of 2008, however, prompting a search for new ways to finance development 
and complement official development assistance (ODA).

When the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development development 
assistance committee (OECD DAC) met again inBusan, South Korea, in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/25/busan-explainer-aid-effectiveness>
, philanthropy had made its way into the communiqué. The G20 went a step 
further that year by asking Bill Gates, a philanthropist, to write a report on 
how to finance themillennium development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/millennium-development-goals> 
(MDGs).

It is only natural that philanthropists welcomed this belated recognition of 
their contribution to global development with lukewarm enthusiasm. The 
eagerness of official donors for the"new global partnership" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/aug/15/apathy-over-busan-aid-effectiveness>
 has evidently been driven much less by an interest in the innovative ways 
philanthropic organisations operate, and much more by the official development 
community's need to find new forms of financing.

The message to philanthropists is unappealing: give your money through 
existing aid channels, desist from running your own programmes, and help drum 
up support for more taxpayers' money for official donors to spend.

The resulting sense that official donors have nothing to learn from 
philanthropists is a fatal cultural flaw. Yet the fault does not lie with 
official donors alone. Too many private donors are unaware the MDGs even exist. 
Too few understand how the official aid system works, or that a type of 
ecosystem is in place that they should be aware of when they get involved on 
the ground.

Philanthropists have also, regrettably, lagged behind official donors in 
embracing the culture of transparency, data sharing and accountability to 
beneficiaries and to the governments of the countries where they operate.

The Rockefeller and Bill and Melinda Gates foundations, which have built 
strong partnerships with official donors and engaged with governments in 
developing countries, are notable exceptions. The Gates foundation has been 
reporting its aid spending to the OECD DAC since 2011.

The Gates foundation's considerable resources – both its money and its 
founder's public profile – mean it can negotiate on equal terms with 
governments. Yet Gates's acknowledgement that even his philanthropic behemoth 
is "a tiny, tiny organisation", compared with the challenges it faces, reflects 
that foundations cannot do it alone.

Shared governance

So what should the new global partnership look like? First, there must be 
joint decision making and shared governance. Official donors cannot expect 
philanthropic organisations to stump up cash without a seat at the table.

The Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/global-fund-to-fight-aids-tuberculosis-and-malaria>
 was an important innovation here: giving private donors and businesses seats 
on the board made it much more attractive to philanthropists than, say, giving 
a grant to the World Health Organisation over which they would have little 
influence. More of these unconventional funding mechanisms and issues-based 
partnerships will be needed.

Second, partnership works best around specific issues. Like it or not, success 
breeds success: if philanthropic organisations can see their money having 
concrete results and tangible impact, further donations are likelier.

As a successful partnership between official and private donors, the Malaria 
No More campaign is instructive here. Some worry that focusing on success in 
this way distorts the global development agenda towards quick wins or more 
media-friendly issues. Maybe so. Suggesting that ODA is immune from 
faddishness, or the influence of what taxpayers might find "sexy", is a bit of 
a stretch.

Frankly, finding jobs for unemployed youth in Africa, or getting access to 
quality education, is likelier to attract funding than statistical capacity 
building. Moreover, in straitened times, heeding public opinion in donor 
countries and demonstrating success will be increasingly important.

Third, it is necessary to understand the division of labour. I am optimistic 
about the potential of the new global partnership because philanthropy can do 
things official donors cannot. A philanthropic dollar and an ODA dollar are 
very different. Rather than trying to fill the funding gap in existing official 
donor programmes, philanthropy should play the role of innovative risk capital 
in development, testing new ideas that can be scaled by official donors in 
collaboration with partner governments and local organisations. This is already 
happening to some degree, as with the partnership between USAid and the Skoll 
foundation on theDevelopment Innovation Ventures <http://www.usaid.gov/div> 
programme.

"Nation states will remain the most powerful actors in world affairs", wrote 
Samuel Huntington in the introduction to his landmark 1993 essayThe Clash of 
Civilisations? 
<http://www.polsci.wvu.edu/faculty/hauser/PS103/Readings/HuntingtonClashOfCivilizationsForAffSummer93.pdf>
. Though still true, the world has changed much in the past 20 years.

The new global partnership, under the post-MDG framework, or as an emanation 
of the efforts of the post-Busan global partnership for effective development 
co-operation, must reflect the reality that governments are going to have to 
work more closely with philanthropic organisations and private actors to solve 
big global problems. We cannot walk the talk while running on parallel tracks, 
no matter how fast we go.
 