
Children’s education in the arts is in a “terrible state” thanks to an 
obsession with exams and league tables, the award-winning novelistPhilip Pullman
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippullman> has said. 

The author of the His Dark Materials trilogy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/his-dark-materials-3.html> urged the 
government to make theatre visits for schools “a firmly established part of the 
curriculum”, saying he was concerned about falling numbers of children being 
taken to plays and concerts.

“I do worry what happens to children when they’re deprived of these things by 
these blasted league tables and this crazy assumption that we’ve got to test 
everything,” he said.

“We do hear this from theatres that we’re not getting any children because the 
schools don’t want to let them out, because it takes time away from their 
lessons. That’s a terrible state to have got into, absolutely terrible.”

According to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-culture-media-sport>
, the proportion of primary school-age children who had visited the theatre in 
the previous 12 months fell from almost half (47.1%) in 2008-9 to less than a 
third (32.3%) in 2014-15.

“It should be a firmly established part of the curriculum that children should 
visit theatres and concert halls,” the author said.

He said teachers, parents and adults also had to ensure children were taken to 
see theatrical productions. “Theatre is one of those things that children will 
love if they’re helped to get there to see it. No child will find his or her 
own way to the theatre.”

Philip Pullman attacks 'barbarian' downgrading of UK arts education
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/philip-pullman-barbarian-arts-education-english-baccalaureate>
Pullman has been an outspoken critic of government policy in this area, saying 
in August that an education in the arts was “of incalculable worth in what it 
means to be a human being”, andcalling the government “philistines and 
barbarians” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/philip-pullman-barbarian-arts-education-english-baccalaureate>
.

Pullman’s fantasy series for children and young adults has sold millions 
around the world and won numerous awards, including the Whitbread book of the 
year in 2001 for The Amber Spyglass, the third in the trilogy. The three novels 
were also adapted into a play which premiered at the NationalTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in 20013, winning two Olivier 
awards.

He praised fellow author JK Rowling for her new play Harry Potter and the 
Cursed Child <http://www.harrypottertheplay.com/>, which is scheduled to open 
in the West End next year and which he said would help to introduce children to 
the theatre.

However, he said it would be “a pity if people are going to be priced out of 
it”. Tickets for the production cost up to £130 each, but such is the demand
they were being offered for up to £2,950 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/28/booking-for-harry-potter-play-extended-due-to-high-demand>
 on resale sites after a batch released for sale earlier this week rapidly sold 
out.

Pullman said gadgets such as tablets and e-readers were “quite efficient”, but 
“nothing beats that pure joy of turning a page and having something physically 
there in your hand”.

Pullman was speaking to mark the publication on Friday of the 200th edition of 
the children’s comicthe Phoenix <https://www.thephoenixcomic.co.uk/>, which he 
said was a “marvellous way of helping children to read”.

The 200th edition, which features a cover by the children’s laureate Chris 
Riddell,will feature a taster of a new comic strip by Pullman 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/pullman-writes-comic-strip-phoenix-315155> 
and artist Fred Fordham called Philip Pullman’s John Blake, about an English 
boy from the 1920s and his time-travelling schooner.

The strip will run for 30 weeks in 2016 before being published in book form in 
2017.

Also included in the issue are strips from readers Jordan Vigay, 14, and 
11-year-old Jonny Toons.

The Phoenix was launched in 2012 and has been voted the second best comic in 
the world by Time magazine. It is the first independent British comic to reach 
200 issues since 1969.
 