
Scotland Yard has uncovered new evidence which could show Andy Gray's phone 
messages were hacked into by theNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>.

The Metropolitan police have written to the former Sky Sports presenter 
offering to show him new documents that are likely to strengthen his legal 
action against the paper's publisher, News Group.

Gray is suing News Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/18/news-world-andy-gray-password?INTCMP=SRCH>
, part of Rupert Murdoch's News International UK newspaper business, and Glenn 
Mulcaire, the private investigator who used to be on the paper's books, in the 
high court.

Scotland Yard's decision to write to Gray provides further evidence of the 
Met's new, more proactive, approach to the phone-hacking scandal.

The Met reopened its inquiry into the affair in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/26/phone-hacking-investigation-reopened-by-police?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and said last week it would review all the decisions made by the previous two 
inquiries.

It also raises questions about why the latest documents were not handed over 
earlier, however. Gray obtained a court order last year forcing the Met to pass 
on all paperwork seized from Mulcaire that referred to the presenter.

Scotland Yard has so far only passed over copies of Mulcaire's phone bills 
which show he dialled Gray's voicemail number, together with redacted copies of 
the private investigator's notes.

On Tuesday the high court judge presiding over a pre-trial hearing involving 
Gray and actor Steve Coogan, who is also suing the News of the World over 
phone-hacking,criticised the Met police's conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/15/judge-police-phone-hacking-news-of-the-world?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Mr Justive Vos said: "The Metropolitan police had not done an appropriate job 
in analysing phone-hacking ... information in their possession. They didn't 
disclose highly relevant information."

The nature of the new evidence uncovered by the Met is unclear. Gray's 
spokesman confirmed the police have offered to arrange a meeting.

The Met said last week it had started to contact dozens of public figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/09/phone-hacking-lord-prescott?INTCMP=SRCH>
 who could have been victims of phone-hacking after obtaining "reasonable 
evidence" that up to 20 people were targeted by the paper.

They include former deputy prime minister John Prescott, who had previously 
been assured by the police there was no evidence he was a victim.

Prescott met with Sue Akers, the Met deputy assistant commissioner leading the 
fresh inquiry, last week.

Akers told Prescott documents seized by the Met from Mulcaire suggested he had 
been targeted by the paper. It includes invoices recovered by police and notes 
made by Mulcaire about Prescott.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 