
There’s a photograph of the artist Pablo Picasso drawing in his studio with 
Paloma 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/fc/a7/76/fca7768a57c2a05b4c8caf7b3ccc5a14.jpg>
 (his daughter) that encapsulates what I find so compelling about him. In that 
moment, they drew on the same level, both of them intent on what they’re doing. 
Not only did he take what she was doing seriously, her freedom was what he was 
aiming for in his own work.

How to draw...a kitten
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/gallery/2015/sep/20/how-to-drawa-kitten>
Last October I saw a stunning exhibition of Picasso sculptures at MoMA 
<http://www.moma.org/> in New York. The surging energy in his work was 
invigorating, undeniable and fresh. It’s evident in almost everything he 
created. His work vibrates with unbridled creativity, curiosity and a voracious 
hunger for life. It’s what art in all forms is about, an expression of what it 
means to be alive on this earth.


Sculpture finds him at play more than his painting. Maybe, because he 
considered himself a painter first, he was liberated to play with sculpture. 
His sculpture was unbound, and included wood, plaster, pebbles, metal, clay, 
found objects, bronze and assemblage. To put a pair of bicycle handlebars 
together with saddle and see that they can be a bull, a bird running along with 
two forks for legs, the essence of duckness (or is it a goose?), the endless 
small clay sketches of animals, people and fawns. Often made in minutes, 
they’re the physical manifestations of thoughts running through a mind, lyrical 
thoughts which embody life, not endlessly laboured over compositions.
 Ed Vere: I’m awed by the sheer energy and life in children’s drawings. 
Photograph: PR 
They’re directly the essence of his famous quote “Every child is an artist. 
The problem is how to remain an artist once we grow up”.

Part of my job as an author and illustrator is going into schools and reading 
my stories to children. I also draw with them, showing them how to draw the 
characters in my books. Without fail, I’m awed by the sheer energy and life in 
their drawings. They’ve drawn following me, but their drawings always have a 
zeal that makes mine seem devoid of life. I don’t think its only innocence, its 
the directness, there’s a kind of truth in them, no disguise. They draw what 
they feel without compromise. Adults learn to compromise, to worry about what 
others think and rein themselves in. Children just put it out there. They’re 
less concerned with being polite, so their drawings contain, honestly, what 
they feel.

Picasso too was not overly concerned with being polite. For all its downsides, 
along with that came incredible freedom of expression that ran untrammeled into 
so many areas.

By the age of 11 children have somehow learnt that there’s a right way to 
draw, and a wrong way. There isn’t.
Ed Vere 
I’ve recently been working with the fantastic CLPE <https://www.clpe.org.uk/> 
(Centre for Literacy in Primary Education) on the importance of visual 
literacy. I see children arrive in primary education expressing themselves 
freely and intuitively through drawing. Expressing themselves in ways they 
can’t yet verbally. They’re also able to understand sophisticated feelings and 
emotions when they “read” a picture that they don’t yet have the vocabulary 
for. Yet, when they leave at 11, pictures are out of the equation and too many 
feel unconfident about drawing. They’ve somehow learnt that there’s a right way 
to draw, and a wrong way. There isn’t. The only thing that matters is that you 
do it and you express yourself through it. It’s an incredibly valuable resource 
that they’re losing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fpicasso-ed-vere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94345a862b3ef3c8ce32924dd0a184fd5e2346d7%2F115_1024_3595_2157%2F3595.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Picasso%3A%20his%20art%20was%20an%20expression%20of%20what%20it%20means%20to%20be%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fpicasso-ed-vere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Picasso%3A%20his%20art%20was%20an%20expression%20of%20what%20it%20means%20to%20be%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fpicasso-ed-vere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94345a862b3ef3c8ce32924dd0a184fd5e2346d7%2F115_1024_3595_2157%2F3595.jpg>
 An scene from Ed Vere’s new book: Max and Bird. Illustration: Ed Vere 
Picasso painted and sculpted without constraint to express himself. He shows 
us all aspects of life, light and dark, its sorrows, its joys and its 
pleasures. This is why he inspires.


There’s another quote of his I like,


“Inspiration exists... but it has to find you working”.

As part of Bookbug Week 2016 
<http://www.scottishbooktrust.com/bookbug/bookbug-sessions/bookbug-week>, I’ll 
be working, reading and drawing with children as I take part in‘Authors Live 
<http://www.scottishbooktrust.com/learning/teachers-librarians/authors-live/authors-live-events/ed-vere>
’ withScottish Book Trust <http://www.scottishbooktrust.com> on Thursday 19 
May… I know I’ll find inspiration there.


Ed Vere’s latest picture book Max and Bird 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/409323/> (Puffin 
Books) is published 3 June 2016.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fpicasso-ed-vere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F497d65da6c0d702a9397dca982eb98f694715077%2F0_0_2509_3308%2F2509.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Picasso%3A%20his%20art%20was%20an%20expression%20of%20what%20it%20means%20to%20be%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fpicasso-ed-vere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Picasso%3A%20his%20art%20was%20an%20expression%20of%20what%20it%20means%20to%20be%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fpicasso-ed-vere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F497d65da6c0d702a9397dca982eb98f694715077%2F0_0_2509_3308%2F2509.jpg> 