
I fund, film, edit and distribute a series called Exhibition on Screen 
<http://www.exhibitiononscreen.com/en-uk/home> to cinemas around the world. Our 
mission is to give global audiences access to international exhibitions and 
permanent collections. We’re just finishing off our twelfth film and third 
season. We’ve now made documentaries about Manet, Munch, Matisse, Rembrandt, 
Vermeer and Van Gogh. Most recently we tackled Goya from the National Gallery 
and the Royal Academy’s Painting the Modern Garden exhibition.

Quite the lineup. I’m of course proud (and exhausted). I’ve also learned 
plenty of lessons along the way about telling stories about and around art and 
artists, in particular through the medium of film.

Here are some insights that may help you when it comes to promoting an 
exhibition, or creating content for it.

Storytelling is everything

 All films are the same; they’re dependent on well-told stories. It’s often 
what’s lacking in today’s TV documentaries. So much time is spent fluffing up 
the presenter’s hair that no one pays much attention to what they’re saying.

So do your research, in depth. Say something beyond just showing shots of the 
art. Ask yourself: what are the narratives of this show?
But also think about other narratives you can tell that run alongside these. 

I always think that the economic context at the time of the artist is 
essential to understand. Without his dealer’s loan, Monet would never have 
acquired his garden at Giverny. Also think about who’s commissioning the works 
(and who’s buying them).


For a side-narrative in our Matisse film, we examined who was influencing his 
work and who he was influencing in turn. No artist works in a void, but this 
isn’t always properly explored. Remember: the audience want to be entertained 
and informed.

Story, story, story.

When it comes to tech, use what you need

Don’t be a slave to what’s new. Technology must be the servant of the story, 
not the opposite. We couldn’t make these films were it not for developments in 
technology, but if you don’t need to show a painting in a fake 3D way, or morph 
between Rembrandt’s self-portraits, or use a drone over the rooftops of the 
National Gallery, don’t.

As for cutting quickly and deliberately, leaving in shaky or refocusing shots 
to make it look “street” or youthful, don’t get me started. Our audiences, 
young and old – like yours – are not idiots. They can look at something for 
more than 15 seconds.

Facts or emotions: what comes first?


A film operates on many levels. It’s probable that, after two weeks, you will 
only remember two or three facts from a film, but you will remember its 
emotion. You will recall a general sense of the art and the artist.

The brain is an astounding thing, but it struggles to absorb new visual and 
aural information at the same time. Throw in captions and foreign words and 
it’s super difficult. You need to decide what you want your audience to focus 
on and when. That can be text, for example (I always start with words rather 
than pictures). The narrative or the artist’s letters are key to the 
storytelling and I trust my audience to have the capacity to engage with this 
as well as just enjoying seeing the art.

Again, I see this error a lot on TV – heavily cut sequences with a booming 
soundtrack and the presenter in a nice jacket speeding around the Colosseum in 
a Fiat Cinquecento. How can you then be expected to remember a word they say? 
Highbrow is good and nothing to be ashamed of.

If in doubt, less is more

It’s very tempting to show – or in our case, shoot – an entire exhibition, but 
our audience would rather see less for longer.

They want to look and not always be talked to at the same time. They want to 
formulate their own questions before we offer up answers. They want to feel 
like they are alone with the art – and then alone with just the curator or the 
world’s leading experts. Throw in some behind-the-scenes access and a broader 
biography filmed in the countries in which the artists lived and worked, and 
you’ve got a satisfied audience.

Bonus tips

 * Research the questions you want to ask an expert, but make sure you also 
engage in conversation. Don’t rattle through your questions one by one. If 
you’re not genuinely interested in their answers, you’re in the wrong job. 
 * Try to understand why the artist filled a blank canvas in that way. There 
are few accidents; most of it is completely deliberate. Treat a painting like a 
detective story. 
Phil Grabsky is the founder of Exhibition on Screen 
<http://www.exhibitiononscreen.com/en-uk/home> and Seventh Art Productions 
<http://www.seventh-art.com/>

His latest film, Renoir – Revered and Reviled 
<http://www.exhibitiononscreen.com/en-uk/our-films/season-3/renoir>, is in 
cinemas now

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 