
The shattered ruins of Nimrud say different things to different people. To 
Sheikh Abdullah Saleh, a custodian of the ancient site until he was chased away 
byIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> extremists two years 
ago, they represent nothing but destruction and loss.

To Iraqi archaeologist Layla Salih the hulking piles of rock are a big jigsaw 
puzzle, from which one of the world’s most significant ancient sites might be 
slowly rebuilt.

Both the sheikh and the scholar have stood in the rubble of Nimrud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/05/islamic-state-isis-extremists-bulldoze-ancient-nimrud-site-mosul-iraq>
 in the week since the Iraqi military reclaimed what remained of it. Salih was 
at the site on Friday, picking out inscriptions from cracked stone and, in her 
mind’s eye, reassemblingthe giant winged buffaloes, known as lamassus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/bull-nimrud-destroyed-isis-recreated-rome-colosseum>
, which Isis had laid to ruin among dozens of other priceless artefacts that 
had been there for almost 4,000 years.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fpiecing-back-together-iraqi-archeological-gem-blown-sky-high-by-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9fb0f0448b94633e19683781b3fcb8055d3c74%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Piecing%20back%20together%20an%20Iraqi%20archaeological%20gem%20blown%20sky-high%20by%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fpiecing-back-together-iraqi-archeological-gem-blown-sky-high-by-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Piecing%20back%20together%20an%20Iraqi%20archaeological%20gem%20blown%20sky-high%20by%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fpiecing-back-together-iraqi-archeological-gem-blown-sky-high-by-isis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9fb0f0448b94633e19683781b3fcb8055d3c74%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Sheikh Saleh points out pieces of a broken statue. Photograph: Cengiz Yar for 
the Guardian 
“There are fragments that can be repaired,” she said. “The winged buffaloes in 
particular. It is not all lost. It was a really sad vision, but what can we do? 
We expected it. The good thing is we can put it back together.”


The view looked very different to Sheikh Saleh on Wednesday, days after he 
returned from a year-long exile at the hands of the marauders who had chased 
him from town for trying to protect what, to him, was both a national treasure 
and a personal livelihood.

“This has been here for thousands of years, before Jesus,” he said amid piles 
of rock that had once formed the heart of the city known to the ancient 
Assyrians as Kalhu. People used to visit from all over the world, especially 
before 1991. “It used to generate money for our village. Many of our people 
worked here,” he said.

“Then one day last year, they came around the village with a truck and 
loudspeakers. They told us to open our windows because there would be a big 
explosion.It was so big that our houses were covered in rocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/06/isis-destroys-ancient-assyrian-site-of-nimrud>
.”
Map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/nimrud/giv-1572644fmgnyCoCWm/>
Iraq’s deputy antiquities minister, Qais Rasheed, estimates that as much as 
70% of Nimrud has been destroyed by Isis. The scale of the site’s ransacking 
suggests his estimate might be conservative but Salih said a trained 
archeological eye could pick out enough scattered remnants across the landscape 
to suggest that all might not be lost.


“There were pieces that I could put together in my mind,” she said. “Small 
things and big things. I hope we can make this happen.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fpiecing-back-together-iraqi-archeological-gem-blown-sky-high-by-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9775907514b62dfad91b4af2cfad04f32da8c14%2F50_0_1400_840%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Piecing%20back%20together%20an%20Iraqi%20archaeological%20gem%20blown%20sky-high%20by%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fpiecing-back-together-iraqi-archeological-gem-blown-sky-high-by-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Piecing%20back%20together%20an%20Iraqi%20archaeological%20gem%20blown%20sky-high%20by%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fpiecing-back-together-iraqi-archeological-gem-blown-sky-high-by-isis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9775907514b62dfad91b4af2cfad04f32da8c14%2F50_0_1400_840%2F1400.jpg>
 A screengrab from a video on an Isis-supporting website shows smoke billowing 
from Nimrud after it was wired with explosives and detonated. Photograph: 
AFP/Getty Images 
There are some encouraging signs. Salih said a meeting with Unesco and the 
governor of Nineveh province on Tuesday yielded a commitment to divert funding 
from a long-stalled archeological project into rebuilding Nimrud. “It’s a 
substantial figure,” she said. “It will get us started. Initially we will 
document the losses and protect the site. We hope to start this at the 
beginning of next month.”

Sheikh Saleh said the site needed to be protected by guards to stop a pillage 
of what remains of Nimrud. “We need to put guards there right away,” he said, 
warning that a failure to lock it down could lead to a repeat of the looting 
that followed the US invasion of Baghdad in 2003, after which the Iraqi 
National Museum was pillaged by Iraqi civilians and US forces.


Thirteen years later, many of those stolen artefacts remain unaccounted for 
and continue to fetch high prices on a lucrative black market for stolen 
antiquities. Other sites around Iraq have also been looted in the instability 
that has plagued the country since the US invasion. TheMosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul> Museum, where Salih was a curator 
until 2009, has been largely emptied by Isis since it took the city in mid-2014 
and started a rampage to erase anything that pre-dated the Islamic era.


The Nineveh plains, on which Nimrud stands, is one of the world’s cradles of 
civilisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/nov/14/nimrud-isis-art-destruction>
 and is a heartland of Assyrian cities and Christian communities. As well as 
laying ancient cities to ruin, Isis rampaged over modern towns and villages in 
the area until the fight to reclaim them began six weeks ago by Iraqi forces 
and Kurdish peshmerga.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fpiecing-back-together-iraqi-archeological-gem-blown-sky-high-by-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd81656124b571593ed0b6b52aa8dc208eeb45b5f%2F0_13_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Piecing%20back%20together%20an%20Iraqi%20archaeological%20gem%20blown%20sky-high%20by%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fpiecing-back-together-iraqi-archeological-gem-blown-sky-high-by-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Piecing%20back%20together%20an%20Iraqi%20archaeological%20gem%20blown%20sky-high%20by%20Isis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fpiecing-back-together-iraqi-archeological-gem-blown-sky-high-by-isis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd81656124b571593ed0b6b52aa8dc208eeb45b5f%2F0_13_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Remains of wall panels and colossal statues of winged bulls destroyed by Isis 
in Nimrud. Photograph: Ari Jalal/Reuters 
From his vantage point, Sheikh Saleh is sceptical about how the military might 
that is being brought to the battlefield could do so little to stop Isis as it 
methodically worked through Nimrud with dynamite and sledgehammers. “They try 
to save the oil companies, but they not try to save Iraq’s history,” he said of 
the fighter jets that buzz overhead. What [Isis] was doing was so obvious. They 
do not want to leave intact anything connected to Iraqi civilisation. This is 
one of the very few places inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> 
where our history was on show, how our civilisation was organised. Now our 
history has been destroyed. We have nothing to show the world now and we will 
miss that.”

Additional reporting: Saud Murrani

 