
App: Piggie

By: Meiwin Fu

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> and iPad

What is it?


A tool to help you keep track of where your money goes. Every time you open 
your wallet you input details of how much you have spent and what you have 
spent it on and the app keeps a tally. You can look back over the past day, 
week or month to see exactly what happened to all that hard-earned cash. If you 
want to group certain types of transactions, for example, every shopping trip 
to Tesco, you can use @, ! or # to create groupable tags in the memo field.

Who is it by?


It's been designed by a developer called Meiwin Fu

What does it promise?


"Personal Money Tracking for iPhone and iPod Touch". I bet you're rushing to 
iTunes

Is it easy to use?


No and yes. Really, it's a pretty straightforward app which lets you input a 
sum of money you've spent and categorise it from a drop-down menu. Once you've 
done that, it automatically displays how much you've spent in each category and 
in total over the course of a day, week, month or year, according to your 
choice, and compares that with the previous day, week, month or year.

However, it is disguised as something much more complicated. After downloading 
it, I stared at the screen for a while before I could see what I needed to do 
to add an item â€“ click on the icon in the bottom-right corner, not on the day 
or date. Inputting the expense was easy, finding the right category wasn't, and 
it was a little while before I worked out that I could add my own categories 
(handy as the list didn't seem to include sports classes).

It wasn't very easy to work out how to add expenditure retrospectively and the 
Help section wasn't particularly helpful.

Is it pretty?


Prettier than your average spreadsheet. It's clear to read and doesn't have 
any unnecessary decoration. Let's face it, even the most stunning backdrop 
couldn't make the hi-tech equivalent of looking at a bunch of receipts as 
interesting as playing Angry Birds.

Should you download it?


If you want to keep track of your spending and can be bothered to stop and 
make an electronic note of every payment, then this is a reasonable place to do 
so. It's free, so you don't have to use it as soon as you download it, and once 
you get to know your way round, it's easy to use. I just can't help feeling 
that because the instructions are so poor, I'm probably missing out on some of 
the things it can do.
 