
The appearance of a Chilean naval vessel in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> Harbour, which had been 
used as a “torture chamber” by the Pinochet regime, has sparked protests from 
Chilean-Australians who say it should be removed from service.

The Esmeralda, a four-masted tall ship that is nearly 400ft long, is in Sydney 
as part of its 61st training cruise and has been docked at Garden Island since 
Thursday morning.

Considered a national symbol of Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile>
, it is used as a sail training vessel by the country’s navy and spends about 
half the year sailing around the world. It was last in Sydney in 2012.

Revealed: Pinochet’s torture ship now flies the flag for Chile around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/pinochet-torture-chile-ship> 
But its tours have sparked controversy after a series of human rights reports 
revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/pinochet-torture-chile-ship> 
that the ship was used to detain victims of the Augusto Pinochet’s regime in 
September 1973.

A 1986 US Senate report suggesting that as many as 112 people – including 40 
women – were held on the ship, with rape, electric shocks, mock executions and 
beatings among the crimes reportedly carried out on board.

A British-Chilean priest, Father Michael Woodward, who had been tortured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/09/pinochet-chile-michael-woodward-valpara-so>
 on board, was taken off the vessel for treatment at a naval hospital but died 
of his injuries in transit.

In 2003 Amnesty International urged 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/amr22/006/2003/en/> Chile’s government 
and navy to acknowledge serious human rights violations committed on the boat. 
In light of its bloody history, its continued use has prompted quayside 
protests around the world.

At the weekend the Esmeralda will be docked at the Sydney fleet base on Cowper 
Wharf Road in Woolloomooloo andopen to the public for guided tours 
<https://www.eventbrite.com.au/e/la-esmeralda-tours-tickets-28599505892>.

The Chile Solidarity Committee, a Sydney-based organisation of about 50 
people, intends to protest against the vessel’s appearance on Saturday.

Regardless of what the present purpose of the ship is, crimes were committed 
there
Vlaudin Vega, Chile Solidarity Committee 
An organiser, Vlaudin Vega, said the Esmeralda had been used as a “torture 
chamber” in 1973 but the Chilean navy had never acknowledged that chapter in 
the ship’s history.

“We need to tell the world, the Australian people, that in this vessel crimes 
were committed and the navy needs to respond.”

More than 330 crew are onboard the ship. Vega suggested that, because of their 
age, many would be unaware of its history.

He said removing the ship from service would be a symbolic gesture that would 
help the Chilean community to “heal those wounds” of Pinochet’s regime, though 
that might require a “more radical government” in Chile.


“Regardless of what the present purpose of the ship is, crimes were committed 
there,” he said. “People got killed there.

“[The navy needs] to take into account what happened to the most prestigious 
ship that they have … There’s no question it’s a beautiful ship but they need 
to retire it as a symbol of some accountability.”

The Chilean-Australian Association, the consulate general of Chile in Sydney 
and the embassy of Chile in Australia – which have promoted the Esmeralda’s 
appearance in Sydney – have been contacted for comment.

The ship is due to depart on Monday afternoon and will return to Chile next 
month.

 