
Lucia Hiriart, the widow of Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet>, is under investigation for 
allegedly swindling the Chilean treasury of millions of dollars by selling 
properties designated as community centers.


A report by Chilean prosecutors also accuses Hiriart, 93, of siphoning funds 
from the NGO she ran, CEMA Chile, to pay General Pinochet’s living expenses in 
the United Kingdom while he was under house arrest followinghis arrest in 1998 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1998/oct/18/pinochet.chile>.

Chile’s minister of public property, Víctor Osorio, told the Guardian that 
prosecutors are preparing to file formal charges over allegations that CEMA 
Chile misappropriatedmillions of dollars in government funds 
<http://ciperchile.cl/2015/11/25/lucia-hiriart-sigue-vendiendo-propiedades-que-el-estado-cedio-a-cema-ingresos-suman-6-300-millones/>
.

During her 43 years at the head of the organisation, Hiriart oversaw the sale 
of dozens of government properties which had been donated to the foundation. 
Chilean officials say that profits from the sales were transferred abroad or 
simply disappeared.


Among the questionable transactions include the transfer of US$100,000 to 
Hiriart in London while her husband was under house arrest <http:// 
http://ciperchile.cl/2015/11/25/lucia-hiriart-sigue-vendiendo-propiedades-que-el-estado-cedio-a-cema-ingresos-suman-6-300-millones/>
. The money was paid in two disbursements of US$50,000, one in 1998 and one in 
1999.

The CEMA Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> foundation was 
founded in 1954 as a vehicle for charitable works by the country’s first 
ladies. Hiriart took over following the bloody 1973 military coup that put her 
husband in power, acting as the group’s president and then president-for-life 
until she resigned the position last week.

The organisation was originally conceived as a community centre for farm 
workers, but Hiriart changed the focus to “women’s centers” with a focus on 
quilting and cake-baking classes. CEMA Chile still has dozens of centers across 
the country that are run by volunteers, but according to investigators the 
group has largely become a vehicle to buy, sell and rent properties.

“If you look at their work, the CEMA Chile foundation operates like a real 
estate company,” Osorio told the Guardian. He called the property sales a 
“misappropriation of public funds” and a direct violation of the terms by which 
the properties were ceded to CEMA Chile.

“We are still tallying the total of properties but we calculate the first 
group of 118 properties to have a value of US$123m – and that’s just a 
percentage of the overall total,” Osorio said.

In July, Chilean police raided the organisation’s Santiago headquarters, 
copying computer hard drives and searching for accounting records.

Despite repeated requests, CEMA Chile officials refused to comment. A 
spokesperson told the Guardian: “Given all the judicial charges we are not 
giving interviews.”


Profits from the real estate sales are thought to exceed $10m but the 
investigation has been hampered by the fact that most records prior to 1996 are 
missing.

Investigators described the book-keeping at the foundation as “chaotic”; many 
properties were listed with a value of just $1,but one property was sold for 
US$1.2m 
<http://ciperchile.cl/2015/11/25/lucia-hiriart-sigue-vendiendo-propiedades-que-el-estado-cedio-a-cema-ingresos-suman-6-300-millones/>
.

“It is very difficult to know where the CEMA money was deposited and into 
which account. The book-keeping was destroyed,” said Alejandra Matus, author of 
a bestselling biography of Hiriart. “There is no evidence whatsoever about what 
they did with the money for 10 or 15 years. There’s lots of missing money and 
missing information.”

Prosecutors suspect that profits from the real estate transactions may have 
been laundered through Riggs Bank,the scandal-plagued – and now defunct – 
Washington DC bank 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2004/07/19/us/at-riggs-bank-a-tangled-path-led-to-scandal.html>
 where the Pinochet family held dozens of secret accounts worth an estimated 
$8m.

So far, investigators have discovered four transfers between accounts at Riggs 
Bank and CEMA Chile.

In his final years, Pinochet was investigated for tax evasion, but until the 
CEMA Chile probe Hiriart has faced much less scrutiny.


Under her leadership CEMA became politically powerful, with a million members 
and military-style hierarchy. The board of directors had just three seats – one 
for each of Pinochet’s daughters.


As the controversy has grown over recent weeks, CEMA Chile unilaterally 
returned six properties to the government with little explanation. “All this 
confirms that we are on the right path to recuperate these public properties in 
the hands of this entity,” said Osorio.

The most recently recovered property, in the northern Chilean city of Copiapo, 
was immediately designated as new offices for an organisation representing 
families of political prisoners who disappeared under the Pinochet regime.
 