
The annual calendar produced by Pirelli tyres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/dec/30/pirelli-calendar-photographer-steve-mccurry>
 – which traditionally centres on the artfully lit nude bodies of female 
supermodels – has been unveiled, presenting a dramatic shift in subject matter 
and aesthetic.

Gone are the gym-toned limbs and heaving bosoms; in their place for the 2016 
calendar, shot byAnnie Leibovitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/annie-leibovitz>, are simple 
portraits of women of various sizes, ages and ethnicities chosen for their 
“professional, social, cultural, sporting and artistic accomplishment”.

Subjects include Yoko Ono, wearing a top hat, tuxedo jacket and fishnet 
tights; andPatti Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/music/patti-smith>, 
modelling jeans, boots and a snarl. The cultural commentator Fran Lebowitz 
makes an unlikely Miss May, smoking a cigarette in a man’s oversized pinstriped 
jacket. The blogger Tavi Gevinson, Chinese actor Yao Chen, artist Shirin 
Neshat, investment banker Mellody Hobson, the director of the film Selma, Ava 
DuVernay, and Agnes Gund, an art collector, also appear.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00c60c9a810255879a4ac8ab3f362db83bb0973f%2F0_0_1664_2362%2F1664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pirelli%20calendar%20goes%20with%20less%20steam%20and%20more%20jokes%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pirelli%20calendar%20goes%20with%20less%20steam%20and%20more%20jokes%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00c60c9a810255879a4ac8ab3f362db83bb0973f%2F0_0_1664_2362%2F1664.jpg>
 Serena Williams in the 2016 calendar. Photograph: Annie Leibovitz/Pirelli 
The tennis star Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> was one of just two 
scantily clad stars, posing in a balletic lunge with her muscular, naked back 
to the camera. December’s subject, the comedian Amy Schumer, sips from a 
lipstick-stained takeaway coffee cup in her underwear, with soft rolls of flesh 
visible on her stomach.

At the launch of the calendar on Monday, Leibovitz explained that none of 
these photographs had been conceived with the male gaze in mind. Williams’s 
photo was “not a nude but a body study”, she said, while Schumer’s was a comic 
conceit: “The idea was that she was the only one who had not got the memo about 
wearing clothes.”

To the uninitiated, the Pirelli calendar might sound like a tatty document 
destined for mechanics to stare at in a garage. But during its 50-odd years of 
production,Pirelli has worked hard to cultivate a sense of artiness and 
exclusivity around the images 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/28/pirelli-calendar-50-soft-porn-won-hearts-fashion-industry>
. In its hard copy form the calendar is only sent out to a select and secret 
few, although the images circulate widely on the internet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F707f71970ee45c0f23c2ad0e9c9a4ac47f68975b%2F0_161_4096_2456%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pirelli%20calendar%20goes%20with%20less%20steam%20and%20more%20jokes%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pirelli%20calendar%20goes%20with%20less%20steam%20and%20more%20jokes%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F707f71970ee45c0f23c2ad0e9c9a4ac47f68975b%2F0_161_4096_2456%2F4096.jpg>
 Annie Leibovitz attends the Pirelli calendar launch in London. Photograph: 
Andy Rain/EPA 
They are given a veneer of respectability, and fashion industry approval, 
thanks to the inclusion of the world’s top supermodels and actors – Kate Moss, 
Gisele Bundchen and Julianne Moore to name a few – who are photographed by 
illustrious names including Herb Ritts, Richard Avedon and Helmut Newton.

Monday’s slick launch event, in the grand ballroom of the Grosvenor House on 
Park Lane, London, underlined the seriousness with which Pirelli takes the 
calendar as a marketing exercise. The world’s media gathered for the unveiling 
of the images, listening as Clare Balding interviewed Leibovitz and three of 
the calendar’s subjects – Gevinson, Gund and Chen – on stage, while the 
proceedings were translated via headsets into four languages.

The women spoke warmly of the calendar’s symbolism, with Leibovitz describing 
it as representative of a shift in the way women are viewed. The tyre 
manufacturer’s chief executive, Marco Tronchetti Provera, said the company had 
been looking to make a departure from the usual format of its calendar this 
year, one that felt “very timely”.

“Women who have done something outstanding in their lives, from every corner 
of the world. This represents what Pirelli thinks is beautiful,” said 
Tronchetti Provera.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F922c6f8e86a7384832d9b47900972ba529066b84%2F0_0_3099_3543%2F3099.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pirelli%20calendar%20goes%20with%20less%20steam%20and%20more%20jokes%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pirelli%20calendar%20goes%20with%20less%20steam%20and%20more%20jokes%20for%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fpirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F922c6f8e86a7384832d9b47900972ba529066b84%2F0_0_3099_3543%2F3099.jpg>
 Yao Chen, the Chinese actor, in the calendar. Photograph: Annie 
Leibovitz/Pirelli 
Leibovitz added that the images were designed to look as natural and 
effortless as possible, with little “pretence” to the pictures. Though shot in 
flattering black and white, they had been subject to just a “little cleaning 
up” of the images rather than the usual heavy post-production work, she said.

Though Leibovitz, who also photographed a calendar of nudes for Pirelli in 
2000, declined to describe the calendar as a feminist watershed moment for the 
brand, she said: “Pirelli has always given free rein to the photographer, so 
it’s really about choice of photographer. I think the company has wanted to 
shift for a few years and my mandate was that they wanted to see some change.”

During a behind-the-scenes film shown at the launch, the photographer’s 
almost-namesake Lebowitz offered a slightly different analysis: “Perhaps 
clothed women are going to have a moment.”
 