
Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is 
known for swelling the oceans and fueling extreme weather, but it may be also 
causing the curious emergence of a new type of bear in the Arctic.


A bear shot in the frigid expanse of northern Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> is believed to be a grizzly-polar 
bear hybrid, a consequence of the increasing interactions between the two 
imposing bear species.

US ceases efforts to end global trade of polar bear parts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/04/us-drops-ban-polar-bear-parts-trade>
Hunter Didji Ishalook originally thought he’d shot a small polar bear but he 
said it was a “half-breed” – a position backed by several bear experts. The 
bear was shot near the small community of Arviat, located on the Hudson Bay 
within Canada’sArctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> region.

 “It looks like a polar bear but it’s got brown paws and big claws like a 
grizzly,” Ishalook said. “And the shape of a grizzly head.”

 Sightings of this hybrid species – which has been dubbed either a “grolar 
bear” or a “pizzly bear” – have become more common in recent years as the 
Arctic haswarmed at twice the rate of the global average 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/28/arctic-sea-ice-record-low-winter>
.

Grizzly bears found in Alaska <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> and 
Canada appear to be moving north as their environment warms, bringing them into 
contact with polar bears located on the coastline.

 Polar bears are spending more time on land as Arctic ice diminishes, causing 
them tolose body weight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/05/polar-bears-losing-weight-arctic-sea-ice-melts-climate-change-canadian-study>
 anddecline in numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/19/climate-change-is-single-biggest-threat-to-polar-bear-survival>
 as they are unable to hunt for favored prey such as seals.

 “The combination of warmer temperatures and vegetation growth means there is 
more overlap between the species and I’d expect that overlap to increase,” 
Chris Servheen, a grizzly bear expert at the University of Montana, told the 
Guardian.

“We didn’t see it much in the past but we are now. The two species are very 
similar genetically so males of both species will be attracted to females, 
which is why we are seeing a mix-up in the breeding.”

 Polar bears evolved from brown bears around 150,000 years ago and are now the 
largest land carnivores in the world, weighing up to 1,600lb (720kg). Grizzly 
bears, known for the distinctive hump on their shoulders, are normally solitary 
animals but come together to feed or to mate.

 As temperatures continue to increase – the world has just broken monthly heat 
recordsfor 12 months in a row 
<http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/summary-info/global/201604> – the long-term 
prognosis could be more favorable to the pizzly than the polar bear.

 “Polar bears really depend upon sea ice, they’ve evolved with it and they 
aren’t built to live on the shore long-term,” said Servheen. “If the sea ice 
disappears, some may be successful but a lot won’t be successful.

 “We are looking at an evolutionary change in the long term where overlaps are 
increasing and polar bears don’t have a lot of options. But it will be hundreds 
of generations before we really see a new type of bear.”
 