
What can you tell us about the Indianapolis Museum of Art 
<http://www.imamuseum.org/>?

The Indianapolis Museum of Art (IMA) is one of the oldest and largest art 
museums in the US, with a collection spanning 5,000 years. It also boasts lush 
gardens, a contemporary art park, a greenhouse and two historic houses. Whether 
you’re an art fan, nature lover, architecture buff, a family or researcher, 
there’s something for everybody at the IMA.

The museum is currently in the process of finalising a new strategic plan, the 
focus of which is the visitor. We’re homing in on the need to develop engaging 
experiences for our audiences through innovative programming and interactivity, 
informed by extensive audience research and evaluation.

RSC head of digital development: tech must inform creativity, not trump it | 
Arts head
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jan/20/rsc-digital-development-tech-shakespeare>
What does your role as director of interpretation, media and evaluation entail?

I oversee a group of nine full-time staff members as well as a number of 
part-time data collectors. The department is organised into four main areas: 
interpretation, media (photography and audio-visual content), editorial and 
publications, and audience research and evaluation. The team is responsible for 
the development of analogue and digital interpretive content and experiences 
for our guests. Audience research and evaluation also plays a key role in the 
process.

What does good research look like in the context of the museum?

Audience research and evaluation is fundamental and guides us in making a 
number of key decisions. We use a variety of methods in our research, including 
surveys, interviews, observation, focus groups and prototype and usability 
testing. The team continues to design these types of interactive feedback 
experiences for visitors, which allows for people to to express their points of 
view in creative and rewarding ways.

We generally conduct four different types of research at the IMA:

 * Exit surveys: the main objective of these studies is to understand who our 
visitors are, why they come to the IMA, what they do once they’re here and how 
satisfied they are with their experience. Results, for example, have helped 
inform some of the programming and interpretation strategies we’ve adopted 
across campus. They also aid in implementing initiatives that improve the level 
of comfort of the visitors, for example more resting opportunities, better 
orientation tools and better visitor services staff training. 
 * Non-visitors studies: the objective here is to understand what the barriers 
are to visiting the museum. We also occasionally consult non-visitors during 
exhibition-planning to see what exhibitions might be more appealing to them. 
 * Exhibition and programme summative evaluations: we do this to understand 
who visits the temporary exhibitions and takes part in specific programmes. 
Through this we can also measure satisfaction and check if the specific 
outcomes of a programme or exhibition have been met, so that changes can be 
made in subsequent iterations. 
 * Exhibition formative, front-end and remedial evaluation: these studies 
occur with visitors on-site and/or online. These help us to better understand 
what visitors or potential ones know about a specific exhibition subject, what 
they’re interested in learning about and doing in the exhibition, their 
interests and preferences for content, their views on titles and branding, and 
what interpretation tools they prefer engaging with to explore a given topic. 
We also test analogue and digital activities at various stages of the 
development process to guarantee that the final product is intuitive and easy 
to use. 
When has research really benefitted the museum?

When we tested the concept for our Robert Indiana exhibition 
<http://www.imamuseum.org/exhibition/essential-robert-indiana>, we realised 
that visitors had a lot of questions regarding how the artist made his works: 
did he use stencils? Did he paint freehand? Did he create the painting first 
and then the print?

This led us to add an additional outcome to the exhibition that focused on 
process. We also provided some video material, visuals and additional artworks 
to support the story. It turned out to be one of the most popular aspects of 
the show.

The museum recently shifted towards being a more visitor-centric institution – 
what does that look like at the IMA?

The museum’s shift towards a more visitor-centred approach has been possible 
because of a number of different initiatives.

First, the implementation of non-traditional programming. We’ve been 
progressively moving away from more traditional approaches, such as talks and 
symposiums, in favour of more fun and playful experiences that support 
participation, social interaction and creativity.

Good examples of this are the museum’s pop-up park – a park-like experience 
located in the museum café during the winter months – andavant brunch 
<http://www.imamuseum.org/special-event/avant-brunch-0>, a multisensory 
experience of music, food and more. We also haveB-movie bingo 
<http://www.imamuseum.org/film/stabilizer-b-movie-bingo>, an interactive game 
of movie clichés, family days and so on.

Don’t think for the visitor; ask visitors what they think

Becoming more visitor-centric has also been possible thanks to the 
implementation of a new exhibition development process and a strong research 
and evaluation strategy that supports the decision-making process across the 
different departments of the museum.

We’re also developing participatory projects that allow online and onsite 
visitors to contribute to the museum experience by creating their own content 
and sharing it publicly. A great example of this was ourPointillize Yourself 
<http://mw2015.museumsandtheweb.com/paper/whats-the-point-two-case-studies-of-introducing-digital-in-gallery-experiences/>
 project, which allowed visitors to use the interface on an iPad to take a 
selfie and apply apointillist <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pointillism> 
filter. We’ve also run hands-on materials workshops and online photography 
competitionsamong other things 
<http://mw2014.museumsandtheweb.com/paper/participatory-experiences-in-art-museums-lessons-from-two-years-of-practice/>
.

What career tips would you give to an aspiring museum professional?

Don’t be afraid to travel abroad to discover new cultures and different ways 
of working in museums.

Another tip: don’t think for the visitor; ask the visitors what they think! 
Sometimes we take for granted that we know what visitors want and need, when in 
reality we’re just projecting our thoughts and needs onto them.

Finally, be patient. Change takes time and can be conflicting at times. Keep 
your focus on your ultimate goal and don’t worry if you are not the most 
popular person in the museum.

Silvia Filippini-Fantoni is director of interpretation, media and evaluation 
at theIndianapolis Museum of Art <http://www.imamuseum.org/>. 

She will be speaking at MuseumNext 2015 <http://www.museumnext.com/geneva/> in 
Geneva, for which the Guardian Culture Professionals Network is a media partner.
The event will take place at the IMAin September 2015 
<http://www.museumnext.com/Indianapolis/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 