
Andrew Bird <https://www.theguardian.com/music/andrew-bird> reels off his tour 
bus looking a little fuzzy round the edges. He stands blinking in the thin 
afternoon light, announces a need for coffee, and then his red corduroy 
trousers go striding off through the grey London streets. He is, you gather, a 
little weary of touring. "Your body adapts," he says, once his hand is safely 
gripping an espresso. "It just accepts that there won't be much joy in anything 
but being on stage."

Bird the performer is remarkably different from Bird the man. In person, he is 
quiet, still and somewhat reserved; on stage, he is a flurry of violin and 
whistling, with guitar, mandolin and - thrillingly - glockenspiel thrown in, 
all elbows and fringe, loops and flourishes. His shows have been met with 
five-star reviews and the word "genius". "I looked at my notes ..." one live 
review from Pitchfork read, "the only comment I had scrawled was, 'Wow!'"

Performing, he admits, is where he comes into his own. "I've always had that 
thing," he says. "In school I was painfully shy. But as soon as I had to get up 
in front of the class and give a book report, it was alarming - I'd suddenly be 
very articulate."

Bird's music is an extraordinary amalgamation of swing and folk, indie-rock 
and jazz, with a weird undercurrent of articulacy and academia. His latest LP, 
the acclaimed Armchair Apocrypha, his tenth record, contains tracks with such 
learned titles as Imitosis, Dark Matter and Scythian Empires; the latter mines 
his long fascination with the nomadic people who flourished in the steppes 
north of the Black Sea from the 7th century BC. "It was history class," he 
recalls, "and we had to choose some part of ancient history to write on. I was 
always fascinated by the anonymous tribes that brought down western 
civilisation. Like the Goths. And I came upon the Scythians. They were mine, my 
ancient tribe."

Bird was born in Chicago and began learning the violin at the age of four, 
using the Suzuki method. "It was the most relaxed way you could teach a 
four-year-old," he says of the Japanese approach that uses the techniques of 
language learning. "My mom had this romantic notion of her children playing 
classical music. The idea is you learn it when you're still learning language. 
It's using the same part of the brain."

By eight, Bird was an accomplished violinist; but he was not a great student. 
"I was designated as being slow, or special learning, because of my peculiar 
way of doing work," he says awkwardly. "But it always seemed redundant to do 
the same assignment as everyone else. I've always associated academia with what 
kills it, what takes the fun out. But I didn't have a total 'fuck you' reaction 
to it. I had a slowburn kind of rebellion."

Bird continued in his unorthodox ways at Northwestern University, where he 
studied violin but spent most of the time discovering other forms of music. "I 
was not the star student," he says. "I'd spend hours in the music library, 
which was all vinyl, early jazz to classical. I'd go through the stacks and 
listen to Norwegian fiddle-playing or Chinese pipa for hours." But it was early 
jazz that made a big impression. First off, he liked "that angular heavy 
post-bop stuff. Then I worked backwards - the traditional, old-school jazz was 
frowned upon in the academic world, but that's what I loved. And I really like 
the Kansas City swing style. The way I play now is not jazz, but that's my 
approach, to keep it in rotation, to not write songs that are going to pin me 
down."

Along with the early jazz, his college studies included English folk music: 
"Old ballads, Martin Carthy: that's what got me into lyrics, because I like 
archaic expressions; they spark my imagination. " Dark Matter begins with the 
line: "When I was just a little boy/ I threw away all of my action toys/ When I 
became obsessed with/ Operation". Bird laughs. "That's just a song about the 
oddities of science," he says. "But did I enjoy Operation? Yeah. Like almost 
all boys."

Does this explain the amount of scientific terminology on the record? "There's 
a lot of interesting words, nomenclatures, in science," he says, looking 
bashful. "I'll sometimes make lists of words," he says. "Or I'll find one and 
fixate on it. Then it takes me on this little journey where maybe I'll end up 
at a dictionary, or just start conversations with people, 'What does anathema 
mean?' That's kind of my ritual for writing. People might be disappointed. But 
I need a little ritual, a conversation piece, or a challenge to myself. 
'Somehow I've gotta work Greek Cypriots into this song and it's gotta make 
sense.' That becomes my little kernel."

He laughs again, half-embarrassed, half-emboldened. "And I do care. It's not 
all random science - you just trust that the things you care about, that are 
really important to you, are going to end up in your songs. But I'm definitely 
the opposite of confessional singer-songwriters. I don't fill journals with 
poetry, thoughts and feelings."

Bird still lives in Chicago, but has a barn in north-west Illinois. "It's 
beautiful," he smiles. "I got 20 acres. And chickens." He built it with the 
intention of bringing a band out there to record; that didn't happen, but he 
did find the barn an inspiration. "When I go, I get really dark circles under 
my eyes and I get unstable," he says. "And I tend to do more songs that are 
less insistent, like Yawny at the Apocalypse. In the city or on tour, the ideas 
can be more dense, more dynamic."

He's already excited about his next record, to be recorded early next year. "I 
wanna do something very warm but minimalistic," he says. "My head is full of 
shifting patterns and polyrhythmic stuff; but I want to use all acoustic 
instruments and create this kind of tapestry of interlocking lulling parts." 
Has he thought of any titles? He nods. "All the songs have a sort of 
motivational speaker feel, so I'm trying to think of bad titles like Build a 
Better You - because, surprisingly, I've found a lot of the songs are 
encouraging somebody, maybe myself, to just, like, buck up".

Â· The single Heretics is out today on Fargo. Armchair Apocrypha is out now.
 