
England

Andrew Flintoff 5

Massive effort with the ball despite ankle injury not offset by poor batting 
and defensive captaincy.

Andrew Strauss 5

Unfortunate with some decisions but game totally subdued by strategic bowling 
with top score of only 50.

Alastair Cook  5

Good start to series and memorable hundred in Perth. But gradually worked over 
and struggling by the end.

Ian Bell  7

Consistent batting and more authority. But ought to have converted one of four 
half- centuries into three figures.

Kevin Pietersen  8

Brilliant at times and potential superstar. Ego got the better of him in 
Adelaide and helped cost the game.

Paul Collingwood  7

Gave everything, fielding was as usual superb and made a double hundred in 
Adelaide. But stagnated thereafter.

Geraint Jones  5

Efficient with the gloves, dreadful with the bat. Promising start petered out 
and pair in Perth cost him his place.

Chris Read 5

Ditto. Took six catches in two Tests but confirmed Duncan Fletcher's 
misgivings with only one score in double figures.

Sajid Mahmood 3

Bowled one good spell in Melbourne but was otherwise a whipping boy for 
Australia's stars. Batting negligible.

Matthew Hoggard 8

Adaptable, wholehearted and brilliant in adverse conditions in Adelaide. 
Missed in Sydney for last Test.

Steve Harmison 4

Underprepared and came up to speed too late. Never the threat of 2005. That 
ball in Brisbane an indelible Ashes image.

James Anderson 4

Very little cricket after his back injury last season and suffered with 
consistency accordingly, ending with a poor strike rate.

Ashley Giles 2

Unable to make impact with ball or bat. Dropping Ricky Ponting in Adelaide was 
the moment the Ashes were surrendered.

Monty Panesar  7

Incredible enthusiast and workaholic who improved all aspects of his game. 
Earned genuine respect.

Australia

Ricky Ponting 9

Stupendous batting and inspirational captaincy from the first day on. Never 
let things slip as he did in 2005.

Matthew Hayden 7

Not the giant he was but rescued his side at the MCG putting on 279 with 
Andrew Symonds after Australia had lost five for 84.

Justin Langer 7

Kick-started each innings and made big runs in Brisbane. Dropped catches in 
Sydney marred his retirement party.

Michael Hussey 8

Mr Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> was Mr Consistency. An 
unfussy, uncomplicated left-hander who is destined for greatness.

Michael Clarke 7

Given the chance through injury to others, he seized it with panache and will 
now be a fixture in the side.

Andrew Symonds 7

Proved himself a Test batsman in Melbourne, although still needs to throw off 
one-day mentality. Brilliant fielding.

Adam Gilchrist 8

Top keeping to Warne and still the best troubleshooter in the business. 
Sensational century in Perth off only 57 balls.

Shane Warne 8

Mesmeric. Not quite the bowler of his prime but still a wonder of the age. 
Batting took game from England at SCG. Irreplaceable.

Brett Lee 6

Enjoyed his best game in Sydney but, for all his pace, concedes runs too 
readily. Will lead the pack in future.

Stuart Clark 9

Wonderful. Scarcely a bad ball in five Tests and should have been man of the 
series. It is a batsman's world.

Glenn McGrath 7

Not quite the inquisitor of old and down on pace. But accuracy was stunning 
and a great influence at the other end.

Damien Martyn 2

Two bad games when he struggled for runs and then disappeared into retirement, 
beating the cut that was coming.

Averages

Batting M I No Runs HS Avg 100 50 C S

K P Pietersen  5 10 1 490 158 54.44 1 3 3 0

P D Collingwood  5 10 1 433 206 48.11 1 1 7 0

I R Bell  5 10 0 331 87 33.10 0 4 5 0

A Flintoff  5 10 1 254 89 28.22 0 2 0 0

A N Cook  5 10 0 276 116 27.60 1 0 2 0

A J Strauss  5 10 0 247 50 24.70 0 1 3 0

A F Giles  2 4 1 74 27* 24.66 0 0 1 0

C M W Read  2 4 1 35 26* 11.66 0 0 11 1

G O Jones  3 6 0 63 33 10.50 0 0 9 0

S J Harmison  5 9 1 73 23 9.12 0 0 1 0

M S Panesar  3 6 1 35 16* 7.00 0 0 0 0

J M Anderson  3 5 3 12 5 6.00 0 0 0 0

M J Hoggard  4 7 1 30 9* 5.00 0 0 0 0

S I Mahmood  3 6 0 18 10 3.00 0 0 0 0

Bowling O M R W Av 5w 10w BB

M J Hoggard  141 25 486 13 37.38 1 0 7-109

M S Panesar  89.3 8 379 10 37.90 1 0 5-92

A Flintoff  137 18 481 11 43.72 0 0 4-99

S I Mahmood  51.2 4 264 5 52.80 0 0 4-100

S J Harmison  170.1 29 614 10 61.40 0 0 4-48

J M Anderson  93.2 18 413 5 82.60 0 0 3-98

A F Giles  82 9 262 3 87.33 0 0 1-46

I R Bell  1 0 12 0 - 0 0 0-0

P D Collingwood 3 0 20 0 - 0 0 0-0

K P Pietersen 29 2 125 0 - 0 0 0-0

Averages

Batting M I No Runs HS Avg 100 50 C S

M E K Hussey  5 7 2 458 103 91.60 1 4 5 0

R T Ponting  5 8 1 576 196 82.28 2 2 4 0

M J Clarke  5 7 2 389 135* 77.80 2 1 2 0

A Symonds  3 4 0 232 156 58.00 1 0 3 0

M L Hayden  5 9 1 413 153 51.62 1 1 7 0

S K Warne  5 5 1 196 71 49.00 0 1 5 0

A C Gilchrist  5 6 1 229 102* 45.80 1 2 24 2

J L Langer  5 9 2 303 100* 43.28 1 1 5 0

B Lee  5 5 2 65 43* 21.66 0 0 2 0

S R Clark  5 5 0 85 39 17.00 0 0 0 0

D R Martyn  2 3 0 45 29 15.00 0 0 3 0

G D McGrath  5 5 2 10 8* 3.33 0 0 1 0

Bowling O M R W Av 5w 10w BB

S R Clark  194.2 53 443 26 17.03 0 0 4-72

G D McGrath  209.1 65 502 21 23.90 1 0 6-50

S K Warne  241.2 43 698 23 30.34 1 0 5-39

B Lee  196.5 32 664 20 33.20 0 0 4-47

A Symonds  31 8 79 2 39.50 0 0 2-8

M J Clarke  17 2 53 0 - 0 0 0-0

M E K Hussey  1 0 5 0 - 0 0 0-0
 