
The one you should read, already: Please Read the Letter, Robert Plant & 
Alison Krauss <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alisonkrauss>

Raising Sand, the collaboration between Led Zeppelin's Robert Plant and 
bluegrass singer Alison Krauss, continues toclimb up the UK album chart 
<http://music.theguardian.com/news/story/0,,2248250,00.html>, and now standout 
track Please Read the Letter gets a well-deserved release as a single. A song 
penned not just by the hand of Plant, but also his Zep cohort Jimmy Page, 
Please Read... is a rousing folk-rock saga that hints at past indiscretions and 
irreparable mistakes which may be light on details but offers a note of sincere 
regret. Despite the song's nostalgic theme, the repetition of the chorus 
"Please read the letter that I wrote" and the way the shadowy backing guitars 
and snare drum steadily fills out over five-and-a-half minutes charge the song 
with an urgent need for resolution. What crowns the track are the elegant 
harmonies, Plant downplaying his bluesy growl so as not to overwhelm the purity 
of Krauss's vocals. They imbue Please Read the Letter with its great sense of 
yearning.
Listen to it here <http://www.myspace.com/officialrobertplantalisonkrauss>.

The one for ghouls who just want to have fun : Ghosts, Laura Marling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/laura-marling>

A self-professed fan of Joni Mitchell with a clear retro edge to her own lo-fi 
folk, 18-year-old Laura Marling was bound to find herself held up as a younger 
version of the 60s icon by interviewers and writers of press releases alike. 
That said, every vaguely folkish singer-songstress has to be compared to 
Mitchell at least once in their career; it's the law. Ghosts proves, however, 
there is a ripe shrewdness to Marling's vocal style more in keeping with 
Nashville's Gillian Welch than any jazzed-out singer from the past. Like Welch, 
there's a ghoulish wisdom to the teenager's analysis of human experience which 
dominates the song, and although it doesn't seem quite plausible in one so 
young, lines like "He would stare at empty chairs, think of the ghosts that 
once sat there, the ghosts that broke his heart" are still poignant and, dare I 
cite another press-release cliche, suggest there are great things to come from 
young Marling.
Watch the video here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XonJJbV54BE>.

The one that's not so thrilling: The Girl Is Mine 2008, Michael Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/michaeljackson> feat will.i.am

What could be worse than Paul McCartney and Michael Jackson flexing their lack 
of muscle in an attempt to win over the same woman against a background of 
woozy, mawkish, 80s disco? Why, if Paul McCartney was replaced by will.i.am, a 
rapper who long ago eschewed any sense of credibility to play a rent-a-clown, 
mainly to Black Eyed Peas singer Fergie's sexless strand of R&B, that's what. 
Thriller, from which this song was originally taken, is 25-years-old this year, 
and a special edition featuring contemporary musicians such as this guy will be 
surfacing very soon. There's absolutely no debate whatsoever that Thriller is 
one of the greatest albums ever made, of which The Girl is Mine, with its bland 
production and blander accompanying tune, was a freakish low-point. If we are 
to celebrate Thriller, perhaps best to avoid doing so with a song comprised 
almost exclusively of will.i.am going "She mine, she mine, she mine" like a 
horny squirrel.
 Listen to the song here 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x3xqi3_the-girl-is-mine-2008_music>.

The one that's Mor of the same: That's How People Grow Up, Morrissey

From the moment you hear the foreboding roll of the opening bars and the 
whimsical lines, "I was wasting my time, trying to fall in love, disappointment 
came to me and booted and bruised and hurt me", it is apparent: this song is 
stock Morrissey. His lyrics remain characteristically scathing and heartrending 
in equal measures, tumbling towards the bitter claim "That's how people grow 
up!" as he details, somewhat unconvincingly, how he learned to accept he might 
never be "someone's sweetie" again. Meanwhile, vociferous indie guitars clang 
along and the catchy melody sweeps up and down, tailored neatly to Morrissey's 
words. It's not groundbreaking stuff, but as is demonstrated in the 
accompanying video, which shows a montage of various fans clambering about 
trying to grope the singer, Morrissey doesn't need to change anything he does, 
or, apparently, censor anything he says, to keep his public happy.
Watch the video here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wAQoquS2vGE>.

The one that's epic and panned: What Hurts the Most, Rascal Flatts

There is a new strand of American epic balladry, brought to prominence last 
year by the Fray's tear-stained How to Save A Life, and it will not go away. 
Moreover, a lot of it appears to have been created with a brief unique to 
music, that is come up with the concept for the video first, then the song will 
take care of itself. Just look at this spectacular mini-motion picture that is 
Rascal Flatts' What Hurts the Most. The opening few seconds feature a teenage 
girl weeping and flailing about her bedroom in a state of absolute grief. It's 
horrible. And then Flatts appear, a platinum country trio from Ohio who sing 
with all the conviction of a band who know they have a crossover hit on their 
hands, to belt out a few lines about rain and loneliness, before the video 
pauses for dialogue. Because, sure there's a song to be sung, but the reason 
we're all here is to watch the next scene in this teen movie about doomed love. 
There is another point to this song of course, beyond finding the right actress 
for the part, and that is to make you cry hot, artificial tears for no reason 
other than the phony catharsis it contrives to inspire.
Watch the video here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QJEs1TyzL_A>.

MySpace of the week: Dels

Ipswich MC Dels found his musical partner Joe Goddard when he went a-MySpacing 
the latter's band, Hot Chip, to congratulate them on their album the Warning. 
The result was a response from Goddard ("I like your flow") and the subsequent 
tracks the pair created together sound much like Kano, but produced by Hot 
Chip. Or as Dels puts it on his MySpace "a waterfall in a council estate". And 
you can hear that waterfallhere <http://www.myspace.com/imdels>.
 