
Key points

Today’s exchange was almost wholly around benefits. Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> recommended that the prime 
minister should “support British cinema” by going to see Ken Loach’s I, Daniel 
Blake during a series of questions about benefit sanctions, universal credit 
cuts and cuts to the employment support allowance for disabled people. He 
accused Theresa May of “imposing poverty on people” under the guise of helping 
them find work. In response, May said Labour was in favour of no sanctions and 
no obligation on claimants to prove they were unfit for work, and that the 
benefits system needed to also be fair to the people who pay for it. She said 
Labour had lost touch with its working-class support and the Tories were now 
the true party of the working classes.

Snap verdict

A satisfyingly serious and grown-up exchange which did not really amount to a 
clear win for either Corbyn or May, but which did credit to them both. Corbyn 
used all six questions to ask about welfare, but he moved from one topic to 
another, with varying success.

May and Corbyn at PMQs - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/02/pmqs-may-corbyn-chilcot-hammond-to-adopt-flexible-fiscal-targets-in-autumn-statement-politics-live>
May was at her weakest at the start, when Corbyn asked about cuts to universal 
credit which were coming down the line and would effectively undo the tax 
credit cuts U-turn announced by George Osborne. But these calculations are 
complex, and hard to explain, and although May did not address the point at 
all, Corbyn did not drive his point hard home.

He was more passionate, and effective, on benefit sanctions, but at this point 
she may had a solid response which involved accusing Labour of being opposed to 
any form of sanction or fiscal discipline in welfare spending. Corbyn finished 
with a dignified plea on behalf of parents who had difficulty affording funeral 
costs for children who die, and this prompted a semi-consensual response from 
May, who said funding was already available. So, overall, a bit of a draw.

Memorable lines

 It’s time we ended this institutional barbarity against the most vulnerable 
people in the system.


Jeremy Corbyn urges May to undo benefit sanctions.

 The Labour party is drifting away from the views of working-class people. It 
is this party that knows how to support them.


May accuses Labour of abandoning its core supporters

 * For more on PMQs and the day’s politics, read our politics live blog with 
Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/19/pmqs-may-corbyn-hammond-angela-eagle-was-subect-to-homophobic-abuse-after-challenging-corbyn-labour-inquiry-finds-politics-live>
.

 * Click here <https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/series/andrew-sparrow-verdict> to 
read more of Andrew Sparrow’s verdicts on PMQS.  