
Key points

Corbyn challenged Cameron over his government’s record on cancer treatment 
spending, and in particular the reduction of funding for radiologists despite 
the government’s own taskforce warning last year that they were essential. 
Cameron hit back by claiming that the health service in Wales – run by a Labour 
government – was lagging behind England. The EU referendum remained the 
elephant in the room (to be debated immediately after PMQs) and it was down to 
SNP members to quiz the prime minister on it.

Cameron statement to the Commons on the EU referendum - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/03/eu-renegotiation-pmqs-cameron-corbyn-he-prepares-to-make-statement-to-mps-politics-live>
Snap verdict

One of Cameron’s weakest PMQs <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs> 
performances for some time. On NHS radiologists his initial non-answer was more 
blatant than normal, and his jibes at Corbyn – “crazy” plans, and the reference 
to his “cogs” turning slowly – felt particularly inappropriate given the 
subject at hand and Corbyn’s earnest and sombre tone. Cameron was better when 
handling the question about employment and support allowance (ESA), but it was 
probably “job done” for Corbyn. Cameron’s repeated references to Wales and 
Scotland also felt rather off-topic although, as an insight into how the Tories 
will campaign between now and May, his repeated attack on Labour’s tax-raising 
agenda in Scotland was very revealing.

Best lines

Corbyn called out Tory backbenchers who have taken to heckling his citing of 
constituents’ letters in his questions. Referring to Martin, a constituent 
struggling to help a friend with cancer, Corbyn said: “He doesn’t think it’s 
very funny.”

Cameron was asked by Corbyn whether cancer patients losing ESA really had the 
“broadest shoulders” – the people Cameron previously said would bear the brunt 
of cuts. Cameron said that those with the broadest shoulders were top-rate tax 
payers, “and they are paying. It is clear what Labour’s policy is: cutting the 
NHS in Wales, and putting up tax.”

For more on PMQs, read our politics live blog with Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/03/eu-renegotiation-pmqs-cameron-corbyn-he-prepares-to-make-statement-to-mps-politics-live>
.
 