
Key points

Corbyn pressed the prime minister on the home secretary, Amber Rudd’s 
since-abandoned plans to make companies publish their numbers of foreign 
employees. He asked why someone’s place of birth mattered so much to the 
government. May responded that it was not a policy, had never been announced 
and that there would be no “naming and shaming” of foreign workers.

May refuses vote on article 50 after conceding debate - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/12/pmqs-may-corbyn-brexit-debate-claims-real-victory-after-may-offers-brexit-debate-concession-politics-live>
On the Brexit confusion, Corbyn accused May of having “no plans, no strategy, 
no clarity, no transparency or scrutiny of the process. The jobs of millions 
are at stake, the pound is plummeting, business is worrying, and the government 
has no answers.” May said that, unlikeLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>, she was optimistic and then 
accused Corbyn of not respecting the referendum verdict. “We are listening and 
delivering,” she said.

Snap verdict

Corbyn never quite put the ball in the back of the net, but this wasn’t May’s 
finest moment either and the Labour leader did quite usefully catalogue some of 
the weaknesses in the government’s position on Brexit.

World faces cold-war-era threat levels, says former MI6 chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/12/world-faces-cold-war-era-threat-levels-former-mi6-chief-sir-john-sawers>
The very fact that Corbyn focused on Brexit was striking, because since the 
referendum (and for some time before) he has generally avoided the topic. But, 
as usual, he asked strong questions and failed to follow them up. (In tennis 
terms, he has an adequate serve, but no return.) He also failed to press May on 
the one question that is really topical today: in the light of her U-turn on 
Tuesday night on a Brexit debate, can she now commit to giving MPs a vote on a 
substantive motion?

May responded competently, but not brilliantly, to Corbyn’s questions, and 
interestingly she avoided some of the gratuitous Labour-bashing that has marred 
some of her earlierPMQs <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs>, although 
she did finish with a neat point about Labour getting the same answer when it 
asks a question for a second time. (Although this was premised on a claim that 
Emily Thornberry has called for a second referendum on the EU, which, as far as 
I’m aware, she hasn’t.)

Most memorable lines

Corbyn, after accepting May’s congratulations on his re-election: 

I’m most grateful to over 300,000 people who voted for me, which is rather 
more than voted for her to become leader of her party.

May, having accused the shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, of wanting 
a second Brexit referendum:

You can ask the same question again, you’ll still get the answer you don’t 
want.
 