
Key points

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, questioned the prime minister on what he and 
the chancellor, George Osborne, were doing to reassure businesses that might be 
considering relocating, onthe increase in hate crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/uk-faith-leaders-unite-in-condemning-post-referendum-rise-in-xenophobic-abuse>
 since the referendum and whether inequality had led to the result.

Considering the political heat around both leaders in the wake of last week’s 
vote, it was an oddly low key but quietly revealing debate. There was one new 
policy announcement and a memorable line whenDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> called on Corbyn to follow 
his lead and resign.


Corbyn asked the prime minister about monitoring hate crimes. Cameron 
responded by revealing plans for a new action plan, which will be published 
soon to help police forces and local communities tackle hate crimes. He said he 
had reassured the Polish, Romanian and Czech prime ministers at the EU summit 
that his government was dealing with this.

Brexit live: 'sad' Cameron says EU must deal with immigration concerns - 
latest news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/29/brexit-live-sad-cameron-eu-immigration-corbyn-leadership>
Snap verdict

It was one of Corbyn’s best PMQs <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs> 
performances for some time. There was some irony in hearing Corbyn ask about 
the economic damage caused by the Brexit vote – because during the campaign he 
suggested that George Osborne’s warnings about the economic impact of Brexit 
were exaggerated and implausible – but he asked direct, pertinent questions and 
obtained relatively informative, interesting replies.

It was only towards the end that Corbyn broadened it out, and asked two 
questions attacking Cameron’s record more generally. At this point Cameron’s 
real feelings started to show. He criticised Corbyn for not doing enough to 
campaign for a remain vote (echoing a point made by many in theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party) and then he let rip at the 
end with a soundbite with vague echoes of Leo Amery in the Norway debate that 
led to the resignation of Neville Chamberlain (quoting Oliver Cromwell’s speech 
dissolving the Rump parliament): “You have sat too long here for any good you 
have been doing. Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. In the name of 
God, go.” (That was Amery, of course; Cameron’s was a diluted version.)

In light of the fact that Corbyn was better than usual today, this pre-cooked 
barb was a little undeserved, but that won’t stop it sounding effective when he 
appears on the TV news.

Memorable lines

Cameron to Corbyn: 


For heaven’s sake man, go.
 