
Key points

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, used his six questions to cover a range of 
subjects – Sports Direct, tax avoidance and an attempt to exploit Conservative 
divisions over the EU referendum. He did not mention thevoter registration 
problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-voter-registration-site-crashes-before-deadline>
, which were dealt with by an earlier question.

Snap verdict

Corbyn has until now avoided tackling Cameron over the EU referendum and we 
can see why. He tried to taunt Cameron over comments made by pro-Brexit 
ministers, but it was like watching someone try to barge through an open door, 
because Cameron was able to deftly deal with this by saying that he did not 
agree with Priti Patel, Michael Gove, etc, either. Angela Eaglemanaged to 
extract some political capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/25/george-osborne-v-angela-eagle-pmqs-verdict-the-eagle-has-landed-punches>
 from this topic, through mockery, but today it was hard to see what Corbyn was 
trying to achieve. His question about Sports Direct was good, but Cameron had a 
reasonable answer to it. And Corbyn did not really achieve a hit either on Tory 
MEPs and tax avoidance, although he had a good line about how nice it would be 
if they actually voted to tackle tax avoidance too. Overall, though, it was a 
breeze for Cameron.

Memorable lines

It was not a vintage PMQs <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs> for 
memorable exchanges. Corbyn delivered a strong question on Sports Direct, 
quoting a correspondent who derided the “scandalous scourge” of zero-hours 
contracts. But Cameron batted it back confidently, deriding the “appalling 
practice” of not paying the full minimum wage.

Corbyn sought to drive a wedge between Cameron and his cabinet colleagues, who 
support the leave campaign, which prompted Cameron to retort:

Here I am trying to be so consensual.

For more on PMQs and the day’s politics, read our politics live blog with 
Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/08/eu-referendum-live-voter-registration-site-crashes-cameron-farage-debate>
 