
Key points

Jeremy Corbyn used all six of his questions to the prime minister to press her 
on plans to expand existing andintroduce new selective grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
. After May paid tribute to her predecessor, David Cameron, whoannounced that 
he was leaving parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/12/david-cameron-to-stand-down-as-mp-for-witney>
 this week, Corbyn congratulated the prime minister for uniting the education 
establishment against her plans for more grammars, before repeatedly attacking 
the plans with evidence from across the sector.

Corbyn presses May over grammar schools at PMQs - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/14/pmqs-corbyn-may-brexit-cannot-have-a-la-carte-access-to-single-market-eu-chief-says-politics-live>
Snap verdict

Corbyn’s best PMQs was the one where he attacked David Cameron over plans to 
force all schools to become academies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/blog/2016/apr/27/cameron-v-corbyn-pmqs-verdict-wheels-coming-off-academy-plans>
 and this one may well have been his second best.

Again, he challenged the prime minister over the lack of support for a plan 
and, again, he won the exchange because he had the best arguments. He was not 
flash (he never is), but his fourth question, in which he spoke passionately 
about how wrong it was to separate children at 11, was powerful, and it was 
telling that towards the end,May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> resorted to changing the 
subject. Unlike last week, May restricted her jokes to her final answer, but 
even her payoff soundbite did not quite work. It was premised on the idea that 
this might be Corbyn’s last PMQs. But, of course, no one believes that ...

Most memorable lines

Corbyn said his policy is not about pulling up ladders. 

It is about offering ladders to everyone. 

He quotes someone saying there is something hopeless about grammar schools, 
and the idea that only some pupils can benefit. It was Cameron, he says, who 
said this.

May finished her answer to Corbyn with a joke about his leadership of the 
Labour party, referring to the – very slim – possibility that Corbyn maynot be 
leader by next week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/jeremy-corbyn-claims-he-can-unite-labour-to-take-on-tories>
. She said his leadership had been marked by “coalmines that aren’t mined, 
submarines that aren’t used and a leader who didn’t lead”.

Whoever is Labour leader after the election, it will be the country that loses.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhy-does-theresa-may-want-to-bring-back-grammar-schools-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20does%20Theresa%20May%20want%20to%20bring%20back%20grammar%20schools%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhy-does-theresa-may-want-to-bring-back-grammar-schools-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20does%20Theresa%20May%20want%20to%20bring%20back%20grammar%20schools%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhy-does-theresa-may-want-to-bring-back-grammar-schools-video-explainer&media=>
Why does Theresa May want to bring back grammar schools? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2016/sep/14/why-does-theresa-may-want-to-bring-back-grammar-schools-video-explainer> 