
When Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> was under siege from 
French troops, it was here in the southern city of Cádiz that the country’s 
lawmakers took refuge, defiantly drawing up Spain’s first constitution in 1812. 
In it, they outlined principles that were ground-breaking for the time – 
enshrining equality before the law, tax reform and doing away with feudal 
privileges.

More than two centuries later, those behind the anti-austerity, 
anti-establishment partyPodemos <https://www.theguardian.com/world/podemos> in 
Cádiz province are hoping this area will once again lead the way in laying the 
groundwork for radical reform.

“It’s about time we gave the system a jolt,” Eladio Doallo Viche explained as 
he handed out flyers in a busy street market. A telecom engineer who has not 
been able to find work, he rattled off statistics: unemployment in the province 
is 42% – the highest in Spain – rising to 69% for those under the age of 30.

“It’s horrible. Everyone can see that we need a change,” said the 58-year-old, 
whirling around quickly to press a leaflet in the hands of an elderly woman as 
she passed by.

Everyone here works for someone. They’re nervous to be seen supporting Podemos 
– they don't want to lose their jobs

On Sunday, his assertions will be put to the test as voters across the region 
of Andalusia cast their ballots in a snap election called less than eight weeks 
ago. Many outside the region will be watching closely – with Andalusians 
representing 20% of voters in Spain, the election is widely seen as a litmus 
test for municipal, regional and general elections due to be held across the 
country later this year.

This is also a critical race for Podemos – its first since the Greek elections 
saw its ally, Syriza, triumph. Podemos is keen to show thefive seats won during 
the European elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/27/podemos-citizen-politics-spain-elections-indignados-movement>
 last May were not simply protest votes but instead a prelude to a Syriza-style 
win in Spain’s general elections. Proof is in the party’s slogan for its 
regional campaign: “The change begins in Andalusia.”

In many ways, Cádiz province – home to Podemos’s Andalusian leader Teresa 
Rodríguez, and where the unemployment rate exceeds that of Greece – is fertile 
ground for the party’s message, said psychologist José Ignacio García Sánchez 
who last year started a Podemoscirculo – or working group – in Jerez. The 
27-year-old pointed to a line often used by the party’s leaders, alluding to 
both geography and socio-economic conditions: “Spain is in the south ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, Andalusia is in the south of 
Spain. And that makes Cádiz the south of the south of south.”

Here in Cádiz, where some six people a day receive eviction notices and one in 
four lives in severe poverty, Podemos’s key message, of an underlying 
disconnect between the economic recovery touted by the People’s party and the 
daily lives of Spaniards, rings true for many.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fpodemos-election-trail-cadiz-andalucia-syriza-teresa-rodriguez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426867290824%2Fcdf6f4e9-3656-4013-8334-9a05bfbef539-2060x1030.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Podemos%20on%20the%20campaign%20trail%3A%20'It's%20time%20we%20gave%20the%20system%20a%20jolt'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fpodemos-election-trail-cadiz-andalucia-syriza-teresa-rodriguez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Podemos%20on%20the%20campaign%20trail%3A%20%27It%27s%20time%20we%20gave%20the%20system%20a%20jolt%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fpodemos-election-trail-cadiz-andalucia-syriza-teresa-rodriguez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426867290824%2Fcdf6f4e9-3656-4013-8334-9a05bfbef539-2060x1030.jpeg>
 Campaign posters of the main candidates, left to right, Susana Diaz (Socialist 
party); Juan Manuel Moreno Bonilla (People’s party); and Teresa Rodriguez 
(Podemos). Photograph: Jon Nazca/Reuters 
On Sunday, Podemos is expecting its strongest result to be in this province, 
said García Sánchez. But he was less confident that the party would triumph 
across the region. “Andalusia is different – there is less support here for 
Podemos than in the rest of the country.”

Part of the reason lies in the continued dominance of the Socialist party in 
Andalusia, said Jesús Rodríguez, one of the party leaders in the province. The 
Socialists have governed the region since Spain’s return to democracy. “Across 
the country, Podemos has been fuelled by disenchanted Socialist voters. But the 
Socialists haven’t disintegrated here like they have in other parts,” he said.

The pair’s predictions are backed by polls. A Metroscopia poll for El País 
published last Sunday suggests Podemos will place third in the region. The 
Socialists, lead by Andalusian president Susana Díaz, are expected to secure a 
narrow victory, with 37% of the vote, while the People’s party would earn 29% 
of the vote. Podemos would win 15%, earning 15 of the 109 seats up for grabs.
Centre-right Ciudadanos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/13/ciudadanos-podemos-of-right-political-force-spain-albert-rivera>
 would get 11%, while United Left is expected to see its support drop to 8.5%. 
More than 20% of the 3,200 people queried in early March were still undecided, 
leaving considerable margin for change.

Both Rodríguez and García Sánchez are vying for seats in the regional 
parliament. On this rainy evening, they had travelled to the small town of 
Chipiona to take part in an informal meet-and-greet organised by local 
campaigners.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fpodemos-election-trail-cadiz-andalucia-syriza-teresa-rodriguez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426867681476%2Fe344a5ba-19ea-441d-8250-4eabe0d70cdf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Podemos%20on%20the%20campaign%20trail%3A%20'It's%20time%20we%20gave%20the%20system%20a%20jolt'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fpodemos-election-trail-cadiz-andalucia-syriza-teresa-rodriguez%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Podemos%20on%20the%20campaign%20trail%3A%20%27It%27s%20time%20we%20gave%20the%20system%20a%20jolt%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fmar%2F20%2Fpodemos-election-trail-cadiz-andalucia-syriza-teresa-rodriguez%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F20%2F1426867681476%2Fe344a5ba-19ea-441d-8250-4eabe0d70cdf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A Podemos rally in Cadiz on Thursday. Photograph: David Ramos/Getty Images 
Podemos has set a limit of €400,000 – all of it from crowd-funding – for its 
campaign in Andalusia, about 10 times less than that of the People’s party or 
Socialists. The shoestring budget means Podemos candidates often foot the cost 
of petrol and many other campaign resources to attend events like these – far 
from the100,000-strong rallies of ponytailed leader Pablo Iglesias 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/31/podemos-spain-austerity-rally-madrid-syriza>
 – where the hard work of converting discontent into votes is carried out.

In the small, echoing gym of a primary school, Rodríguez and García Sánchez 
took turns at a makeshift podium, outlining the key planks of the party’s 
platform, detailing agrarian reform to a moratorium on evictions.

Podemos would focus on boosting industry to the region, Rodríguez told the 50 
or so people gathered, ranging in age from toddlers to pensioners, so that 
young people would no longer have to leave the province in search of jobs. “We 
have lots of resources here but we haven’t paid any attention to the idea of 
value added,” said Rodríguez. “Andalusia is one of the world’s biggest olive 
oil producers. But much of our oil is sold in bulk to Italy, which bottles it 
and sells it at a high mark-up.”

Tens of thousands join Podemos anti-austerity rally in Madrid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/31/tens-of-thousands-join-podemos-anti-austerity-rally-in-madrid>
Dressed casually and staying long after the event to answer questions, the 
pair sought to mark the difference between themselves and other politicians 
vying for votes. “We want to represent our citizens, not to make money,” said 
Rodríguez. Like the party’s five MEPs, any Podemos member elected to the 
regional parliament has promised to take home only three times the minimum 
salary, donating the rest to charity or the party. Representatives will also be 
subject to regular checks and balances with voters. “If you don’t feel that 
we’re representing you, you can throw us out. You don’t have to wait until the 
next election,” said Rodríguez.

From her seat at the back of the room, Dolores Sierra del Hoyo, 61, listened 
carefully. She had voted Socialist her whole life, but now with the Socialists 
in Andalusia entangled in allegations of misusing hundreds of millions of euros 
in public funds earmarked for the unemployed, Sierra del Hoyo was on the hunt 
for alternatives. “I like that these guys have zero tolerance for corruption 
and want more transparency.”

Support for Podemos was quite high in Chipiona, she said, a fact obscured by 
the event’s low turnout. “Everyone around here works for someone. They’re 
nervous about being seen publicly supporting Podemos – they don’t want to lose 
their jobs, their access to farm subsidies or hurt their relationship with the 
PP or Socialist politicians who run the town’s council.”

Her comments hinted at the isolated position of Podemos in the electoral 
spectrum of the region. But if the polls are borne out, Sunday’s election could 
change this, as it is likely to deny the Socialists a majority and leave them 
looking for coalition partners or parties willing to back them on an ad-hoc 
basis. The situation would leave Podemos walking a strategic tightrope; any 
alliance with the Socialists could dampen its message of change, but refusing 
to forge alliances could destabilise the regional parliament, lending 
credibility to opposition claims that a vote for Podemos is a vote for 
instability.

As he handed out leaflets in the market, extolling the virtues of the party to 
anyone who would listen, Doallo Viche remained convinced Podemos would triumph, 
regardless of how many seats it wins on Sunday. “I think we’re going to achieve 
something,” he said. “Even if it’s just shocking people by winning a few seats. 
That’s all we need to start changing the way people think about politics in 
this country.”
 