
Poor Arthur Hallam didn't have much luck as a poet. Not only did he die young, 
but he is remembered today not for any single poem of his own, but for a work 
by his best friend, of which he is the subject.

In Memoriam is the emotional logbook of Alfred Tennyson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Tennyson,_1st_Baron_Tennyson>'s responses 
to Hallam's death. The pair had met at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1829, 
when Tennyson was aged 20, and Hallam, 22. In the same year, Hallam was 
introduced to Alfred's sister, Emily, and would later become engaged to her. 
His sudden death of a brain haemorrhage in Vienna in 1833 devastated both the 
poet and his sister.

Tennyson began to work on In Memoriam immediately. It was finally published in 
1850. "The sections were written at many different places, and as the phases of 
our intercourse came to my memory and suggested them," he explained. "I did not 
write them with any view of weaving them into a whole, or for publication, 
until I found that I had written so many. The different moods of sorrow as in a 
drama are dramatically given...It is rather the cry of the whole human race 
than mine."

In Memoriam consists of 131 individual poems. Some connect sequentially, but 
many do not. Overall, however, they form an emotional narrative, a progress 
from grief to hope, and they are unified by the four-lined stanza-form Tennyson 
chose. The poem has been criticised both for an excess of disharmony, and for 
its monotony. "So many poems, all in one measure, and all on one 
subject...tiresome enough" complained Mary Mitford.

Today, readers should have no problem with the "disharmony" of those minor 
shifts of register, and might even appreciate that the diction is not all 
"ambrosial air" but makes room for the "Magnetic mockeries" of popular science 
and the carousing students who "crash'd the glass and beat the floor". The 
charge of monotony is harder to contest. The very effortlessness of the prosody 
can seem relentless, and sometimes, I think, that smoothness disguises the 
intellectual struggle (with Darwinism, with atheism) that challenges 
theological consolation and darkens many passages of natural description and 
tender lamentation. Tennyson's claim that his poem is the cry of the whole 
human race may be exaggerated, but undoubtedly one of its strengths is to evoke 
a particular, personal loss in all its intensity without, somehow, aggrandising 
that loss. The poem recognises that grief is our common lot. And most readers 
will find passages that poignantly echo their own experiences of death or 
mourning.

Tennyson has been much criticised over the years. He was not wholly popular in 
his own lifetime. Hopkins found his diction too frequently "Parnassian". 
Detractors thought of him as polite and middling ("Lawn Tennyson") or as a 
mindless patriot, thumping the tub for the "Light Brigade", for example, in 
honour of that disgraceful episode during the Crimean war in which Lord Cadogan 
had commanded the charge from his luxury yacht in Balaclava Bay.

At heart, he wasn't a "smiling public man" at all. He was a poet steeped in 
melancholy and (although he professed to oppose Pater's "Art for Art's Sake" 
principles) aestheticism. A thorough-going Victorian all the same, he was one 
of those poets who, without self-compromise, are able to pick up and express 
the public mood. He was offered the Laureateship because of Prince Albert's 
liking for In Memoriam and later, after Albert's death, Victoria said it was 
the work that comforted her most, together with the Bible.

Does it still speak to us today? I believe it does and that, so as to 
appreciate the drama as well as the smoothness, it should be read in its 
entirety. The full text can be found, in a nice clear type-face,here 
<http://tennysonpoetry.home.att.net/IMAHHS.htm>.

In the meantime, here is a favourite section, in which the poet, left alone 
after a happy summer's evening party, re-reads some of his dead friend's 
letters.

By night we linger'd on the lawn, For underfoot the herb was dry; And genial 
warmth; and o'er the sky The silvery haze of summer drawn;

And calm that let the tapers burn Unwavering: not a cricket chirr'd: The brook 
alone far-off was heard, And on the board the fluttering urn:

And bats went round in fragrant skies, And wheel'd or lit the filmy shapes 
That haunt the dusk, with ermine capes And woolly breasts and beaded eyes;

While now we sang old songs that peal'd From knoll to knoll, where, couch'd at 
ease, The white kine glimmer'd, and the trees Laid their dark arms about the 
field.

But when those others, one by one, Withdrew themselves from me and night, And 
in the house light after light Went out, and I was all alone,

A hunger seized my heart; I read Of that glad year which once had been, In 
those fall'n leaves which kept their green, The noble letters of the dead:

And strangely on the silence broke The silent-speaking words, and strange Was 
love's dumb cry defying change To test his worth; and strangely spoke

The faith, the vigour, bold to dwell On doubts that drive the coward back, And 
keen thro' wordy snares to track Suggestion to her inmost cell.

So word by word, and line by line, The dead man touch'd me from the past, And 
all at once it seem'd at last The living soul was flash'd on mine,

And mine in this was wound, and whirl'd About empyreal heights of thought, And 
came on that which is, and caught The deep pulsations of the world,

Ã†onian music measuring out The steps of Time-the shocks of Chance- The blows 
of Death. At length my trance Was cancell'd, stricken thro' with doubt.

Vague words! but ah, how hard to frame In matter-moulded forms of speech, Or 
ev'n for intellect to reach Thro' memory that which I became:

Till now the doubtful dusk reveal'd The knolls once more where, couch'd at 
ease, The white kine glimmer'd, and the trees Laid their dark arms about the 
field:

And suck'd from out the distant gloom A breeze began to tremble o'er The large 
leaves of the sycamore, And fluctuate all the still perfume,

And gathering freshlier overhead, Rock'd the full-foliaged elms, and swung The 
heavy-folded rose, and flung The lilies to and fro, and said

'The dawn, the dawn,' and died away; And East and West, without a breath, Mixt 
their dim lights, like life and death, To broaden into boundless day.
 