
‘The reformists’ electoral strategy has beaten fundamentalist conservatives at 
their own game’

Mahmoud Sadri


Some called it an oxymoron; others saw it as the proverbial camel, a horse 
designed by a committee. But Iran’s constitution, hammered out in the wake of 
the 1979 Islamic Revolution, remains the only one of its kind to combine the 
conflicting principles of democracy and theocracy.

It has ushered in a dual system of government that has survived for nearly 
four decades. However, the hybrid has come with a hefty price tag: a relentless 
contest between the opposing principles and their advocates has bedevilled the 
Islamic Republic and hampered its ability to manage internal and external 
crises. A string of debacles including the American hostage crisis, the 
protracted war with Iraq and the bloody suppression of the “the Green Movement 
protests” are traceable to the tension between democracy and theocracy 
enshrined in the constitution.

This is the context within which the election on 26 February should be 
understood. Iranians will elect the representatives for the tenth term of the 
Iranian parliament (Majlis) and the fifth term of theAssembly of Experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/feb/24/iran-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau>
, which is charged with choosing the next supreme leader.

The contest resembles the latest round of an ongoing chess tournament between 
old rivals. The theocratic (fundamentalist or ‘principle-ist’) camp, aware of 
its lack of popularity, resorts to the levers of power it controls: the 
security forces, public broadcasting, supervisory bodies, and the judiciary. 
The democratic (reformer and moderate) side controls the presidency and the 
parliament through regularly winning elections despite the increasingly 
intrusive and partisan vetting process for candidates – as well as the veto 
powers of the authoritarian bodies overseeing the president and the parliament.

The reign of the reform-minded president Mohammad Khatami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2013/sep/20/iran-khatami-revenge-rouhani-victory>
 (1997-2005) taught principlists and their allies that even a fettered 
democracy could threaten a theocratic regime. Ever since, they have been 
determined to prevent the election of another reformist president or 
parliament. They have resorted tosweeping disqualification of reform candidates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jan/19/iran-guardian-council-blocks-reformists-february-parliamentary-poll>
 (to the tune of 99% in the recent round) and vote rigging - manoeuvres known 
as “engineering of the elections”.

The democratic camp, for its part, has learned that, given its 
vulnerabilities, openly challenging or boycotting the electoral process is 
detrimental to its long-term objectives. Its new strategy involves working with 
whatever qualified candidates the regime selects, while voting for the most 
moderate individuals on that roster.

This plan worked during the last presidential election. After the prominent 
reformist candidateAli Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jan/27/iran-ali-akbar-hashemi-rafsanjani-comeback-assembly-experts-election>
 was unceremoniously blocked from running for president, the movement turned to 
a centrist approved candidate, Hassan Rouhani, and carried him to a landslide 
victory. Hence, the “engineered” election was “reverse-engineered” by the 
collective genius of Iran’s electoral majority.

Now the reformists are looking to repeat their feat. Having quickly recovered 
from the shock of widespread disqualification of its candidates - including
Hassan Khomeini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/sep/17/hassan-khomeini-signals-ready-enter-politics>
, Ayatollah Khomeini’s erudite and reform-minded grandson - the reform movement 
has organized a nation-wide alliance, aptly nicknamed ‘The Second Step’ (Gam-e 
Dovvom). 

The strategy includes casting ‘negative ballots’, that is, holding one’s nose 
and voting for a distasteful candidate to block a far more odious one. It also 
includes courting moderate loyalists who, having secured official approval, 
would welcome a windfall of popular support. This move has the added advantage 
of dividing the conservatives.

The announced goals of the new alliance include defeating the highly 
influential and widely detested ‘JYM triangle’ – Ayatollahs Ahmad Jannati, 
Mohammad Yazdi and Mohammad Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi - in Tehran and their 
counterparts in other provinces, including Sadegh Larijani, Ahmad Alamolhoda, 
Mohammad Momen and others. The alliance is urging its supporters to vote for 
the entire roster of its candidates (in Tehran, for example, 30 for the 
parliament and 16 for the Assembly of Experts) to ensure a major defeat for the 
arch-conservatives. President Khatami recently dubbed the list: “The roster of 
Hope.”

President Rouhani, Mohammad Khatami and Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani are openly 
backing the reform alliance under the banner: “We will not vote for the 
extremists”. The most prominent political prisoners of the reform movement, 
too, have united in an impassioned appeal for massive participation to turn the 
elections into a plebiscite against the theocratic camp. An increasing number 
of musicians and movie stars are joining the campaign by airing short clips in 
which they invite their fans to vote; a move that ought to alarm the other side 
because is it likely to mobilize a fan base that is otherwise largely 
apolitical.

One sign of the effectiveness of the reformer/moderate alliance is that it has 
frightened the right wing. Several of its leading figures, including the 
candidates singled out for defeat, have angrily lashed out against the 
‘negative ballots’ strategy of the reform alliance. They have resorted to the 
spurious argument that since the western media (particularly the BBC) have 
reported on the reformists’ strategy, the west must have inspired it – or that 
the reform candidates have been “infiltrated” by sworn foreign enemies of the 
regime.

The official reform spokesmen have remained triumphantly reticent against 
these charges while a gleeful public has taken to the electronic media with 
sarcastic rebuttals. A popular ‘telegram’ channel features hundreds of comments 
like: “I don’t understand, even aerobic bacteria have been filtered out by the 
diligent vetting of our Guardian Council. Where are all these ‘infiltrators’ 
coming from? All we want is to do is vote for the ‘30+16’ from their roster of 
the approved candidates. None of these folks are disloyal to the regime or else 
they would have been disqualified … all of them have stated their unwavering 
commitment to this wondrous regime … They have even cursed the ancestors of 
conspirators, schemers and plotters against the regime. Now, we would like to 
vote for these ‘approved’ and ‘vetted’ candidates. Is there a problem with 
that”?

The reform alliance has made its move. The next move belongs to the 
principlists and their allies. They are furious about being stymied.

Will they take their losses and face a more reform-minded parliament and a 
slightly more moderate Experts’ Assembly or will they resort to electoral fraud 
or force? The success of the new reform strategy may not improve the situation 
that much but it will prevent it from getting much worse and, additionally, 
packs an enormous symbolic punch. It will mark a significant defeat for the 
theocratic election-engineers. They will have been beaten in their own game.

Mahmoud Sadri is professor of sociology and affiliated professor of women’s 
studies, Texas Woman’s University and the Federation of North Texas Area 
Universities
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firan-elections-struggle-theocracy-democracy-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05abdd69b2a1434ec804843984b3cef6fa5890ee%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Point%2C%20counterpoint%3A%20does%20'reformists%20versus%20hardliners'%20still%20cut%20it%20in%20Iranian%20politics%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firan-elections-struggle-theocracy-democracy-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Point%2C%20counterpoint%3A%20does%20%27reformists%20versus%20hardliners%27%20still%20cut%20it%20in%20Iranian%20politics%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Firan-elections-struggle-theocracy-democracy-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05abdd69b2a1434ec804843984b3cef6fa5890ee%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Iranian parliamentary candidate Ali Motahari, a principlist, has called on 
Iranians to vote against those who opposed the nuclear deal. He now appears on 
‘reformist’ lists. Photograph: Behrouz Mehri/AFP/Getty Images 
‘With politics reshaped by the nuclear agreement, the Iranian elections have 
moved beyond the divisions of yesteryear’

Gareth Smyth


Elections in Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> have often 
confounded expectations. The upstart Mahmoud Ahmadinejad won a landslide in the 
2005 presidential poll after much of the international media had already lauded 
Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani as the winner.

In 2013, Hassan Rouhani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani> 
turned the election in a television debate when he linked the poor state of the 
economy to the nuclear issue, so opening up a divide with rivals on an issue on 
which there was supposedly consensus and so winning crucial edge just days 
before polling. It was the economy, stupid.

This may well remain the case this week for the parliamentary election and 
even the election for Majles-e Khobregan, the Experts Assembly, the body 
charged with selecting a supreme leader should a vacancy arise. Especially away 
from the political hothouse of Tehran, most of the 55 million voters around the 
country do not see the election in the clear-cut terms beloved by some 
commentators. Regional, tribal and local factors are all at work as Iranians 
judge who might best offer jobs and affordable homes, or stimulate business.

The absence of national lists, much less effective political parties, also 
precludes any simple binary divide. In any case, therealignment of politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/dec/11/realignment-irans-political-factions-before-2017-elections>
 with the nuclear agreement has overtaken the old distinctions between ‘left’ 
and ‘right’ of the 1980s, and between ‘reformists’ and ‘conservatives’ in the 
1990s.

As president, Rouhani has succeeded where he failed in leading negotiations 
with the European Union in 2003-05 - in reaching a lasting nuclear agreement 
with the backing of the bulk of Iran’s political class and so reducing 
dangerous tensions with the United States. With sanctions easing, Rouhani now 
wants economic reform to stimulate the private sector, attract and manage 
foreign investment, and so improve growth.


But the nuclear deal presents challenges. Many of Iran’s elderly clerics are 
concerned at western cultural influence. Many strong supporters of the Islamic 
Republic, less adept in their thinking than pragmatists like Rouhani or his 
ally Rafsanjani, wonder whether the US remains set on changing the regime and 
prepared to use all means – including the Islamic State group (Isis) ­– to 
achieve this end.

The Middle East is badly divided between Sunnis and Shia, with Saudi Arabia 
more assertive and less predictable than anyone in Tehran can remember. These 
are dangerous, threatening times. Over 400 Iranians have died fighting in 
Syria, where Isis this week added Sayida Zeinab to the Shia shrines they have 
bombed. Thousands of Iranian pilgrims have been killed in neighbouring Iraq. 
Political change is not always for the better, security is better than chaos.

Yet Rouhani’s critics have presented no convincing alternative to the nuclear 
agreement and the president’s wider emphasis on diplomacy. WhileAyatollah Ali 
Khamenei <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, the 
supreme leader, has maintained rhetoric of resisting “infiltration” to enthuse 
his core base, particularly through the Basij, the nuclear agreement would not 
have happened without his approval.

The reformists have been isolated from mainstream politics since their 
candidates were crushed in Ahmadinejad’s 2005 victory. However popular in north 
Tehran and other cities, and among the educated, and however well Khatami 
polled in the 1997 and 2001 presidential elections, they have struggled to 
widen their base of active support.

But the reformists have also drawn lessons from the crushing of the street 
protests after the 2009 presidential election, judging that with Rouhani in 
office a more considered approach can slowly regain admittance to the 
mainstream as memories of the 2009 “sedition” begin to fade.

Hence, even with most of their candidates disqualified by the watchdog 
Guardian Council, the reformists’ advocacy of tactical voting is stronger than 
ever before. ‘‘We act within the system,’’ Mohammad Reza Aref, former 
vice-president and prominent candidate in Tehran, told a campaign rally. 
‘‘Nobody loves the revolution more than us. Like a mother, we feel concern for 
it and want to preserve it.’’

A wide swath of the political class – including many principlists as well as 
Aref – believes this means supporting the Rouhani government. In Qom, Ali 
Larijani, the parliamentary speaker who helped steer the nuclear agreement 
through the legislature, is standing for election with support from the Society 
of Qom Seminary Teachers but opposed by other principlists, including some 
allied to Ayatollah Mohammad Taqi Mesbah-Yazdi.

Supporters of Rouhani’s path may well back Larijani, reflecting the 
co-operation between the two since 2013 that has overcome the hostility between 
government and parliament that characterised both Ahmadinejad’s presidency and 
Khatami’s later years in office. It is hard to imagine more of an insider – 
indeed more of a ‘principle-ist’ - than Larijani, partly because both his 
father and father-in-law were ayatollahs, and partly because of his long-term 
record as a commander of the Revolutionary Guards, labour minister, culture 
minister and secretary of the Supreme National Security Council.

As minister of culture after 1992 under president Rafsanjani, Larijani said 
his main task was to resist a western cultural onslaught through “holy Islamic 
learning”, an approach he continued as head of state broadcasting from 1994 to 
2004. But nothing in Larijani’s beliefs gives him any reason to oppose Rouhani, 
while his long-term support for private enterprise – going back to his 
opposition in the 1980s to the egalitarianism advocated by leftists like Mir 
Hossein Mousavi, later leader of the ‘green movement’ – will be useful for the 
president if the parliament elected on Friday votes to return Larijani as 
parliamentary speaker.

The election for Khobregan – the Experts Assembly – has aroused unusual 
interest because of the reasonable chance it will be called upon during its 
eight-year term to choose a successor to Khamenei, who is 76 and in 2014 
underwent prostate surgery. But while the election is for sure an important 
step towards the succession, this is a journey of twists and turns.

The apparent demise of Ayatollah Shahroudi – considered a frontrunner until a 
report last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/mar/13/iran-supreme-mohammad-yazdi-leader-in-waiting>
 of a judicial investigation into financial irregularities apparently led to 
his withdrawal as a candidate for chairing the assembly – has thrown the 
contest wide open. Clues as to the next stage of manoeuvring around the 
succession may emerge from results of Friday’s Khobregan election, from the 
subsequent choice of a chairman, and from Khamenei’s subsequent dealings with 
the senior clerics. But no-one should hold their breath.

Rouhani recently drew attention to the combined ‘religious’ and ‘democratic’ 
<http://www.irna.ir/en/News/81965167/> nature of the Iranian system – whose 
lynchpin is the leader. “According to the constitution, sometimes several 
people are on equal standing in jurisprudential, social and political terms and 
so the vote of the Experts Assembly will decide who among two or three 
individuals can become the leader,” he said. “Under certain conditions, even a 
single vote of the Experts Assembly members will be important for election of 
the leader.”

This is no doubt true. Clerical rivalries – not just in Shia Islam - can be 
bitter. Reducing the succession to a battle between a ‘moderate’ and a 
‘hardline’ camp, or suggesting the leadership will be simply decided by 
Khamenei or by any other interest or bloc, belies both the opacity of the 
Experts Assembly and the complexities of Iran’s factional politics. As the 
Iranian proverb has it: mountains do not meet, but people do.

Gareth Smyth has reported from the Middle East since 1992, including four 
years as Tehran bureau chief for the Financial Times


The Tehran Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the 
Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 