
New South Wales police were running an online sting against 16-year-old 
charged with terrorism offences while at the same time working to 
“deradicalise” him through an official program, it has emerged.

Sydney teenager charged with Anzac Day terrorism plot pleads not guilty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/sydney-teenager-charged-with-anzac-day-terrorism-plot-pleads-not-guilty>
Experts who advise the government and police on violent extremism say the 
revelations are a “huge risk to the integrity” of the deradicalisation 
programs, likening it to officers posing as drug dealers outside a police-run 
drug rehabilitation facility.

Guardian Australia understands that police will allege the Sydney teenager – 
accused of trying to source a gun for use in a terrorist attack – had discussed 
obtaining the weapon with officers posing online as supporters of Muslim 
extremism. The alleged communication took place some time in the last week and 
triggered his arrest on Sunday afternoon.


It is also understood that for the past year the boy, who is from Auburn in 
the city’s west, has been in an official deradicalisation program involving 
regular welfare checks by police and referral to counsellors and religious 
authorities.


The boy has denied the charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/sydney-teenager-charged-with-anzac-day-terrorism-plot-pleads-not-guilty>
, which carry a maximum life sentence, and will make a bail application on 
Friday.

Anne Aly, a specialist who was consulted by police on the programs, said the 
boy’s case was “the perfect example” of why deradicalisation should be run by 
community groups at arm’s length from law enforcement.

“I do not blame the police because it actually puts them in a very precarious 
situation, where on one side they’re doing deradicalisation, which is social 
and community-based, and necessarily so; and on the other side there’s the law 
enforcement aspect.

“You’re putting police in a position where they have to be both, and obviously 
the law enforcement comes first,” she said.

In December last year a 15-year-old, also understood to be the subject of 
police deradicalisation efforts,was arrested and charged with terrorism offences
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/11/sydney-raids-bail-denied-to-15-year-old-accused-of-conspiring-to-attack-police>
 in relation to a plot allegedly hatched more than a year before.

Deradicalisation makes headlines, but Muslim initiatives win young minds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/oct/22/deradicalisation-makes-headlines-but-muslim-initiatives-win-young-minds>
Aly said both cases “show the tension between a law enforcement program, where 
the program object is monitoring, arrest and detainment, and deradicalisation, 
where the primary purpose should be to disengage and reintegrate”.

“It’s a huge risk to the integrity of the programs ... like putting someone in 
drug rehabilitation and then putting drugs in front of them,” she said.

The head of a community intervention research and support hub at the 
Australian National University, Clarke Jones, agreed “the police can’t perform 
these dual roles”.

“They’ve either got a willingness or intent to help him, and if they feel 
they’re struggling to get results in terms of engagement, then they need to 
change tack,” he said.

“Do they want to help him, or do they want to prosecute him?”

NSW police declined to comment.
 