
Police have searched the mosque visited by the Sydney teenager who allegedly 
shot deadNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> police employee 
Curtis Cheng outside Parramatta headquarters on Friday, before being killed in 
a firefight with police.

Video footage from Seven News 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/a/29706350/parramatta-gunmans-final-moments-revealed-in-exclusive-video/>
 shows black-clad 15-year-old Farhad Jabar Khalil Mohammad pacing outside the 
Charles Street police complex moments after shooting Cheng at point-blank range 
from behind. The 58-year-old accountant was a 17-year veteran of the NSW police 
finance department.

Parramatta shooting: 'whole nation must take stock', says Julie Bishop
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/04/parramatta-shooting-whole-nation-must-take-stock-says-julie-bishop>
Farhad can be seen waving a handgun and firing at three special constables, 
tasked with protecting the police station, who went outside when they heard 
gunshots. The video then cuts to Farhad lying at the bottom of the entry ramp, 
dead.

The NSW premier, Mike Baird, and police commissioner, Andrew Scipione, paid a 
personal visit to Cheng’s family over the weekend to express their condolences.

Cheng’s wife, Selina, son, Alpha, and daughter, Zilvia, released a statement 
on Sunday remembering him as “a kind, gentle, and loving person”.

“He was humorous, generous of heart, and always put the family first,” the 
statement said. “He has set a tremendous example for us as a family.

“We are deeply saddened and heartbroken that he has been taken from us, but we 
are truly grateful for the fruitful and happy life he has shared with us.”

Farhad was born in Iran of Iraqi-Kurdish descent. The Sydney Morning Herald 
reported 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/parramatta-shooting-gunman-identified-as-farhad-jabar-khalil-mohammad-20151003-gk0jze.html>
 that he attended Arthur Phillip High School, just around the corner from the 
police headquarters.

On Friday afternoon, Farhad left school and headed west to the Parramatta 
mosque on Marsden Street. He apparently changed clothes there before making the 
10-minute return walk east to the police headquarters.

Police searched the mosque on Saturday.

Neil El-Kadomi, the chairman of the Parramatta mosque, told Guardian Australia 
he received a call from police about 7.30pm and went to the mosque to let a 
group of detectives in.


“They ring me, I went there, they searched, but they didn’t find anything,” 
El-Kadomi said. “We support the police, we work with the police, the police 
were happy with our support.”

El-Kadomi said Farhad had been to the mosque a few times but was not a member 
of their community. He said the mosque was “unconnected” to Farhad’s actions, 
saying, “we condemn it.”

“He is not known to us,” El-Kadomi said. “He is a boy, alone, comes sometimes 
to pray. A very, very limited time. And then what he did is not accepted.”

Hizb ut-Tahrir: is it an offence to oppose government policy? If so, let it be 
said plainly | Uthman Badar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/23/hizb-ut-tahrir-is-it-now-an-offence-to-oppose-government-policy-if-so-let-it-be-said-plainly>




Public social media profiles believed to belong to Farhad have been silent for 
a few years, but earlier posts paint a picture of an ordinary Australian 
teenager.

A Twitter account that appears to be Farhad’s dates from in April 2013, and 
was apparently used for thesole purpose of following reality TV talent show The 
Voice <https://twitter.com/FarhadJabar>. The account followed eight people, 
all, with the exception of actor Hugh Jackman, connected to the show. Its final 
tweet, dated May 28, 2013, reads “Miami is the best”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fpolice-search-parramatta-mosque-gunman-allegedly-visited-before-shooting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b953bdecc19790f7eebf9d25c06a667a561c84%2F0_93_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20search%20Parramatta%20mosque%20gunman%20allegedly%20visited%20before%20shooting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fpolice-search-parramatta-mosque-gunman-allegedly-visited-before-shooting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20search%20Parramatta%20mosque%20gunman%20allegedly%20visited%20before%20shooting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F04%2Fpolice-search-parramatta-mosque-gunman-allegedly-visited-before-shooting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b953bdecc19790f7eebf9d25c06a667a561c84%2F0_93_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The NSW premier Mike Baird and Police Commissioner Andrew Scipione. 
Photograph: David Moir/EPA 
The NSW police commissioner, Andrew Scipione, said on Saturday that police had 
“no information that this individual posed this type of threat.”

Scipione said Farhad’s “exact motivation still remains a mystery to us,” but 
that “we believe his actions were politically motivated and therefore linked to 
terrorism.”

He said there was no information, at that early stage in the investigation, to 
suggest that Farhad’s “was doing anything but acting alone”. Police still don’t 
know how he got a handgun.

Scipione said it appears Cheng was targeted just because he walked out of the 
police station. “He was a much-loved man, [he had] been with us a long time. I 
don’t think I’ve ever heard anyone have a bad word about Curtis and he will be 
missed,” he said.

The ABC has reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-10-04/parramatta-shooting-police-raid-mosque-in-shooting-investigation/6825882>
 that police identified Farhad after his older brother, who had heard the news, 
called and said it might be him. The same report, quoting unnamed senior police 
sources, says that Farhad’s sister went missing from the family’s North 
Parramatta apartment on Thursday and apparently caught a Singapore Airlines 
flight to Instanbul.

Scipione said it was important to separate Farhad’s actions from his faith.

“First and foremost, simply because a certain person is of the Muslim faith 
doesn’t mean that they are a terrorist,” he said. “We shouldn’t be treating 
entire communities like they are all suspects because that’s simply not the 
case. This is a small, small, small minority.”

Parramatta shooting: Turnbull urges unity amid tight security for grand finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/03/parramatta-shooting-turnbull-urges-unity-amid-tight-security-for-grand-finals>
The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, had a phone 
conference with the premier of NSW Mike Baird, Scipione, and seven or eight 
Muslim leaders on Saturday to discuss the shooting.

One of those leaders was Dr Jamal Rifi, a Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> GP and prominent member of 
the Lebanese Muslim community. He told AAP the phone call signaled a critical 
mood shift in Australia’s response to incidents like this.

“Before, we felt that as a community we were fighting radicalisation with our 
hands tied behind our back and with this telephone conversation, where the 
prime minister listened to every member of that teleconference, we felt that 
the shackles came off,” he said. “The mood right now has shifted. It’s not 
about blame it’s about solution.”
 