
It’s folksy season again in politics. Obama’s on the Vineyard, showing off his 
mom jeans on a regular basis. Members of Congress – and 2016 hopefuls – are out 
on recess, racing from fair to fair to eat variousfoods 
<http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/opinion/columnists/kathie-obradovich/2014/08/06/iowa-state-fair-candidates-etiquette/13701463/>
 onsticks 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=corn+dog+michele+bachmann&espv=2&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=qBLtU4nDEo21yASWz4CwBA&ved=0CBwQsAQ&biw=842&bih=402>
. Casual Friday politics is even showing up in our rhetoric: Obama feels bad 
about that we“tortured some folks” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/01/obama-cia-torture-some-folks-brennan-spying>
; Hillary wants to“hug it out” 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/administration/215043-white-house-says-media-wont-see-obama-clinton-hug-it-out>
.

Adopting a summer-y populist pose reached an absurd level of vulgarity here in 
Minnesota, where independently wealthy US Senate candidate Mike McFadden 
released an ad that shows himgetting hit in the nuts 
<http://www.minnpost.com/party-politics/2014/07/senate-candidate-mike-mcfaddens-groin-gate-ad-named-best-summer>
 while coaching little league football. Nothing says “man of the people” like a 
groin injury.

But “understanding the problems of people like you” isn’t necessarily about 
state fairs and coffee shops. Rand Paul, for instance,has already gotten dinged 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2724088/Rand-Paul-caught-partying-Hamptons-skipping-conservative-event-family-commitment.html>
 forskipping 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/rand-paul-skips-iowa-event-spotted-in-the-hamptons/>
 this weekend’s Family Leadership Summit in Ames, Iowa ... in favor of a 
library fundraiser in the Hamptons. But I kind of respect anyone who would turn 
down the chance to pander to a bunch of ideologically rigid creationists in 
favor of promoting, you know,reading. I couldn’t tell you the last time Mike 
Bloomberg or George Soros ate corn dogs, but few progressives will turn their 
money down.

And state fairs do not automatically lead to the image of a humble public 
servant, just trying to do right by real Americans. Rick Perry went to the Iowa 
state fair, ate some bacon, then gave a speech in which he concluded,“I’m 
awesome!” 
<http://www.desmoinesregister.com/story/news/politics/elections/2014/08/12/rick-perry-does-the-iowa-state-fair/13965353/>
 (Just don’t ask him to give three reasons why.)

But seriously: it’s all cowboy boots and coffee shops until the budget cuts 
come. The most horrid offenses against the poor and middle class have often 
come at the hands of the class-identity manipulators most skilled in affecting 
the appearance of jes’ plain folks. Bush cleared brush as heproposed 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/bushs-war-poor> a $1bn cut in child welfare. 
Perry’s twang is no comfort to the1.2m Texans left out of Obamacare’s Medicaid 
expansion 
<http://www.ksat.com/content/pns/ksat/news/2014/08/14/lawmakers-mull-alternatives-to-medicaid-expansion.html>
.

Even politicians who can legitimately claim middle-class experience tend to 
legislate aspirationally. They can “feel our pain”, but politicians really want 
to be above the crowd. And being in Congress is a good way get rich with 
minimal effort. Members of Congress routinely find theirnet worth increasing 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/11/01/congress-net-wealth-income-gap_n_1069377.html>
 while Americans see steep decreases; their stock portfoliosperform up to 10% 
better 
<http://finance.townhall.com/columnists/johnransom/2011/05/26/how_to_go_to_congress_and_become_a_millionaire>
 than the average investor.

Even the threat of being voted out of office – or impeached, let’s say – isn’t 
anything like a real person losing a job. However Obama leaves office, he then 
becomes a member of lots of corporate boards and gets paid millions on the 
speakers circuit. That’ll show him! The Clintons may have been“dead broke” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/24/hillary-clinton-income-inequality-2016-election>
 when they left the White House, but their path to financial security was a 
smooth downhill run:How will we get out of debt? Better keep being the Clintons!
Failed down-home Republican candidatesget their own TV shows 
<https://www.google.com/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=huckabee%20net%20worth>
 – ortheir own TV shows and TV channels 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2014/07/sarah-palin-online-tv-channel-109429.html>
.

The lives of national political figures aren’t just like ours – and to some 
degree that’s understandable and necessary, if only for their personal 
security. But what if they – at some point – took real jobs? And “running a 
business” doesn’t count. As stunty as Undercover Boss is, there is a real point 
to it, and something like that might be the best we can hope for.

Or if it’s just too much to ask for policies back in Washington to reflect the 
lived experience of most Americans on display during our national politicians’ 
five-week vacation, how about being on the ground when matters on a more 
urgent, personal level? How about going beyond beyond butter cows, steak fries 
or even parachute-in appearances such as Obama’s front porch tour? Will we ever 
see a president – or 2016 contender – march on today’s picket lines, take the 
food-stamp challenge, or join in the peaceful Ferguson demonstrations rather 
than opine about them?

Proving one’s middle-class bona fides – or using someone’s wealth as proof of 
distance from it – is so ingrained in the American political discourse it’s 
hard to even differentiate it as a specific tactic. But imagine if the standard 
was not whether or not one appears to be “of the people” and rather showed a 
willingness to defer to them.

 * This article was amended on 18 August 2014 to correct the office for which 
Mike McFadden is running. He is a candidate for the US Senate, not governor of 
Minnesota. The Guardian regrets the error.  