This week in 1953, Elvis Presley made his first recordings, when he cut a 
vanity disc at the Memphis Recording Service for his mother. How much did he 
have to pay to make the record?  Nothing – the owners of the studio just asked 
him to perform a concert for them when he became famous  $3.98 This week is 
also the 62nd anniversary of his first Sun Records single, That’s All Right.  
$19.98  $50 Deep Purple split up 40 years ago this week. Which of the following 
bands was not formed by one or more of its members following their departure 
from the group?  Rainbow  Whitesnake  Paice Ashton Lord  Trapeze Bassist and 
vocalist Glenn Hughes had already been in Trapeze before joining Deep Purple. 
He returned to them after the split. The Spice Girls made their first 
appearance on Top of the Pops this week in 1996, performing Wannabe. Which 
nickname did the song give to Victoria Adams, who later became Victoria Beckham?
 Easy VApparently, she “doesn’t come for free, she’s a real lady”.  Posh Spice  
Vicky Vic VIc  The Brunette Bardot Happy 50th birthday Stone Gossard, out of 
Pearl Jam! Which of the following groups has he not been a member of?  Green 
River  Mother Love Bone  Brad  Pigeonhed  Pigeonhed did, however, feature 
Brad’s singer, Shawn Smith. This week in 1969, Aretha Franklin was arrested for 
causing a disturbance in a Detroit parking lot. She paid $50 bail and left the 
police station. What happened next?  She got in her car and promptly ran down a 
road signShe had also been arrested the previous year for reckless driving.  
She announced that she would be playing a benefit show to raise money for those 
who couldn’t afford to get their cars back after they had been impounded  She 
sang Say It Loud, I’m Black and I’m Proud a cappella on the police station 
steps, while being filmed by the local CBS news affiliate  She announced her 
retirement from music, only to announce her comeback three days later This week 
in 2006, the News of the World said George Michael had been cruising for sex on 
Hampstead Heath in London. What did the object of his affections reportedly say 
to Michael when the singer approached him?  “Mate, you were better in Wham! 
More fun, you know?”  “Just don’t expect me to get in the car with you.”  “Can 
you believe how hard the paper is in these toilets?”  “You’re not totally 
English, are you?”The 58-year-old unemployed van driver concerned said Michael 
“looked kind of brown”. Saturday marks the fifth anniversary of the death of 
Amy Winehouse. But what was the biggest hit single she sang on?  Do They Know 
It’s Christmas by Band Aid 20  Valerie, by Mark Ronson  It reached No 2 in 
2007. The original, by the Zutons, had reached No 9 the previous year  Back to 
Black  Rehab Which group was the highest new entrant in the UK albums chart 
this week five years ago?  Arctic Monkeys  Incubus  Chase & Status  The Horrors 
 Skying entered the chart at No 5. It was their highest position in eight weeks 
on the chart. Bobby Fuller died on 18 July 1966. He’s best known for recording 
I Fought the Law, but which popular children’s movie used his song Let Her 
Dance on its end credits?  Finding Nemo  Kung Fu Panda  Fantastic Mr Fox 
Fuller’s death was ruled to be suicide, but many believe he was the victim of a 
mob hit.  Tangled Hello Nasty by the Beastie Boys became the second rap album 
to top the UK charts this week in 1998. What was the first?  Wu-Tang Forever by 
Wu-Tang ClanThe second Wu-Tang album also topped the charts in the US.  Stutter 
Rap! The Album by Morris Minor and the Majors  Licensed to Ill by the Beastie 
Boys  Of the Heart, of the Soul and of the Cross: The Utopian Experience by PM 
Dawn  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  