
Lady Gaga: Artpop <http://ladygaga.co.uk/>

Last month, as befits the first single from the third album by a 
multi-platinum selling popstar,the video for Lady Gaga's Applause 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pco91kroVgQ> was simultaneously premiered on 
the US breakfast TV show Good Morning America and video screens in New York's 
Times Square.Rolling Stone was moved to compare the results to the oeuvre, 
variously, of Ingmar Bergman, the German expressionists and Botticelli 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/10-weirdest-influences-in-lady-gagas-applause-video-20130819>
, which seems to underline the unique position Lady Gaga currently holds within 
pop music. In fairness, it often feels as if there's a disconnect between Lady 
Gaga's presentation and the actual music at its centre (for all the lyrical 
references to Jeff Koons, Applause sounds like a well-crafted but entirely 
straightforward piece of chart pop), which it would be nice if Artpop went some 
way towards bridging. There has been talk of a more "experimental" approach, 
and influences from J-pop and "underground Chicago gay club trap". We shall see.
Album released 11 November.

Jay-Z <http://lifeandtimes.com/>

After a series of acclaimed one-off summer shows, during which he shared a 
stage with Justin Timberlake, the rapper returns to the UK, headlining his own 
arena tour.Tour begins 3 October at Arena, Manchester, phones4uarena.co.uk 
<http://www.phones4uarena.co.uk/>

Arcade Fire <http://www.arcadefire.com/>

As yet untitled, but rumoured to be called Reflektor, Arcade Fire's followup 
to 2010's chart-topping, multiple award-winning The Suburbs sees the band 
collaborating with producer James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem.Album released 
29 October,arcadefire.com <>

The Weeknd <http://www.theweeknd.com/>

The Canadian R&B experimentalist Abel Tesfaye's rise continues: in the wake of 
his first major-label album, Kiss Land – which the singer compares to "a horror 
movie" – he arrives in the UK's biggest venues for his first arena tour.

Tour begins 22 November, NIA, Birmingham, thenia.co.uk <>

Black Sabbath <http://www.blacksabbath.com/>

Still without original drummer Bill Ward, but with their first US No 1 album 
(the Rick Rubin-produced 13), the undisputed godfathers of metal play a handful 
of UK shows.Tour begins 10 Dec, O2 Arena, London, theo2.co.uk <>

Alexis Petridis

The great autumn psych-out: psychedelia is back with a vengeance

Like disco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/31/disco-gets-lucky-daft-punk>, 
psychedelia is one of those genres that has enjoyed so many comebacks it's 
never really gone away. But this autumn, there is enough psych action to make 
it feel as though the music has truly taken hold once more. Most significantly, 
there is theLiverpool International Festival of Psychedelia 
<http://www.liverpoolpsychfest.com/home-blog.php> (fast becoming a serious 
rival toAustin's annual psych extravaganza <http://www.austinpsychfest.com>). 
Taking place at the end of September, it features five dozen bands, from 
straight revivalists employing standard psych tropes – swirly melodics, phased 
vocals – to exponents who stretch the definition of the term, acknowledging the 
past but accommodating more recent innovations. Many of the prime movers will 
be releasing new records and touring in their own right this season, notably
Temples <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/07/new-band-temples>, the 
Midlands four-piece Noel Gallagher"worships" 
<http://news.qthemusic.com/2013/04/noel_gallagher_worships_temple.html>. But 
the year has been swamped with acclaimed psych albums, by established acts such 
as Flaming Lips (The Terror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/28/flaming-lips-the-terror-review>) 
and My Bloody Valentine (m b v 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/04/mbv-review-my-bloody-valentine>
), as well as releases by newer purveyors: Hookworms' Pearl Mystic, Foxygen's 
We Are the Ambassadors of Peace & Magic,Jacco Gardner's Cabinet of Curiosities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/06/new-band-jacco-gardner> and 
Destruction Unit's Deep Trip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/15/destruction-unit> – a duo who 
prove that psychedelia can be by turns eerily pretty and murderously heavy. 
Even Queens of the Stone Age get filed under "psych" these days. But then, 
isn't all music, if it's doing its job right – exploring uncharted territories, 
blowing minds – is really psychedelic?Paul Lester
 