
It was a typical Pope Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> 
touch, and one in keeping with the extraordinary life story of Saint Teresa of 
Kolkata, as the Catholic nun became on Sunday.

On papal orders, 1,500 homeless people were brought to Rome overnight on buses 
from around Italy to be given seats of honour at the canonisation ofMother 
Teresa <https://www.theguardian.com/news/mother-teresa>, revered around the 
world for her work with the destitute and dying.

Also at the Vatican was a Naples pizza maker and 20 of his workers, invited to 
provide lunch for the homeless men and women. The meal was served by 250 nuns 
and priests of the Sisters of Charity order.

Many among the massive crowds in and around St Peter’s Square were celebrating 
what were, in their eyes, two saints: Mother Teresa and Pope Francis, who has 
dedicated his papacy to mercy, humility and serving people on the margins.

In his homily during the special two-hour mass, Francis said the diminutive 
Albanian nun had, by her actions, shamed world leaders for the “crime of 
poverty” they had created.

“She bowed down before those who were spent, left to die on the side of the 
road, seeing in them their God-given dignity; she made her voice heard before 
the powers of this world, so that they might recognise their guilt for the 
crime of poverty they created,” the pope said on the steps of St Peter’s 
Basilica, beneath a huge portrait of Mother Teresa.

He urged this “emblematic figure of womanhood” and “tireless worker of mercy” 
to be a model of holiness for Catholics and others.

In the crowd, Francis Gojcaj, from Detroit, was in no need of the pope’s 
exhortation. “No one can be as good as Jesus Christ, but she’s pretty close,” 
he said as he shielded his seven-month-old daughter, Georgiana, from the sun.

Mother Teresa “gave her whole life to the poor”, said Gojcaj, an American of 
Albanian heritage with a Catholic father and a Muslim mother. “She has a 
special place in our hearts. Life is short, we all come and go. If you’re a 
true believer, it’s all about what we do while we’re here.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6961fcdb8de422cb66828a410b218e08a8378f6%2F62_207_2620_1572%2F2620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pope%20Francis%20canonises%20Mother%20Teresa%20before%20St%20Peter%E2%80%99s%20Square%20masses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pope%20Francis%20canonises%20Mother%20Teresa%20before%20St%20Peter%E2%80%99s%20Square%20masses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6961fcdb8de422cb66828a410b218e08a8378f6%2F62_207_2620_1572%2F2620.jpg>
 Nuns carry Mother Teresa’s relics during her canonisation. Photograph: 
Vincenzo Pinto/AFP/Getty Images 
Several hundred of the nuns cramming into St Peter’s Square were wearing the 
distinctive blue and white robes of the Missionaries of Charity, the order set 
up by Mother Teresa in Kolkata with 12 followers in 1950. It now runs 758 
homes, hospices and shelters in 139 countries around the world.

Around 100,000 tickets were issued for the mass, but thousands more turned up: 
nuns, priests, pilgrims and tourists. Police officers and volunteers in yellow 
tabards and baseball caps marshalled the crowds between crash barriers while 
Red Cross workers handed out bottles of water.

Thirteen countries sent heads of state or government delegations, including 
100 ministers and officials fromIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>
. Queen Sofia of Spain was among the dignitaries.


The mass began with hymns but quickly moved to the formalities. Cardinal 
Angelo Amato read a brief description of Mother Teresa’s work before asking the 
pope to canonise her.

Francis responded: “After due deliberation and frequent prayer for divine 
assistance, and having sought the counsel of many of our brother bishops, we 
declare and define Blessed Teresa of Calcutta to be a saint, and we enrol her 
among the saints, decreeing that she is to be venerated as such by the whole 
church.”

Later, in an unscripted comment during his homily, he suggested that many 
people would have difficulty in referring to her as Saint Teresa. “I think 
we’ll carry on calling her Mother Teresa,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99436282d20bd443d8fcc71284fb2e7ede962319%2F0_60_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pope%20Francis%20canonises%20Mother%20Teresa%20before%20St%20Peter%E2%80%99s%20Square%20masses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pope%20Francis%20canonises%20Mother%20Teresa%20before%20St%20Peter%E2%80%99s%20Square%20masses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99436282d20bd443d8fcc71284fb2e7ede962319%2F0_60_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 St Peter’s Square during Mother Teresa’s canonisation. Photograph: Angelo 
Carconi/EPA 
In Kolkata, a commemoration was held at Mother House, the Missionaries of 
Charity’s headquarters. Hundreds took part in a mass near her tomb, holding lit 
candles and laying flowers beneath a huge portrait of the nun. Large screens 
beamed the canonisation ceremony live from the Vatican.

Sister Blesilla said it was “a day of gratitude, pray and thanksgiving”. 
Well-wisher Sumita Tandon said Mother Teresa had “made the city of Kolkata 
proud … She was an inspiration to me”.

The canonisation also reignited criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/sep/02/mother-teresa-saint-criticism-miracles-missionaries-abortion-suffering-canonisation>
 of Mother Teresa and the Missionaries of Charity, which detractors claim 
focused on the elevation, rather than the relief, of suffering.

Critics say grossly inadequate medical care was given to the sick and dying. 
Syringes were reused without sterilisation, pain relief was non-existent or 
negligible, and conditions were unhygienic. Meanwhile, Mother Teresa spent much 
of her time travelling around the world in a private plane to meet political 
leaders.


In an article posted online on Saturday, and headlined “Calcutta will take a 
century to recover from Mother Teresa 
<https://missionariesofcharity.wordpress.com/2016/09/03/calcutta-will-take-a-century-to-recover-from-mother-teresa/>
”, Hemley Gonzalez, a former volunteer with the Missionaries who has become one 
of its most vocal critics, said the nun had been intoxicated by “hordes of 
sycophants”.

He wrote: “She repeatedly told the world she went around the city 24x7 
‘picking up’ destitute from its squalid ‘gutters’ (she did not), that she fed 
up to 9,000 in her soup kitchens (she did not), she never refused a helpless 
child (she did as a rule), that the dying destitute in her so-called home for 
the dying, Nirmal Hriday, died a ‘beautiful death’ (they were treated harshly 
and often died a miserable, painful death).”

Three years ago, an academic study at the University of Montreal 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/life/the-hot-button/mother-teresa-was-anything-but-a-saint-new-canadian-study-claims/article9317551/>
 concluded that the Vatican had ignored Mother Teresa’s “rather dubious way of 
caring for the sick, her questionable political contacts, her suspicious 
management of the enormous sums of money she received, and her overly dogmatic 
views regarding … abortion, contraception and divorce.”


Mother Teresa to become saint amid criticism over miracles and missionaries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/sep/02/mother-teresa-saint-criticism-miracles-missionaries-abortion-suffering-canonisation>
In Rome, criticism was dismissed by the St Peter’s Square crowds. Paul 
Spiteri, 69, who had travelled from Malta for the ceremony, said he had met the 
Mother Teresa four times and was thrilled to witness her being made a saint. 
“This is a very special moment,” he said. “Everyone faces criticism. They even 
criticise Jesus Christ.”

Shamini Chakupurayil, 19, from Kerala, said Indian Catholics were especially 
proud of Mother Teresa’s life and work. “This is the best day of my life,” she 
said.


Pushing through the throng to “get as close as I can”, recent convert Lynne 
Semkiw, who had travelled from California, said simply entering St Peter’s 
Square was a “very spiritual moment. You can feel the energy, the love, in the 
air. I almost cried.”

After the mass, Pope Francis greeted the crowds from his popemobile, which 
drove around the square amid cheers and cries of “Papa!” He reached out to 
touch the heads of several infants as he passed.

Mother Teresa – who was born Anjezë Gonxhe Bojaxhiu in 1910 in what is now 
Macedonia – was proclaimed a saint almost 19 years to the day after her death 
in 1997. Conforming with the process of canonisation, two miracles were deemed 
to have been performed after she died, both involving the alleged cure of 
terminally ill people.


She was awarded the Nobel peace prize in 1979. She said she did not deserve 
the award but accepted it “in the name of the hungry, the naked, the homeless; 
of the crippled, of the blind, of the lepers, of all those people who feel 
unwanted, unloved, uncared for throughout society”.

Sailendra Sil in Kolkata contributed to this report

Saintly behaviour

Mother Teresa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/sep/04/mother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis>
 is only the latest in a line of Catholics to be canonised by the the current 
pope, many of whom are not nearly as well known as the woman who won the 1979 
Nobel peace prize.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbf0f9faebfa616ae5ca616588874fb1c54ad430%2F80_0_1557_1946%2F1557.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pope%20Francis%20canonises%20Mother%20Teresa%20before%20St%20Peter%E2%80%99s%20Square%20masses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pope%20Francis%20canonises%20Mother%20Teresa%20before%20St%20Peter%E2%80%99s%20Square%20masses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fmother-teresa-declared-saint-by-pope-francis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbf0f9faebfa616ae5ca616588874fb1c54ad430%2F80_0_1557_1946%2F1557.jpg>
 Pope John Paul II. Photograph: Plinio Lepri/AP 
In fact, since being elected in March 2013, Pope Francis has declared 29 
saints, approximately one every six weeks. It is a prolific rate compared with 
his predecessor, Pope Benedict XVI, who during his seven-year reign canonised 
45 saints. However, it pales in comparison with the record 482 declared by Pope 
John Paul II. Even accounting for the fact that his reign lasted 26 years, John 
Paul II bestowed sainthoods at a faster rate (more than one a month) than 
Francis. John Paul II was himself canonised by Francis, in April 2014.

In an unprecedented double canonisation mass for past pontiffs, he was 
declared a saint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/27/popes-john-paul-ii-and-john-xxiii-saints-canonisation>
 alongside another towering figure of the 20th-century church, John XXIII, in 
St Peter’s Square. In other firsts, last year in January, Francis declared Sri 
Lanka’s first saint, Joseph Vaz, and in October Louis and Zélie Martin, known 
for being the parents of the 19th-century French saint Thérèse of Lisieux, 
became the first married couple to be canonised together.

In September last year, Francis attracted controversy when, on a visit to the 
US, he canonised Junípero Serra, a Spanish missionary who helped colonise 
California in the 18th century, despite protests by Native Americans. During 
his homily, Francis said Serra “sought to defend the dignity of the native 
community”. The move enraged representatives of California’s last surviving 
Native American populations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/pope-francis-junipero-serra-sainthood-washington-california>
, who accused Serra of being responsible for the near eradication of 
California’s native peoples.

Haroon Siddique
 