
Bill Shorten has declared he’s never felt more certain in his leadership of 
the Labor party as powerbrokers are applying institutional pressure to unify 
the right faction, in an effort to stymie any potential challenge by the NSW 
leftwingerAnthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese>.


Shorten told reporters in Melbourne on Sunday he had “never been more certain 
of my leadership than I am this morning.”

“I have never been more confident of my support,” the Labor leader said in 
response to questions about whether Albanese was positioning to run in a 
leadership ballot.

It is too soon to say whether Albanese will put his hand up for the party 
leadership after Saturday’s election result,which still hangs in the balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/malcolm-turnbull-says-coalition-can-form-majority-despite-dramatic-losses-australian-election>
. Whether he ultimately moves or not is contingent, in the view of party 
insiders, on Labor’s final position once the count is resolved.

Shorten fought on policies. Turnbull sat back waiting for the people to elect 
him | Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/03/shorten-fought-on-policies-while-turnbull-sat-back-waiting-for-the-people-to-elect-him>
In the final week of the campaign, figures in NSW were positioning for a 
leadership change in the event Labor lost the election.

Albanese would have a good prospect of victory in a leadership ballot if he 
were the left faction’s only candidate, and if he had the support of the NSW 
right faction.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbill-shorten-says-turnbulls-policies-are-the-clear-losers-of-the-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bill%20Shorten%20says%20Turnbull%E2%80%99s%20policies%20are%20the%20clear%20losers%20of%20the%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbill-shorten-says-turnbulls-policies-are-the-clear-losers-of-the-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bill%20Shorten%20says%20Turnbull%E2%80%99s%20policies%20are%20the%20clear%20losers%20of%20the%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fbill-shorten-says-turnbulls-policies-are-the-clear-losers-of-the-election-video&media=>
Bill Shorten says Turnbull’s policies are the clear losers of the election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/03/bill-shorten-says-turnbulls-policies-are-the-clear-losers-of-the-election-video>
Shorten managed to hold off Albanese in the 2013 leadership ballot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/13/bill-shorten-wins-labor-ballot>, 
the first vote for the federal parliamentary leader which included the 
grassroots membership, because the right faction voted for the Victorian as a 
bloc, and Albanese lost critical caucus votes from inside his left faction.

What happens from here depends on Labor’s final results. Poll analysts such as 
Crikey’s William Bowesaid on Sunday 
<https://www.crikey.com.au/2016/07/03/australian-election-results-what-we-know-so-far/>
 the count suggested Labor would be in a position to claim between 63 and 75 
seats.

But on Sunday morning Labor insiders were increasingly bullish about the 
party’s final position, and the Coalition’s disposition suggested contingency 
planning was under way in the event they were forced into a minority government.

Bill Shorten basks in the moment as Labor faithful roar his name
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/bill-shorten-basks-in-the-moment-as-labor-faithful-roar-his-name>
Independents, including Andrew Wilkie and Cathy McGowan, revealed they had 
conversations with the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, on Sunday morning. 
Wilkie told reporters Turnbull was “ensuring that the channels of communication 
are open and I took the opportunity to tell him of my election commitment to 
the community about no deals, and he was quite understanding about that”.

Right wing supporters of Shorten have been rallying over the past few days to 
head off any potential leadership tussle at the pass. In the final week of the 
election campaign, some of Shorten’s closest supporters, including Victorian 
left-wingers, Kim Carr and Jenny Macklin, made public declarations that he’d 
done enough to remain as Labor leader post election.

NSW rightwing powerbroker Sam Dastyari, who was reported 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/federal-election/bill-shorten-faces-labor-leadership-battle-as-reports-surface-that-sam-dastyari-backs-anthony-albanese/news-story/659159119d94d8aba0c9b3c436967208>
 last week to be backing Albanese in the event Labor lost the election, told 
Sky News on Sunday morning: “Of course the Labor party is going to end up 
sticking with Bill Shorten, we just had the best result.”

He then noted somewhat ambiguously: “I have not had anyone on the phone to me 
suggestingBill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>
 won’t be the leader since last night’s election.”

Labor’s general secretary in NSW, Kaila Murnain, said on Sunday 
<https://twitter.com/SeanNic/status/749427860914343936> she “unequivocally” 
supported the “amazing work that Bill Shorten did during this campaign.

“He will continue to lead Labor and we are all extremely proud to be a part of 
his team.”
 