
Every 19 minutes, a baby is born in America to a mother who struggles with 
opiate addiction, a percentage that hassoared 
<http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/baby-opioids/> in the past 
decade alongside a broader addiction spike. The increase has forced some state 
lawmakers to decide whether the mother’s drug use, which can leave the baby 
with post-birth withdrawal called neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS), is a 
criminal justice issue or a disease.

As with heroin and opioid addiction outside of pregnancy, the consensus 
<https://www.acog.org/-/media/Departments/Government-Relations-and-Outreach/NASToolkit.pdf>
 among doctors and advocates is that this is a health matter, and not one for 
the courts. (NAS is a highly treatable condition without long-term effects, 
though it’s still an unfortunate one: newborns with NAS convulse, projectile 
vomit and emit a telltale shriek.) President Obama agrees – he recentlyannounced
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/prescription-drug-abuse-addiction-treatment-painkiller>
 an increase in funds dedicated to treatment, and an increase in the number of 
patients a doctor can treat with some maintenance medications.

Curbing pain prescriptions won't reduce overdoses. More drug treatment will | 
Maia Szalavitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/prescription-drug-abuse-addiction-treatment-painkiller>
State lawmakers, on the other hand, are still learning. They tend to default 
to treating it as a crime, only to find that doesn’t work.

Tennessee was the first state to enact a law, in 2014, expressly criminalizing 
drug use during pregnancy. The law empowers police officers to lock up women 
who deliver babies with NAS. Today, five other states – Alabama, Colorado, 
Louisiana, North Carolina and Virginia – are considering enacting similarly 
punitive policies.


But Tennessee decided in March to take its “fetal assault” law off the books 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/doctors-applaud-end-tennessees-fetal-assault-law-193702839.html>
, effective July 2016. They based their decision on the fact thatthe law made 
women more afraid 
<http://nashvillepublicradio.org/post/tennessee-fetal-assault-bill-fails-allowing-it-be-struck-state-law#stream/0>
, rather than more likely, to seek treatment.

Here are the things that I hope they’ve learned – and that other states will 
heed – before more laws are passed that discourage addicted women from 
receiving prenatal care and drug treatment.

Drug addiction is a disease, period.


Virtually every medical organization in the nation – from the American Medical 
Association, to the American Academy of Pediatrics, to the American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists – opposes the prosecution of drug-addicted 
mothers.

They instead support treatment and education for the disease of addiction. 
Drugs <https://www.theguardian.com/society/drugs> change the brain – they alter 
its structure and its functions, robbing a pregnant addict of judgment, even at 
the risk of harming her fetus. Consider why any mother – one who has decided to 
carry her pregnancy to term – wouldchoose to give birth to a baby with 
developmental shortcomings. She wouldn’t. As the National Association for 
Perinatal Addiction Research and Education correctly points out: “These women 
are addicts who become pregnant, not pregnant women who decide to use drugs.”

The US doesn’t incarcerate pregnant women who have other kinds of serious 
medical conditions – such as HIV/Aids or cancer, diabetes or asthma – that 
could potentially affect fetal or child development. Doing so would be cruel 
and unusual. How is drug addiction, which is no more a choice than any other 
disease, different?

Punishing prenatal substance abuse is counterproductive, and it leads to 
unintended consequences.

Advocates of Tennessee’s fetal assault law argued before its passage that the 
penalty would facilitate healthier pregnancies – that the threat of jail time 
wouldsomehow scare women 
<http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/investigations/2014/06/13/drug-dependent-babies-challenge-doctors-politicians/10112813/>
 into treatment. I suppose they were right about one thing: women becoming 
afraid. But the law has, in all other ways, had the exact opposite effect.

Instead of seeking help, women are going underground for fear of penalization. 
Carmen Wolffled to a neighboring state 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/state-where-giving-birth-can-be-criminal/> to 
give birth. Brittany Hudsondelivered her infant 
<http://www.wrcbtv.com/story/31622816/doctors-applaud-end-of-tennessees-fetal-assault-law>
 in the back seat of a car. Tonya Martintook her own life 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/state-where-giving-birth-can-be-criminal/>. 
Some women, to the revulsion of many pro-life supporters who would otherwise 
support punishment, are even having abortions.

But even more damning is this: the law hasn’t decreased NAS births statewide. 
Since its implementation, such births have actually increased, with 975 
reported cases in 2014 and 986 in 2015,according 
<https://tn.gov/assets/entities/health/attachments/NASsummary_Week_5215.pdf> to 
the Tennessee department of health. Holding a hammer over the heads of 
drug-addicted expectant mothers to encourage healthier pregnancies seems to be 
about as effective as eating a Big Mac while exercising on a treadmill to lose 
weight. It doesn’t work.

If a state doesn’t invest in drug treatment for pregnant women, its approach 
will fail.

The Tennessee law guarantees that if a woman enrolls in treatment while 
pregnant, and sticks with it, she will not be jailed. But they made that 
stipulation without increasing access to treatment enough to meet the growing 
demand.

The state needs more than double 
<http://taadas.org/TAADAS%20White%20Paper%202015.pdf> the slots in its licensed 
treatment facilities to care for pregnant drug users than it currently has 
available. Contributing to the access problem are significant geographical 
burdens imposed on women living in isolated, rural towns with addiction centers 
hours away; waiting lists with, typically, hundreds of people on them at any 
given time; and extreme unaffordability of treatment due to Tennessee’s 
continuedrefusal 
<http://lawstreetmedia.com/blogs/crime/first-pregnant-woman-arrested-under-tennesse-controversial-new-law/>
 to expand Medicaid under Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

Pregnant women with addictions need healthcare, not handcuffs. And that’s not 
only what doctors, relevant experts and science have long maintained. It’s also 
what Tennessee is learning the hard way, from its failed experiment. States 
considering punitive responses to the opioid and pregnancy dilemma should take 
note.
 