
App: Premier Inns <http://www.premierinn.com/en/>

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone, Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>
, Nokia and BlackBerry

What is it?

A simple app to find and book Premier Inn hotels.

Who is it by?

Premier Inns, Britain's biggest budget hotel chain, while the app was 
developed byGrapple Mobile  <http://www.grapplemobile.com/>and business 
solutions specialistFujitsu <http://www.fujitsu.com/global/>.

What does it promise?

"Real-time availability of all 590 Premier Inn hotels. Customers can manage 
their booking from start to finish, while on the move."

How does it work?

It allows you to immediately search for hotels near you (always handy) or by 
location, then add your details (dates and number of people etc), and look at 
the results. Results are displayed well enough, with a photo and address of 
each hotel plus buttons to book or call, an image gallery and an integrated 
Google map to locate you hotel. There is also a description of the hotel and 
local area. So there's pretty much everything you would want ahead of booking, 
though one small fault is that the icons indicating specific amenities each 
hotel has are difficult to distinguish and, without any kind of key to explain 
their meaning, superfluous.

When booking you are offered breakfast for £7.99 but no other annoying add-on 
costs are bombarded at users, which is refreshing. You are given a booking 
reference number and an email should also be dispatched to you. Bookings are 
stored in the "My bookings" section, which allows for easy access when you 
arrive at your destination (simply flash the booking reference on your phone at 
the "concierge").

Is it easy to use?

Yes. I purposefully downloaded the Hilton Hotels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/hotels> app and the Premier Inn app at the 
same time. One was user-friendly, functional and intuitive; the other was ... 
the Hilton hotels app.

A further word on the latter: the Hilton app home screen is clearly designed 
for US users (with a 1-800 number on prominent display). The app does its best 
to find a nearby destination automatically, but when you manually click to 
search under city or address, the default options are all for the US. This is 
incredibly annoying – so much so that I have binned the Hilton app completely. 
It is a great lesson in how not to port an existing app across to new countries.

Is it fun?

Sometimes ease-of-use can be fun and, if you're like me and prefer to sort 
domestic admin quickly and efficiently, you'll be over the moon with this.

Is it pretty?

There is one awfully strange design decision. Rather than display a snazzy 
Premier Inns logo or specially created splash page, the home page merely has a 
picture of a bed and a couple of tappable buttons. It may be functional, but 
it's far from pretty – the app equivalent of a 1970s pub urinal. The rest of 
the app includes more of the substance-over-style aesthetic.

Should you download it?

Let's be honest and think about who would want to use this app. Premier Hotels 
is a budget chain and is therefore a favoured destination for quick stops, 
cheap wedding accommodation and the like. If you do use budget hotels, this 
will be a really useful app. But those who like to compare budget hotels 
alongside more expensive accommodation (or even other budget accommodation) may 
wish to use a broader hotel search engine app such asLate Rooms 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/irooms-laterooms-com-hotel/id334701579?mt=8>, 
Kayak <http://www.kayak.co.uk/iphone> or HotelsByMe (powered by Expedia).
 