
Approaching the Standing Rock Reservation to stand with the Water Protectors, 
you couldn’t miss the dramatic display of tribal flags flying high along the 
dirt driveway and surrounding the perimeter of the large campgrounds. Scattered 
between hundreds of flags are banners bearing messages such as:Mni Wiconi, 
“water is life” in the Lakota language.

Also scattered among the flags were banners calling for the release of Leonard 
Peltier, a Native American who has been in jail for more than 41 years,unjustly 
convicted <http://www.amnestyusa.org/our-work/cases/usa-leonard-peltier> of the 
1975 murders of FBI special agents Jack Coler and Ronald Williams on the Pine 
Ridge Reservation in South Dakota. Barack Obamajust 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/12/19/president-obama-grants-commutations-and-pardons>
 pardoned or commuted the sentence of 231 individuals on Monday, and Peltier 
was not among them.

We represent Leonard Peltier in his 2016 clemency petition, which asks Obama 
to allow him to live his final years at home on the Turtle Mountain Reservation 
in North Dakota. Mr Peltier is old, ill and a threat to no one.The petition 
<http://www.whoisleonardpeltier.info/LEGAL/uploads/2016clemencyapp.pdf> seeks 
his release in the interests of justice and reconciliation and issupported 
<http://www.whoisleonardpeltier.info/home/support/> by Nobel Peace Prize 
laureates, humanitarians and scholars. Rights groups have embraced his cause, 
including more than 100,000 people who have signed anAmnesty International 
petition 
<http://act.amnestyusa.org/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1839&ea.campaign.id=27118>
 calling for his release.

Over the course of our legal representation, we reviewed old government 
records obtained through decades of litigation under the Freedom of Information 
Act as well as court proceedings. Viewed through today’s lens, the case 
presents a glimpse of an era when social activists were considered a threat and 
Native American activists, in particular, were branded “extremists”.

The incident took place in the wake of the American Indian Movement’s (Aim’s) 
1973siege <http://www.whoisleonardpeltier.info/home/background/wounded-knee/> 
of the Wounded Knee Massacre site, where hundreds of unarmed Lakota men, women 
and children were murdered by the US Army in 1890. That siege brought attention 
to broken treaties, failed promises and tribal corruption. Under the FBI’s 
exclusive jurisdiction for the prosecution of major crimes, violence escalated 
in the impoverished and politically charged community; it is an era that locals 
refer to as the “Reign of Terror”.

Leonard Peltier arrived in June 1975 to help protect Oglala Lakota families 
from violence. On 26 June that year, two FBI agents entered the private 
property in unmarked cars and gunfire erupted. By the end of the incident, 
Agents Coler and Williams died, as did Native American Joseph Stuntz, although 
no charges were brought against anyone for his death.

Peltier states in the petition: “I did not wake up ... planning to injure or 
shoot federal agents, and did not gain anything from participating in the 
incident … I was [on Pine Ridge Reservation] to protect ... residents, not to 
cause harm … If I could have prevented this tragedy from occurring, I would 
have done so.”

FBI agents from across the country immediately were dispatched to Pine Ridge 
Reservation, where they launched what amounted to an assault upon the Oglala 
Lakota Nation. They made warrantless searches of homes, offices and residences, 
coerced testimony, detained people without cause and even restrained an 
attorney who attempted to prevent a warrantless search. Requests at the time 
from US Civil Rights Commission Investigator William Muldrow for independent 
oversight of the FBI were ignored by federal officials.

The injustices that contributed to Peltier’s conviction are not subject to 
credible dispute. Federal agentsmade false statements 
<http://www.whoisleonardpeltier.info/FREEPELTIERNOW/images/DOCN0011B.gif> to 
the press;submitted <http://www.freepeltiernow.org/extradition.html> false 
affidavits to courts;coerced 
<http://www.whoisleonardpeltier.info/LEGAL/TRIAL.htm> alleged witness 
statements; and deliberatelywithheld 
<http://www.whoisleonardpeltier.info/LEGAL/uploads/831056P.pdf> critical 
ballistics reports in order to gain an unfair advantage at trial.

When the ballistics results were discovered after trial, the government’s 
attorneys conceded – as they had to – that they had no credible evidence 
regarding who shot the FBI agents, and did not know whose weapon actually 
killed the agents.

Peltier’s many requests for a new trial were opposed by the government and 
denied by the courts. He remains in jail today primarily because of an 
“accomplice” theory of liability which was included in the written charges but 
not argued to the jury, that he allegedly assisted someone in an unidentified 
way.

The clemency petition does not reargue the verdict, but rather, it sets forth 
the facts and is supported by the FBI’s own records. If Obama does not grant 
the petition before he leaves office in just a few weeks, then it will be a 
death sentence for Peltier, who is next eligible for parole in 2024.

The tragic loss of all three lives will never be forgotten. That pain should 
not blind us, however, to what the case represented at the time, and has come 
to represent since.

In our opinion, history will record Peltier’s case as one of the greatest 
injustices in the history of the American justice system.

When a nation fails to reckon with its past, it risks the perpetuation of 
intolerance on one hand, and resentment on the other. To “seize a better 
future” as Obama hassaid 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-obama-turkish-parliament>
, our nation must reckon with its historical injustices against Native 
Americans.

Granting clemency to Leonard Peltier is not a referendum on federal law 
enforcement. It is a declaration to the world that we embraceNative Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/native-americans> as equal members of 
society, and a pledge to become a stronger and fairer nation. It presents a 
moral imperative relevant to our nation’s past, present and future – and to 
Obama’s legacy.

After 41 years, please Mr President, free Leonard Peltier.
 