
A tournament that has largely gone to script will come to a logical conclusion 
tomorrow when Cameroon, the holders and Olympic champions, meet Senegal in a 
clash between two of the teams who will contest the World Cup this summer.

Cameroon's 3-0 semi-final stroll against the previously impressive hosts Mali 
marks them down as favourites to retain a trophy they won for the third time on 
penalties two years ago. And Patrick Mboma, who missed the semi with a foot 
injury, is confident of being fit.

"I will be OK for the match, it's just not a serious injury," said the Parma 
striker who has scored three goals in his four games here.

However the coach Winfried Schafer will wait until the last minute before 
naming his team as Pius Ndiefi played well against Mali. "It's a great 
situation to be in," said the German, who also has Real Mallorca's striker 
Samuel Eto'o to call upon. "Although it will be difficult to leave one of them 
out, it is a delight for me to be able to make that kind of choice."

Cameroon are physical and tactically astute, and their 3-5-2 should ensure a 
fascinating contrast of styles with Senegal's classic 4-4-2. "I respect the 
Cameroonians, sure, but I don't fear them," said the Senegal striker El Hadj 
Diouf."We have a great team, but above all we are so close we are like a band 
of brothers."

Morale is high for Cameroon, too, despite their goalkeeping coach Thomas Nkono 
reportedly receiving a one-year touchline ban for his incursion on the pitch 
prior to Mali's semi-final, which saw him bundled away in handcuffs after being 
accused of dropping "magic" on to the pitch.

That said, Mali's president Alpha Oumar Konare went to the changing room after 
the match to apologise. "It was a gesture that we really appreciated. Mali owed 
us an apology and we received it from their leading citizen," Schafer added.

Â· You've read the piece, now have your say. Send your comments, as sharp or as 
stupid as you like, to <A HREF=" mailto:football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
">football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk
 