
The Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>, has defended his 
country’s handling of the investigation into the murder of Italian student 
Giulio Regeni, and said that allegations of complicity on the part of Egypt’s 
security forces were putting the country at risk.

Sisi’s comments showed he was standing by Egypt’s official position that 
government-sanctioned forces had no role in the torture and murder of Regeni, 
even though experts and activists have said they believe his death bore all the 
hallmarks of Egypt’s notorious secret police.


The remarks came as signs emerged on Wednesday that Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> was ready to capitulate to a demand 
by Italian investigators for certain mobile phone records that, after weeks of 
stalling, could help to identify the possible perpetrators behind Regeni’s 25 
January disappearance.

Sisi used his often cryptic and rambling nationally televised speech on 
Wednesday to address criticisms levelled at the government’s handling of the 
case, which most recently saw an increasingly frustratedItaly recall its 
ambassador to Cairo for consultations in Rome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/08/italy-recalls-ambassador-egypt-talks-death-student-giulio-regeni>
.


He defended what he said was an investigation being conducted with “utmost 
transparency” into the death of Regeni. The academic researcher’s body was 
found bearing signs of torture on 4 February in an outlying district of Cairo.

Sisi attacked the way the case was being perceived both at home and abroad, 
saying that Egyptians who were spreading “lies” about the case had endangered 
the country.


“We Egyptians started circulating these allegations and lies, we made this 
problem ourselves, we made this problem for Egypt,” he added, referring to the 
ongoing suspicions that Egyptian security forces were responsible for Regeni’s 
death.


He said the involvement of the country’s judiciary had added to the 
credibility of the case and admonished journalists for making “social media 
your source”.

 Egyptian authorities released a photo of Giulio Regeni’s personal belongings 
in March. Photograph: AP 
The remarks were seen as a “bad sign” by Raffaele Marchetti, professor of 
international relations at Luiss University in Rome.

“It makes the situation even more difficult and, as is usually the case, 
authoritarian governments usually take advantage of external pressure to 
repress even more,” Marchetti said, pointing to Sisi’s accusations against the 
media.

“He seems to have taken, as other officials have, to referring in the same 
breath to an Egyptian national who went missing inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> as though there’s some kind of 
comparison here,” said HA Hellyer, of the Royal United Services Institute.

“Cairo’s authorities seem to think that as long as they talk about 
transparency, it will become a reality – but Rome patently doesn’t see things 
as transparent, and Italian public opinion doesn’t either,” he added.


“Sisi knows that there’s a lot of pressure, but he seems unable to recognise 
how badly Cairo’s stance is actually received in Italy. Cairo appears to think 
it can hold on to what it’s doing so far and eventually this problem will just 
go away,” he said.


The Egyptian foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, told journalists in Cairo on 
Tuesday that Egyptcould circumvent supposed constitutional obstacles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/italy-and-egypt-begin-talks-over-giulio-regeni-death>
 to handing over phone records pertaining to the case, according to the Italian 
news agency ANSA. Officials at Egypt’s foreign affairs ministry later denied 
this to the Guardian, saying that Shoukry had agreed to convey necessary 
information, but that this did not mean giving up the phone records.

Shoukry later said the investigation could take some time, comparing it to the 
year-long investigation into the death of Egyptian public prosecutorHisham 
Barakat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/29/cairo-bomb-attack-injures-state-prosecutor>
in June 2015.


The remarks were important because Egyptian officials had earlier suggested 
that they hadfound and killed members of a criminal gang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/egypt-police-shoot-dead-suspects-giulio-regeni>
 they believed were responsible for Regeni’s murder, a theory that was roundly 
rejected by Italian officials as implausible.

If Egypt moves to hand over some phone records, it could help thaw 
increasingly frosty relations between Cairo and Rome over the case.
 