
The most surprising thing about President Obama asserting in a recent New 
Yorker interview 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2014/01/27/140127fa_fact_remnick?currentPage=all#pq=avozBc>
, "there's some folks who just really dislike me because they don't like the 
idea of a black president" is that he said it. Surely, the assertion itself is 
almost mundane. The pool of Americans who don't like the idea of a black 
president is large enough to have its ownt-shirt market 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/10/13/romney-supporter-wears-put-the-white-back-in-the-white-house-campaign-event-ohio_n_1963583.html>
. And that market is larger than you'd think: about 1.5 million Americansopenly 
admit 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/112915/author-obama-racism-study-responds-nate-cohn-criticism>
 to pollsters that they will not vote for a black president.

It's the "openly" that's a problem, of course. That, and the strong 
possibility that Obama was not referring to just those 1.5 million, but to some 
larger percentage of the 51% of Americans who disapprove of the job he's doing 
– a group that, statistically speaking, can't just consist of avowed racists. 
But whowas he talking about?

One thing is for sure: none of the people he's talking about will change their 
minds now; even more distressing, they probably don't know that their minds 
need changing.

White critics don't question Obama's role as a racial ambassador when he poses 
as the disappointed elder. His hascritiqued black men repeatedly 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/16/us/politics/15cnd-obama.html>, for years, 
especially young black fathers, for participating in a culture of resentment 
and insolence. In his commencement address to the all-male, historically black 
Morehouse College, heput it bluntly 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/thetwo-way/2013/05/19/185348873/two-excerpts-you-should-read-from-obamas-morehouse-speech>
:

[W]hatever hardships you may experience because of your race, they pale in 
comparison to the hardships previous generations endured – and overcame.

He also has made a connection 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2013/feb/15/news/la-pn-obama-chicago-preventing-violence-20130215>
 between gun violence and absent fathers that would not sound out of place 
coming from Glenn Beck, or the National Rifle Association's frontman Wayne 
LaPierre:

When a child opens fire on another child, there is a hole in that child's 
heart that government can't fill. Only community and parents and teachers and 
clergy can fill that hole.

In general, Obama has been so critical of the black community that many 
progressive black columnists and pundits find it a troubling pattern. 
"Historians will pore over his many speeches to black audiences,"wrote 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2013/05/how-the-obama-administration-talks-to-black-america/276015/>
 Ta-Nahisi Coates at The Atlantic, and "they will see a president who sought to 
hold black people accountable for their communities, but was disdainful of 
those who looked at him and sought the same".

Of course, when it's deemed fit to accuse Obama of "race-baiting", or when the 
virtues of his domestic policy agenda are criticized as "give-aways" or 
"reparations", those moments where he offered his own most searing criticism 
are conveniently forgotten.

That is probably why he has rarely talked about racism in an explicitly 
personal way; off the top of my head, I can think of only three occasions: at a 
Democratic primary debate in 2007, he made a joke abouthailing cabs 
<http://www.ontheissues.org/Archive/2007_YouTube_Dems_Principles_+_Values.htm> 
in New York City. It was in a response to a question about being "authentically 
black". Remember when that was a thing we worried about?

And last year, in his most memorable revelation, he made the disquieting 
observation 
<http://www.cnn.com/2013/07/19/politics/obama-zimmerman-verdict/index.html>, 
"Trayvon Martin could have been me." Few seemed prepared to question his 
authentic blackness then. But that was almost beside the point. Obama meant to 
call attention to Trayvon Martin's unknowable potential (how many future 
presidents, future Nobel prize winners, future mothers and fathers have we lost 
to pointless racial violence?) and to his own good fortune. Instead, critics 
treated it as an ego move, as if it were Obama that injected politics into the 
Zimmerman trial, and not another kind of politics that kept Zimmerman from 
being arrested promptly in the first place.

In another example I'm thinking of, the racism originated with Obama's family: 
"my own white grandmother". His 2008 post-Reverend Wright controversy "race 
speech" (sometimes known as the "more perfect union" speech)included 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2008/03/18/obama-race-speech-read-th_n_92077.html>
 her as a counterexample to the radical black triumphalism of Wright. She "once 
confessed her fear of black men who passed by her on the street," he confided, 
"and … on more than one occasion … uttered racial or ethnic stereotypes that 
made me cringe."

It felt like a stretch to hold up poor Madelyn Dunham's kitchen-table 
confidences as the equivalent of Wright's bombastic sermons. Obama just drafted 
Madelyn in the service of making his rhetoric more palatable: "See, weall make 
mistakes!" But he wasn't scraping the bottom of the anecdotal barrel for 
Grandma Dunham's subtle aspersions, he was actually making a representative 
claim: much as Reverend Wright is an appropriate spokesman for a certain strain 
of black racism, Madelyn Dunham is the face for that of most whites. Now, which 
is more difficult to address? Which is more difficult to stamp out? When a 
black preacher makes sweeping pronouncements about whites, that's clearly 
racism; when your relative whispers about a stereotype whose roots go back as 
far as the preacher's rage, well, that's just grandma.

The degree to which white racism has been driven into whispers, and, worse, 
habit, is evident when Americans arepolled about racism 
<http://www.rasmussenreports.com/public_content/lifestyle/general_lifestyle/july_2013/more_americans_view_blacks_as_racist_than_whites_hispanics>
: more people, black and white, say that "most blacks are racist" than "most 
whites are racist". Among all Americans, 37% say that "most blacks are racist", 
15% say that "most whites" are. Split by race, there's only a seven-point 
difference in the percentage that describes "most blacks" as racist: 38% of 
whites, 31% of blacks.

I don't think this is because black people are truly more racist; I just think 
they're more candid about it – and they are able to recognize it. History has 
taught them to. They know the way they talk amongst themselves, they know their 
Rev Wrights and they know their grudge-filled relatives, and when those people 
say things that are racist, everyone knows that's racism. What's more, when 
white people hear about those comments,they recognize it as racism.

What's startling is the breakdown for white racism. Among blacks, 15% say most 
whites are racist. Among whites, 10% say most whites are racist. In that 
context, Obama's remarks seem even less controversial, and perhaps even 
disturbingly blasé.

But even taking those findings at face value, I think black America might be 
giving the rest of us a pass: I think of all of the statistics that show the 
dismal chances of a black child breaking out of the cycle ofpoverty 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/08/28/these-seven-charts-show-the-black-white-economic-gap-hasnt-budged-in-50-years/>
. I think of how our schools are moresegregated 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/08/28/these-seven-charts-show-the-black-white-economic-gap-hasnt-budged-in-50-years/>
 today than they were 30 years ago. I think of the disproportionatecasualties 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/04/08/drug-war-mass-incarceration_n_3034310.html>
 of the drug war. I think of the health outcome studies that show such shocking 
statistics as black children having a 500% higher death rate fromasthma 
<http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/templates/content.aspx?ID=6170> than white 
children, and that in general black infants aretwice as likely 
<http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/templates/content.aspx?ID=3021> to die than 
white infants.

Black America, may blame white America for its troubles in some generalized 
way, but, concretely, a lot of African Americans seem to realize that whatever 
is happening to their people, it's not because white people are explicitly 
racist in their everyday affairs, even though some of us, maybe even 10%, are. 
But we are less racist than we used to be; polls show thatover and over 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/1687/race-relations.aspx>. Black people's struggles 
continue anyway, because of a terrible history with lingering consequences, and 
an imperfect system of redress that requires constant vigilance and hard work 
to be kept from slipping back into devastating inequality. Sometimes someone 
needs to remind the rest of us of that. I wish that the president could it more 
often.
 