
A previously unknown script by Swedish director Ingmar Bergman, intended to be 
part of a collaboration withFederico Fellini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/federico-fellini> and Akira Kurosawa, is to 
be turned into a film to mark the 100th anniversary of his birth.

Sixty-Four Minutes With Rebecka, written in 1969, is about a teacher of deaf 
children who falls pregnant. The film follows her over the course of a few 
days, during which she gets into a car accident, visits a sex club and goes to 
dress fittings.

The role was intended to be played by Katharine Ross, who had at the time been 
nominated for an Oscar for her role in The Graduate.

Wow! Bergman was a feminist for 64 minutes!
Suzanne Osten 
Bergman’s script was to be his contribution to a portmanteau film with Fellini 
and Kurosawa, but the collaboration never came to fruition. It was not until 
Bergman donated his archive to the foundation he set up in his name in 2002 
that its existence came to light.

Bergman’s script will be adapted and filmed by Suzanne Osten, one of Sweden’s 
most prominent directors, and a surprising choice given that Osten and Bergman 
were openly hostile to each other up until his death in 2007. They were on 
opposite sides of the cultural struggle of the late 1960s: Bergman was seen as 
traditionalist, individualist and patriarchal, whereas Osten was one of the 
founders of the radical, feminist and collectivist Group 8 movement.

They also had personal conflicts. Osten’s mother, a film critic and would-be 
film-maker, had worked for Bergman on one of his early movies, but could not 
progress in the male-dominated industry of the time. Osten’s first film,Mamma 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0084295/>, was about this struggle and portrayed 
Bergman in an unflattering light.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Funknown-ingmar-bergman-script-filmed-fellini-kurosawa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2aead1f07cd33b8c118422a1f22a2478d47ad8c%2F0_649_1432_963%2F1432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Previously%20unknown%20Ingmar%20Bergman%20script%20to%20be%20filmed%20by%20former%20antagonist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Funknown-ingmar-bergman-script-filmed-fellini-kurosawa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Previously%20unknown%20Ingmar%20Bergman%20script%20to%20be%20filmed%20by%20former%20antagonist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Funknown-ingmar-bergman-script-filmed-fellini-kurosawa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2aead1f07cd33b8c118422a1f22a2478d47ad8c%2F0_649_1432_963%2F1432.jpg>
 Ingmar Bergman in 2001, six years before his death. Photograph: Jonas 
Ekstromer/EPA 
Their next clash was in Glasgow in 1990, when Osten’s film, The Guardian Angel 
– which had won prizes and had been well received at Cannes –had eight 
nominations at the European film awards 
<http://archive.europeanfilmawards.eu/en_EN/archive>.

“I was sure we would get some prizes,” Osten told the Guardian. But Bergman 
was chairman of the jury and they won nothing. Osten believed he had blocked 
her film, so she sent him a long letter attacking him.

Osten also tells a story of Bergman warning a friend not to work with her. “He 
said, ‘Don’t get near her, I will shoot her’”, Osten said. “That was pretty 
tough … he really did some mean things to me.”


The script took a serendipitous path into Osten’s hands. It was initially 
offered to the national radio station, Sveriges Radio, with the idea that it 
would be recorded and broadcast for Bergman’s centenary in 2018. One of Osten’s 
former students had just been appointed as head of the station’s drama 
department and offered it to her former teacher, who liked it so much she 
decided to turn it into a film as well. Osten has already adapted it as a radio 
play, whichwill have its world premiere on 6 November on Sveriges Radio 
<http://sverigesradio.se/sida/avsnitt/810327?programid=965>. 


“At first I was rather reluctant,” Osten said. “I had zero idea what it was. 
And then I was really enthusiastic when I read it. I exclaimed immediately, 
‘Wow! He was a feminist for 64 minutes!’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Funknown-ingmar-bergman-script-filmed-fellini-kurosawa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9af683556e15c51b8c016383225ad0433f5d30ee%2F0_182_2816_1690%2F2816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Previously%20unknown%20Ingmar%20Bergman%20script%20to%20be%20filmed%20by%20former%20antagonist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Funknown-ingmar-bergman-script-filmed-fellini-kurosawa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Previously%20unknown%20Ingmar%20Bergman%20script%20to%20be%20filmed%20by%20former%20antagonist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Funknown-ingmar-bergman-script-filmed-fellini-kurosawa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9af683556e15c51b8c016383225ad0433f5d30ee%2F0_182_2816_1690%2F2816.jpg>
 Ingmar Bergman on the set of Saraband. Photograph: 
Pics/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Sixty-Four Minutes With Rebecka was written around the same time as Shame, The 
Passion of Anna and The Touch, films Osten describes as very different to the 
rest of Bergman’s canon. “They’re so political and open-minded, and of the 
zeitgeist,” she said.

“When you see his text, it’s very good. Politically, he became very 
conservative, but as an artist he was still struggling with the existential 
questions. Sixty-Four Minutes is so openly optimistic and on the woman’s side. 
It has his sadism and his tension – it’s very good dialogue, for instance. It’s 
in the framework of his 1969-71 films, but it’s something of its own kind.”

Particularly shocking is the scene in the sex club, in which Rebecka asks a 
man to have sex with her, telling him “I want it to really hurt”, and later 
revealing that he had nearly killed her. But Osten said the script is unusually 
progressive for Bergman, especially in the portrayal of Rebecka and one of her 
deaf students. “This girl is very vivid and rebellious. She has a body and a 
sexuality and she goes her own way. It’s a queer motif, a love story, and it’s 
very modern.”

Osten added that the themes of Sixty-Four Minutes With Rebecka are echoed in 
later Bergman films such as Autumn Sonata and his TV series Scenes from a 
Marriage.


In search of Ingmar Bergman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/jul/06/ingmar-bergman-week-faro>
Jan Holmberg, who runs the Ingmar Bergman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ingmarbergman> Foundation, said he was 
delighted when he found out Osten would be making the film, describing it as “a 
match made in heaven”.


“They had a difficult personal relationship to say the least,” Holmberg said. 
“Bergman tried his best at times to hurt Osten’s career, whereas she, from her 
underdog position, would attack his world view, his privileges, his alleged 
abuse of power, etc. As it recently turned out that Bergman had written a 
script on exactly those issues – gender, power, sexuality, politics, etc – 
during this exact time, I for one couldn’t think of a better director than 
Suzanne Osten to do it.”

Holmberg described the script as “a missing piece of the puzzle”. “It’s quite 
on a par with finding an unpublished manuscript by Ernest Hemingway or an 
unknown painting by Picasso. It’s Bergman at the peak of his abilities, and in 
the same category as his best work – hardly some juvenile stuff written for the 
writing desk drawer.”

Swedish newspaper Dagens Nyheter has published two excerpts from Bergman’s 
script, bothin the original Swedish 
<http://www.dn.se/kultur-noje/film-tv/las-ett-exklusivt-utdrag-ur-bergmans-okanda-manus-sextiofyra-minuter-med-rebecka/>
 andtranslated into English 
<http://www.dn.se/kultur-noje/film-tv/read-an-exclusive-excerpt-from-bergmans-unknown-script-sixty-four-minutes-with-rebecka/>
.
 