
My role

I work at Keys Childcare <http://www.keyschildcare.co.uk/>, a provider of 
registered children’s homes and schools. My role as operations manager involves 
training staff in all our services to increase their knowledge and skills to 
manage the risks for children who go missing from care or who are at risk of 
sexual exploitation. I work with the board of directors, senior management 
team, registered managers and head teachers to develop strategies based on 
legislation and guidance.
 Gayle Bradbury Photograph: Keys Childcare 
A typical day

Depending on which area I am visiting, my day can start very early. Even if 
I’m heading up to the head office in Rawtenstall, Lancashire, the day generally 
begins in the car.

Although I have training plans in place for the services, sometimes the 
overnight reports, which detail issues and incidents raised to the on-call 
manager, or a call from an individual home about a new admission completely 
changes the structure of my day. I have to be able to react quickly because 
thepoint of my job is to put strategies in place to keep young people safe.

In addition to supporting staff within the homes I also want to engage with 
young people who are particularly vulnerable. As a company we are looking to 
gather data and analyse patterns across the organisation in order to target 
resources, improve services and maintain placement stability. This data helps 
me to identify high-risk children, as I can examine the risk factors and make 
informed conclusions about who will become a priority. This means we can take 
proactive steps to nip any issues in the bud.

This enables me to visit the home to check the risk assessments and care 
plans, discuss possible new strategies and offer an independent pair of eyes on 
the problem. It might simply be that the young person needs more activities and 
engagement. It’s the push/pull effect: we need to make the pull to stay in the 
home greater than the push to leave.

The issues affecting my work

Missing from care and child sexual exploitation are such huge areas, and have 
a very high profile in the media. Sometimes I feel I am only scraping the 
surface. But having a trained and motivated staff team can make a huge 
difference, and that is what I am aiming for. I am also aware that people often 
associate sexual exploitation with girls, but it also affects boys and this is 
something we shouldn’t forget.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> and young people go 
missing from care for a myriad of reasons; the main one being simply that they 
are missing their family and friends and are unsettled in unfamiliar 
surroundings. Sometimes it’s the typical teenage thrill of risk taking that 
manifests itself in running away.

What I love about what I do

Despite the challenges there are so many times when the job is unbelievably 
satisfying. I worked with one young man for two years and he completely changed 
his behaviour, engaging at school and addressing his criminal actions. Using 
cognitive behavioural therapy we addressed his offending behaviour by 
increasing his empathy with victims and his understanding of what the 
consequences might be. As a result, over a period of time he started to attend 
school and did not re-offend. I have lots of stories like this and a thank you 
card or a few grateful words make it all worthwhile.

There is so much satisfaction in watching the staff I have trained engaging 
with the young people in their care and becoming enthused and motivated to make 
a difference. They then feel the same fulfilment at a job well done and the 
life of a young person changed for the better.

Adoption is a journey that doesn’t end with a placement. I’m there for it all
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/aug/07/adoption-journey-coram-research-development-worker>
What I wish I’d known when I started out

I’ve learnt so much since I came into social work at the age of 24. I had a 
fairly sheltered upbringing and looking back I was very naïve. Working with 
young people and families in crisis came as a shock to the young girl I was 
back then. I now realise that I can’t change the world, I can only do my best. 
I also know now how much paperwork is involved in social work.

I have been a social worker for more than 18 years. Who knows what the future 
holds, but I definitely want to continue developing my role to work effectively 
with the staff teams and the young people at our homes and schools.Young people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople> come and go and it’s a huge 
undertaking to keep updating our training and strategies and dealing with the 
many different issues we come across. No youngster is the same and all of them 
need to be worked with in slightly different ways to give the best chance of a 
positive outcome.

In an ideal world my role would be redundant, but that is never going to 
happen. So while I’m on the road travelling to and from our homes and schools I 
really wish that service stations would review the price of their coffee!

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 