



Diversity on UK TV screens will move a step closer to the everyday next month 
when two black actors,Sophie Okonedo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sophie-okonedo> and Adrian Lester star in 
BBC1 thriller Undercover.

The pair feature in a rarity for UK primetime drama, a show with black leads 
where the colour of their skin isn’t central to the plot.


Written by the award-winning playwright Peter Moffat, the six-part drama comes 
as the BBC and other British broadcasters face mounting pressure to improve 
their record ondiversity, both on and off screen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/03/bbc-diversity-cash-ofcom-review-bame>
.

The show, about undercover police officers and death in custody, stars Okonedo 
as a high-flying lawyer about to become the first black director of public 
prosecutions. Lester plays her husband and the father of her three children.

Lester said he hoped viewers would focus on Undercover’s tense story rather 
than the colour of the actors’ skin. “What appears on screen is just my 
everyday life. It’s not remarkable, it’s just Britain.”

He said he had focused on his character’s nature – “a concerned parent, 
someone who loves his partner deeply, but who has lied” – and that society had 
to get to a point where it recognised “somebody’s skin colour isn’t a character 
trait”.

Yet the issue of diversity continues to dog the BBC and other broadcasters. 
Earlier this month,it emerged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/03/bbc-staff-diversity-trevor-phillips>
 that just 12.2% of BBC employees are black, Asian and minority ethnic despite 
setting a recent target of 14.2% by 2017.

In January, Idris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/jan/18/idris-elba-talent-is-everywhere-opportunity-isnt-video>
, who broke the mould when cast as the lead in the primetime BBC dramaLuther 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/16/luther-review-special-idris-elba>
, spoke out against stereotyping black characters, saying that “TV hasn’t 
caught up with reality”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fidris-elba-talent-is-everywhere-opportunity-isnt-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F18%2F1453141781987%2FKP_1454838_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Idris%20Elba%3A%20talent%20is%20everywhere%2C%20opportunity%20isn't%20%20%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fidris-elba-talent-is-everywhere-opportunity-isnt-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Idris%20Elba%3A%20talent%20is%20everywhere%2C%20opportunity%20isn%27t%20%20%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F18%2Fidris-elba-talent-is-everywhere-opportunity-isnt-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F18%2F1453141781987%2FKP_1454838_crop_640x360.jpg>
Idris Elba speaks to a group of MPs on diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/jan/18/idris-elba-talent-is-everywhere-opportunity-isnt-video>
Moffat, who was inspired to write the story by the Guardian’s investigations 
into the behaviour of undercover policemen and the failures of the justice 
system and the media, said the idea of casting black actors in the lead had 
come as the storyline developed.

However, several scenes brought home the significance of the casting, 
including one in which the main family are eating dinner in their nice 
middle-class home. “Here was a black family sitting around the dinner table 
eating pasta. So normal and yet I had never ever, not once, seen that on 
mainstream TV [in the UK].”

Moffat, who won two Baftas for Criminal Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2009/oct/05/bbc-licence-fee-criminal-justice>
, said the situation was far better in the US where popular dramas such as
Scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jun/28/kerry-washington-scandal-interview>
 and Empire have given lead roles to black actors.

Both Elba and Okonedo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/04/sophie-okonedo-interview>, 
Oscar-nominated for her role in the 2004 film Hotel Rwanda and currently 
appearing on Broadway in The Crucible, have said they were offered more 
opportunities for lead roles in the US. In an interview with the Guardian in 
2014, Okonedo said: “Why isn’t my inbox of English scripts busting at the seams 
in the same way as my American one is? There’s something amiss there.”

Sophie Okonedo interview: 'I have to go across the Atlantic to get work'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/04/sophie-okonedo-interview> 
Moffat, who credited his female lead for helping with the script, described 
the situation in the UK, where Luther has no black friends or even 
acquaintances for example, as “embarrassing” but said he was optimistic things 
would improve.

“I think it’s about to change. I know people at the BBC who want to change it 
and will change it,” before adding that it showed how far society had to move 
if “even theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, which is fairly full 
of liberal thinking folk, hasn’t got round to sorting this stuff out”.

The Labour MP Chi Onwurah <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chi-onwurah>, 
who has spoken out about the lack of diversity on British television, said 
there was still some way to go 15 years after Greg Dyke called the BBC 
“hideously white”.

Onwurah said: “I think it’s brilliant but at the same time also slightly 
ridiculous that the BBC has discovered that there are professional black 
families,” and called for more people from BAME backgrounds behind the cameras 
as well as in front of them.

Both Moffat and Lester, who has won awards for several Shakespearean roles, 
said it would be disappointing if viewers focused on the colour of the main 
characters’ skins by the second episode.

Moffat said that as well as being inspired by the scandal of undercover 
policemen, he had been made “profoundly angry” by the revelation that the 
sister of a former paratrooper who died in police custody,Christopher Alder, 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death_of_Christopher_Alder> had been spied on 
after his death by the police.

“I don’t think we should think about black parts or white parts but ... we 
should think about imagination. We should have black actors playing theNight 
Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/22/the-night-manager-review-bbc-le-carre>
 ... and not think about it.”

 * Undercover is set to appear on BBC1 in April.

• This article was amended on 10 March 2016. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that Undercover would be the first primetime British drama to 
feature two black actors in the lead roles.
 