
Its stunts have included hounding Britain's former ambassador to Moscow, 
comparing Estonia's president to a pig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jul/24/russia>, and encouraging young 
patriotic Russian girls to wear knickers with Vladimir Putin's name on them.

But now Nashi <http://www.nashi.su/> – the Kremlin's fanatical youth 
organisation – has embarked on a new campaign against the west and its media, 
suing the Independent and three other European newspapers last week for libel.

Nashi has taken legal action against the Independent over accusations that its 
activists issued death threats against a Russian journalist. The organisation 
is also suing France's Le Monde, and Le Journal Du Dimanche, as well as the 
liberal German daily Frankfurter Rundschau.

Earlier this month, Nashi activists picketed the home of Alexander Podrabinek, 
a Soviet-era dissident, after he wrote an internet article criticising local 
officials.

The officials had forced the owner of a Moscow kebab shop to change its name 
from Anti-Soviet to Soviet. Podrabinek accused the current Russian authorities 
of trying to whitewash the image of the Soviet Union – prompting Nashi to 
demonstrate outside his flat and call for him to be kicked out ofRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

In an article published on 2 October, the Independent's Moscow correspondent, 
Shaun Walker, reported how Podrabinek claimed he had been forced to flee after 
he and his family received threats. The Frankfurter Rundschau compared Nashi's 
alleged behaviour to "banditism", describing it as reminiscent of the Stalin 
era.

Today, Nashi's lawyer, Sergei Zhorin, said the youth group wanted the papers 
to withdraw claims that activists had directly threatened Podrabinek. "The 
papers printed wrong information. They damaged Nashi's reputation and image," 
he said. Nashi was a harmless "young anti-fascist organisation," he added.

Nashi has asked for 500,000 roubles compensation (£10,500) but was prepared to 
come to a "peaceful settlement" if the newspapers backed down, Zhorin said. 
Walker said he hadn't received formal notification from Nashi that it was 
suing. "We are waiting to hear from them," he told the Guardian.

This isn't the first time Nashi has targeted its perceived foreign enemies. It 
has previously stageda noisy campaign against Tony Brenton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/oct/16/russia-foreignpolicy>, Britain's 
former ambassador to Moscow, picketing the British embassy and comparing him to 
Hitler after he shared a platform with Eduard Limonov, a radical Kremlin critic.

It has also sent an inflatable tank to Estonia's embassy.

The nationalist organisation enjoys the blessing of Putin and Dmitry Medvedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dmitry-medvedev>, Russia's leaders, both of 
whom have turned up in short sleeves at Nashi's annual summer camp on the 
shores of Lake Seliger.

The Kremlin's chief ideologue, Vladislav Surkov, founded the organisation in 
2005 apparently to forestall a pro-western uprising in Russia following
Ukraine's Orange Revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/dec/04/ukraine.nickpatonwalsh>. 
According to today'sMoscow Times 
<http://www.themoscowtimes.com/news/article/nashi-sues-4-foreign-newspapers-for-libel/388119.html>
, Surkov reportedly met with Nashi leaders recently and instructed them to 
harass Podrabinek.

The opposition activist, who was arrested in the 1970s and spent several years 
in Soviet labour camps, recently emerged from hiding to address a rally 
commemorating the murder of the Russian journalistAnna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>. In his article, he 
wrote that the Soviet past was "bloody, false and shameful" – a view that 
contradicts the Kremlin's recent attempts to rehabilitate Stalin.
 