
The proportion of children vaccinated against measles, mumps and rubella at 24 
months has fallen in England for the first time in seven years.

By their second birthday, 92.3% of children received a first dose of the MMR 
vaccine, down from 92.7% the year before, data from theHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Social Care Information Centre 
(HSCIC) for 2014-15 shows.

The percentage of children vaccinated remains short of the World Health 
Organisation target of 95% needed for herd immunity – the level at which a 
measure of protection is provided for individuals who are not immune.

MMR <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> coverage was highest in the 
north-east of England (95.2%) and lowest in London (87.3%).

In a slight increase on the previous year, 88.6% of children had received 
their second and final dose of MMR by their fifth birthday, while by the same 
age 94.4% of children had received their first dose.

No link between MMR and autism, major study concludes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/21/no-link-between-mmr-and-autism-major-study-concludes>
Uptake of the MMR vaccine fell heavily in the late 1990s following the 
publication of research by Andrew Wakefield suggesting a possible link between 
the vaccine and autism. Experts havewidely discredited his study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/21/no-link-between-mmr-and-autism-major-study-concludes>
 and he wasstruck off the medical register 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/mmr-doctor-andrew-wakefield-struck-off>
 in 2010.

The HSCIC report said several factors could have led to a rise in MMR uptake 
in recent years, including campaigns to target unvaccinated teenagers and a 
recommendation that MMR is offered on the same day as other vaccines. But 
experts suggested the new drop could be due to problems with the study’s 
methodology, potentially linked to increased pressure onNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> staff.

Overall, the figures for most routine childhood vaccinations at the ages of 
one and two fell slightly in 2014-15 for a second consecutive year, but there 
were small increases in the numbers vaccinated by the age of five.

The flu vaccine was also offered to all children aged two, three and four 
during the winter of 2014-15. Coverage for all two-year-olds in England was 
38.5%. It was 41.3% among three-year-olds and 32.9% among four-year-olds. Among 
adults aged 65 and over, flu vaccine uptake was 72.7% in 2014-15, down on 73.2% 
the year before, and below the WHO target of 75%.

'It's never the science itself': why the right questions climate and vaccines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/05/measles-vaccines-climate-god-conservatives-anti-science>
David Elliman, an immunisation expert for the Royal College of Paediatrics and 
Child Health, said: “It is disappointing that uptake of NHS immunisations has 
not continued to rise, however the falls are very small. This could be read as 
children not receiving the vaccination or, alternatively, it could be a lack of 
data collection linked to considerablepressures on staff working in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jun/12/nhs-staff-most-stressed-public-sector-workers-survey-finds>
.

“Immunisation is vitally important if we are to protect child health both here 
in the UK and internationally in the long term. I would therefore urge all 
parents to contact their GP if they are unsure whether their child is up to 
date with their vaccinations.”

Mary Ramsay, the head of immunisation at Public Health England, said: “England 
has a world-class national immunisation programme which is constantly reviewed 
and updated to reflect the changing nature of infectious diseases, and the 
annual data shows continued high uptake of all routine vaccinations in children 
aged up to five years.”

She added: “We urge all parents to check that their children are up to date 
with their vaccinations and to contact their GP as soon as possible if they are 
unsure so that no child misses out.”
 