
Insurer Prudential rose nearly 6% on talk that Chinatrust of Taiwan might be 
interested in taking a stake or even bidding. The suggestion came from reports 
in Taiwan that wealth management group Chinatrust wanted to increase its 
presence in the insurance sector, and had decided it would be cheaper to buy an 
existing company rather than set up a business from scratch.

However traders pointed out that Prudential was only one possible target, with 
Germany's Allianz and Aegon of the Netherlands also mentioned. Nor is 
Chinatrust believed to have appointed advisors yet for any deal. Even so,
Prudential <https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential> ended 20.25p 
higher at 374.25p.

Elsewhere banks and property companies were in focus. Barclays ended 11.4p 
better at 116.2p after reporting better than expected profits, whileRoyal Bank 
of Scotlandrose 0.8p to 24.8p. But Lloyds Banking Group bucked the trend, 
losing 4.5p to 100.5p.

Real estate group Hammerson climbed 35.75p to 432.75p after unveiling a £584m 
rights issue to bolster its balance sheet, whileBritish Land added 46.5p to 
501p as it sold a half share of Sheffield's Meadowhall shopping centre for 
£587.7m toLondon and Stamford Property, up 1.25p to 116.5p, and its Gulf-based 
investment partner Cavendish. Analysts still believeBritish Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishlandcompany> might ask 
shareholders for another £650m or so alongside results due later this week.

Investors were also on the lookout for the next candidates for cash calls, and 
alighted on electrical retailerDSG, down 1p to 25.5p on talk of a possible 
multi-million equity issue. Analyst Nick Bubb of Pali International issued a 
sell note on the business, saying:

"A rights issue [would] crush the hopes of those who thought it could stay out 
of financial trouble by just selling off the freehold of its Swedish warehouse 
for £40m-£50m. The fact is, that with trading under great pressure, debt 
covenants are going to get quite stretched this autumn, and it could well cost 
DSG up to £300m to get rid of the loss-making European disasters (Spain, Italy 
and Eastern Europe). At some point a phoenix could arise from the ashes, if DSG 
can find the funds to complete the Currys store revamp programme, but some 
painful retrenchment and restructuring has to be undergone first and at this 
level we continue to believe that the shares are seriously overvalued."

Overall the FTSE 100 index closed 15.74 points higher at 4307.61, despite an 
opening dip on Wall Street on news that Barack Obama's bailout package for US 
banks had been delayed by a day until tomorrow.

Miners were mixed, with BHP Billiton up 43p to £13.78 after Goldman Sachs 
upgraded from neutral to buy, butRio Tinto fell 37p to £19.20 on the sudden 
departure of director Jim Leng, who had been lined up as the company's next 
chairman.

Among the mid-caps insurer Chaucer climbed 4.75p to 45p after it revealed 
other bid approaches in addition to an existing offer from rival Novae, up 8p 
to 320p.Amlin, up 1p to 384.75p, was believed to be one of the other possible 
bidders.

But chipmaker Arm slipped 4.5p to 95.25p as Goldman Sachs removed the company 
from its conviction buy list, although the bank maintained its buy 
recommendation.

Lower down the market, retailer JJB Sports jumped 4.5p to 12.75p on hopes of 
an imminent sale of its fitness clubs.

Telecom Plus, which provides gas, electricity, fixed line and broadband 
services, slipped 1p to 325p as it sold 1.5m shares held in treasury at 315p 
each to meet institutional demand.
 