
Maurice Levy has admitted that Publicis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/publicis> Groupe would "certainly" be 
interested in buying parts of Aegis Media, but said he would not be drawn into 
a bidding war for the "highly priced" UK media buying company.

It is the first time the French marketing services group has admitted it would 
be a player for snapping up parts ofAegis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> Group, if the planned sale of 
research arm Synovate prompts a sell-off of its other assets as many analysts 
expect.

"There are pieces which are interesting and if the move to breaking Aegis 
Media into pieces [happens] we would certainly be interested in some pieces," 
said Levy, chairman and chief executive of Publicis, speaking to 
MediaGuardian.co.uk at theCannes Lions International Festival of Creativity 
<http://www.canneslions.com/> on Friday.

"We are obviously looking at what is going on. We are just cautiously watching 
what happens. There is no question there are some very interesting pieces," he 
added.

He reiterated that Publicis had no interest in buying Synovate. Aegis is 
currently in talks to sell the research arm to French research company Ipsos.

Levy hinted at what parts of Aegis Media he would be interested in when he 
underlined the key areas of focus for growth for Publicis.

"What we currently focus on is emerging markets and digital, and we don't want 
to deviate," he said. "So obviously we will look at what will happen and see if 
our interests are in balance."

Aegis Media owns international media buying networks including Vizeum and 
Carat, digital agency group Isobar and an 18% share in Chinese media group 
Charm.

However, Levy also said his view was that Aegis as a whole is over-priced. 
"Aegis is currently highly, highly priced," he added. "If there is tomorrow a 
bidding war I don't know who would be interested and we are certainly not part 
of it."

To avoid any doubt he said there were currently "no discussions, no 
negotiations and that nothing is underway".

On Thursday Sir Martin Sorrell, the WPP chief executive, indicated he might be 
interested in "bits" of Aegis Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/23/martin-sorrell-aegis-media>.

Sorrell said he thought Vincent Bolloré, the largest shareholder in Aegis 
Group with a 26.5% stake, was the most likely to end up taking over the media 
assets and merging them with his French marketing services group, Havas.

Aegis Group declined to comment.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 