
The BBC, Channel 4 and ITV are leading an initiative to secure the future of 
free-to-air viewing on internet-enabled TV sets, under a new brand called 
Freeview Connect, a move in part sparked bythe hijacking of YouView by pay-TV 
partners BT and TalkTalk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/feb/04/bbc-to-slash-youview-investment>.

The broadcasters have banded together to establish a new service to make their 
catch-up TV services –BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> iPlayer, ITV 
Player and 4oD – available as standard on smart TVs.

It was originally envisaged that YouView would be used as the future brand and 
technology for public service broadcasting, eventually replacing less advanced
Freeview <https://www.theguardian.com/media/freeview> which is in more than 13 
million homes.

However in a telling move, the broadcasters have plumped to recommit to 
Freeview.

It is understood that a number of issues arose while pushing YouView to TV 
manufacturers, including that the technology is not accepted as a European-wide 
standard, and a requirement for viewers to only use a YouView-led user 
experience on TV sets.

This has been exacerbated by the perceived ideological hijacking of YouView – 
a joint venture between the BBC, ITV, Channel 4,Channel 5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive>, TalkTalk, BT and Arqiva – by 
its telecoms partners to build their pay-TV services.

Last week it emerged that the BBC and the other public service broadcasters 
(PSBs) intend to dramatically reduce their investment and involvement in the 
joint venture when the new shareholders agreement comes into force in April.

Freeview Connect is being spearheaded by industry body Digital UK, which is 
funded by the BBC, ITV,Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> 
and Arqiva and which has a mission to ensure the universal availability of 
public service TV.

While Digital UK has always had a role to lead on platform strategy and 
explore new technologies, the spearheading of the Freeview Connect project is a 
significant sign and a continuation of its very public position as a champion 
and defender of Freeview.

One source said that the aim of Freeview Connect is for the PSBs to "get back 
to their free roots" but that the move is not specifically anti-Sky. The source 
believes that once Freeview Connect is up and running there is no reason why 
companies such as BSkyB might not be involved.

Last month the PSBs used Digital UK to publish a 77-page report warning the 
government andOfcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> about the dangers 
of potentially shifting digital terrestrial television from the spectrum it 
occupies to give more space for mobile operators.

The report warned of the vacuum that would occur if Freeview did not have the 
spectrum it needs to be developed, including that pay-TV operators would win 
over Freeview customers, which would be detrimental to the PSBs.

With as many as 3m households set to have a smart TV by the end of this year, 
and given that the user experience is controlled by the TV manufacturers, it 
has become increasingly important for broadcasters to secure their prominence. 
To date smart TV manufacturers such as Samsung,Panasonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/panasonic> and LG have struck individual 
deals to make their catch-up TV services available, meaning viewers can only 
access certain services on particularinternet-enabled sets.

Freeview Connect aims to create an industry-standard technology and service 
that will be acceptable to all TV manufacturers and ensure the prominence of 
PSB services and content on smart TVs.

Digital UK has become much more vocal since the appointment of Caroline 
Thomson, the former chief operating officer at the BBC, in January last year. 
Last week Thomson appeared in front of a committee of MPs taking testimony on 
the BBC's £100m DMI technology disaster, where she described how she "pleaded" 
to work her notice but was forced to leave immediately by then director general 
George Entwistle.
 