
Call off the hunt; send the huskies back to the kennel. We have finally seen 
it: the limit, the endpoint, the finger on the end of the tentacle, of Simon 
Cowell's grip on the entertainment industry. It may not be good for much, but
Pudsey the Dog: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pudsey-the-dog-the-movie> marks the point at 
which Cowell's hegemony over all things mass-media abruptly halts; past this 
beetling shoreline, it's darkness, chaos and dragons.

Why the movie industry has confounded Cowell is a good question. After all, 
he's stormed the music business, taken TV to the cleaners, and has the media 
eating out of his hand. Moreover Cowell's corporate entity, Syco Entertainment, 
is a joint venture with Sony, one of the biggest behemoths at the 
entertainment-biz table. Presumably working on the assumption that, if Cowell 
touches it, any old shit will turn to gold, the industry has a right to be 
baffled as to why a film about a talking dog has failed to set the multiplexes 
alight.

For the figures are in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/22/dawn-planet-apes-transformers-box-office-analysis-uk>
. Pudsey's £446,000 opening weekend in the UK isn't a total embarrassment, just 
a non-event. It scraped a screen average of just over £1,000; again, not a 
disaster, just ordinary. Cowell wouldn't be bothered by the string of abusive 
reviews; he'd be used to that. But at least with his music acts he could point 
to their unit-shifting popularity; Pudsey has turned out to be one big dogbowl 
of tepid water. With minimal appeal outside the UK, Pudsey would have tokill to 
make back even itsmodest £2.4m budget 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pudsey:_The_Movie>. That, we can safely say, is 
not going to happen. Yes, it may turn out to do well on DVD at Christmas; yes, 
it may have been a smart move cancelling the week-of-release press screening to 
avoid even more abusive reviews; but these aren't the thoughts, strategies or 
indeed actions of a putative movie mogul.

It may or may not be a coincidence that the same day these results emerged, 
Cowell's real cash-cow, boy band One Direction,announced their second and third 
bites at the concert-movie format 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/22/one-direction-1d-new-film-where-we-are>
 – thereby reminding everyone of Cowell's only approximation of cinematic 
success, the first One Direction concert-movie, This Is Us. Certainly, Syco's 
follow-up One Chance – and its first foray into narrative – has slowly and 
inexorably lamed out since excitable critics suggested Cowell might have a
"word-of-mouth hit" on his hands 
<http://variety.com/2013/film/reviews/toronto-film-review-one-chance-1200612255/>
 at the Toronto film festival. Having attracted in James Cordern, an actor who 
is popular in the UK from his TV work and hot name in theatre circles in the 
US, as well as the interest of fellow golden-touch merchants the Weinstein 
brothers as executive producers, Cowell must have been quietly confident he 
could pull off a Billy Elliot-style transatlantic hit. One Chance did OK when 
it opened in the UK, with a £718,000 opening weekend (and a full total of 
£2.48m). Now it may not even get a proper theatrical release in the US, as the 
Weinsteins attempt toretrench by trying a VOD premiere 
<http://variety.com/2014/digital/news/weinstein-one-chance-yahoo-1201265626/>. 
Again, it may be a smart move to head off a theatrical-release flop, but is 
hardly the result Cowell will have been looking for.

The Cowell movie is now a contemporary phenomenon and the stark truth is: by 
the third one, we know whether it's going to work. Unless Cowell can pull 
something sensational out of the bag, we have to conclude it's not going to. 
Has his magic touch simply deserted him, or are Cowell's talents simply not 
suited to this particular entertainment arena? It gives me no schadenfreude to 
say, it looks like the latter. Cowell has never been an standard-bearer for 
artistic genius – his recording successes revolve mostly around bubblegum 
boybands and cover-version soul divas, and his TV shows are rigidly formatted 
New Faces derivatives – but then again, no one ever went broke in the movie 
business by underestimating the audience. Surely he couldn't fail to come up 
with some high-concept naffness that would clean up? The problem for Cowell is 
that movies don't work that way. Constructing a film narrative, even a dumb 
one, is painstaking, expensive work, often involving high-priced special 
effects, or stroking the backs of known faces who can "open". You get the sense 
that Cowell's mind, so brilliant at promotion and hype, just doesn't work that 
way.

The content of Cowell-related films, so far, has been essentially both 
parochial and recycled. All of them have been classic cross-media, 
cross-promotion events in the trademark Cowell mould. One Direction emerged 
from the 2010 series of X Factor; Potts won the first series ofBritain's Got 
Talent <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/britains-got-talent> in 2007; 
Pudsey came out of BGT in 2012, and the movie rights licensed to British indie 
outfit Vertigo. But while the shows have worked as ads for the music, they 
don't work in the same way for the movies. If you're going to sell a story 
about scrappy Brits overcoming adversity to Americans, you're up against it if 
it's about a Carphone Warehouse salesman who wants to be an opera singer. Plus, 
as a thousand TV movies show, translating a putatively inspiring real-life 
story into narrative film is tricky, treacly terrain, filled with saccharine 
and false sentiment. It wouldn't be impossible for Potts, or Susan Boyle, or 
Wagner, or Steve Brookstein, to have an entertaining movie made about them, but 
Cowell would have to take serious risks to turn them into credible movies. 
Otherwise you've just got Take a Break on celluloid.

And, crucially, the problem for Cowell is that he appear as the central 
character. For, in the end, his special talent is himself. Remember, he didn't 
create Pop Idol or American Idol: he was hired as a judge on them, and against 
the odds proved a magnetic TV presence. (I says this as someone who finds all 
the music he promotes entirely unlistenable, but who became worryingly addicted 
to the first few seasons ofAmerican Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>.) Of course, with his 
ambition, he tweaked the format and set up his own properties, X Factor and Got 
Talent; they became the conveyor belts to his movie ambitions. But without him 
in the flesh, what are the movies worth? Sadly, not much.

• Mark Kermode's review of Pudsey the Dog: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/20/pudsey-the-dog-the-movie-comedy>
• I played a sausage in Pudsey the Dog: The Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/22/how-i-played-a-dream-sequence-sausage-in-pudsey-the-dog-the-movie>

This article was amended on 24 July 2014 to reflect the fact that Pudsey the 
Dog: The Movie was a production by Vertigo Films.
 