
In October 1997, Nicolas Winding Refn sat watching old sci-fi movies in an 
attic room in a small hotel off Oxford Street. A few days past his 27th 
birthday, the fledgling Danish director had been brought to Britain to promote 
his first film, a low-budget crime drama calledPusher 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/66726/pusher>. "It was a glorious 
moment," he recalls. "The film had done more than I ever thought it could – it 
had left Copenhagen. For me that was like making Star Wars."

Fifteen years on, he sits in another, larger Soho hotel – a sleek and genial 
figure whose last film, the neon-lit thrillerDrive 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/142036/drive>, carried him into 
Hollywood's upper levels. A London-set remake of his debut is about to be 
released, on which his credit is executive producer. He is here to reminisce. 
To walk between the two hotels would take minutes, yet the journey from one to 
the other has been outlandish – an odyssey through the film industries of 
Britain, the US and Scandinavia with a detour to India and a baroque cast of 
real-life characters. The new Pusher is, in fact, a second remake, joining a 
pair of sequels Refn made himself in what must surely be modern cinema's most 
unlikely franchise.

The original plot was classically simple, a seven-day countdown as a 
Copenhagen heroin dealer tries to settle a debt to a louche but vicious Serbian 
gangster. Refn's gift for casting was clear – the burly Kim Bodnia gave 
anti-hero Frank a glowering magnetism, the much-admired Mads Mikkelsen took a 
first screen role as his sidekick. The result hummed with promise – the son of 
Danish film-makers who spent his youth in 80s New York, Refn instinctively 
fused the swagger of American crime movies with handheld European vérité.

In Denmark, the film was a huge and unexpected hit. The rest of the world 
failed to notice. It took British distributor Metrodome to brave a first 
international release. In the last moments beforeTrainspotting 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/67567/trainspotting> became old news, 
company founder Rupert Preston cannily sold Refn as "the Danish Danny Boyle" 
and the film won an audience big enough to stir interest elsewhere. "Britain is 
where it all started," Refn says. "This place got me out of my cage."

For its director, Pusher had served its purpose: he came to see the movie as a 
film student might regard their final coursework, with fond memories of a 
riotous shoot, a supporting cast of club kids and local heavies, and a snotty 
commitment to authenticity that meant "all the cocaine on set being real". 
Assuming all that was now behind him, Refn got on with the rest of his career. 
Eventually, inevitably, he headed to the US. In 2003 came a wilfully opaque 
thriller calledFear X <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/96278/fear.x>, 
starring John Turturro. It baffled almost all who saw it. All, essentially, was 
no one. Its director was left financially ruined. "I was down and out," Refn 
says. "I owed the bank a million dollars. I was depressed, humiliated, I had 
just had my first child. I felt like a rock'n'roll suicide."

If the scale of his debt outdid Frank in Pusher, there was a mordant irony to 
the solution – the "despicable sell-out" of making not one but two belated 
sequels. He had few other offers. InPusher II  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/107127/with.blood.on.my.hands>– Refn now 
calls it "the girly Pusher" – Mikkelsen's goonish sadsack attempted fatherhood.
Pusher III <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/113001/pusher-3> focused on 
Milo, the ageing gangster again played by Zlatko Buric, a crazy-haired 6ft 5in 
Croatian steeped in avant-garde theatre who had stolen much of the first movie. 
Yet there would be a twist. Born as desperate cash-ins, the sequels won Refn 
new levels of critical acclaim. They also made just enough money to pay off the 
bank. An unhappy spellmaking Miss Marple TV movies 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/sep/08/nicolas-winding-refn-interview> 
still lay ahead. But old friendships endured. Preston had by now left Metrodome 
for Vertigo Films, a hard-nosed outfit whose movies were keenly attuned to the 
market. Having produced Refn's Pusher sequels, he now suggested a remake.

Given the original's strong characters and ticking-clock conceit, he wasn't 
the first. A script appeared from an American producer. Fox discussed making a 
network TV show. Given the nature of Refn's career, it was therefore 
predictable that the first remake of Pusher would be developed in Leicester and 
shot in Hindi.

A cheerful Anglo-Indian actor from the east Midlands, Assad Raja 
<https://twitter.com/assadfilm> had nursed a passion for the film since 1997. 
Finally, after years telling friends he wanted to make a film "a bit like 
Pusher" to escape the weary chase for roles on The Bill, he approached Refn for 
the rights to direct a fully fledged remake – a showcase for his talents aimed 
at the Indian film business. Refn, says Raja, was "amused" by the thought of 
his debut going Bollywood. Casting himself in the lead and shooting in London, 
his production was almost as chaotic as the original: unable to find an Asian 
actor to play a henchman, Raja narrowly avoided having to "brown up" a white 
bodybuilder. In the end,his film came out in 2010 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1082075/> sharing the same scruffy, adrenal energy 
as its inspiration while adding a sub-plot about the cricket world cup.

India, to Raja's disappointment, was unmoved. At home, too, while the film 
found a fanbase on DVD, not everyone saw the commercial potential.

In the meantime, Refn had agreed to Preston's idea of their own remake, set in 
London. It would be a mistake to see him as an innocent among moneymen. By his 
own account, his career began at 21, when his uncle – then owner of Denmark's 
biggest arthouse distributor – recruited him to scout for films at Cannes. 
"That was my education," he says. "I never approached film-making as an art. I 
saw it as what sells."

For most of the remake's production, he was in Bangkok making his next film, 
cop thrillerOnly God Forgives 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/sep/01/best-film-directors-world-2012>. 
But his involvement went much further than the executive producer's typical 
role of turning up for the premiere. The choice of writer – former TV producer 
Matthew Read – was his. He and Preston together picked director Luis Prieto,a 
Spanish maker of Italian romantic comedies <http://vimeo.com/11860629>. The 
budget was set at $1m (£623,000) – a sum Preston says ensured fidelity to the 
tone of the original, but which must also have relaxed the accountants.
 Kim Bodnia as Frank in Nicolas Winding Refn's original Pusher. Photograph: 
The Ronald Grant Archive 
Fighting jetlag in an east London bar, Prieto describes Refn's role in the new 
Pusher as "like God – usually invisible, but always there". Casting decisions, 
he says, were collaborative – hiring ex-modelAgyness Deyn 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/2012/feb/26/agyness-deyn-supermodel-stage> 
as Frank's stripper girlfriend Flo was an idea put to him by the producers, but 
one he gladly accepted. Once he did, he insisted neither she nor co-star 
Richard Coyle should watch the original film, ensuring the only principal actor 
who had seen it had also starred in it – Buric, returning as Milo after coaxing 
from Refn.

Prieto says he made his movie with two goals – to create something more 
stylised than the original and to foreground the character of Flo. On those 
terms, he succeeds. Deyn is a vivid presence, while $1m buys you a lot of 
slickness in 2012. And if the remake does sometimes make you pine for the 
Pusher you saw back in 1997, the truth – expressed politely but without apology 
by all concerned – is that it's not really for you: "Luis's version is for a 
new audience," Preston says. "So many people won't have seen the original. If 
you're 20 now, you were five when it came out."

Similarly, if there were fears that setting Pusher in London might taint the 
film with geezerism, in fact the remake feels strikingly little like London. 
Shot in Stoke Newington, the standard-issue urban backdrops could often be 
anywhere. For Preston, hiring a director with no connection to the capital was 
deliberate – the result of a desire not to make "one of those British crime 
movies we see too often". But in a global film market there may be other 
benefits – giving an international audience the hint of local flavour without 
enough of it to scare them off.

This way, it seems, lies the future. Because rather than their remake ending 
the Pusher story, Refn and Preston see it as the start of a new chapter – or 
chapters. A working model is ready to go – Refn matching up a character, a city 
and a skeletal story, before the two men then find writers and directors to 
make the movie. So next will be a sequel to the remake – not, to be clear, a 
remake of the sequel – following Deyn as Flo to a new life in Las Vegas. Then 
it will once more be the turn of the tireless Buric, though Refn is unsure 
where to put him: "Zlatko could go anywhere. Maybe Tokyo."

Asked how many Pushers he might ultimately father, he pauses. "At one point I 
wanted to do 10," he says. "I'll keep going until the ideas run out." He sips 
his cappuccino. "So far they never have."
 