
So, at least four more Putin years … and how many more dead journalists? Let's 
look back on the president-and-then-PM's first 12 years of power (using 
International Press Institute figures).

In 2011, three journalists dead (including newspaper editor Khadzhimurad 
Kamalov, shot 14 times as he left his office). In 2010, two killed; in 2009, 
five more (including a young reporter from Novaya Gazeta, caught in a hail of 
bullets). Add four for 2008, one in 2007 and then 2006 asAnna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>, the most famous victim 
of them all, is murdered. But she wouldn't forget Yevgeny Gerasimenko – found 
in his Saratov flat with a plastic bag pulled over his head and computer 
missing – and nor should we.

Two Russian journalists died in 2005, and three in both 2004 and 2003; but 
2002 was a wicked year, with eight lost (including Valery Ivanov, battling 
editor, shot in the head) and 2001 added another victim. Putin's reign of power 
in 2000 began with six dead reporters and editors: a grim portent, looking 
back, of bad things to come.

There are other countries in the world where journalists repeatedly perish in 
the course of duty, to be sure: Pakistan, Afghanistan, Colombia, Mexico. And 
Russia has terrorists and rebellions of its own to deal with as well. But the 
drip, drip, drip of journalists' blood, year in and year out, crimes scantily 
investigated and rarely brought to any conclusion, is still deeply dismaying.

Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> is the 
supposed strong man at the centre of a nation that seeks to play a decisive 
role in world affairs. He is elected time and again. Yet a free press seems to 
mean pitifully little to him. You investigate? You report? You die, unavenged.
 