
The innovation minister, Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne>, has told 
crossbench senators the government will only provide extra assistance for the 
car industry if they back down on their opposition to cuts to family tax 
benefits paid to low income families.


Pyne made the link in a meeting last week with crossbench senators Ricky Muir, 
John Madigan andNick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> and representatives 
from the automotive industry.

The meeting was discussing a plan to provide an additional $200m over four 
years under the Automotive Transformation Scheme (ATS) and broaden its criteria 
to assist new companies that might employ some of the tens of thousands of car 
workers who will be made redundant when the major carmakers leave Australia in 
2017.

Coalition reverses planned $500m cut to automotive industry assistance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/10/coalition-reverses-500m-cut-to-taxpayer-assistance-to-auto-industry>
But some attendees were surprised when Pyne told the senators that unless 
Labor and the crossbench passed the family tax benefit cuts, there would be no 
expanded ATS.

The independent senator Nick Xenophon, who like Pyne, comes from South 
Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/south-australia> which 
will be hard hit by the closure of General Motors Holden, suggested he could 
see some rationale for the linkage.

“At this stage these are very preliminary negotiations, but in my view if you 
can stem the tsunami of job losses coming from the closure of the automotive 
industry, that would have a big impact on the number of families on welfare, 
and that’s a good thing,” Xenophon said.

But the Motoring Enthusiast senator Ricky Muir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ricky-muir> is understood to have 
told the treasurer, Scott Morrison, and Pyne that he believes the two issues 
should be treated entirely separately.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fpyne-links-auto-industry-aid-to-welfare-cuts-in-negotiations-with-crossbench%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dbf2810c229a3e974c26b810eacafe7cc8de170%2F0_109_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pyne%20links%20auto%20industry%20aid%20to%20welfare%20cuts%20in%20negotiations%20with%20crossbench&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fpyne-links-auto-industry-aid-to-welfare-cuts-in-negotiations-with-crossbench%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pyne%20links%20auto%20industry%20aid%20to%20welfare%20cuts%20in%20negotiations%20with%20crossbench&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fpyne-links-auto-industry-aid-to-welfare-cuts-in-negotiations-with-crossbench%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dbf2810c229a3e974c26b810eacafe7cc8de170%2F0_109_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Crossbench senators from left; David Leyonhjelm, Dio Wang, Ricky Muir, John 
Madigan, Bob Day and Glenn Lazarus at the senate doors of Parliament House on 
Wednesday. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
And Victorian senator John Madigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-madigan> said “the welfare of 
Australian families and Australian manufacturing are both important to me, and 
I will not undermine either to advance the other.”

The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> proposed 
deep cuts to family tax benefits in its first budget in 2014 – but about $6bn 
of those savings remain stalled in the Senate, opposed by Labor, the Greens and 
a majority of the crossbench.

Morrison, who was responsible for the cuts in his former portfolio of social 
security, has been in negotiations with the crossbench over a compromise plan, 
softening some of the cuts and forgoing almost half of the savings.

A Senate committee has been looking at what the government could do to help 
auto workers facing redundancy when the car industry closes in Australia.

The government originally planned to cut $900m from the ATS as the car 
industry prepared to close and the Coalition declared the “age of industry 
entitlement’ to be over. But this year it partially reversed that decision, 
budgeting to spend $105m, and diverting the rest back into Treasury coffers.

Under the plan now on the table, another $200m would be available to around 20 
companies – most of them not currently eligible for the payments. They could 
include businesses making aftermarket parts and accessories or low emission 
components or engines for export. The funding would help component makers 
diversify and continue in business even after the big carmakers close.

Last week’s meeting was attended by the Motor Trades Association, the Federal 
Chamber of Automotive Industries, the Australian Automotive Aftermarket 
Association and Bosch Australia.

The government has also hypothecated the savings from the cuts to family tax 
benefits as a way to “pay” for a $3.5bn childcare shake-up that was the 
centrepiece of this year’s budget.

Income splitting: a policy to keep mothers at home and not in work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2015/may/21/income-splitting-a-policy-to-keep-mums-at-home-and-not-in-work>
In recent talks with the crossbench, Morrison and his advisers have offered to 
ditch the plan to freeze the indexation of family tax benefit part A payments 
(received by families earning up to $100,000), which is booked in the budget to 
save $2.6bn over four years.

Instead of stopping family tax benefit part B (paid to sole parent and single 
income families) when the youngest child turns six (the current cut off is 18) 
they have floated a compromise cut off when the youngest child turns 12 – a 
move that would significantly erode the estimated $1.8bn in savings from that 
change.

Annual end-of-year “supplements” paid to family tax benefit recipients would 
over time be rolled into the fortnightly amounts that families receive, with 
proposed cuts part of the phase in.

And the negotiations have also included the promise to pay an additional 
$1,000 a year to stay-at-home parents with a child under one, which was also 
promised as part of new prime minister Malcolm Turnbull’s coalition agreement 
with the National party.

Pyne declined to comment on last week’s meeting.
 