
Christopher Pyne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne> 
has rejected a further suggestion that the Coalition’s Direct Action climate 
policy could operate as a de facto emissions trading scheme, telling the ABC’s 
Q&A program the scheme was not intended to work that way.

Pyne, the industry minister, and his regular sparring partner, opposition 
frontbencherAnthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese>, were the only 
two panellists on Monday’s election special, which fell in week three of the 
eight-week campaign.

The environment minister, Greg Hunt, dismissed questions at the National Press 
Club last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/greg-hunt-commits-to-direct-inaction-to-preserve-carbon-tax-scare-campaign>
 about whether the “safeguard mechanism” of the scheme could be triggered to 
require companies who exceed their baseline emissions to buy pollution permits, 
effectively turning it into a cap and trade scheme.

Guardian Australia previously reported that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/coalition-climate-plan-assumes-emissions-trading-says-government-modeller>
 an associate at Energetics, the firm that conducted modelling of potential 
abatement,, said the intended reductions could be achieved by putting a lot 
more money into the emissions reduction fund or by tightening the safeguard 
mechanism.

The idea was pushed further by Alan Kohler in The Australian on Monday 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/opinion/alan-kohler/australias-secret-ets-starts-in-five-weeks/news-story/7f1de2a63db3e8d4a12066f31edcf640#itm=taus%7Cnews%7Caus_authors_index%7C1%7Cauthors_storyBlock_headline%7CAlan_Kohler%7Cindex%7Cauthor&itmt=1464009151538>
, who said the Coalition’s policy was a “secret ETS [emissions trading scheme].”

When the question was raised on Q&A, Pyne said he could not address the issue 
because he had not been told to read Kohler’s column before the show.

Labor voted with the Greens and the Coaliton to introduce the policy last 
year, but is campaigning on the basis of introducing a formal emissions trading 
scheme.

Asked by host Tony Jones if his vote in parliament meant he would support the 
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> introducing a 
de facto cap-and-trade scheme, Albanese also deflected by saying he had not 
read the Kohler column.
Peter Hannam (@p_hannam) 
#QandA <https://twitter.com/hashtag/QandA?src=hash>: Questioner is right. 
'Safeguard mechanism' has potential to be an emissions trading scheme - but 
only if govt pulls the lever.
 <https://twitter.com/p_hannam/status/734718888806514688> May 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/p_hannam/status/734718888806514688> 
It was one of a number of points of agreement between the two frontbenchers, 
whose comfortable double-act is honed from their regular Friday morning 
appearances on Channel Nine’s Today show.

They were in agreement about defence spending, the offshore processing of 
refugees (though Albanese said Labor’s proposed doubling of the refugee quota 
would give people the “hope” they needed to remain in formal refugee camps), 
the need for more funding of vocational education and TAFE programs, support 
for the Australian steel industry, superannuation tax increases (although not 
whether they should be retrospective), and hatred of the Greens.

Points of contention included the National Broadband Network (NBN), which Pyne 
said would ensure people got “the speeds they want and need,” a metric he later 
described as the ability to watch five movies simultaneously (“That’s a lot of 
movies! That’s a lot of televisions!”). Albanese, who was briefly 
communications minister during the second Rudd government, said the NBN “isn’t 
about movies, it’s about the economy” and that the copper-to-the-home model 
being rolled out by Malcolm Turnbull, both as communications minister and later 
as prime minister, was “19th century technology.”

Another battle arose over the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, and his 
comment last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/peter-dutton-says-illiterate-refugees-would-be-taking-australian-jobs>
 that most refugees were illiterate and innumerate, which Albanese 
characterised as dog-whistling and Pyne as misunderstood.
thomas violence (@thomas_violence) 
i'm not watching q&A but i bet pyne and albo debating their identical asylum 
seeker policy must be thrilling
 <https://twitter.com/thomas_violence/status/734722968073342976> May 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/thomas_violence/status/734722968073342976> 
Pyne, who described the slimmed-down format as a “fireside chat” and insisted 
Jones refer to both he and Albanese by their first names, concluded by urging 
voters to support either the Liberal party or the ALP, saying “Only the Liberal 
party and theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> can deliver. We’re the 
only people that can form government.”

Albanese, unsurprisingly, agreed. He has been facing pressure from the Greens 
in his inner-west Sydney seat of Grayndler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/battle-for-grayndler-greens-take-on-anthony-albanese-on-his-own-turf>
, a battle News Corp-owned tabloid the Daily Telegraph considered so dire it 
ran the front-page headline: “Save our Albo”.

The Greens, he said, did not want to work with the major parties, but instead 
“they want to replace us.”

“I think have a look at where they’re concentrating their campaigns,” he said. 
“They launched their campaign in my electorate … I’m not the most right-wing 
person in the parliament, but that’s who they’re targeting.

“[They’re] spending very little time attacking the Coalition … their objective 
is to try to take over a few inner-city seats, but that won’t change things.”
Quietly Confident (@jonkudelka) 
Left wing party in targeting left leaning seats shock. #qanda 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/qanda?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/jonkudelka/status/734726281267286017> May 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jonkudelka/status/734726281267286017>  