
Michaelia Cash <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/michaelia-cash>, 
the minister for women, rejected being labelled as a feminist despite pressure 
from other commentators on the Q&A panel – and even an admission from rightwing 
radio host Alan Jones that he hoped he was a feminist.

“I don’t label myself,” Cash told the ABC’s Q&A program on Monday night, the 
eve of International Women’s Day, to the derision of fellow panellists Mamamia 
founder Mia Freedman and Labor’s Penny Wong.

The New York-based media personality Josh Zepps rounded out the panel of five, 
which touched – at least in passing – on domestic violence, the gender pay gap, 
parental leave and women’s superannuation. On several topics, the question 
being asked was whether actions speak louder than words.

The episode began with a question about Peta Credlin, Tony Abbott’s chief of 
staff, whose close relationship with the former prime minister is the subject 
of journalist Niki Savva’s new book, The Road to Ruin.

The book claims the closeness of the relationship between the two gave rise to 
rumours the two were having an affair – a claim both strongly deny.

Q&A's attempt at 'women's issues' reminds me of why I quit watching
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/10/qas-attempt-at-womens-issues-reminds-me-of-why-i-quit-watching>
In response to her question whether “a powerful woman will [ever] be judged 
solely on her performance and not subject to gossip and innuendo about who 
she’s sleeping with”, Jones said he agreed with audience member Nicole 
Williamson’s sentiments.

“I will say this: it does seem that some people are very uncomfortable with 
powerful women,” he said. “I’m always surprised that it’s women who are the 
more uncomfortable.”

He said Credlin was a “formidable woman” with a distinguished track record of 
political organisation: “Some people don’t like Peta Credlin, but I think she 
will survive all of this because those who know her know she is a woman of 
ability.”

Freedman said that if the impression given in Savva’s book that Abbott was 
incapable of governing without Credlin was correct, the blame lay with him, not 
her, though it was to both their detriment. Wong said speculation about their 
personal relationship distracted from “obvious dysfunction at the heart of the 
government”.

Cash invoked International Women’s Day to call for more women in leadership 
positions across Australia: “I wouldn’t like to think that for one moment 
because something is written or something is said about a woman that it 
detracts from the fantastic job that they can do.”

Kate Jenkins appointed Australia's sex discrimination commissioner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/kate-jenkins-appointed-australias-sex-discrimination-commissioner>
Over the course of the program, the panellists took on Cardinal George Pell’s 
evidence at the royal commission into institutional responses to child abuse, 
Chinese investment in dairy farms, the exploitation of foreign seafarers and a 
final question about whether “Donald Trump might be a secret Democrat working 
from the inside to destabilise the Republican party”.

Jones was also called upon to explain earlier comments that another stolen 
generation was necessary to “protect” children in Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander families from the drug abuse problems of their parents.

“I believe we’ve got an obligation to say these children deserve a better 
chance, whether they are Anglo Saxon children or Indigenous children,” he said. 
“When are we going to say we can’t visit the errors and omissions, the 
violence, the drug-related behaviour of parents – we can’t be visiting that 
upon our children, whether they are Indigenous children or not.”

Though Jones’ argument seemed to be met with scepticism or dismissed outright 
by the other panellists and the host, Tony Jones, Cash was criticised by Wong 
for both former prime minister John Howard’s refusal to apologise for the 
stolen generation and cuts to programs and services for Indigenous Australians.

Cash later came under scrutiny again when she was asked by audience member 
Maddie Mott about how she could both be minister for women and not identify as 
a feminist.

Alan Jones says Australia needs another stolen generation 'to protect' 
children'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/15/alan-jones-says-australia-needs-another-stolen-generation-to-protect-children>
“Why are you so scared of the word?” Freedman interjected.

“I don’t label myself,” Cash said.

“I was going to say, if it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it’s a 
duck,” said Freedman to applause. “You’re a feminist, Michaelia.”

Asked by Freedman if he was a feminist, Alan Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> said: “I hope so. I certainly 
believe in gender equality, I can tell you.”

Freedman and Wong both argued for Cash to reconsider her stance, with the 
former chalking it up to outdated perceptions of feminism and fear of 
alienating or offending men. “It is also an act of respect,” said Wong, of the 
women who fought for the rights she has today, which was met with applause from 
the audience.

She quoted the Australian feminist scholar Dale Spender 
<https://twitter.com/QandA/status/706800879211454464>: “If someone says, ‘I’m 
not a feminist’, I ask, ‘What is your problem?’”

“I agree with everything that Penny said,” Alan Jones said in response to Tony 
Jones pressing him on whether or not he was a feminist. “I find this a bit 
difficult, in a way.”

Asked by audience member Jane Bowen as to the state of feminism in Australia, 
Cash identified the gender pay gap as a problem in demand of a joint effort 
from government, employers and society.

She pointed to the Australian Council of Trade Unions’ new report that reveals 
<http://www.actu.org.au/actu-media/media-releases/2016/women-are-still-losing-out-on-pay-at-every-stage-of-life-new-report-reveals>
 that Australian women are financially disadvantaged at every key stage of 
their life.
ABC Q&A (@QandA) 
Unravelling the gender pay gap is not just for govts, @SenatorCash 
<https://twitter.com/SenatorCash> wants to change policies that affect this 
#QandA <https://twitter.com/hashtag/QandA?src=hash> https://t.co/i1UsNBcdKr 
<https://t.co/i1UsNBcdKr>
 <https://twitter.com/QandA/status/706801741048598529> March 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/QandA/status/706801741048598529> 
“It is a role for every single one of us working together, and certainly from 
my perspective, the government needs to look at what levers it can pull to 
ensure that we are increasing women’s workforce participation.”

Apparently to hark back to her earlier skirmish with Cash over “labels”, 
Freedman said the gender pay gap was “part of the reason that I call myself a 
feminist”.

 Wong agreed that it was one of the indications that feminism was still 
relevant today. “At least we now have a woman as a minister for women,” she 
said. “That’s an improvement.”
 