
Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> groups have 
criticised a UK trade minister for travelling to Qatar to seek contracts for 
British companies before the 2022 World Cup without apparently highlighting the 
abuses faced by migrant workers building venues for the event.

Greg Hands, junior minister at the Department for International Trade, was in 
Qatar on Wednesday for a conference in Doha calledSport is Great 
<https://www.events.ukti.gov.uk/sport-is-great-mission-to-qatar/event-day/sport-is-great-mission-to-qatar-day-2/>
, billed as an opportunity “for UK companies to meet with key decision-makers 
and buyers actively looking to procure services to support projects in the 
run-up to the 2022 Fifa World Cup”.

Amnesty International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>
 said it was “extremely disappointing” that Hands had not spoken out about 
human rights ahead of the visit, saying Qatar’s construction sector was “rife 
with abuse”.

Human Rights Watch said Hands seemed to be making an “obsequious sales pitch”, 
and that UK companies should beware of the risks to reputation of involvement 
in Qatar’s construction boom.

The awarding of the World Cup to Qatar has proved hugely controversial, 
particularly thetreatment of the thousands of foreign workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/migrant-workers-suffer-appalling-treatment-in-qatar-world-cup-stadiums-says-amnesty>
, mainly from south Asian nations, many of whom have been put up in squalid 
accommodation, had their pay withheld or delayed, and their passports 
confiscated.

Fifa faces legal action in the Swiss courts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/fifa-faces-legal-challenge-over-qatar-migrant-workers-world-cup-2022>
 over its alleged complicity in the mistreatment, amid calls for football’s 
world governing body to move the 2022 tournament away from the Gulf state.

Hands’ department said it would check whether the minister planned to raise 
any human rights concerns with his hosts. However, Hands did not mention them 
in anarticle published on Wednesday in the Peninsula 
<http://www.thepeninsulaqatar.com/opinion/09/11/2016/Qatar%E2%80%99s-sporting-ambition-creates-ripples-of-success>
, an English language newspaper in Qatar.


The article praised the absolute monarchy’s “ambitious sporting vision” in 
securing theWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>
, as well as last month’s cycling Road World Championships, and the World 
Athletics Championships in 2019.

“This is an exciting time for Qatar’s vision, and the UK has the opportunity 
to be a strategic partner to ensure all these events are as successful as 
possible for spectators, competitors and organisers alike,” Hands wrote, saying 
Britain had a “world-leading capability in delivering global sports events”.

Hands ended the article by saying he was “looking forward to touring some of 
the sites where nations will be pinning their hopes of World Cup victory in 
2022”, adding that he took great pride in the involvement of UK companies in 
the endeavour.

Amnesty International UK’s head of policy and government affairs, Allan 
Hogarth, said: “Greg Hands’ job involves banging the drum for trade, but it’s 
extremely disappointing he couldn’t find room in his article to make even a 
passing mention of the dangerous and exploitative conditions many of the 
migrant labourers building Qatar’s gleaming new sports venues find themselves 
in.

“The stadiums, roads and other infrastructure for World Cup 2022 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2022> are being constructed by 
often poorly paid people from places like India and Nepal – migrant workers who 
routinely have their passports confiscated and regularly work excessively long 
hours in intolerably hot and dangerous conditions.

 “Qatar’s construction sector is rife with abuse, as we and others have been 
highlighting for years. We’d like Mr Hands to raise this with his hosts in Doha 
and show he understands that the 2022 World Cup shouldn’t be based on violating 
the human rights of hundreds of thousands of exploited workers.”

Nicholas McGeehan, the Qatar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar>, UAE 
and Bahrain researcher for Human Rights Watch, said: “It’s understandable that 
the UK government wants to ensure British companies get as many construction 
and engineering contracts as possible, but Greg Hands should be mindful of the 
fact that Qatar’s construction market poses serious legal and reputational 
risks to UK firms on account of the Qatari government’s stubborn refusal to 
meaningfully reform its labour system or investigate an alarming pattern of 
unexplained migrant worker deaths.

“The minister’s article reads like an obsequious sales pitch, but in that 
sense it is fairly consistent with the UK government’s approach to the Gulf 
states.”
 