
A meeting for sacked Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> Nickel workers chaired 
by broadcaster Alan Jones has called for the company’s liquidation and 
government support for a community buyback of Clive Palmer’s mothballed 
refinery.

Clive Palmer attacks ABC's Four Corners investigation into business affairs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/10/clive-palmer-attacks-abcs-four-corners-investigation-into-business-affairs>
The meeting in Townsville on Monday pre-empted a report by QN administrators 
that Guardian Australia understands will recommend creditors vote for 
liquidation.

Organisers of the Townsville meeting, who secured Jones’ involvement through 
federal MP Bob Katter, said they were sending food parcels to some workers who 
could no longer afford everyday expenses while waiting for payouts.

Almost 800 QN employees, who are owed about $74m in entitlements and make up 
the bulk of creditors, cannot access the commonwealth fair entitlements 
guarantee until it is in liquidation.

The report by administrators FTI Consulting to be released on Tuesday will 
also reveal findings by forensic investigators who looked at whether Palmer 
acted as a “shadow director” by controllingQueensland Nickel investment 
decisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/16/clive-palmer-to-be-referred-to-police-and-taxation-office-over-queensland-nickel-collapse>
.

Those questions are the focus of a separate Australian Securities and 
Investments Commission investigation and a report by ABC’s Four Corners program 
on Monday night.

Queensland Nickel administrators fail to sell Clive Palmer-owned cattle station
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/queensland-nickel-administrators-fail-to-sell-clive-palmer-owned-cattle-station>
If Palmer were found to have acted as a shadow director, he could be exposed 
to legal action if the company were also found to have traded while insolvent.

The meeting led by Jones called for an “unequivocal guarantee and commitment 
to financial support of a buyback” by the Queensland and federal government.

“Should the plant close, the aggregate cost to the community could be $100m or 
more,” Jones said.

The organisation lobbying for the buyback, Sister City Partners, would likely 
require bank investment through government guarantees that Palmer 
unsuccessfully lobbied for. It would also have to negotiate directly with 
Palmer, who continues to own the plant assets through Queensland Nickel parent 
companies.

Sandra Chesney, from the Queensland Nickel Workers and Community Action 
Committee which organised the meeting, said the group had distributed food 
parcels to cash-strapped workers.

“They’re battlers. They can’t pay their rates, they can’t pay their 
electricity. They can’t even buy food because they can’t access [the Fair 
Entitlements Guarantee program] until the company goes into liquidation and 
they never got their holiday pay, severance pay, anything.”

Police urged to investigate Clive Palmer over Queensland Nickel collapse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/16/clive-palmer-to-be-referred-to-police-and-taxation-office-over-queensland-nickel-collapse>
Chesney said the attitude of Queensland Nickel workers was that “Clive Palmer 
does not exist”.

“Nobody’s mentioning him. They’re moving on, that’s how they see it. They’re 
backing the community buyback,” Chesny said.

Palmer surprised administrators last month by sacking Queensland Nickel as 
plant operator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/07/clive-palmer-takes-back-control-of-struggling-queensland-nickel-refinery>
 after they signalled the refinery would be mothballed because of ongoing 
trading losses and his refusal of requests for emergency funding.

Palmer owns the refinery separately through Queensland Nickel’s parent 
companies, which appointed another company Queensland Nickel Sales as the new 
operator.

But Queensland Nickel Sales has so far failed to carry out a promise to 
re-employ workers and has maintained the plant with a skeleton staff.

A source said FTI Consulting had no option but to recommend liquidation for 
Queensland Nickel given its trading losses and the absence of any proposals to 
restructure the company.


Neither Palmer nor Sister City Partners submitted a deed of company 
arrangement by the administrators’ deadline.

Creditors are due to formally vote on Queensland Nickael’s fate at another 
meeting in Townsville on 22 April.

Clive Palmer's Queensland nickel refinery breaches ammonia levels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/18/clive-palmers-queensland-nickel-refinery-breaches-ammonia-levels>
SCP could still engineer a buyback but would have to negotiate with Palmer.

Australian Workers Union Queensland secretary Ben Swan said workers would get 
a fraction of what they were owed under the federal government’s entitlements 
scheme.

Four Corners will allege Palmer used the email alias “Terry Smith” to 
authorise multimillion-dollar spending decisions at Queensland Nickel when he 
was not a director of the company.

Palmer wrote to ABC managing director Mark Scott to complain before the Four 
Corners broadcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/10/clive-palmer-attacks-abcs-four-corners-investigation-into-business-affairs>
, which he said contained “factual errors” and would cause him “substantial 
damage”.

He has claimed to have retired from operating his businesses since entering 
parliament in 2013.

Palmer has complained that Four Corners refused to grant him a live interview 
to answer its claims. But Four Corners staff say the program does not do live 
interviews and Palmer refused their requests for a pre-recorded interview.
 