
In 1985, when Freddie Mercury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/freddie-mercury> and Queen reigned over Live 
Aid, it would have seemed unthinkable that within just six years the great 
showman would be dead, never mind that in 2015 two of his bandmates would tour 
with an American Idol talent show runner-up performing the old songs. But the 
unlikely union works.

It helps that Queen’s back catalogue is so formidable that even a two-hour 
show isn’t long enough to pack in their best known songs (there’s no You’re My 
Best Friend or – irony of ironies – The Show Must Go On).

Guitarist Brian May and drummer Roger Taylor are now grizzled, grey-haired 
men, but still pack the showmanship and musicianship of real rock legends, even 
if this does mean indulgences such as drum battles (with Taylor’s son, Rufus) 
and guitar solos that presumably require enough electricity to power a small 
town.

Surprisingly, though, this show succeeds because of Adam Lambert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jun/04/adam-lambert-american-idol-interview>
, not despite him. The 32-year-old has said he wants to celebrate the 
flamboyant, camp, gay Mercury rather than replace him, but he definitely has 
the Freddie factor. Where the band’s earlier tours with heterosexual, macho, 
ex-Free, bluesy shouter Paul Rodgers felt wrong, the black leathered, 
bequiffed, nail varnished Lambert is every bit the showman that was Mercury.

Queen: ‘Freddie is present throughout the show’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/26/queen-freddie-mercury-present-throughout-show>
The American sips champagne while singing a camped up Killer Queen draped 
across a chaise longue <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zHA9YvA3l-E> and yells 
We Will Rock You wearing a silver crown. When Lambert claps hands, the audience 
clap with him, unprompted. His unusually wide vocal range allows him to hit 
high notes (notably Mercury’s famous one in Somebody To Love) which would 
normally require the assistance of even tighter trousers.

However, the Indianan is no mere talent show get-lucky 
<http://popdust.com/2014/08/18/adam-lambert-best-american-idol-performances-videos-ranked-greatnes/>
. Like Mercury, Lambert paid his dues with opera training, theatre,singing in 
clubs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IpDi5jtU9V4> and performing dance and 
rock, which has given him the dexterity to tackle a catalogue stretching from 
thumping grooves (Radio Gaga, Another One Bites the Dust) to blistering hard 
rock (Seven Seas of Rhye, Tie Your Mother Down).

Being the first openly gay man to go straight to a US No 1 (with 2012 solo 
album Trespassing) does matter. In more conservative times, Mercury sang about 
his sexuality by way of codes and hidden double entendres; Lambert turns the 
same songs into riotous celebrations.

There is poignancy, too, when Lambert sings Who Wants to Live Forever 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cylaTnUMBhA> under lighting that makes him 
look like a ghost and in the touchingly warm reception given to May’s achingly 
sincere Love of My Life, for Mercury.

Because, in a way, this is still the late star’s gig: a homage to his music. 
It’s Mercury who provokes gasps when he appears on screen to “duet” with 
Lambert in a Bohemian Rhapsody so riotous one fears the venue may combust.

“There will only be one Freddie Mercury, ever,” Lambert declares, as people 
roar approval for “the new boy”. However, in Adam Lambert, the late star’s old 
bandmates have surely found the right person to honour his achievements.

• At London 02 (17, 18 January – tel 0844 395 4000), then touring. Details: 
queenonline.com <http://www.queenonline.com/>
 