How did the young Cronenberg secure funding from the Canadian government for 
his early film Stereo?  He pretended to be writing a novel  He claimed it was a 
family-friendly musical  He pretended it was a science project  He explained 
that its gory, brain-surgery plot was a serious investigation of the nature of 
consciousness Cronenberg's movies are usually pretty frightening, but which of 
them inspired the marketing slogan: "Be afraid. Be very afraid"?  The Dead Zone 
 Spider  Scanners  The Fly In which of Cronenberg's movies does Oliver Reed 
play a sinister psychiatrist whose patients' inner conflicts are given form as 
vengeful midgets?  The Brood  Rabid  Dead Ringers  eXistenZ Which actor, best 
known as a pop star, has a role in "snuff TV" drama Videodrome?  Diana Ross  
Debbie Harry  David Bowie  Phil Collins An adaptation of which British novel is 
set to be Cronenberg's next directing project?  The Camomile Lawn by Mary Wesley
 Hotel du Lac by Anita Brookner  Use of Weapons by Iain M Banks  London Fields 
by Martin Amis Cronenberg was announced, and then dropped, as the director of a 
sequel to which of these box-office smashes?  Monsters Inc  When Harry Met Sally
 Basic Instinct  Antz Which of Cronenberg's movies was effectively banned from 
the West End by Westminster city council?  Videodrome  M Butterfly  Shivers  
Crash In Naked Lunch, what happens to the typewriter used by author Bill Lee?  
It turns into a handsome young man  It begins to write its own material  It 
turns into a sandwich  It turns into a cockroach Jeremy Irons won many plaudits 
for his roles as the twisted gynaecologist twins in Dead Ringers. What's the 
other Cronenberg movie he's starred in?  M Butterfly  eXistenZ  Spider  The 
Dead Zone A History of Violence has already attracted a lot of attention for 
its unsettling sex scene. Where does it take place?  At the supermarket  On a 
staircase  In a deep freeze  Over the internet  You gotâ€¦  A perfect score - 
your mind has merged with these movies in a slightly sinister way  Not bad. 
Cronenberg himself said his movies "ask questions but don't have answers". You 
clearly know what he means  Dear oh dear. Has someone been performing mind 
control experiments on you that have wiped your memories?  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  