Christopher Pyne: “About 18% of a HECS [Higher Education Contribution Scheme 
student loan debt] is never repaid, so about A$1 in A$5 of a HECS debt is never 
repaid, and the HECS debt at the moment is ***. That's how much the Australian 
taxpayer has lent students over the last almost two decades. It's an immense 
number. Most of the people who don't pay it back are people who move overseas, 
and most of those people who move overseas go to the UK.”  A$26bn  A$52bn  
A$88bn  A$102bn David Willetts: “We are simply setting universities free to 
respond to the choices of individuals – based on much better information about 
what is available. We do not want to set an arbitrary target for ***. Nor do we 
want an equally arbitrary cap on numbers.”  Students  Universities  Growth  
Enrolments Christopher Pyne: “You [UK] of course are no stranger to this 
phenomenon of education as an export industry. Your export income from 
education services was estimated in 2011 to be £17.5bn a year. Worldwide, 
Australia and Britain have the highest percentage of international students 
among their tertiary enrolments. Britain is second only to *** in the volume of 
international higher education.”  China  US  Canada  India David Willetts: “For 
one university to set up a *** in another country is a big financial and 
management decision. But if it’s a group of universities and one, for example, 
sets up the engineering faculty and another the languages faculty and effort 
and investment is pooled then I can see the ways in which the Australia-UK 
links are now going to turn to third countries.”  Research centre  Laboratory  
Campus  Faculty  Christopher Pyne: "Our nations have fully mature education 
sectors with immense capacity and capability. We share a relentless focus on 
*** and on much needed reform, matters close to the hearts of all in this room."
 Quality  Saving money  Ideology  Innovation Christopher Pyne: “Rather than 
slamming the door closed I’m trying to give more people a chance to get a 
university degree. *** in Scotland has made zero difference on equity issues. 
This reform is an equity measure, it is about spreading opportunity.”  Free 
education  Increased funding  Policy change  The student grant David Willetts: 
“Australia and the UK have a rich history of collaboration on major science 
projects and we value the relationship between our countries on this important 
project [the Square Kilometre Array telescope]. Having recently opened the SKA 
headquarters in Manchester and visited the South African SKA site, I now have a 
real sense of a truly *** project coming together with the aim of furthering 
human knowledge.”  Collaborative  Important  Exciting  International 
Christopher Pyne: “Australia’s oldest universities were largely founded by 
people educated in the great universities of Britain. Very many Australians 
have studied in British universities, and significant numbers of British 
students in Australian universities. More students come to study in Australia 
from Britain than from any other *** country. In many ways, our universities 
look to each other, as well as to the US and elsewhere, to develop ideas for 
the future, including on teaching and learning and on research."  European  
Commonwealth  English-speaking  Developed David Willets: “Our higher education 
reforms mean more *** people will get the chance to go to university and have 
the quality experience they deserve when they get there.”  Mature  Disadvantaged
 Wealthy  Young  You got…  You know your higher education ministers. Well done! 
 Not bad, but you lack a grasp of the finer detail.  You clearly haven't been 
paying attention – you need to spend more time studying those speeches.  
Challenge your friends Submit answers  