
Quvenzhané Wallis, who made history at this year's Oscars as the youngest ever 
nominee for best actress,is to star as Annie 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/02/beasts-of-the-southern-wilds-quvenzhane-wallis-to-play-annie/>
 in a screen remake of the hit Broadway musical and Academy Award-nominated 
1982 film.

Wallis, now nine but six when she filmed her Oscar-nominated debut role in 
Benh Zeitlin'sBeasts of the Southern Wild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145827/beasts-of-the-southern-wild>, 
replaces Willow Smith (daughter of Will) in the high-profile role. The remake 
was originally conceived as a vehicle for Willow, with her father on board as 
producer andJay-Z <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jayz> – who memorably 
sampled It's the Hard Knock Life <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zxtn6-XQupM> 
from the1982 version of Annie <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-0bOH8ABpco> for 
one of his best known hits – working on the music.

Will Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/5bae7081-64ef-4473-825a-38d310deb14c> 
and Jay-Z remain on board as producers, but Deadline reports that Willow, 12, 
was thought to have grown too old to play the 11-year-old Annie during the 
film's lengthy gestation process.Easy A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/138538/easy-a>'s Will Gluck has signed 
on to direct.

"With the recent Academy Award nomination and critical acclaim, Quvenzhané 
Wallis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/quvenzhan-wallis> is a true star and 
we believe her portrayal as Annie will make her a true worldwide star," said 
Hannah Minghella of Columbia Pictures. "She is an extraordinary young talent 
with an amazing range, not only as an actress but as a singer and dancer, and 
we can't wait for audiences to further discover her."

The new version of Annie is due in cinemas for late 2014. The original 1982 
film <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79017/annie>, which drew a mixed 
response from critics but still landed Oscar nominations for best art direction 
and best original score, was based on the long-running Broadway play about a 
young girl who escapes from the clutches of an evil orphanage owner to go in 
search of her missing parents. The stage show opened in 1977 at the Alvin in 
New York and ran for what was then a record-breaking six years at the theatre.
 