
Costa Rica

Costa Rica is well on its way to becoming the first developing country to have 
100% renewable electricity. Thanks to our hydro, wind and geothermal resources,
98% of our power is already renewable according to official data (Spanish 
website) <https://appcenter.grupoice.com/CenceWeb/CenceMain.jsf>. This year, 
Costa Rica had 100% renewable power for 94 consecutive days 
<http://renewables.seenews.com/news/costa-rica-beats-own-record-relies-solely-on-renewables-for-94-days-488370>
. This achievement took several decades to build and the next milestone is to 
ensure that our electricity system is 100% renewable the whole year. This will 
require us to replace distributed diesel generators – that are used as a 
back-up source – with distributed, renewable energy resources.

The state-owned Costa Rican Institute of Electricity (ICE) plans 
<http://www.grupoice.com/wps/wcm/connect/3bd3a78047cdebee904df9f079241ace/PEG2014+rev+jun2014.pdf?MOD=AJPERES>
 to add more hydro, wind and geothermal power plants and retirie the heavy fuel 
oil-powered Moin plant in 2017. ICE also plan to improve the efficiency of 
existing plants that run on fossil fuels. For example, by using German 
technology to increase efficiency at theGarabito plant, 
<http://powerplants.man.eu/references/projects/ice-garabito-costa-rica> it will 
go from producing 200MW to 280MW.

With Costa Rican citizens and entrepreneurs excited about solar panels, wind 
turbines, batteries and bioenergy, the country is now on track to have a 
fossil-free power system by 2025 – probably earlier.

Eight ways to reach 100% renewable in developing countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/08/eight-ways-to-reach-100-renewable-in-developing-countries>
This precedent builds confidence that we could become be the first developing 
country to have not only 100% renewable electricity but also a 100% renewable 
energy matrix. How can we tap into our agro-residues to replace imported fossil 
fuels for industrial uses? Why not replace petroleum-powered cars with electric 
cars? We have seen a new wave of societal pressure to fix public transportation 
and the government has pledged to deliver an electric train. Getting this done 
will accelerate our ongoing transition to becoming a 100% renewable energy 
country.

Monica Araya is founder and director of Nivela <http://www.nivela.org/> and 
Costa Rica Limpia <https://www.facebook.com/CostaRicaLimpia.org>, a citizen 
observatory. Follow@MonicaArayaTica <https://twitter.com/monicaarayatica> on 
Twitter.

Afghanistan 

Ironically, some of Afghanistan’s most challenging characteristics support the 
growth of renewable energy. The fragmented nature of the country – 
geographically and politically – means that it will always be a big ask to 
build and maintain the sort of large-scale electricity grid typically powered 
by coal or gas. Such things depend on good governance and a central authority – 
not much in evidence inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>. So decentralised power 
generation – owned and controlled by local people – which can harness local 
sources of energy, is more favourable.


Secondly, Afghanistan has renewable energy sources in abundance. Much of the 
country enjoys high levels of sunshine; its upland areas have decent wind 
potential, and its rivers can be harvested by small-scale hydro plants. These 
don’t involve large, damaging dams, but small diversions of enough water to 
drive turbines producing electricity for a few villages.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718915431%2F44ab799b-43af-4992-9313-f17aef1706d3-1020x730.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Race%20to%20renewable%3A%20five%20developing%20countries%20ditching%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Race%20to%20renewable%3A%20five%20developing%20countries%20ditching%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718915431%2F44ab799b-43af-4992-9313-f17aef1706d3-1020x730.jpeg>
 Afghanistan’s upland areas have decent wind potential and its rivers can be 
harvested by small-scale hydro plants. Photograph: Martin Wright 
That may all sound a little optimistic, but there’s practical work underway. 
In the northern provinces of Badakhshan and Takhar, 11,500 homes, schools, 
markets, local businesses and hospitals are currently being supplied with power 
by a mix of hydro and solar plants. These were installed by the German 
development agency,GiZ <http://www.giz.de/en/html/index.html>, in close 
collaboration with both the government and, more importantly, local people, who 
are trained to operate and run them as semi-independent enterprises. The scheme 
won anAshden Award for sustainable energy 
<https://www.ashden.org/winners/giz-integration12>.


Is the Caribbean a paradise for renewable energy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/06/caribbean-paradise-for-renewable-energy>
There’s a realistic chance that such schemes could be replicated across 
swathes of the country. With little in the way of large-scale industry, 
Afghanistan’s power needs are relatively modest, making renewables even more 
relevant. And with ongoing political turbulence, rooting such plants in local 
communities gives them the best chance of delivering power for years to come.

Martin Wright is a writer and editor specialising in sustainable futures. 
Follow@MartinFutures <https://twitter.com/MartinFutures> on Twitter.

China

China has emerged as the world’s renewables superpower in less than a decade 
of highly focused development – the country is the world’s largest producer and 
user of renewable energy technologies. The official target of the Chinese 
government is for non-fossil fuelsto grow to 20% of total energy consumption by 
2030 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/11/11/us-china-joint-announcement-climate-change>
, rising from the current level of 11%. Meanwhile coal consumption is to be
capped at 4.2bn tons by 2020 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/china/2014-11/19/c_133801014.htm>. China is 
also committed to a significant increase of the electricity generating capacity 
based on renewable sources, doubling wind and quadrupling solar by 2020.


Those targets are likely to be achieved, given China’s track record to date. 
In fact consumption of coal has already started to decline, aGreat Reversal 
<http://www.japanfocus.org/-Hao-Tan/4365/article.html> of the trend for the 
past decade. As a result, revenues, profit, and stock prices of coal and oil 
companies have all fallen sharply.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441719047160%2F15e985a5-470e-4f8f-8e2b-811aae43dd8c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Race%20to%20renewable%3A%20five%20developing%20countries%20ditching%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Race%20to%20renewable%3A%20five%20developing%20countries%20ditching%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441719047160%2F15e985a5-470e-4f8f-8e2b-811aae43dd8c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Solar panels on the roof of greenhouses growing mushrooms in Neihuang county, 
Henan province Photograph: China stringer network/Reuters 
There are divergent views in China over the future for renewables beyond 2030. 
A recentstudy by the Energy Research Institute 
<http://www.efchina.org/Reports-en/china-2050-high-renewable-energy-penetration-scenario-and-roadmap-study-en>
 within China’s central planning body has made a strong case for renewables to 
account for 60% of the total energy consumption and 85% of electricity by 2050; 
while the China Academy of Engineering projects thatrenewables will account for 
just over 40% of total energy consumption by 2050 (Chinese article) 
<http://www.cae.cn/cae/html/main/col36/2012-03/02/20120302133512638700819_1.html>
. One conclusion is clear across many studies, though, that it is both 
technically and economically feasible for China to phase out fossil fuels with 
cleaner energy sources such as solar and wind.


China is building pipelines to transport oil and gas from all over the world, 
the lock-in effect will be a challenge

The trajectory of China’s future energy system is determined by competitive 
dynamics between the old and the new. China’s coal-fired power stations, 
currently of about 900GW of capacity, need to be decommissioned over the next 
decades.China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is also building 
projects such as pipelines that transport oil and gas from all over the world, 
and the lock-in effect will be a challenge for renewables to overcome.

On the other hand, China continues to invest in renewables at a scale that 
dwarfs that of other countries.China invested nearly $90bn in clean energy in 
2014 <http://www.theclimategroup.org/_assets/files/RE100-China-analysis.pdf>, 
or 73% more than the US, building large solar parks in Qinghai and wind farms 
in Xinjiang and Inner Mongolia, just to name a few. China also leads the world 
in some key areas of infrastructure, such as high speed railways and smart grid 
technologies, which will facilitate a new model of energy consumption and 
supply, and one that makes a break with the system based on fossil fuels.

Hao Tan <https://www.newcastle.edu.au/profile/hao-tan> is a senior lecturer at 
thefaculty of business and law 
<https://www.newcastle.edu.au/about-uon/governance-and-leadership/faculties-and-schools/faculty-of-business-and-law>
, University of Newcastle, Australia.

India

With more than 20% of India’s population currently coping without access to 
electricity, the government has promised to provide all households withconstant 
power supply before the next national election in 2019 
<http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=118109>. Meanwhile, the Make 
in India <http://www.makeinindia.com/> campaign seeks an expansion of 
manufacturing capabilities in the country, which will also depend heavily on – 
and increase the demand for – access to power.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441719673942%2Fb90b97fe-f083-40b8-b466-c1c8edc3f323-2060x1379.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Race%20to%20renewable%3A%20five%20developing%20countries%20ditching%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Race%20to%20renewable%3A%20five%20developing%20countries%20ditching%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441719673942%2Fb90b97fe-f083-40b8-b466-c1c8edc3f323-2060x1379.jpeg>
 Off-grid solar power station in West Bengal Photograph: Alamy 
Development for all is dependent on electricity for all, which will simply not 
be possible without decentralised solutions, best served by renewable energy 
sources. Earlier this year, the central government announced an ambitious 
target of175GW of renewable energy 
<http://cleantechnica.com/2015/03/04/india-allocates-400-million-for-renewable-energy-expansion-in-annual-budget/>
 of which 100GW would come from solar alone, by 2022. But growth in the sector 
has been relatively slow, considering the immense potential: according to the 
Indian ministry of renewable energy, the total installed solar capacity crossed 
over 3GW for the first time in December last year, adding only 886MW in 2014 - 
in contrast, Tata Solar Power, ina report released in 2014 
<http://www.tatapowersolar.com/news_files/news/Coverage%20report_Bridge%20to%20India_September%201,%202014.pdf>
, estimated that India could reach 145GW of solar by 2024. This good news has 
further positive implications: as solar power rapidly becomes a mainstream 
energy option, the industry could create over670,000 new, clean-energy jobs 
<http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/jobs/solar-energy-can-create-6-7-lakh-jobs-in-india-in-10-years/articleshow/41443470.cms?intenttarget=no>
 in India.


These positives however, would be impossible to achieve without a paradigm 
shift in policies that boost the rapidly improving business of renewables. It 
will be important to ensure that this shift from polluting power to clean 
renewables is done in a way where citizens are in greater control over their 
own power supply, as virtually infinite potential from wind and solar energy 
can truly democratise the generation of, and access to, power.

Pujarini Sen is a climate and energy campaigner at Greenpeace India 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/india/en/>. Follow @pujarini89 
<https://twitter.com/pujarini89> on Twitter. 

Albania

Albania has among the highest number of sunshine hours per year in Europe

Albania, a small country of 2.77 million inhabitants, has big potential and an 
exciting future for renewable energy. Driven by a desire to reduce dependence 
on imported fossil fuels and promote a secure supply of energy, the government 
of Albania has been very eager to encourage increased investment in renewable 
energy and in 2013a law was passed to promote renewable energy 
<http://europeandcis.undp.org/blog/2013/07/08/here-comes-the-sun-albania-passes-law-on-renewable-energy/>
.

The new renewable energy law sets a nationally binding target for renewable 
energy (non-hydro) of 38% by the year 2020. In addition, it provides for 
priority grid access for renewable energy projects, for streamlined licensing 
procedures, for the ability to sign sale and purchase agreements for renewable 
energy for up to 15 years and for preferential feed-in-tariffs, to be 
established by the regulator. This package of measures should provide greater 
confidence to investors that their investments in renewable energy inAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> offer an attractive rate of return 
in a country that, for its size, has abundant renewable energy resources.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441720039525%2F3d5fc19b-254a-47ed-9ddd-3f5f836c79c1-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Race%20to%20renewable%3A%20five%20developing%20countries%20ditching%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Race%20to%20renewable%3A%20five%20developing%20countries%20ditching%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ffive-developing-countries-ditching-fossil-fuels-china-india-costa-rica-afghanistan-albania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441720039525%2F3d5fc19b-254a-47ed-9ddd-3f5f836c79c1-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Blue Eye hot spring in southern Albania Photograph: Nic Hamilton/Alamy 
Water is Albania’s most important natural resource. At least eight large 
rivers run through the country, fed by hundreds of smaller streams and total 
hydropower resources are estimated at 4500MW. In addition, solar energy 
potential (for both photovoltaics and solar hot-water heaters) is excellent as 
the country has among the highest number of sunshine hours per year inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> (an average of 2,400). Wind 
energy potential for Albania is also very good along the Adriatic coast.


The law on renewable energy was passed two years ago but investment in 
non-hydro renewable energy in the country is yet to take off. Partly this is 
because secondary legislation is not yet in place and partly because of lack of 
private sector awareness of the possibilities available.


Over the longer term, the potential for increased investment in renewable 
energy in Albania is excellent as the country becomes an energy exporter. 
Albania plans to spend over $200m to build power cables to Italy, a country 
with excess energy demand. This should help drive additional investment in 
renewable energy.

John O’Brien is a regional technical adviser on climate change mitigation for 
theUN Development Programme in Europe and Central Asia 
<http://www.eurasia.undp.org/content/rbec/en/home.html>. Follow @johnobrien98 
<https://twitter.com/johnobrien98> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#EnergyAccess <https://twitter.com/search?src=typd&q=%23EnergyAccess>.

 