
Ramze Shihab Ahmed, a 69-year-old former army general, travelled to Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> from his home in the UK to visit 
family in November 2009. He was having dinner at a relative's house when Iraqi 
security officials arrested him and put him in jail, where he alleges he was 
tortured. Last Wednesday, 7 December, marked two years since he was imprisoned.

His 64 year-old wife Rahiba, a former teaching assistant who lives in Dollis 
Hill, north London, believes her husband's arrest was politically motivated as 
he is a Sunni who was once part of a rebellion against Saddam Hussein.

Ahmed's family did not know where he was being held until nearly four months 
after his arrest, when, on 25Â March 2010, he managed to call his wife from 
prison. He told her he was being held in the old Muthanna airport in Baghdad 
and asked her to alert the British authorities straight away. The phone 
conversation was immediately cut off.

Ahmed was arrested on terrorism-related charges and held at the secret 
al-Muthanna prison between December 2009 and April 2010. He has told his wife 
he was tortured during that time. He said that he was suspended by his ankles 
and subjected to electric shocks to his genitals and suffocation by plastic 
bags. He is currently being held in Baghdad's al-Karkh prison, where he has not 
been tortured but he is believed to be suffering from serious ill-health.

On Thursday 15 December, the fifth of five trials concerning Ahmed's case will 
start. Amnesty is concerned that the hearings so far have not met international 
standards for fair trials. However, Ahmed has been found not guilty of the 
charges he has faced so far.

Amnesty International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>
 is calling on the government of Iraq to guarantee that Ramze receives a fair 
trial and to independently investigate his allegations of torture in detention. 
If he is found not guilty he should be released immediately and be free to 
return to his wife in London.

To take action, email the Iraqi Minister for Foreign Affairs and a 
representative at the Iraqi Embassy by clickinghere 
<http://action.amnesty.org.uk/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1194&ea.campaign.id=9443>
.
 