
By turns achingly delicate and bracingly violent, Ran is the last great 
masterpiece ofAkira Kurosawa <https://www.theguardian.com/film/akirakurosawa>, 
now restored to pristine 4K condition. A colour cousin to his black-and-white 
1957 Macbeth adaptation Throne Of Blood – and no less overwhelmingly bleak – 
the 1985 film runs variations on the themes of King Lear. The aged lord 
Hidetora (Tatsuya Nakadai) hands power to his eldest son, at the same time 
banishing the youngest, the only one to speak honestly to him. Betrayal is 
piled on betrayal as the eldest sons turn against the old man, relentlessly 
spurred on by Kaede (Mieko Harada), malevolent, viperish wife of the new ruler.

Akira Kurosawa: 10 essential films for the director's centenary | Ben Walters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/mar/23/akira-kurosawa-100-google-doodle-anniversary>
Moments of poetic delicacy – the youngest son cutting boughs of blossoms to 
make an arbour to shade his father as he dozes under a soundtrack of glorious 
birdsong – give way to sequences of battle so intense and violent that they 
beggar the imagination. The first battle – one of the most impressive in 
Kurosawa’s entire oeuvre – opens after Hidetora says the words “We are in hell” 
at the one-hour mark. All direct sound drops out and Tôru Takemitsu’s 
Mahler-inflected score takes over, rising and falling over exquisitely edited 
images of repeated arrow-showers, hundreds of soldiers with colour-coded 
uniforms and banners rushing headlong back and forth, corpses by the dozen, 
blood everywhere, the murder of six concubines by gunfire, and finally the 
burning of the castle to the ground, with the old lord slowly going catatonic 
amidst all the mayhem. It is a staggering six minutes of cinema, reminiscent of 
Bruegel’s great painting The Suicide Of Saul, whose titular event occurs 
off-centre, almost unacknowledged, as giant armies of ant-like soldiers swarm 
over the rest of the painting.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fran-trailer-akira-kurosawa-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F24%2F1456312918769%2FKP_1809830_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ran%3A%20trailer%20for%20the%20restored%20Kurosawa%20classic%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fran-trailer-akira-kurosawa-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ran%3A%20trailer%20for%20the%20restored%20Kurosawa%20classic%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fran-trailer-akira-kurosawa-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F24%2F1456312918769%2FKP_1809830_crop_640x480.jpg>
And let’s not forget the hellcat Kaede, who channels Lady Macbeth via Cruella 
de Vil, wheedling and scheming behind an impassive mask of white Noh make-up. 
When her husband, the new lord, dies, she seamlessly transfers her attentions 
to his successor-brother, first licking the blood from his wounds like an 
animal, and kicking her late husband’s helmet away from her, then pulling a 
knife on him, screwing him on the floor and demanding that he kill his own wife 
and marry her. Like everyone else – this is Shakespeare, after all – she gets 
what’s coming to her.

Seven Samurai – Philip French on Kurosawa's masterly 16th-century epic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/15/seven-samurai-philip-french-kurosawa-masterly-epic-classic-dvd>
The other pleasures are manifold: one group of generals talking on a hilltop 
as two giant armies converge in perfect symmetry on an arch-like ridge fully a 
mile behind them; a sudden crescendo of birdsong when Hidetora realises he is 
betrayed; the lord and his fool alone on a gigantic plain of volcanic ash; and 
a defining image of absolute pessimism: a blind boy alone at midnight on a 
treacherous precipice, with no one left alive to guide him to safety. God is 
dead, indeed.
 