
As markets surge following the US Federal Reserve's surprise decision to keep 
the money taps turned on, mining shares are among the main beneficiaries.

Fed chairman Ben Bernanke, contrary to many people's expectations, said the 
central bank would continue its $85bn a month bond buying programme, suggesting 
concerns about US economic growth.

The news has boosted emerging and developed markets, as well as commodity 
prices. Gold and silver have both edged higher while among base metals, copper 
hit a three week high.

So with the FTSE 100 currently up 88.70 points at 6647.52 - having earlier 
touched 6657 - miners are leading the way.Randgold Resources has risen 420p to 
£48.98, Mexican precious metals specialistFresnillo is up 70p at £10.78, 
Antofagasta has added 38.5p to 899p while Anglo American is 72.5p better at 
£16.50.

Among the mid-cap miners African Barrick Gold has climbed 19.7p to 155.5p as 
it named director Andrew Wray as its chief financial officer, part of a 
shake-up which has seen the recent departures of both the chief executive and 
chief operating officer.

The perceived boost to emerging economies from the Fed's decision has lifted 
Asia-focused bankStandard Chartered by 55p to £15.69. Rebecca O'Keeffe at 
Interactive Investor said:
 In what may well be looked at in hindsight as a mistake, markets were taken 
totally by surprise by the failure of the Fed to change its stimulus policy and 
the big question for investors is why? The bond market had arguably tightened 
too much and the new Fed chair may well be a dove rather than a hawk, but the 
decision - which has bond, commodity and emerging markets soaring, does raise 
some underlying concerns about what the Fed knows that we don't.

It is hard to see how an October taper can be justified if a September move 
could not. Even the mid-2014 deadline for withdrawing all quantitative easing 
now looks to be in doubt. Whatever the reason, tapering has been put on hold 
and the markets love it.

Among the few fallers, Vodafone is down 1.75p at 209.60p while Tesco has 
dipped 2.45p to 375.85p as Nomura cut from buy to neutral and reduced its price 
target from 430p to 400p.
 