
“I’m just trying to change the world, one sequin at a time,” announces Lady 
Gaga, planning, no doubt, to wear only 5,000 shimmering sequins in her next 
creation. But now word has got out, in the glamorous world of music, fashion 
and culture, what this week’s topic is, the Readers Recommend cocktail bar is 
suddenly flooded with celebrities eager to have their say. Blimey. I’d better 
order more champagne. And rather nervously, I’ve just touched the gloved hand 
of Grace Jones, who tells me, darling, how “I simply love those classic figures 
from the 30s and 40s … Bette Davis, Joan Crawford, Humphrey Bogart, Rita 
Hayworth. They had such glamour and style.” Whatever you say Grace, I agree. 
You’re not only right but you’re equally glamorous too. Just don’t hit me. Or 
get me tohowl at the moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/oct/12/grace-jones-hurricane>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13469f4b3bd7ae4113032d6a829209416ba1b89d%2F0_0_2266_3543%2F2266.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13469f4b3bd7ae4113032d6a829209416ba1b89d%2F0_0_2266_3543%2F2266.jpg>
 Grace Jones - squeezing in 1981. Photograph: Rob Verhorst/Redferns 
So then, this week let’s search for songs that pertain to glamour and style in 
song lyrics, whether that be in the cut of jib, or the manner of behaviour or 
utterance. Music is awash with stylish, glamorous artists, but what’s relevant 
here is where that subject comes up songs. But what does it all mean? How do 
you define glamour or style? Here’sLana Del Rey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lana-del-rey>, slipping up to the bar. She 
started her career as Elizabeth Woolridge Grant, but then changed it because 
the name “reminded us of the glamour of the seaside. It sounded gorgeous coming 
off the tip of the tongue.” And with a quality of dark mystery, it certainly 
seemed to work.


Suddenly though there’s a gasp on the RR catwalk stairs. It’s only Marilyn 
Monroe! She says glamour is not about clothes but femininity - no problem 
there, then - but also “Give a girl the right shoes and she can conquer the 
world.” And if you’re not careful those shoes will stomp on your fingers. Yes, 
shoes can indeed be glamorous. Last year I saw Prince wearing high heels with a 
flashing light inside them. But that wasn’t where the glamour really lay. 
Talking of shoes,Victoria Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/victoria-beckham> now has something to 
say. Incredible. “I can’t concentrate in flats.” So is that why she lives in a 
house the size of a palace?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7e8d2cbbf9e22398833fc3d5848bc0744ec83b7%2F0_447_3125_2716%2F3125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7e8d2cbbf9e22398833fc3d5848bc0744ec83b7%2F0_447_3125_2716%2F3125.jpg>
 Marilyn Monroe on her 30th birthday. Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
“Fashion fades, only style remains the same,” announces Coco Chanel. “Fashion 
fades, only style is eternal,” adds Yves Saint Laurent. “I said it first,” 
snaps back Coco. “No you didn’t,” says Yves, “That’snot the same.” Behind the 
glamour and glitz, things are suddenly taking a more bitchy tone, as can happen 
in this glitzy, glamorous world. Is beauty skin deep then? Art critic, painter 
and writer John Berger pitches in: “Glamour cannot exist without personal 
social envy being a common and widespread emotion.” “Shut up!” shout the others.


But is glamour all just media hype? It can be, but then, as in songs, we’re 
really looking for songs, new or old, that can span the ages.

We really need some calm here. It’s supplied by Audrey Hepburn, delicately 
holding a cigarette holder in that Breakfast at Tiffany’s way. “Elegance is the 
only beauty that never fades,” she purrs, softly. Anyone else? “Glamour to me 
is about remaining graceful and understated,” adds Kate Winslet, rather in awe 
of Audrey, butgathering herself <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K0kpwdDksgE>. 
Now I think we’re really getting somewhere. From behind a lens, Jean Cocteau 
cuts in: “Style is a simple way of saying complicated things.” It echoes 
Leonardo da Vinci’s phrase that “simplicity is the ultimate sophistication”. 
Timeless stuff. Sophia Loren is a woman who certainly knows about glamour. “A 
woman’s dress should be a like a barbed-wire fence: serving its purpose without 
obstructing the view.” Yes. And what a view.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F297ad9e2e07d8f34fc986fbfb5015feb5de9624a%2F0_0_1792_1448%2F1792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F297ad9e2e07d8f34fc986fbfb5015feb5de9624a%2F0_0_1792_1448%2F1792.jpg>
 Christina Hendricks as Joan in Mad Men Season 2 Photograph: Everett 
Collection/REX 
But style and glamour isn’t just about beauty or simplicity. It is also about 
charisma. The character of Joan, played byChristina Hendricks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/christina-hendricks>, in Mad Men for 
example, is far more than a woman of very shapely form, she is a clever, subtle 
survivor in a world of cut-throat sexism. “In order to be irreplaceable one 
must always be different,” confirms Coco Chanel, approvingly. The same goes for 
serial womaniser but out-of-the-box creative Don Draper. He’s handsome in the 
eyes of the ladies, but is also very different. On that form of glamour, we now 
we have all kinds of characters chipping in. What a party.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06d7ab87aa7ac73df82645a4e95e5f0635de10f3%2F0_0_2598_1860%2F2598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06d7ab87aa7ac73df82645a4e95e5f0635de10f3%2F0_0_2598_1860%2F2598.jpg>
 George Clinton. A man with a style all of his own. Photograph: Kevin 
Winter/Getty Images 
George Clinton, who certainly has his own style, says, “Style is whatever you 
want to do, if you can do it with confidence.” Johan Lindeberg adds that “an 
easy way to find your own style is to exaggerate yourself a bit and then find a 
balance.” Good advice. Gore Vidal, no slouch when it comes to an elegant 
phrase, says in chorus withOrson Welles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/orsonwelles> before him: “Style is knowing 
who you are, what you have to say, and not giving a damn.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1d75a687b039f6aec43e8a7e772e1ec6fede35d%2F0_713_5044_3562%2F5044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20about%20glamour%20and%20style%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Freaders-recommend-songs-about-glamour-and-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe1d75a687b039f6aec43e8a7e772e1ec6fede35d%2F0_713_5044_3562%2F5044.jpg>
 Dark glamour. Orson Welles in 1951. Photograph: Jane Bown 
How tangible is glamour? What makes, for example, glam rock glam? Not the 
clothes, surely. Fancy clothes and hats, for sure, but it’s something more in 
every genre and walk of life.


In some ways it’s the indefinable that creates glamour. Artists such as Kate 
Bush and David Bowie are glamorous because they are evasive, mysterious.The 
Glamour <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/106924.The_Glamour>, a novel by 
brilliant Mancunian authorChristopher Priest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/christopher-priest>, follows characters 
who gain a form of invisibility in society, not by some supernatural sci-fi 
power, but by the social trick of anonymity, allowing them to slip unseen into 
hotels, restaurants and parties, and even have sex in public places without 
people noticing. The secrecy and access, rather than the fame, is a true form 
of glamour, while what is often behind the lives of the famous is anything but 
glamorous.

So then, slip into your glamorous garb, and sift through your musical 
wardrobes for this week’s nominations. Bear in mind that we’ve previously had, 
a very long time ago, thetopic of fashion 
<http://rrindex.com/topics/fashion.htm>, but as we all know that can be 
something very different to glamour or style. This week’s glamour guru is the 
illustriousllamapaca <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/llamalpaca>. Put in 
your nominations bylast orders (11pm GMT) this coming Monday 9 November for the 
final results published onThursday 12 November.

To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:


• Tell us why it’s a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song’s words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify or 
SoundCloud are fine.
• Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you’d like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist from readers’ suggestions, please email
peter.kimpton@theguardian.com <mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com>
• There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
“zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the ‘Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.
 