
“Misery is the river of the world,” grunts out an energetically downbeat Tom 
Waits. “Melancholy is sadness that has taken on lightness,” replies the 
eccentric, upbeat authorItalo Calvino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/italocalvino>. And, now also entering the 
Readers Recommend bar (you never know who might turn up), here’s Rob Spragg, 
aka Larry Love, from Alabama 3. He decides to do a spontaneous gig, as I’ve 
seen him do a couple of times, and, no matter what the subject matter or how 
upbeat the style, he dryly remarks, with a twinkle in the eye, and that 
gravelly voice - “Here’s another sad song for ya!”

For what is melancholy? It is more than sadness. It is a nuanced mix of 
emotions that seems steeped in articulacy. It implies there’s something to say 
about a state of mind and the state of the world. Arguably melancholy is as 
much a driving force to songwriting as any idea or emotion. Is it a functional 
form of depression? Perhaps. If so, it certainly served to be for the likes of 
Nick Drake, or Joni Mitchell, who later admitted to suffering from such a state 
throughout the writing of several ofher most acclaimed albums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/26/joni-mitchell-blue-hissing-summer-lawns-court-spark-hejira-dylan>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440524489638%2F1f3cce13-6f03-4f7e-b47b-796b622a3c9d-1769x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440524489638%2F1f3cce13-6f03-4f7e-b47b-796b622a3c9d-1769x2040.jpeg>
 Portrait of John Donne ca. 1595. Photograph: The Gallery Collection/Corbis 
The best known and earliest work on the subject is Robert Burton’s Anatomy of 
Melancholie (1621), a scholarly analysis of proto-psychology, describing what 
was then thought of as an imbalance of the four humours. The first rock star of 
the genre, however, was undoubtedly the poet John Donne (1573–1631), known for 
his many erotic affairs, and lovelorn elegies on their passing. His poems range 
from the deeply intimate, earthy and sexual, to the most profoundly complex, 
and religiously ethereal. They include lines such as “Love built on beauty, 
soon as beauty, dies,” (Elegy II) and “The day breaks not, it is my heart,” 
(Stay O Sweet). In short, Donne was a something of a serial, but sensitive 
seducer, as well as sad, dirty sod, and had remarkable gift of the gab. Sounds 
like a successful formula. What kind of superstar he would be now we can only 
imagine.


Melancholy, however, seems to be most associated with two things. Lying down 
and being forlorn, and secondly, twizzling your abundant head of hair with a 
despondent look. Think of the mass of long locks and facial expressions Jim 
Morrison, a younger Neil Young orAmy Winehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse>, and it gives a whole new 
dimension to that famous phrase from Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet - “parting 
is such sweet sorrow”.


Yet even Marcel Proust, who spent a lot of time lying down on the sofa and 
munching madeleine cakes for comfort, described, with a number of 
characteristic sub-clauses, “that melancholy which we feel when we cease to 
obey orders which, from one day to another, keep the future hidden, and realise 
that we have at last begun to live in real earnest, as a grownup person, the 
life, the only life that any of us has at his disposal.” Melancholy is about 
facing the sadness of things. It may contain despair, ennui, depression, 
pessimism and weltschmerz, all of which hurts, but can it, as Susan Cadogan and 
others put it, “hurt so good”? Melancholy may even have a big dash of rebellion 
about it too, alongside a profound feeling of illumination. So even if you 
can’t do anything about it, you can at least describe it. And why write a 
1,000-page novel when you can do a four-minute song?

Mexican culture has a strong fixaction with melancholy, stemming from tragedy 
and death. Is that whyMorrissey <https://www.theguardian.com/music/morrissey>, 
for one, is so popular in this region of the world? Is it the lyrics or the 
music? Your suggestions could imply both.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440608362316%2Fc292fe63-dea5-4a2c-ac76-ea36d2c88436-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440608362316%2Fc292fe63-dea5-4a2c-ac76-ea36d2c88436-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Who would have thought this bookish fellow from Stretford in Manchester would 
touch the melancholy hearts of so many Mexicans? Photograph: ITV/REX 
Shutterstock 
We can find melancholy everywhere – in the news, in our daily lives. And 
here’s some in a piece of art, such as this Australian sculpture seen in Berlin.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440532864552%2F2d9b93a2-514e-4c88-964d-16b29f9348f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440532864552%2F2d9b93a2-514e-4c88-964d-16b29f9348f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Contemplation of Untitled (Big Man) by Australian artist Ron Mueck in February 
2006 at the Neue Nationalgalerie museum in Berlin. Photograph: Oliver 
Lang/AFP/Getty 
And then, in this rather profoundly sad but beautiful sight of a lost teddy 
bear on wet paving stones.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440524408450%2Faaea3fe1-8d40-4288-a748-661ba99bd2c5-2060x1851.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440524408450%2Faaea3fe1-8d40-4288-a748-661ba99bd2c5-2060x1851.jpeg>
 Lost teddy. Anybody claiming it? Photograph: Niall McDiarmid/Alamy 
Melancholy runs through music like a message through a stick of rock. It is 
deep in the DNA. But perhaps of all genres, including country and folk, the 
strongest roots of the melancholy tree grow from the blues. “The blues is 
instilled in every musical cell that floats around your body,” says Nick Cave, 
who is among an army of rock and pop musicians, from the Beatles to the Stones 
toTom Waits <https://www.theguardian.com/music/tom-waits> and Jack White and 
many more across the decades extolling the influence of Robert Johnson et al 
from the early 20th century onwards.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440608530479%2F1094ff12-16e2-4e6a-bce0-002e938a6eed-1819x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20melancholy%20songs%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F27%2Freaders-recommend-melancholy-songs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440608530479%2F1094ff12-16e2-4e6a-bce0-002e938a6eed-1819x2040.jpeg>
 Blues singer-songwriter and guitarist Robert Johnson (1911-1938), left, with 
fellow blues musician Johnny Shines (1915-1992), circa 1935. Photograph: Getty 
Images 
So now the RR bar is really filling up now with artists wanting to say 
something about the blues. Here’s Amy Winehouse with her big hair and 
melancholy smile: “Every bad situation is a blues song waiting to happen.” How 
right you are, Amy. Now here’s Jimi Hendrix, who can play anything, but 
concedes that: “Blues is easy to play, but hard to feel.” Alexis Korner chips 
in now, hinting how functional melancholy can be: “I guess music, particularly 
the blues, is the only form of schizophrenia that has organised itself into 
being both legal and beneficial to society.”


Mahalia Jackson’s voice floats higher and louder than anyone at this week’s RR 
party. She herself finds the blues too dark, and puts in a word for a lighter 
side of melancholy: “Blues are the songs of despair, but gospel songs are the 
songs of hope.” And finally, comes a comment from an unexpected source – Peter 
Tork from the Monkees. Does he have a cure for the blues? No. Because the blues 
are the preventative cure: “Pop music is aspirin and the blues are vitamins.”
So then, join this rich mix of melancholy songwriters and performers to 
suggest you many songs on this subject. This week’s maestro of melancholia is 
returning RR guruRavi Raman <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14521984>. 
Place your songs in comments belowby last orders (11pm BST) on Monday 31 August 
for the final results published onThursday 3 September. 


To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:

• Tell us why it’s a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song’s words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify or 
SoundCloud are fine.
• Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you’d like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist from readers’ suggestions, please email
peter.kimpton@theguardian.com <mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com>
• There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
“zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the ‘Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.

During the week of 19 September 2015 the glorious Guardian Readers Recommend 
blog is going to be 10 years old. There will be an informal celebration of this 
during the weekend of Saturday 19 September, with a meeting up from lunchtime 
onwards on that Saturday in London, near the Guardian’s offices. For more 
details, and possible other meet-ups around this time, please email 
peter.kimpton@theguardian.com or keep an eye out on the Readers Recommend 
topics appearing here each Thursday.

Interested in compiling and writing about a list of songs from readers’ 
suggestions? Email peter.kimpton@theguardian.com. Slots available from Thursday 
10 September.

 