Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fg1nUgshd1lY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fg1nUgshd1lY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fg1nUgshd1lY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
All of the December suggestions have been mixed together in a woolly hat, and 
it has delivered its choice:The Shipping News 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fiction/9781857022421/the-shipping-news>
 by Annie Proulx. This was a nomination from ripley1, who wrote"I felt frozen 
stiff and windblown reading most of it" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/13285604>.

Shotsford supported the nomination, calling it "one of the coldest books I 
have ever read" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/13287235> and 
stateoftheart described it as a"fine wintry book" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/13287235>.

So, definitely on topic, although Kendrew did point out that "in addition to 
the bloody cold there was little in the way of decent food to look forward to. 
All those seal flipper pies and squid burgers" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/comment-permalink/13290157>.

I have no idea what s/he's talking about, since I am in the happy position of 
knowing next to nothing about the book at this stage in our monthly journey. 
Even so, I'm hoping for good things. It wasn't the most-nominated book this 
time round, but it was clearly a popular choice, with 46 recommendations, which 
makes me optimistic. Then there's the fact that Annie Proulx is an excellent 
writer, and plenty of people seem to think The Shipping News is her masterpiece 
– not least the juries for thePulitzer prize for fiction 
<http://www.pulitzer.org/> and the National Book Award 
<http://www.nationalbook.org/>, who both gave the novel gongs.

Elsewhere, there's a Kevin Spacey film adaptation 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120824/> to discuss and we may also have a look 
at something calledThe Ashley Book of Knots 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ashley_Book_of_Knots>, since Proulx named 
that as the major influence on the book … And, as ever, I'm open to 
suggestions. If there's something you think we should be discussing, do say so 
in the comments below.

But first, the reading. I'm ordering my copy right away. And, good news! The 
wonderful people at Fourth Estate have offered us 20 editions of the book to 
the first 20 people who post asking for one in the comments below. And if 
you're not quick enough on the draw for a freebie, don't despair: the Guardian 
bookshop has sorted us a 30% discount: you canbuy it from them for £5.59, down 
from £7.99 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk:80/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781857022421>
.
 