
Ahead of International Women’s Day, we invited our readers to celebrate women 
writers. Help us by adding your favourite books written by women in the 
comments below – as well as the story of how they earned a place on your 
shelves.

The White Album by Joan Didion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/may/21/usnationalbookawards.society>. 
Made her one of my favourite living writers and essay collections one of my 
favourite literary genres.—DJMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jul/29/which-books-by-women-have-had-the-biggest-impact-on-you#comment-38762095>

A Wrinkle In Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/jan/19/wrinkle-in-time-newbery-medals>
 (series) by Madeleine L’Engle – I loved these books when I was younger, they 
were well-developed, unique, quasi-science based concepts that I found 
fascinating.—Jennifer Myers <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13582276>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Finternational-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425645796706%2F8b10110c-6b7f-4ade-9b80-7e3801b10377-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20favourite%20books%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Finternational-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20favourite%20books%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Finternational-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425645796706%2F8b10110c-6b7f-4ade-9b80-7e3801b10377-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Prescient ... Margaret Atwood in 2007. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the 
Guardian 
I adore everything by Hilary Mantel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/hilary-mantel> and Margaret Atwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/margaretatwood>, among others, but for 
personal impact, I have to go withThe Dispossessed 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/dispossessed.html> by Ursula K LeGuin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ursulakleguin>. It forever shaped what I 
think and feel about love, faith and justice.—davidloy 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13582147>

The Children of Violence series by Doris Lessing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dorislessing>. Hard to summarise how this 
opened my eyes to a different world. One of the very few fiction books that 
have ever left me with something other than “what was that about?”—JohnChanin 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4718060>

Written on the Body <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/written-on-the-body.html> 
byJeanette Winterson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jeanettewinterson> – 
All of her early books have affected me a lot and I’d probably rateSexing the 
Cherry <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/sexing-the-cherry.html> as my 
favourite, but I think it was the sheer power of Written on the Body which made 
the greatest impression on me. As a young twentysomething I was drawn to its 
all-consuming intensity, its fevered portrayal of love, loss and rage, as well 
as the androgenity of the narrator which gave it a timeless universality.—
nilpferd <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2438014>
Herculine Poirotte (@DrChapman87) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> obviously "mémoires du 
jeune fille rangée", first autobiographical novel by Simone de Beauvoir.
 <https://twitter.com/DrChapman87/status/573805096045264896> March 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/DrChapman87/status/573805096045264896> Rob Long 
(@roblongwrites) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> Herta Müller, staggeringly 
good writer. The Appointment is probably my favourite of hers
 <https://twitter.com/roblongwrites/status/573808025879887872> March 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/roblongwrites/status/573808025879887872> Anti-Ka 
(@kat_reddan) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> #IWD2015 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/IWD2015?src=hash> : The Shipping News by Annie 
Proulxpic.twitter.com/JaDlHGGfWY <http://t.co/JaDlHGGfWY>
 <https://twitter.com/kat_reddan/status/573785214394171395> March 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/kat_reddan/status/573785214394171395> 
Patricia Highsmith – I read the Ripliad – the name given to the five novels 
where the characterTom Ripley <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Ripley> appears 
– last year (finishing the final book earlier this year) and experienced a joy 
and commitment to the story that I haven’t experienced since my teenage years 
reading John Grisham and Michael Crichton in my parents’ back garden.

Have to go with Daphne Du Maurier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/daphnedumaurier> as well – the short stories 
are brilliant, and there are images fromJamaica Inn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/19/julie-myerson-daphne-du-maurier-jamaica-inn>
 that still stick in my mind’s eye like a bad dream...—judgeDAmNation 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10112344>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Finternational-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425642569253%2Fbce7357d-40f0-451b-b8dd-adb85923af25-1500x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20favourite%20books%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Finternational-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20favourite%20books%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Finternational-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425642569253%2Fbce7357d-40f0-451b-b8dd-adb85923af25-1500x2040.jpeg>
 Eye-opener ... Doris Lessing pictured in 1984 at her home in London. 
Photograph: Jan Delden/AFP/Getty Images 
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie>’s book Americanah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/apr/11/americanah-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-review>
 has moved me like no other in recent memory. I would describe it as 
transformational because it provided an insight into the reality of what it 
means to be a young, ambitious, highly intelligent, sometimes single black 
woman in contemporary America. It’s an honest book about race, identity and the 
constant longing and nostalgia one feels for this metaphorical place called 
home. I was also moved by the story because it touchingly describes the loving 
relationship between the two central characters, showcasing that neither space 
nor time can erase love. We usually go back to the same desires and preferences 
we had as 15-year-olds, and Americanah captures this sentiment. Moreover, it is 
a transformational book because it portrays Nigeria as a place that is 
mythical, marvellous, chaotic and slightly dangerous, yet also wildly 
fascinating, with a magnetic power to attract its brightest emigrés back to its 
shores. Reading this has made me realise that some of the most powerful 
narratives in contemporary fiction have been written by young, highly educated 
female African writers, who are tired of the old clichés frequently bandied 
around about Africa. Ngozi Adichie is a new, powerful and incredibly talented 
voice; her novel Americanah is the expression of a different African tale, of a 
continent and its people that have many more magnetic stories to tell, as well 
as critiques to raise about the so-called enlightened West.—beograd 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38778233> 

Pilgrim at Tinker Creek 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/pilgrim-at-tinker-creek.html> by Annie 
Dillard. Simply delightful, like a walk in the woods while meditating.
The Golden notebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/06/the-golden-notebook-50-years-on> 
byDoris Lessing <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dorislessing>. It made me 
realise how far we still had to go when I read it as a young woman in the early 
80s.
Anything by Carson McCullers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/08/fiction.alismith> and Virginia 
Woolf <https://www.theguardian.com/books/virginiawoolf>, Marguerite Duras, 
Annie Proulx <https://www.theguardian.com/books/annie-proulx>.
Colette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/02/colette-break-of-day-rereading>, 
whose tender portraits of cats and lovers are magical.
...and May Sarton, whose diaries are proof that even a well-observed flower is 
a powerful reason for remaining alive.—artcrit 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4186761>

The Mill on the Floss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/mar/27/eliot-mill-floss-biography-tulliver>
 and Romola byGeorge Eliot <https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeeliot>. The 
former is as true as a well-cast bell about a girl’s life in the provincial 
England of the author’s time. The latter is in need of a cold-eyed editor to 
trim part-digested historical research and a lurching, over-burdened plot – but 
the profound and poised account of a woman’s love misplaced and a man’s selfish 
exploitation thereof is breathtaking.

Eliot wrote that writing Romola had aged her greatly, but she did us a fine 
service by it.—zuftawov943 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11457447>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Finternational-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425644513965%2F0d770d18-59b1-4a2d-b590-f3a09c61a392-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers'%20favourite%20books%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Finternational-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%27%20favourite%20books%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F06%2Finternational-womens-day-readers-favourite-books-by-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425644513965%2F0d770d18-59b1-4a2d-b590-f3a09c61a392-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Transformational ... Nigerian novelist Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, in a 2012 
picture. Photograph: Rex 
I picked up a novel by Elizabeth Taylor (1912-1975, not the actress) and went 
on to read all her 12 novels. All but the last two are engaging, in a quiet 
unsensational way. Perhaps the best isA Game of Hide and Seek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/sep/26/game-of-hide-and-seek>. Taylor 
was reprinted by the admirable Virago in the 1980s and 1990s, but has rather 
lapsed back into oblivion. Men should read her. [...] There was no “side” to 
Taylor, no fakery, her tales are plausible and engaging. She could weave a 
novel out of nothing, as Haydn could compose a symphonic movement from a couple 
of bars of music. She lived a perfectly uneventful life, as the huge majority 
of us do, despite our desperate rage to become “celebs”.Chapeau, Mrs Taylor! 
Your books are not “important” — and bugger importance. As Kingsley Amis put 
it: “Importance isn’t important. Good writing is.” Amen to that.—Bloreheath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jul/29/which-books-by-women-have-had-the-biggest-impact-on-you#comment-38765811>
Benji Taylor (@destroy_time) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @lorettamilan 
<https://twitter.com/lorettamilan> "A Handmaid's Tale," @MargaretAtwood 
<https://twitter.com/MargaretAtwood> for its prescience and her fearlessness in 
engaging tropes and future
 <https://twitter.com/destroy_time/status/573807386558734336> March 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/destroy_time/status/573807386558734336> Giovanni Cicogno 
(@Bunnethustler) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> All of Val McDermid, Denise 
Mina, Caro Ramsay and Tana French. Also Patricia Highsmith, Anna Kavan, Djuna 
Barnes#IWD2015 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/IWD2015?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Bunnethustler/status/573807670832066560> March 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Bunnethustler/status/573807670832066560> William French 
(@wtfrench76) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> Middlemarch, Persuasion, 
Wives + Daughters, Wuthering Heights, Adrian Mole, The Night Watch, Miss 
Smilla's Feeling for Snow.
 <https://twitter.com/wtfrench76/status/573803534984028161> March 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/wtfrench76/status/573803534984028161> pat blake (@EePat) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> Austen; Lorrie Moore; 
Alison Monroe; Margaret Laurence; Antonya Nelson; Rose Tremain; George Eliot; 
Lore Segal.. Many more
 <https://twitter.com/EePat/status/573798878383763456> March 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/EePat/status/573798878383763456> Claire (@Creative_Claire) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> To Kill A Mockingbird of 
course!#InternationalWomensDay 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/InternationalWomensDay?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Creative_Claire/status/573795054210392065> March 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Creative_Claire/status/573795054210392065> Anika 
(@AnikaWrites) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @lorettamilan 
<https://twitter.com/lorettamilan> Mary Shelley's Frankenstein - brilliant book 
and way ahead of its time!
 <https://twitter.com/AnikaWrites/status/573807713676869632> March 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/AnikaWrites/status/573807713676869632> 
Good Morning, Midnight 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/good-morning-midnight.html> by Jean Rhys. A 
superb work of literary Modernism and as tough and fascinating a work on 
addiction as anything by Burroughs or Buckowski.—DJMC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/jul/29/which-books-by-women-have-had-the-biggest-impact-on-you#comment-38762095>

Is your favourite missing? Contribute to our all-female reading list by adding 
it to the comments below
 