
The economies of the United States and Europe are seeing their worst downturn 
since the Great Depression. Tens of millions of people are unemployed or 
underemployed. This has led to millions losing their homes, their access to 
health care, and, in some cases, their lives.

Remarkably, the two individuals who bear the greatest responsibility for this 
disaster, former Federal Reserve Board chairman Alan Greenspan former president 
of theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> Jean-Claude 
Trichet, do not appear to be suffering at all for their failure. Both are 
living comfortably and continue to be sought out for their expertise on 
economic policy. This should infuriate reasonable people everywhere.

At this point everyone should understand that the economic wreckage destroying 
tens of millions of lives across the globe was an entirely preventable 
disaster. In the case of both the United States andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> unsustainable asset bubbles 
were allowed to grow to ever more dangerous levels. It was inevitable that the 
bubbles would burst and when they did the outcome would be a severe downturn 
from which it would not easy to recover.

In the case of the United States the story was a housing bubble that resulted 
in an unprecedented run up in house prices. After just keeping pace with 
inflation for a hundred years, nationwide house prices rose by more than 70 
percentage points in excess of the rate of inflation over the decade from 1996 
to 2006.

There was nothing in the dynamics of the supply and demand of the housing 
market that could have justified such an increase. Rents were going nowhere and 
there was a record high vacancy rate as early as 2002. More importantly the 
bubble was clearly driving the economy with near record rates of residential 
construction from 2002-2005. And housing wealth driven consumption pushed the 
saving rate to nearly zero from 2004-2007.

Of course these sources of demand would disappear when the bubble burst. What 
did Greenspan think would replace them? We may never know what Greenspan was 
thinking, but what he has said in his own defense is utterly absurd. In fact he 
told the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/06/14/AR2008061401479.html>
 that he did not even know of the explosion of subprime lending until his last 
month as Fed chair in January 2006. If that is actually true it displays a 
level of incompetence that puts a drunken school bus driver to shame.

Greenspan should have been attacking the bubble with everything in his vast 
arsenal. Most immediately he should have been using the research of the Fed and 
his megaphone as Fed chair to warn the country about the bubble in unmistakable 
terms. (He actually did the opposite, denying the existence of a bubble and 
encouraging people to take out adjustable rate mortgages.) He also should have 
used his regulatory authority to crack down on bad mortgages. If both of these 
tools failed, he should have raised interest rates. This would have slowed the 
economy and increased unemployment, but it was better than the disaster we are 
seeing now.

Trichet doesn't have any better defense. The bubbles in the peripheral 
countries were leading to trade imbalances that were clearly unsustainable. As 
early as 2004 the current account deficit in Spain was already 5.2% of GDP, in 
Greece it was 5.8% of GDP and in Portugal it was 8.3% of GDP. These deficits 
peaked in 2007-2008 at 10% of GDP or higher. How did Trichet think that 
deficits of this size would resolve themselves in a single currency? What was 
the process whereby the peripheral countries would suddenly be able to pay for 
their imports from the core countries? If he envisioned some mechanism for this 
adjustment that didn't involve an economic earthquake, it is difficult to 
imagine what it could have been.

European Central Bank officials are prone to say in their own defense that 
their mandate is only to target 2% inflation; it doesn't say anything about 
preventing depressions. Interestingly the ECB did not take this narrow view of 
its mandate when the euro zone's largest banks faced insolvency in the fall of 
2008. It came through with trillions of euros of below market loans.

The reality is that a central bank has to be responsible for maintaining 
economic stability as the ECB has implicitly acknowledged with its actions 
since the onset of the crisis. This means the ECB has no more excuse for 
failing to stem the imbalances of the last decade than does the Fed.

This raises the question of why the public should be paying for the generous 
pensions that bothGreenspan 
<http://www.federalreserve.gov/careers/benefits.htm#retirement> and Trichet 
<http://www.ecb.int/ecb/jobs/pdf/coe_annex_3a_staff_joining_from_1_june_2009.pdf?9136ccccab02a61b438e14230ad415ea>
 enjoy. After all, if Greenspan and Trichet had tried to burn down their 
respective institutions would we be paying their pensions? Given the 
consequences of their policy failures, we would be much better off if they had 
done their done their jobs competently and our only complaint was an incident 
of arson.

Economists believe that it is important that workers be given incentive for 
good work and punished for bad work. It would be hard to imagine central 
bankers more in need of punishment than Greenspan and Trichet. If we don't take 
action against these two, why would we expect that their successors will be any 
better?
 