
Imported from the US, Recyclebank <http://www.recyclebank.com/rewards> rewards 
people for taking everyday green actions.

The company was founded on the belief that environmental solutions create 
economic opportunities.

Its business is to attract participating members and then motivate them to 
become greener residents and smarter consumers by offering incentives for 
responsible home recycling.

Recyclebank turns UK practice on its head. Until its arrival, local and 
national policy had largely focused on penalty schemes rather than the 
company's "a carrot, not a stick" approach.

First introduced to the UK in 2009, Recyclebank was rolled out in the Royal 
Borough of Windsor and Maidenhead in 2010 – in partnership with the council and 
waste management service provider, Veolia Environmental Services.

Already successful across 29 States in America, the challenge in the UK was to 
engage households in the scheme and get the message across to "think before you 
throw".

Recyclebank does this by measuring the amount each home recycles and then 
converting it into points, redeemable at nearly 300 local and national retail 
and reward partners – including Marks & Spencer.

The UK dumps more household waste to landfill than any other EU state. With a 
stringent target to halve 1995 levels of municipal waste sent to landfill by 
2013, landfill tax increasing by £8 per tonne a year, and landfill space at a 
premium, recycling is even more important for councils.

Initial PR and marketing set out to tap into the consciousness of 'wasteful' 
households through simple messages and word-of-mouth recommendations.

Backed by community media events held in residential streets, the idea was to 
showcase the scheme in action and present it as a win-win formula.

No celebrity endorsements or advertising were used. Instead, the scheme is 
explained in financial terms as being worth at least £135 per year to member 
households.

All PR was conducted electronically and key partner Marks & Spencer 
contributed a video demonstration of how a milk carton bought in Windsor could 
be consumed and recycled by a resident to benefit all.

Subsequent extensive media coverage, including TV and radio and national news, 
resulted in up to 71% of eligible households activating their accounts.

The initiative also won endorsement from the prime minister and other MPs.

Since the start of the programme, Recylebank has led to:

• Involvement of 217 local business and 12 becoming national partners.

• 56.9m Recyclebank points for residents.

• A 35% increase in recycling rates by participants.

• 54,791 rewards being handed out.

The UK division now serves more than 100,000 members and is expected to grow 
rapidly during 2011.

Members can also donate their points to the Recyclebank green schools 
programme, which has so far provided the Boyne Hill primary school with £1,250 
to develop a sustainable garden.

Recyclebank's mission is to reward changed behaviour to bring benefits to the 
community, business and the environment.

Once established in the UK, it aims to develop in line with the US model, 
which also encourages lower energy consumption and reuse.

Lynn Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 