
The Red Bull designer, Adrian Newey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adrian-newey>, was honoured on Thursday, 
becoming one of the latest inductees to Motor Sport magazine's hall of fame. 
The awards, which recognise and celebrate the achievements of people involved 
in motor sport, were established in 2010, with four new inductees each year.

Alongside Newey, John Surtees was inducted. The driver and rider won the 500cc 
motorbike world championship in 1956, 1958, 1959 and 1960 then the F1 
championship with Ferrari in 1964. He remains the only man to have won both 
bike and F1 world championships.

Also honoured were the late Colin McRae â€“ world rally champion in 1995 and 
Italian motorcycle great, and Giacomo Agostini, who has won 15 world 
championships.

Newey, who has won back-to-back titles in the past two seasons with Red Bull, 
is the only designer to have won constructors' championships with three 
differentFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> teams, 
taking five wins with Williams and one with McLaren.

"This is something I had never dreamt of," he said, on receiving the award. 
"To have joined so many legends, so many people who I have followed, who I have 
aspired to when I was younger. It's an amazing feeling, it feels very special."

The Red Bull <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/red-bull> team principal 
Christian Horner welcomed Newey to the stage and was understandably effusive in 
his praise for the designer McLaren's Martin Whitmarsh described last year as a 
valuable and "scarce resource".

Motor Sport's magazine editor-in-chief Nigel Roebuck went further, describing 
Newey as "the best designer ever to have graced the Formula One paddock".

Previous inductees to the hall of fame include Ayrton Senna, Michael 
Schumacher, Jim Clark, Enzo Ferrari, Ron Dennis, Sir Jackie Stewart, Juan 
Manuel Fangio and Sir Frank Williams.
 