
Do some dogs simply have the “it” factor?

In life’s vast kennel of hopefuls and have-nots, can encountering certain 
canines be – for the makers and breakers in show business – like discovering a 
new starlet: one look and they light up the room?

Can acting pooches show great promise and potential, only to derail their own 
careers with a series of bad decisions or a scandalous addiction to dried meat 
goods?

For a small section of the film and TV industry, these are serious questions 
(although maybe not the last one) that tend to trigger answers in the 
affirmative. With potentially tens of millions of dollars on the line, it’s no 
surprise that casting decisions for a movie such asRed Dog: True Blue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/red-dog-true-blue> are made with as much 
scrutiny – perhaps more – than those for any human-centric production.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fred-dog-true-blue-film-makers-on-what-makes-a-dog-a-star-when-you-see-it-you-just-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8801c628a340905d2d87d0eb5ef33eab7da561fa%2F0_0_3204_4695%2F3204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Red%20Dog%3A%20True%20Blue%20film-makers%20on%20what%20makes%20a%20dog%20a%20star%3A%20'When%20you%20see%20it%20you%20just%20know'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fred-dog-true-blue-film-makers-on-what-makes-a-dog-a-star-when-you-see-it-you-just-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Red%20Dog%3A%20True%20Blue%20film-makers%20on%20what%20makes%20a%20dog%20a%20star%3A%20%27When%20you%20see%20it%20you%20just%20know%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fred-dog-true-blue-film-makers-on-what-makes-a-dog-a-star-when-you-see-it-you-just-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8801c628a340905d2d87d0eb5ef33eab7da561fa%2F0_0_3204_4695%2F3204.jpg>
 ‘Some dogs have a certain star quality where, when they walk into a room, they 
change the temperature,’ says Red Dog: True Blue producer Nelson Woss. 
Photograph: Don Arnold/WireImage 
To say the massive success of its predecessor, the 2011 family film Red Dog, 
was a surprise is something of an understatement. The real-life-inspired tale 
of a nomadic four-legged friend in search of a new owner chewed through over 
$21m at the local box office, making itthe 10th-highest-grossing Australian 
film of all time 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/fact-finders/cinema/australian-films/top-films-at-the-box-office>
.

With the star of the show – a kelpie named Koko, who belonged to producer 
Nelson Woss – having now, sadly, passed, a younger dog-actor named Phoenix 
follows in its paw-steps.

And yes, absolutely, there is an “it” factor, according to Woss, who also 
produced True Blue.

“Some dogs have a certain star quality where, when they walk into a room, they 
change the temperature,” Woss says. “When you see it, you just know. They light 
up the scene; you can see their emotion. Anybody who has had a dog, or 
connected with a dog, can understand that it’s real.”

Kriv Stenders, returning to the director’s chair for True Blue, agrees. “When 
you look into his [Phoenix’s] eyes, you sense a soul, you sense a spirit and 
you sense a connection,” he says. “Koko in the first film was a lot more, I 
guess, middle-aged, while in this film, Phoenix is sort of the teenager or 
young adult. A bit like casting Robert Redford and Brad Pitt.”


Koko was more middle-aged, while Phoenix is sort of the young adult. A bit 
like casting Robert Redford and Brad Pitt.
Kriv Stenders, Red Dog director 
Stenders has a chuckle at the end of that last sentence, but is quite serious 
when he discusses the differences in personality between the two tail-wagging 
thesps. Koko was “a lot more mercurial than Phoenix” and “had more 
idiosyncrasies”, he says, including freaking out about loud noises. Scenes 
involving rowdy pub patrons clapping and cheering in the original had to be 
mimed on set, with the audio added in post-production to prevent the star from 
running away.

There’s no question that Red Dog and its prequel, which opens on Boxing Day in 
Australia and is trottingto Sundance next year 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/movies/article/2016/12/06/aussies-sundance-red-dog-prequel-feature-2017-line>
, occupy a significant place in Australian popular culture. They belong to a 
canon of enduring, animal-themed Australian films that have a big influence on 
young viewers in their formative years, including classicsStorm Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/21/storm-boy-rewatched-heartfelt-portrait-of-a-boy-and-his-pelican>
,Babe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/17/babe-rewatched-the-smash-hit-story-of-the-little-pig-that-could-20-years-on>
 andThe Silver Brumby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/10/the-silver-brumby-rewatched-a-natural-beauty-that-doesnt-age>
.


They are also part of a more contemporary slate of locally produced 
child-friendly movies that have collected big bucks at the Australian box 
office. These include three 2015 releases:Oddball 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/fact-finders/cinema/australian-films/top-films-at-the-box-office>
 ($11m),Paper Planes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/14/paper-planes-review-a-heart-on-sleeve-tournament-movie-just-for-the-kids>
 ($9.6m) andBlinky Bill the Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/17/blinky-bill-the-movie-review-a-cranked-up-embrace-of-australianisms>
 ($2.9m).

Both Stenders and Woss believe this success with viewers whose shoe sizes 
exceed their age (or thereabouts) comes down to a simple fact: Australian kids 
love local content. They are certainly more partial to homemade cinema than 
teenagers and young adults, who tend to gravitate towards the kind of 
bling-lathered SFX bonanzas only Hollywood can deliver. “Kriv and I grew up 
watching films like Stand By Me and Empire of the Sun,” says Woss. “We wanted 
to make a unique family film that was iconically Australian, that we could show 
our own kids.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fred-dog-true-blue-film-makers-on-what-makes-a-dog-a-star-when-you-see-it-you-just-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25f1e0367615d041c6356d960f520033fd1f5e22%2F0_0_1404_931%2F1404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Red%20Dog%3A%20True%20Blue%20film-makers%20on%20what%20makes%20a%20dog%20a%20star%3A%20'When%20you%20see%20it%20you%20just%20know'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fred-dog-true-blue-film-makers-on-what-makes-a-dog-a-star-when-you-see-it-you-just-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Red%20Dog%3A%20True%20Blue%20film-makers%20on%20what%20makes%20a%20dog%20a%20star%3A%20%27When%20you%20see%20it%20you%20just%20know%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fred-dog-true-blue-film-makers-on-what-makes-a-dog-a-star-when-you-see-it-you-just-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25f1e0367615d041c6356d960f520033fd1f5e22%2F0_0_1404_931%2F1404.jpg>
 Levi Miller (Mick) and Phoenix in Red Dog: True Blue. Photograph: Roadshow 
Entertainment 
Stenders is currently among the busiest Australian film and TV directors, with 
several productions in the pipeline, including Danger Close with Sam 
Worthington, Australia Day with Bryan Brown anda re-adaptation of Wake in Fright
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/08/wake-in-fright-to-get-tv-treatment-in-two-part-series-for-network-ten>
 for Channel Ten. He had an epiphany last year while sitting down with his son 
and his son’s friend to watch Paper Planes, director Robert Connolly’s 
tournament movie about the competitive world of paper plane throwing.

“They completely loved it,” Stenders says. “They got it. They didn’t judge it 
by stacking it up against an American film. Paper Planes and Oddball were built 
on, I guess, the pathway we created with Red Dog. What’s great is that these 
films have cleared it, and made the pathway wider and longer.

“I think there is a definitely now a proven conduit: Australian kids love 
watching Australian kids and seeing their own stories on screen.”

• Red Dog: True Blue hits Australian cinemas on Boxing Day
 