
The grandson of the founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> has been barred from running for a top 
clerical body, his family has said, as the country prepares for crucial 
elections next month.

The decision to bar Hassan Khomeini, who has close ties to reformists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/18/iran-hassan-khomeini-enters-politics-assembly-of-experts-elections-ayatollah-ruhollah-khomeini>
, is likely to serve as pushback against anyone proposing changes to the 
clerical government following the nuclear deal with world powers negotiated by 
the administration of Iran’s moderate president, Hassan Rouhani.

Khomeini planned to stand in the assembly of experts election, to be held the 
same day as Iran’s parliamentary elections, in which moderates hope to make 
gains. The 86-member body of clerics is elected by the public to eight-year 
terms.

Khomeini's reformist grandson follows the ayatollah's footsteps into politics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/18/iran-hassan-khomeini-enters-politics-assembly-of-experts-elections-ayatollah-ruhollah-khomeini>
It serves a function similar to the Vatican’s college of cardinals, and will 
someday have to pick a successor to the 76-year-old supreme leaderAyatollah Ali 
Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jan/15/legacy-iran-supreme-leader-ayatollah-khamanei>
. It can also directly challenge the supreme leader’s rule, something it has 
never done before.

Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini became the country’s first supreme leader after 
leading Iran’s 1979 Islamic revolution.

A final list of qualified nominees for the assembly of experts election is 
expected to be released on 16 February, just ahead of the 26 February election 
for both the assembly and Iran’s parliament.

On Tuesday, Ahmad Khomeini, the son of Hassan Khomeini, apparently made a post 
on Instagram saying his father had been barred from the election by Iran’s 
Guardian Council. The state-run Islamic Republic news agency later reported 
details of the post.

It was captioned: “Last night, it was clarified that the Guardian Council 
could not approve the qualifications of my father and they could not learn 
about his qualifications.” Hassan Khomeini apparently did not attend an exam 
for the Guardian Council, something his son claimed was not required of others 
running for the council.

Brand Khomeini gets a facelift
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/oct/05/instagram-savvy-khomeini-heir>
“I think the reason is clear for all,” the post read, without elaborating.

Half of the Guardian Council, a 12-member body, is selected by Iran’s supreme 
leader and the other half by the country’s judicial chief with parliament’s 
approval.

The council holds veto power over Iran’s parliament, as well as determining 
the eligibility of candidates for the assembly, the parliament and the 
presidency. It is widely considered to be a largely conservative force inthe 
country’s politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jan/18/iran-economic-reform-blocked>
.

The Guardian Council earlier this month disqualified a number of reformist 
candidates for Iran’s 290-seat parliament. Many were disqualified because they 
were not seen to be sufficiently loyal to the ruling system, as defined by 
council members.

The barring of moderates and reformists is seen as a hardline tactic to limit 
Rouhani’s moderate allies afterthe nuclear deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-expected-to-be-announced-in-vienna>
.
 