
It has been thirteen months exactly since the suicide of Aaron Swartz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz>, at the age of 26. It’s 
not the roundest anniversary, but it’s the signal today for a global wave of 
protests against ubiquitous online surveillance in the western world.

Swartz was a hacker, in the old internet sense of the word. An unstoppable 
need to create things led to his involvement in the creation of RSS, the 
standard for creating web feeds which now underpins much of the mobile web; in
Reddit <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/reddit>, the social news site, 
which merged with his own company Infogami early in its life; and in Creative 
Commons, the organisation which invented new forms of “copyleft” to let people 
unambiguously free their creations from copyright controls.

It was that last motivation which led to his downfall. Swartz had already had 
trouble with the authorities after downloading and releasing more than 2.5m US 
federal court documents from the PACER service, in an effort to make public 
domain information actually public. While PACER charged $0.08 per page for 
access to the documents, they weren’t restricted by copyright. The FBI 
investigated Swartz, but ultimately decided not to prosecute.

Two years later, however, he repeated the same trick, allegedly using MIT’s 
computer network to download around 70GB of papers from academic database 
JSTOR. While JSTOR is mainly an archive of older papers, the service does host 
new research as well.

But Swartz wasn’t just charged with copyright infringement. Instead, due to 
the fact that he had apparently used a laptop connected to the physical 
network, hidden in a wiring cupboard in the university, the charges were of 
wire fraud, computer fraud, unlawfully obtaining information from a protected 
computer and recklessly damaging a protected computer.

Perhaps because they were smarting over their failure to find anything they 
could stick him with over the PACER downloads, it seems the federal prosecutors 
had little desire to let him off lightly.

Darrell Issa, in charge of the US house of representative’s investigation of 
the Justice Department’s prosecution of Swartz,told the Huffington Post that 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/15/darrell-issa-aaron-swartz-_n_2481450.html>
 “overprosecution is a tool often used to get people to plead guilty rather 
than risk sentencing… If someone is genuinely guilty of something and you bring 
them up on charges, that’s fine. But throw the book at them and find all kinds 
of charges and cobble them together so that they’ll plea to a ‘lesser included’ 
is a technique that I think can sometimes be inappropriately used.”

On January 11 2013, Swartz hanged himself. He left no note.

The first of the NSA files <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nsa> were 
released five months later. In the process, the conversation around civil 
liberties changed. While Aaron Swartz didn’t live to see it, those who knew 
him, such as David Segal, the executive director of US organisation Demand 
Progress, say they have little doubt he would be “on the front lines fighting 
against a world in which governments observe, collect, and analyze our every 
digital action”.

In 2012, Swartz was one of the guiding lights of the movement against a pair 
of US laws, SOPA and PIPA, which threatened to damage the legal underpinning of 
the internet, by potentially blocking access to any site which hosted user 
generated content. That campaign saw sites likeWikipedia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/wikipedia> and Reddit black out their 
pages for a day in protest.

Two years on, the community is reunited. February 11 has become “the Day We 
Fight Back”.

In the UK, the protest was launched at 11:30 with a thunderclap 
<https://www.thunderclap.it/>, a mass call on social media for wider opposition 
to spying. That opening strike was supported by users including Owen Jones, 
Graham Linehan, and Tom Watson MP, and was organised in co-operation with a 
range of civil liberties organisations including Liberty, English PEN, Privacy 
International, Article 19 and Big Brother Watch.

The groups have together launched the Don’t Spy On Us 
<https://www.dontspyonus.org.uk/org> campaign, calling on internet users across 
the UK to support a six-point manifesto attempting to mitigate the damage 
caused by GCHQ’s surveillance. Demands include no surveillance without 
suspicion, an end to secret laws, a requirement for a right to redress, and 
judicial rather than political authorisation for spying.

The Fight Back campaign has garnered 120,000 signatures already, as well as 
12,000 phone calls to elected officials. In Britain, it looks set to begin a 
conversation which has been long overdue, addressing directly the question of 
what the surveillance agencies can and can’t do.

• Hacking of MIT website marks first anniversary of Aaron Swartz’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/11/aaron-swartz-death-first-anniversary>
 