 Internet pioneers are gathering this week to celebrate the 30th anniversary of 
the Arpanet, the first step towards the creation of the world wide web.
Celebrations are focusing on University College London, where the first fully 
fledged link was made between UCL and the Kjeller Norway university in 1973. The
Arpanet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/arpanet> was the precursor to 
the internet, and was designed by Dr Robert E Kahn and Dr Vinton G Cerf, who 
today receive honorary fellowships from UCL.

The earliest link - albeit crude - was made in 1969 by Professor Peter 
Kirstein of UCL who contacted the US in 1969 by connecting to the very first 
version of Arpanet. He went on to provide the UK's principal internet link 
between the UK and the US throughout the 1980s.

Professor Kirstein said: "During the late 60s and early 70s, research 
departments in universities were making huge technological strides forward that 
contributed greatly to the birth of the internet. UCL in particular had a 
prominent role and made the first UK connection to the Arpanet, making the 
enterprise international for the first time.

"[Bob Kahn and Vint Cerf's] joint development of TCP/IP [internet protocol] 
has led to a communication network that links people regardless of geographical 
location. That has made a lasting impact on our education, quality of life and 
economy. This ceremony and the events that will take place throughout the week 
mark the discovery of the internet, and signal the start of a new era of 
internet developments."

Dr Cerf said: "UCL has had a central role in the evolution of the internet and 
it has been a privilege to maintain a collegial relationship with the UCL team 
as it explores new territory in the endless internet space."

The inauguration ceremony of the honorary fellows is due to take place at 5pm 
today.
 