
Science <https://www.theguardian.com/science> and technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/technology>
 Photograph: Claire Higgins/Christiano Lab at Columbia University Medical 
Center 
• Durham University
Human cells used to grow new hair could transform treatment for hair loss 
<https://www.dur.ac.uk/news/research/?itemno=19001>. Researchers have devised 
the method which is the first to use cloned human cells to induce hair growth, 
rather than redistributing hair from one part of the scalp to another. The 
researchers said their findings could significantly expand the use of hair 
transplantation to women who tend to have insufficient donor hair, as well as 
to men in early stages of baldness. Scientists say the research could also be 
an important step in creating replacement skin with hair follicles to aid the 
recovery of burn patients. Colin Jahoda, a professor at Durham University, 
says: "Current hair-loss medications tend to slow the loss of hair follicles or 
potentially stimulate the growth of existing hairs, but they do not create new 
hair follicles. Neither do conventional hair transplants, which relocate a set 
number of hairs from the back of the scalp to the front. Our method, in 
contrast, has the potential to actually grow new follicles using a patient's 
own cells. This could greatly expand the utility of hair restoration surgery to 
women and to younger patients — now it is largely restricted to the treatment 
of male-pattern baldness in patients with stable disease."

• University of Southampton
Young black women have a higher risk of breast cancer coming back 
<http://www.southampton.ac.uk/mediacentre/news/2013/oct/13_187.shtml> than 
white women in the same age group, a study reveals. Findings also show that 
this group is more likely to have larger and more aggressive tumours and higher 
rates of triple negative breast cancer – a type of breast cancer that does not 
respond to hormone therapies. Yet even when these factors are taken into 
account, they do not completely explain why black women have poorer outcomes, 
particularly those with the type of breast cancer that is expected to be 
sensitive to hormones. The authors of the study say it could be explained by an 
as-yet unidentified biological factor such as cancers in women of 
African-Caribbean descent responding less well to treatments, including hormone 
therapy or differences in the genetics of their tumours. Ellen Copson, a senior 
lecturer at the University of Southampton and one of the authors, says: "Our 
study confirms for the first time that black women under 41 in the UK are more 
likely to have breast cancer recurrence than their white counterparts, despite 
equal access to healthcare. The finding also backs up similar findings in the 
USA, suggesting that this could be an international trend, but further research 
is needed to try and pin down the exact cause or causes, so we can tackle this 
issue."

Arts and humanities <https://www.theguardian.com/education/artsandhumanities>
 Photograph: the Guardian 
• Royal Holloway University
The international research team at Royal Holloway is hosting an exhibition to 
reveal theimportance of the spirit world for different cultures 
<http://www.rhul.ac.uk/research/news/newsarticles/londonexhibitionhighlightshalloweentraditionsfromaroundtheworld.aspx>
. The event will showcase how native communities honour the dead and connect 
with the spirit world. Helen Gilbert, a professor from Royal Holloway, says: 
"We think about traditions such as trick-or-treating, lighting bonfires and 
telling ghost stories as quintessential to Halloween in the UK and Ireland, but 
in other parts of the world, many different cultures have their own unique and 
fascinating ways of connecting with the spirit world around the same time of 
year." A number of artists at the exhibition will also demonstrate the cultural 
philosophies and spiritual customs of Latin America.

Social science <https://www.theguardian.com/education/socialsciences>
 Photograph: University of Manchester/University of Ghana 
• University of Manchester / Ghana 
Sixty clay figurines up to 1,400-years-old 
<http://www.manchester.ac.uk/aboutus/news/display/?id=10921> excavated by 
archaeologists are to be revealed for the first time outside of Ghana at the 
Manchester Museum. The figurines, including two-headed humans, a chameleon, a 
crocodile and a man on horseback, are thought to have been used to invoke the 
help of ancestors to cure illnesses. Using computed tomography scanning 
techniques, archaeologists revealed hidden channels within the objects which 
they think had a medicinal function, used for liquid ritual offerings. The 
figurines show people with congenital conditions including anencephaly - which 
still affects children in Africa today. Timothy Insoll, professor from the 
University of Manchester, says: "Little is known about the people who made the 
figurines, who have no connection with Koma Land's current inhabitants. In 
fact, we know little in general about the past in this part of Ghana, because 
there are few historical sources before the late 19th century and oral 
traditions are scarce. But archaeology is unlocking some of the secrets of the 
past, and this project shows what can be achieved." He adds: "We now know the 
figurines may have had ritual and medicinal functions and the mounds they were 
found in were perhaps medicine shrines, or places for disposal of material 
considered dangerous. We also know these people were farmers, who traded with 
cowry shells, used iron tools and lived in villages, with complex religious 
beliefs."

• Nottingham Trent University / Nottingham
Using a humanoid robot as an educational tool could significantly improve 
engagement of children with severe intellectual disabilities 
<http://www.ntu.ac.uk/apps/news/149001-15/Humanoid_robot_shown_to_boost_engagement_of_children_with_intellectual_disa.aspx>
, researchers have found. A study shows that pupils who interacted with the 
autonomous NAO robot had up to five times greater engagement than when they 
were in a standard classroom setting. David Brown, a professor at Nottingham 
Trent University, says: "Human-robot interaction is an emerging field of 
research and these are really exciting initial results. Educating young people 
with intellectual disabilities presents different challenges due to their 
impaired understanding and reduced social skills." He adds: "Engagement is 
thought to be the single best predictor of successful learning in children with 
intellectual disabilities and we have demonstrated here how robots can be used 
to increase engagement." The programmable NAO humanoid robot is more advanced 
than robots used in similar studies, with capabilities including speech, speech 
recognition, sitting, standing, walking, dancing and playing sound files.

And finally
 Photograph: Rebecca Naden/PA 
• UCL / Southampton
Researchers have developed a new kind of radar 
<http://rspa.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/469/2160/20130512.full> that 
can detect hidden surveillance equipment and explosives. The new system is able 
to distinguish targets, such as certain types of electronic circuits that may 
be used in explosive or espionage devices, including items such as pipes, 
drinks cans and nails, that may be mistaken for a genuine target by traditional 
radar and metal detectors. The new system is based on a unique sonar concept 
called twin inverted pulse sonar (TWIPS). TWIPS exploits the natural abilities 
of dolphins to process their sonar signals to distinguish between targets and 
clutter in bubbly water. Some dolphins have been observed to blow 'bubble nets' 
around schools of fish, which force the fish to cluster together, and their 
sonar would not work if they could not distinguish the fish from the bubbles. 
Tim Leighton, a professor from the University of Southampton, says: "Certain 
electronic components can scatter radar signals nonlinearly if driven by a 
sufficiently strong radar signal, in contrast to naturally occurring objects 
which tend to scatter linearly. Such technology could be extended to other 
radiations, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and light detection and 
ranging (LIDAR), offering the possibility of early fire detection systems."

Would you like your university's research featured on the network? Email 
claire.shaw@theguardian.com <mailto:claire.shaw@theguardian.com> with your 
latest news

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 