
The outgoing central bank governor, Glenn Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/20/central-banks-running-out-of-firepower-in-fight-for-global-growth-says-glenn-stevens>
, has declared whomever winsthe federal election on 2 July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-election-2016> will 
inherit substantial heavy lifting on budget repair, as the campaign descended 
into a day of partisan finger-pointing about budget “black holes”.


In comments anticipated to be his final public intervention before leaving the 
Reserve Bank of Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/05/scott-morrison-names-philip-lowe-as-next-reserve-bank-governor>
, Stevens said the bank concurred with updated forecasts produced by Treasury 
last week about the state of the nation’s books but he said the official 
outlook amounted to everything is OK as long as nothing goes wrong.

Nova Peris resigns from the Senate after reports she was seeking AFL job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/24/nova-peris-resigns-from-the-senate-after-reports-she-was-seeking-afl-job>
“The budgetary situation will be OK if nothing else goes wrong,” Stevens told 
his audience in Sydney. “You can’t really assume in life that nothing will go 
wrong over an an extended period.

“I suspect there are quite some years of hard repair work ahead for whomever 
is the government over the period ahead.”


Stevens also noted conditions would be more favourable if economic growth was 
stronger. “Growth is proceeding, it would be good if it was a bit stronger, but 
it’s not too bad.”

The comments came as the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> attempted to intensify 
its political attack on Labor over the costings of its election policies, 
holding several media events on Tuesday to ventilate a contention that the ALP 
has a $200bn black hole in its costings over 10 years.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, started the day 
by branding the Labor leader “billion-dollar Bill” before ramping up the theme 
Labor was making spending promises it couldn’t afford.

At a media conference in Canberra at lunchtime, the treasurer, Scott Morrison, 
and the finance minister,Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, declared the 
budget blowout over the forward estimates amounted to $66.9bn.

Labor was increasing taxes, and none of the revenue was going to deficit 
reduction. “All of these additional taxes are being used to chase higher and 
higher levels of public spending,” Morrison said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Freserve-bank-governor-glenn-stevens-says-election-winner-faces-years-of-budget-repair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2ab8bf66a7b3eef2fc5dd948cfac44245b18a60%2F0_237_4431_2658%2F4431.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reserve%20Bank%20governor%20Glenn%20Stevens%20says%20election%20winner%20faces%20'years'%20of%20budget%20repair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Freserve-bank-governor-glenn-stevens-says-election-winner-faces-years-of-budget-repair%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reserve%20Bank%20governor%20Glenn%20Stevens%20says%20election%20winner%20faces%20%27years%27%20of%20budget%20repair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F24%2Freserve-bank-governor-glenn-stevens-says-election-winner-faces-years-of-budget-repair%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2ab8bf66a7b3eef2fc5dd948cfac44245b18a60%2F0_237_4431_2658%2F4431.jpg>
 In comments anticipated to be his final public intervention before leaving the 
Reserve Bank of Australia, Glenn Stevens said he would prefer economic growth 
to be higher. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
But Labor rounded on the government when it became clear that some of the 
government’s calculations for the alleged black holeincluded numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/24/coalition-says-black-hole-calculations-include-statements-that-are-not-labor-policies>
 that were not Labor’s settled policy. One example of the black hole inflation 
was including Labor’s long-term aspiration to restore $19bn of foreign aid cuts.

The shadow finance spokesman, Tony Burke, later told reporters voters had just 
watched the government’s two economic spokesmen, Morrison and Cormann, “the two 
people who were meant to be in charge of accuracy in numbers for our nation, 
basically blindfolded, throw darts at the Labor party”.

The opposition leader, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, described the attack 
as “desperate” and told reporters there were two competing visions on offer at 
this election.

There was the Coalition’s “trickle down” economics, “where you look after the 
top 1 and 2% and hope everyone else gets something on the way through, or 
Labor’s plan to look after working-class and middle-class families, good 
education, good health, good jobs. That is the most sustainable way to generate 
economic growth in the long term.”

“Mr Turnbull’s spending people’s money,” Shorten said. “He is just not 
spending it on Australians.”

Stevens also defended the RBA’s system of inflation targeting, rejecting calls 
from some economists for a rethink of the system.

He said inflation targeting was “not a rigid thing that demands kneejerk 
reactions”, it was a system with sufficient flexibility to deliver what was 
required.

Stevens noted many approaches had been tried but the current system had worked 
and “you wouldn’t want to be without it”.

Coalition says 'black hole' calculations include statements that are not Labor 
policies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/24/coalition-says-black-hole-calculations-include-statements-that-are-not-labor-policies>
He also addressed the housing market, warning the bank was keeping a close 
watch on the leverage in the system. “It’s a thing we watch and it’s key to 
keep an eye on the leverage and we’ve been quite focused on that.”

Stevens noted that household debt was high and, thus far, people appeared to 
be managing that well, “but these things remain a work in progress”.

Stevens said there was no easy road to riches through highly leveraged 
investments in real estate.

The outgoing governor was also asked about China’s economic transformation. He 
noted Beijing was “trying to manage a profound epochal transition” and there 
was no textbook for how to do that, because no country had ever attempted the 
transformation thatChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> was 
attempting on the scale it was attempting.

Stevens said there was a threshold question for Australia – can the 
authorities in China land this transition – and this would be “a threshold 
question we will live with for some years”.
 