
Science <https://www.theguardian.com/science> and technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/technology>
 Photograph: Reuters 
• University of Bristol / Peking University / US Geological Survey
For decades it was thought that our skeleton and all its characteristic bony 
tissues originated in the predators, known as 'conodonts'. Howevernew research 
<http://www.bris.ac.uk/news/2013/9830.html>, led by the University of Bristol, 
shows that they were evolutionary copy-cats who evolved tooth-like structures 
and tissues independently of other vertebrates. The origin of our skeleton is 
to be found in the armour of our ancestors who evolved bony armour to protect 
themselves from such predators. Philip Donoghue, co-author of the study at the 
University of Bristol, says: "This removes a key piece of evidence from the 
hypothesis that teeth evolved before the skeletal armour, and suggests that the 
common ancestors of conodonts and other vertebrates likely lacked a mineralized 
skeleton. Rather, it seems that teeth evolved from the armour of our meek 
filter-feeding ancestors."

• Imperial College London
A study has discovered profound abnormalities in brain activity in a group of 
retired American football players 
<http://www3.imperial.ac.uk/newsandeventspggrp/imperialcollege/newssummary/news_17-10-2013-10-55-42>
. Brain imaging tests revealed unusual activity that correlated with how many 
times they had left the field with a head injury during their careers. Previous 
research has found that former American football players experience higher 
rates of neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's 
disease. The new findings suggest that players also face a risk of subtle 
neurological deficits that don't show up on normal clinical tests. Adam 
Hampshire, lead author of the study, from Imperial College London, says: "The 
critical fact is that the level of brain abnormality correlates strongly with 
the measure of head impacts of great enough severity to warrant being taken out 
of play. This means that it is highly likely that damage caused by blows to the 
head accumulate towards an executive impairment in later life." The findings 
also highlight the inadequacy of standard cognitive tests for detecting certain 
types of behavioural deficit. Hampshire adds: "The results tell us something 
very interesting about the human brain, which is that after damage, it can work 
harder and bring extra areas on line in order to cope with cognitive tasks. It 
is likely that in more complicated real world scenarios, this plasticity is 
insufficient and consequently, the executive impairment is no longer masked. In 
this respect, the results are also of relevance to other patients who suffer 
from multiple head injuries."

Arts and humanities <https://www.theguardian.com/education/artsandhumanities>
 Photograph: Bloomberg News 
• University of Cambridge
Research shows that while a shift in personal music taste over a lifetime is 
intrinsically linked to personality and experience 
<http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/the-musical-ages-of-modern-man-how-our-taste-in-music-changes-over-a-lifetime>
, there are common music genre trends associated with key stages in a human 
life. Findings show that the music we like adapts to the particular 'life 
challenges' we face at different stages of our lives. Using this theory, 
researchers say that we come to music to experiment with identity and define 
ourselves, and then use it as a social vehicle to establish our group and find 
a mate, and later as a more solitary expression of our intellect, status and 
greater emotional understanding. "Teenage years are often dominated by the need 
to establish identity, and music is a cheap, effective way to do this," said 
Jason Rentfrow, senior researcher on the study at Cambridge. "Adolescents' 
quest for independence often takes the shape of a juxtaposed stance to the 
perceived 'status quo', that of parents and the establishment. Once people 
overcome the need for autonomy, the next 'life challenge' concerns finding love 
and being loved." He adds: "Whereas the first musical age is about asserting 
independence, the next appears to be more about gaining acceptance from others."

Social science <https://www.theguardian.com/education/socialsciences>
 Photograph: Alan Schein Photography/Corbis 
• Durham University
High cost credit companies which charge huge rates of interest should be 
prevented from lending to people who cannot afford repayments, researchers 
urge. Sarah Banks, professor and co-director of Durham University's Centre for 
Social Justice and Community Action, says: "Among the families we have been 
working with, high cost credit is commonplace and regarded as normal. There was 
low awareness of the huge interest rates and, instead, a simplistic focus on 
the weekly repayments rather than the total cost of this credit." She adds: "We 
believe it is essential that high cost credit companies are made to adopt a 
charter to ensure that they cannot lend to people who are not able to afford 
these loans. We are recommending new regulations for data-sharing to ensure 
affordability, as well as a legal cap on the total cost of credit. Although 
supposedly for short-term use, in practice extremely high interest rates could 
last for months and Annual Percentage Rates of 4,000 per cent were common."

• University of Oxford
Latest research shows more than half of those who go online do it without 
enthusiasm <http://www.ox.ac.uk/media/news_stories/2013/131001.html>. Nearly 
one in six (14%) users felt the internet was taking over their lives and 
invading their privacy. An additional one-third (37%) of British users had no 
strong feelings either for or against the internet and were described as 
'moderate' in their view. Some 17% said it made them more efficient; 12% said 
they were happy going online; and 19% had mixed views, feeling efficient and 
happier but also frustrated, according to the report. Grant Blank, a researcher 
from the Oxford Internet Institute, says: "This survey shows that while most of 
us in Britain are now using the internet, half do it without enthusiasm. These 
are people who use the internet because they have to, not because they want to. 
They don't go online to enjoy themselves and they don't feel more productive 
online. They also perceive problems, particularly with regard to privacy, 
frustration and wasted time." He adds: "The apparent weak growth in the 
proportion of people using social network sites is a remarkable change from 
prior years. We can speculate that this is because of media coverage about 
privacy issues on social media sites. Or, maybe it shows that we are 
approaching a natural limit in the number of people interested in such sites.'

And finally
 Photograph: the Guardian 
• University of York / Exeter / Newcastle / Bristol / Edinburgh / British 
Antarctic Survey
A team of UK scientists have discovered huge ice channels beneath a floating 
ice shelf in Antarctica 
<http://www.york.ac.uk/news-and-events/news/2013/research/ice-channels/>. At 
250 metres high, the channels are almost as tall as the Eiffel tower and 
stretch hundreds of kilometres along the ice shelf. The channels are likely to 
influence the stability of the ice shelf and their discovery will help 
researchers understand how the ice will respond to changing environmental 
conditions. David Rippin, senior lecturer in the environment department at 
York, says: "We know very little about the drainage of water beneath the 
Antarctic ice sheet. However, seeing such large channels in one of the floating 
ice shelves that surround Antarctica and then seeing that these channels line 
up with locations where we predict water would outflow from under the Antarctic 
ice sheet, is strong evidence that channelised drainage exists beneath, at 
least parts of, this huge ice sheet. This has significant implications for 
Antarctica's dynamic behaviour."

Would you like your university's research featured on the network? Email 
claire.shaw@theguardian.com <mailto:claire.shaw@theguardian.com> with your 
latest news

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 