
I am sitting inside a makeshift shelter built under the stairs of an infant 
school in Rochdale, listening to a group of five-year-olds in earnest 
conversation. They are discussing who should negotiate with me, and how, in 
order to entice me out of my hiding place to rejoin the band, whose much 
anticipated concert has been broken up by my walkout in protest (and in 
character, of course) at the drummer's insistence on bashing her drums too 
loudly. The other band members have also gone their separate ways, and the 
children are having to work out how to get the band back together again so the 
concert can continue.

That was three decades ago. Just last week, in a blog for this network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/dec/11/theatre-education-schools-art-commissioners>
, Adam Barnard of the Company of Angels made a welcome and heartfelt case for 
the importance of art-led drama in schools. The main thrust of his argument was 
that "the only theatre in education really worth making is where art comes 
first, and education is a happy accident".

In the course of his article, he described the various theatrical tortures 
that are frequently inflicted on our children and young people in schools, in 
the name of education or even edutainment. But by far his greatest loathing was 
reserved for what he termed "educational theatre" – the antithesis in his view 
of "real theatre".

Barnard's artistic and theatrical heart is undoubtedly in the right place, and 
the work Company of Angels undertakes in schools is of high quality. But his 
article saddened me. In its desire to denigrate all educational theatre to 
reinforce the cause of art in schools, he either conveniently or wilfully 
ignored an extraordinary, vibrant and important part of our recent theatrical 
and educational history.

The work that occurred in and for schools across the UK (particularly from the 
mid-1960s through to the late 1980s) under theTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in Education (TIE) banner, was 
truly progressive, genuinely transformative and world-leading work of the 
highest quality and integrity, educationally and artistically.

Barnard describes a professional writer working in a school, with the students 
acting as commissioners, editors and contributors, as some sort of revelatory 
innovation. Back in the 1960s, Brian Way, who foundedTheatre Centre 
<http://www.theatre-centre.co.uk/> in 1953, was pioneering work that engaged 
the creative imagination of children, by enabling their active participation in 
the storytelling process. He would invite them to write, paint, make models, 
invent their plays. Way was using plays as stimulus for even more creative work.

Way's work was a huge influence on Gordon Vallins, who founded the UK's first 
TIE company at the Belgrade Theatre in Coventry in 1965. That it was that 
particular city, and that the company's first devised production was called Out 
of the Ashes, were not accidental. They reflected a belief thatthe Belgrade and 
all its work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/oct/01/belgrade-theatre-arts-education-interview>
 should be at the heart of the city's regeneration and its civic, cultural and 
democratic life.

The belief in high quality theatre as a genuine force for positive educational 
and social change coincided with an exponential growth in arts funding via both 
local authorities and the Arts Council. The result was the creation of dozens 
of TIE and Young Peoples' Theatre (YPT) companies, usually but not always 
linked to a regional venue.

Most regions and major cities had a resident TIE or YPT company, and those 
companies frequently attracted actors, actor-teachers, designers, directors, 
and writers of the highest calibre, attracted by the quality and integrity of 
the art, the educational purpose and, yes, the often radical politics.

An extraordinarily rich, powerful and sometimes provocative body of work came 
out of those companies. They produced work for and with four-year-olds in 
reception classes and 18-year-olds alike. They not only worked closely with 
teachers to ensure that the questions and issues raised in the work were 
embedded in the curriculum, but many companies had teachers as company members 
to ensure both artistic and pedagogic integrity.

This exciting and fertile period began to fade towards the late 1980s as the 
political and economic climate cooled and became distinctly unfavourable. The 
transfer of school funding control from local authorities down to individual 
schools meant there was no centralised, city-wide or region-wide support for 
TIE companies. Many were forced to close.

Back in 2011, Lyn Gardner was praising the wealth of opportunities for 
children and young people in east London schools to participate in drama and 
theatre projects. Company of Angels garnered particular approval.But she also 
expressed a concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2011/apr/13/theatre-education-youth-basics>
:

"As theatre education managers challenge themselves and satisfy funders with a 
seemingly constant race to think of more and more exciting ideas, I wonder 
whether we are also compromising a very basic, and now very unfashionable use 
for theatre in education – that of using performance as a way of directly 
promoting positive social change."

This is precisely what 'real' theatre in education was, and should be, about. 
In pursuit of that noble cause, educational purpose was not and could never be, 
as Adam Barnard would have it, some "happy accident".

Paul Kleiman is the Higher Education Academy's UK lead for dance, drama and 
music – follow him on Twitter@drpaulkleiman <http://twitter.com/drpaulkleiman> 
and read his blog,Stumbling with Confidence 
<http://stumblingwithconfidence.wordpress.com.> 

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 