
Mali is on tenterhooks as the hosts face Algeria today in the last of their 
group matches.

Victory in Bamako would ensure progress for Mali into the quarter-finals, 
whereas a draw could still be enough for them to qualify. But that depends on 
Nigeria beating Liberia in the other Group A match at Mopti, played at the same 
time this afternoon.

Mali and Liberia are tied after two draws, one point ahead of the Algerians. 
Nigeria are the only side to have registered a victory in the group, albeit 
with a good deal of fortune against Algeria.

Today Algeria will present strong opposition for the hosts, particularly after 
they salvaged their continued participation in a dramatic 2-2 draw with Liberia 
in Bamako on Friday.

Now the Algerians plan another dramatic comeback, according to their coach 
Rabah Madjer. "We have been uplifted by the way we played against Liberia and 
are motivated to win against Mali," said the former African footballer of the 
year.

The former Chelsea and Manchester City striker George Weah leads Liberia for 
possibly the last time after announcing he was to retire from international 
football at the end of the tournament.

Defeat would end Liberia's interest and bring the curtain down on a 
charismatic career for Weah, the only African to have won the 
world-footballer-of-the-year award.

Senegal's assistant coach Jules Bocande was yesterday handed a one-match 
touchline ban for throwing a bottle of water into the crowd on Saturday as his 
team secured a last-gasp 1-0 win against Zambia and a quarter-final place. The 
incident came after Souleymane Camara scored the only goal in the Group D match.

The Aberdeen striker Hicham Zerouali scored twice to give Morocco a 2-1 win 
over Burkina Faso to move to the top of Group B. After three successive 
goalless draws, Zerouali hit the group's first goal after 23 minutes of the 
game and his second late on.

In Group C, the Democratic Republic of Congo drew 0-0 with Togo.
 