
Although the impact of the budget on the overall market was rather muted, 
retailers benefited from confirmation that Sunday trading laws would be relaxed 
during the Olympics.

J Sainsbury was the biggest riser of the day in the leading index. Its shares 
closed 13.8p higher at 319.3p, also helped by upbeat trading news.Marks & 
Spencer, up 9.5p at 389.5p, benefited from a positive update from Spain's 
Inditex, owner of the Zara chain.

Debenhams added 1.75p to 78.3p as Societe Generale raised its target price 
from 69p to 78p in the wake of Tuesday's trading update.Dixons Retail rose 
1.33p to 18.8p andHome Retail was 6.6p higher at 122.5p.

But Ted Baker lost 12.5p to 775p as it reported flat profits of £24m after 
exceptional items. Freddie George at Seymour Pierce said:
 In our view, the exceptional costs of £2.8m were not properly flagged to the 
market. They related to rent for stores on stores not yet opened, set up costs 
in relation to China and provision for bad and doubtful debts in Greece. Ted 
Baker is a relatively safe investment, has a strong balance sheet and as with 
SuperGroup has a great opportunity to develop its brands on the internet and 
overseas. Earnings growth, though, is likely to be held back by the slow pace 
of development and is we believe unlikely to exceed 10% per annum over the next 
five years. 
The FTSE 100 edged up 0.54 points to 5891.95, with Wall Street proving a 
slight drag after weaker than expected US existing home sales in February.

Back with the budget, north sea oil companies moved higher after news of 
increased investment.Centrica climbed 1.2p to 313.8p, Enquest added 4.2p to 
132.6p, whileFaroe Petroleum jumped 5% to 159.5p.

Housebuilders benefited from the expansion of the Get Britain Building fund, 
withBarratt Developments up 6.3p at 148.8p and Bovis Homes 15.6p better at 
508.5p.

But upmarket estate agency Savills slipped 9.2p to 373p following the 7% stamp 
duty tax on properties worth more than £2m, and banks fell back on news an 
increase in the levy would make up for any gains from the chancellor's 
corporation tax cuts.Barclays ended 0.8p lower at 244.7p while Lloyds Banking 
Group lost 0.325p to 35.865p.

Elsewhere Wolseley added 65p to £25.58 after Credit Suisse lifted its price 
target on the building materials company from £24 to £28.50 with an outperform 
rating. The bank said:
 We have increased our earnings per share forecasts by 12% and 22% for 2012/13 
and 2013/14 respectively.

The majority of the group upgrade is related to an increase in our forecasts 
for the US. In addition to the improved data on US housing starts and the ABI 
Index, we cite the Credit Suisse US Homebuilding Team's Monthly Survey of Real 
Estate Agents as an extremely supportive lead indicator of an improved housing 
market. The balance of the revision to earnings forecasts relates to our 
European forecasts where the more resilient start to the year from peers 
(versus our expectations) has meant we upgrade sales assumptions for 2012 and 
2013. 
But Weir was the biggest faller in the leading index, down 123p at £18.59 
after a profit warning from US rival Baker Hughes, which mentioned lower 
pricing and raw material shortages, whileAviva lost 20.7p to 353p as the 
insurer's shares went ex-dividend.

Ocado dropped 4.5p to 118.8p as Panmure Gordon repeated its sell advice 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2012/mar/21/ocado-panmure-sell-note>
 on the online grocer, while IT services groupLogica lost 2.45p to 99.05p after 
Societe Generale reduced its recommendation from hold to sell.

Elsewhere analysts at Panmure Gordon have been looking at possible bid targets 
in the media sector and believeAegis, up 1.8p at 182.8p, ITV, 0.3p better at 
87.15p andInforma, 4p higher at 440p, fit the criteria for predators.

They also suggested investors are becoming sceptical of conglomerates, and said
Reed Elsevier, down 0.5p at 542p, could dispose of its exhibitions business:
 [Reed has] a chairman who has already undertaken one major demerger (eg 
Bunzl/Filtrona). 
Finally Hardy Underwriting surged 35% to 276.75p as US insurer CNA Financial 
made a 280p a share, £143m agreed offer for the struggling Lloyd's of London 
insurer.
 