
Anjem Choudary and his extremist groups are believed to have motivated at 
least 100 people from Britain to pursue terrorism, including organisations 
committed to campaigns of murder against the west, the Guardian has learned.

Choudary avoided serious criminal charges for years, but his own conviction 
for terrorism, agreed unanimously by an Old Bailey jury in July, can now be 
reported after legal restrictions were lifted.

Documents from intelligence sources say his groups were at the heart of the 
Islamist movement in Britain, which has been left facing a “severe” threat of 
jihadi attack.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anjem%20Choudary%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anjem%20Choudary%20%E2%80%93%20video%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-video-profile&media=>
Anjem Choudary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/aug/16/anjem-choudary-video-profile>
Choudary and an acolyte, Mohammed Rahman, were convicted after they urged 
support forIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> and pledged 
allegiance to the group.

Anjem Choudary case raises questions about terror laws, says watchdog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/17/anjem-choudary-case-raises-questions-terror-laws-watchdog>
The conviction represents only a fraction of the jihadi mayhem to which the 
lawyer is linked.

People connected to Choudary and his groups who turned to terrorism include 
Michael Adebolajo,one of the men who murdered the soldier Lee Rigby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/26/lee-rigby-killers-michael-adebolajo-adebowale-whole-life-ruling>
 on a London street in 2013. He is also linked to foiled plots to kill in the 
UK over a decade ago, youngsters who have fled to join Isis in Syria, leaving 
their families distraught, and the alleged inspiration of violence across 
Europe.

Choudary and his co-defendant, Mohammed Rahman, 33, told their supporters to 
obeyAbu Bakr al-Baghdadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/inside-the-hunt-for-isis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi>
, the Isis leader, who is also known as a caliph, and travel to Syria to 
support Isis or “the caliphate”.

On the ninth anniversary of the London terror attacks – 7 July 2014 – Choudary 
and Rahman posted an oath of allegiance online under theirkunyas or Islamic 
names, Abu Luqman, used by Choudary, and Abu Baraa, used by Rahman, on an 
extremist website.
Who is Anjem Choudary? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=anjem_choudary>
Choudary was a key figure for a succession of extremist Islamist groups. He 
was dismissed as a clown by some, while helping motivate youngsters to turn to 
terrorism in Britain and Europe, and enjoyed frequent media appearances.

 He was a key figure in al-Muhajiroun before it was banned under terrorism 
legislation and relaunched itself as al-Ghurabaa,which again was banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/jul/18/terrorism.immigrationpolicy> 
under terrorism laws. Successor groups in turn were banned under terrorism 
legislation, such asIslam4Uk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jan/12/islam4uk-banned-alan-johnson-islamist>
 and Muslims Against Crusades.

Commander Dean Haydon, the head of Scotland Yard’s counter-terrorism command, 
said his team had trawled through 20 years of Choudary’s statements to build 
the case against him. Haydon denied the extremist had been “allowed to run” so 
intelligence could be gained on the aspirant jihadis he attracted.

Haydon said of Choudary and Rahman: “These men have stayed just within the law 
for many years, but there is no one within the counter-terrorism world that has 
any doubts of the influence that they have had, the hate they have spread and 
the people that they have encouraged to join terrorist organisations.

“Over and over again we have seen people on trial for the most serious 
offences who have attended lectures or speeches given by these men.”

A conservative estimate is that no less than 100 people from Britain linked to 
Choudary or his groups have fought or supported violent jihad, according to 
counter-terrorism sources. The figures were supported by a leftwing 
anti-extremism group that has studied the influence of al-Muhajiroun and its 
successor groups.

That number increases on taking into account those in Europe who joined 
organisations such as Isis after being involved with extremist groups Choudary 
helped establish or influence, such as in Belgium and the Netherlands.

Choudary’s influence in Europe was such that the Dutch intelligence agency AIVD
 <https://english.aivd.nl/> assessed him to be a key influence in the spread of 
the jihadi movement in the Netherlands. A spokesperson for AIVD said it stood 
by its assessment of Choudary’s central role in the UK first, and then Europe, 
set out in a 2014 document: “Since the 1980s the UK has harboured an active 
Islamist movement propagating an anti-democratic, intolerant and sometimes 
explicitly violent ideology.

“At its heart is the now banned group Islam4UK, previously known as 
al-Muhajiroun, al-Ghurabaa and Muslims Against Crusades. Its most familiar 
faces areOmar Bakri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/30/omar-bakri-son-killed-iraq-fighting-for-isis-report>
 (currently resident in Lebanon) and Anjem Choudary, who acts as its spokesman. 
Modelling itself closely on this British movement, Sharia4Belgium was active in 
Belgium for several years …”

The spokesperson for Dutch intelligence added that the fact Choudary operated 
publicly and could “step out of the shadows and into light” was an inspiration 
for others to do the same.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Frevealed-how-anjem-choudary-inspired-at-least-100-british-jihadis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faff334678d0ef8ab6b1820b7c7b15df33a9907a8%2F0_189_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20how%20Anjem%20Choudary%20influenced%20at%20least%20100%20British%20jihadis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Frevealed-how-anjem-choudary-inspired-at-least-100-british-jihadis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20how%20Anjem%20Choudary%20influenced%20at%20least%20100%20British%20jihadis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Frevealed-how-anjem-choudary-inspired-at-least-100-british-jihadis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faff334678d0ef8ab6b1820b7c7b15df33a9907a8%2F0_189_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Belgians pay tribute to the victims of the terror attacks in Brussels in 
March. Photograph: Nicolas Maeterlinck/AFP/Getty Images 
In Belgium, which is coping with the aftermath of terrorist attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/brussels-airport-explosions-heard>
 in March and fearing more to come, Choudary helped set up Sharia4Belgium.

According to the European law enforcement agency Europol, Sharia4Belgium 
“engaged in organised indoctrination and recruitment of young people to 
participate in the armed conflict in Syria”. Choudary praised its leader after 
more than 40 of its members were convicted of terrorism.

 The groups Choudary led were “the single biggest gateway to terrorism in 
recent British history”, says one study on his activities, details of which are 
published here for the first time, from the leftwing groupHope Not Hate 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/>. It said: “Over the last 15 years he has 
influenced and inspired over 100 Britons who have carried out or attempted to 
carry out terrorist attacks at home and abroad.”

According to research from Hope Not Hate, supported by a 
counter-radicalisation expert who has worked with al-Muhajiroun members, 
Choudary helped Isis gain British recruits.

Hope Not Hate said: “In the six months following the creation of the Islamic 
State, Choudary was its biggest cheerleader in the English-speaking world and 
the network he helped create became the largest recruiter for IS in Europe.”

Choudary’s ability to operate in plain sight, seemingly without legal 
sanction, raises many questions. Sources in Britain’s Muslim community say 
Choudary was reported to the police, with some in the UK’s Islamic communities 
left baffled about how he remained untouched for so long.

Scotland Yard’s counter-terrorism command had previously attempted to build 
criminal cases against Choudary, only to be rebuffed by the Crown Prosecution 
Service, which judged there was insufficient chance of gaining a conviction.

Haydon said of the conviction reported for the first time: “The oath of 
allegiance [made by Choudary to Isis] was a turning point for the police. At 
last we had the evidence that they had stepped over the line and we could prove 
they supported Isis.”

Between August and September 2014, Choudary and Rahman posted speeches on 
YouTube encouraging support for Isis. An audio clip, lasting one hour and six 
minutes and uploaded to Choudary’s YouTube channel on 9 September 2014, was 
played to jurors. Titled How Muslims Assess the Legitimacy of the Caliphate, 
the speech was played over the image of a map of northern Africa, the Middle 
East, north-west Asia and southern Europe. Choudary begins by setting out his 
views about the requirements of a legitimate Islamic caliphate, then explains 
why he sees Islamic State as meeting the criteria. “The lesson from this 
narration is that obedience to the caliph is an obligation, if they rule by the 
sharia. And to obey them obviously means they must be established,” Choudary 
said.

Estimates of how many people Choudary funnelled into violence range from 100 
to 500. Hannah Stuart, of theHenry Jackson Society 
<http://henryjacksonsociety.org/> thinktank, said: “A quarter of all 
individuals convicted of Islamism-inspired terrorism and terrorism-related 
offences in the UK since 1999 had direct links with al-Muhajiroun (or its 
aliases), through public membership, al-Muhajiroun-linked activism or regular 
attendance at lectures and protests. One in 10 offenders had a proven personal 
relationship with Choudary in particular.”

British Muslims had complained about the media attention paid to Choudary and 
the impression given to audiences that he was representative of British Islamic 
thought.

Miqdaad Versi, of the Muslim Council of Britain, said: “Mr Anjem Choudary has 
long been condemned by Muslim organisations and Muslims across the country, who 
consider him and his support for Daesh [Isis] to be despicable and contrary to 
the values of Islam and our nation.

“Many Muslims have long been puzzled why this man was regularly approached by 
the media to give outrageous statements that inflamed Islamophobia.

One expert in counter-radicalisation said Choudary was useful for Isis in the 
early days, when it was looking to gain traction in the UK. But the likes of 
him are now needed barely at all because Isis’s reputation in jihadi circles 
and its online machine has grown so much. “They don’t need a middle man,” said 
the expert.


Choudary and Rahman will be sentenced next month and face a maximum of 10 
years in prison.

The home secretary, Amber Rudd, said: “The successful conviction of Anjem 
Choudary and Mohammed Rahman is recognition of the tireless efforts of police 
and security agencies to keep the people of this country safe.

“These dangerous individuals were recruiting sergeants for Daesh. They 
poisoned the minds of vulnerable people and their warped and twisted propaganda 
offered support and succour to a murderous and barbaric terrorist organisation.

“The government is clear. We will continue to confront those who promote hate 
and threaten our way of life. Together we will protect communities against 
extremism and defeat this toxic ideology.”
 