
The first photographs have emerged of Australian senior Isis member, Neil 
Prakash, following his capture and imprisonment in Turkey.

The photographs obtained by the Guardian show the accused terrorist with a 
face that has thinned noticeably since he appeared more than six months ago in 
publicity material as one of the extremist group’s chief recruiters.

Prakash, whom the Australian government believed had been killed in an 
airstrike in Iraq’s second city, Mosul, in May, wasarrested by Turkish border 
guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/neil-prakash-isis-fighter-dead-george-brandis-arrested>
 on 24 October, in the southern village of Inali, the Guardian has confirmed.


Neil Prakash extradition risks creating 'totem to other Islamic radicals'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/neil-prakash-extradition-risks-creating-totem-to-other-islamic-radicals>
At first, Australia’s most wanted man claimed to be a Cambodian national named 
Piseth Doung. However, Turkish officials said they recognised Prakash’s 
Australian accent and formally charged him with terrorism the following day.

Since then, he has been held in a prison in southern Turkey, where officials 
from both the Turkish and Australian governments have interviewed him.

Prakash featured prominently in propaganda videos exhorting Australians to 
join Isis – an ultra hardline group that proscribes as apostates anyone who 
does not share its hardline read of Islamic tenets.


He was believed to have been killed during a US-led attack on central Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>. At the time, Iraqi officials said 
Prakash had been in one of the city’s banks, which Isis had commandeered and 
was using to sort cash to be distributed around its so called Caliphate.


Prakash was one of three senior Australian members of the group who was 
thought to have been killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/31/neil-prakash-australias-most-senior-operative-in-islamic-state-believed-dead>
, alongside Mohammed Elomar and Khaled Sharrouf. Australian security officials 
believe dozens of Australians have been killed fighting in Iraq and Syria.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fneil-prakash-new-images-isis-member-arrest-turkey-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F442aef95308992af390acb39ee44fd620bf5923a%2F111_40_725_631%2F725.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20the%20new%20face%20of%20Neil%20Prakash%2C%20Australia's%20most%20wanted%20Isis%20member&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fneil-prakash-new-images-isis-member-arrest-turkey-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20the%20new%20face%20of%20Neil%20Prakash%2C%20Australia%27s%20most%20wanted%20Isis%20member&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fneil-prakash-new-images-isis-member-arrest-turkey-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F442aef95308992af390acb39ee44fd620bf5923a%2F111_40_725_631%2F725.jpg>
 Images taken of Neil Prakash, one of Australia’s most senior Isis recruits, 
after his arrest. He was previously though to have been killed after travelling 
to Syria. Photograph: The Guardian 
After carving a swath of influence in both countries, Isis is now on the back 
foot militarily with a sustained US-led campaign of airstrikes and gains by 
forces on the groundshrinking the so called caliphate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/18/isis-revenue-drops-nearly-a-third-after-loss-of-territory-shrinks-tax-base>
 by more than 60% in the past year.

The loss of territory has seen the group’s command and control slowly 
disintegrate and led its leaders to focus more on controlling populations than 
geography.


The switch in tactics has seen Isis send senior figures to Europe and beyond 
where they have been tasked with staging spectacular attacks like thoseseen in 
Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> and Brussels, as well 
as lone-wolf strikes like thetruck rampage in Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bastille-day-truck-attack>.


Prakash’s reported demise in May was at the time heralded by the Australian 
government as a major victory against Isis. Australia’s attorney general, 
George Brandis, said: “His death disrupts and degrades Isil’s ability to 
recruit vulnerable people in our community to conduct terrorist acts.”

Prakash has been actively involved in attempts to compel Australians to fight 
overseas and encouraging individuals to carry out attacks on Australian soil. 
He enteredSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> in 2013 and has 
featured prominently in propaganda material disseminated by Isis.

The child of Cambodian and Fijian migrants, Prakash is originally from 
Melbourne. He converted to Islam in 2012, and attended the al-Furqan Islamic 
centre. The centre came to public attention more recently after two 
18-year-olds linked to the centre were charged with terrorism offences in 2015. 
It was subsequently closed.

The Australian federal police issued a first instance arrest warrant for 
Prakash in August 2015.


The warrant is still current, and Australia’s justice minister, Michael 
Keenan, has announced that Australia has lodged a formal extradition request 
with Turkey.


But it remains unclear how Turkish authorities will respond to the request. 
Prakash could also be charged with offences in Turkey, and local authorities 
may still seek to prosecute him there.


Some defence experts have warned against extraditing Prakash, in part because 
it could lead to himbecoming a “totem” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/29/neil-prakash-extradition-risks-creating-totem-to-other-islamic-radicals>
 for local extremists in Australia.

 