
Disgraced former Sky Sports presenters Richard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> and Andy Gray have been 
signed up by TalkSport to present a flagship daytime show on the talk radio 
station, MediaGuardian.co.uk can reveal.

TalkSport moved in for the pair just two weeks after they were engulfed in a 
sexism storm which began after they made disparaging comments about a female 
football official off air 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2011/jan/23/sky-presenters-sexist-remarks-female-official>
 that were leaked to the Mail on Sunday.

Gray was sacked by Sky Sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/25/andy-gray-sacked-sky> after 
new evidence of "unacceptable and offensive behaviour" came to light. Keyslater 
resigned after giving an ill-advised radio interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/26/richard-keys-resigns-sky-sports>
 about the incident, coincidentally on TalkSport.

The pair will present a three-hour weekday show between 10am and 1pm, 
beginning next Monday. It is understood they have been hired on six-figure 
salaries.

TalkSport <https://www.theguardian.com/media/talksport> said there were no 
plans for Keys and Gray to interview Sian Massey, the assistant referee who was 
the subject of their initial comments.

Keys said it was the "start of something new and very exciting for Andy and 
myself". He added: "We are delighted to be joining the TalkSport family and 
can't wait to get started."

The TalkSport programme director, Moz Dee, described the signing as a 
"sensational coup" for the station.

"The events of the last couple of weeks have been a lesson and have changed 
them," said Dee.

"One thing that hasn't changed however is that they are two iconic 
broadcasters who have a wealth of experience in the world of sport and that's 
what we have to do now – move forward with them as sports broadcasters.

"I think it's a sensational coup for TalkSport and great for radio. These men 
have carved out amazing careers in television and were at the forefront of the 
Sky revolution. I think they are going to have a massive impact on the radio 
scene."

Dee has known Gray and Keys for some time, working with the former on the 
original incarnation of TalkSport, Talk Radio's coverage of the 1998 football 
World Cup. He later worked with Gray at BBC Radio 5 Live and its coverage of 
the 2002 World Cup.

Gray said: "I can't tell you how excited I am to be joining TalkSport. It's a 
wonderful opportunity for Richard and I to do what we do best and that's talk 
about sport."

Keys and Gray were the long-serving faces of Sky Sports' Premier League 
coverage until the sexism row that engulfed the broadcaster after they were
recorded suggesting that female officials "don't know the offside rule" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/24/richard-keys-andy-gray-sexism>
.

Further clips emerged showing Gray exchanging sexist comments with a Sky 
Sports touchline reporter <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=34JxxlUUhc8> before 
the match andto a female Sky Sports presenter 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuPMFvuYcvk>.

Another clip emerged of Keys discussing a former girlfriend of Sky pundit 
Jamie Redknapp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/25/video-sky-sports-richard-keys>
.

TalkSport broadcasts 64 live Premier League games a year and celebrated record 
audience figures of more than 3 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/03/rajars-talk-radio?INTCMP=SRCH> 
in the final three months of last year.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 