
Can Rick Perry – the one-time laughingstock who couldn't overcome uncountable 
gaffes and wildly uneven stump performances 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/post/rick-perry-ends-campaign-his-top-five-moments/2012/01/19/gIQArV5vAQ_blog.html>
 to become the Republican nominee in 2012 – be the Republican party's great red 
hope in 2016? Given a schizophrenic GOP and a political climate where one word 
– jobs – can trump most every concern, the answer, let me tell you, is ... 
let's see ... sorry ... oops ... yes! And it's preciselybecause his policy 
positions are as wildly unpredictable as his debate performances.

Take immigration, the very issue that helped sink Perry two years ago but has 
now brought him into the national consciousness with a force that seems to have 
stunned even Perry himself. He has managed to simultaneouslyaccuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/03/texas-governor-troops-border-refugee-crisis-child-migrants>
 President Obama ofcausing the humanitarian crisis at the border and pledged to 
work with the administration to alleviate it,handshakes on the tarmac and all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/10/obama-meets-perry-and-links-border-patrol-changes-to-supplemental-budget>
. It's a we'll-see-about-that situation if there ever was one, but at least it 
shows a modicrum of flexibility.

If Perry can project a relationship with Obama of fruitful contrariness – I 
don't like you, but I'll deal with you if I have to – he will have hit on an 
enviable political sweet spot where he can be neither faulted by the hard right 
for being too much in the president's pocket nor written off as an 
obstructionist scold with a legislative resumé written largely in the language 
of "No".

By contrast, the junior Wacko Bird from Texas, Ted Cruz, will be popular only 
as long as GOP voters are day-dreaming about anybody but Obama in the White 
House and not making plans to actually accomplish anything. Against the rest of 
an already crowded 2016 field with a precise preference forthe increasingly 
unpopular Tea Party 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/25/upshot/support-is-thin-for-tea-party-but-it-retains-its-muscle.html?_r=0>
, their way and the highway, Perry's amalgam may prove strangely appealing: 
topsy-turvy positions on immigration reform, Obamacare and even prison reform – 
plus his uncanny inability to turn anything into a conversation aboutjobs jobs 
jobs – just might make him the lunatic they're looking for.

Are you not entertained? 

Using the legislative process to, you know, enact laws is the traditional 
advantage that governors have over senators in presidential primaries. Unlike, 
say, Rand Paul or Marco Rubio, the senior governor from Texas will have a 
signature issue, after this immigration crisis (Obama said after meeting Perry 
on Wednesday that "this thing can get done next week"), to answer almost any 
objection from the Tea Party or establishment moderates: employment. Sure, 
Texas job growth under his tenure featured prominently in his 2012 campaign, 
but it did not fail as a selling point so much as fail to trump the clown-car 
optics and culture-war sniping of the GOP's messy primary season. (It is also 
best not to look to closely atwhat kind of jobs he's created 
<http://apps.texastribune.org/hurting-for-work/>.)

"Git 'er done" conservatism is Perry's trademark, in stark contrast with Your 
Parents' GOP. So he has staked out a position the left – to the left! – of Obama
on drug decriminalization 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/03/12/rick-perry-jimmy-kimmel_n_4945101.html>
, and got out ahead of the rising libertarian movement –Rand Paul and Cory 
Booker 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2014/07/cory-booker-rand-paul-team-up-108640.html>
 – on low-level drug crimes. Perry has already shown a deft – deft! – touch in 
explaining whyhe's actually led the Obama administration 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/politics/95046/perkinson-prison-texas-perry-death-penalty-justice-reform>
 when it comes to prison reform and alternative sentencing for non-violent drug 
offenders: it is, he's said, aboutChristian mercy and saving money 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/03/14/christian_right_evolves_how_prison_reform_went_mainstream/>
, the dual ideals of totemic importance to the GOP's base.

Perry is correct about at least the latter. Sentencing reform saved the state 
$443m the first year it went into effect 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/politics/95046/perkinson-prison-texas-perry-death-penalty-justice-reform>
. About $241m was re-allocated to treatment for addicted offenders and violent 
crime has now declined by almost 15%. (He's also on solid theological grounds 
as to the former – though one wonders why he doesn't apply the same two guiding 
ideals when it comes to the death penalty.)

He's even been able to use – or attempted to use – his radical pragmatism to 
distance himself from his own troubling comparison of homosexuality and 
alcoholism: "Whether you're gay or straight you need to be having a job," he 
said last month in aninterview 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/articles/2014/06/20/rick_perrys_second_wind_123045.html>
 after a public statement reviving an opinion already expressed in his 2008 
memoir. He neatly pivoted to the sloganeering demanded by the Republican 
party's failure to move with the country on social issues:

If you really are going to be the party that's going to talk to everyone, say, 
'Listen you may not agree with all of my positions, but giving you and your 
family and your loved ones the opportunity to get a better life, if we create a 
climate in this country where you're going to have a job, and a good job, and a 
good paying job' – if we'll do that, then I think we'll be successful.

He'll have to weather some stumping, of course, and, of all the potential 
Republican presidential candidates, Perry stands to benefit the most from the
shortened primary season and curtailed debate schedule 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/itsallpolitics/2013/12/20/255856534/gop-crafts-new-rules-to-shorten-2016-primary-season>
. But it would behoove his naysayers to remember that his bad-to-weird stump 
performances in 2012 were a seeming anomaly in a retail politics career that 
once earned himcomparisons 
<http://blog.chron.com/rickperry/2011/08/commentary-rick-perry-is-as-natural-on-the-stump-as-clinton-was/>
 to Bill Clinton and theendorsement 
<http://www.myplainview.com/article_a26a18b1-bc7a-56c9-be56-af70f9593784.html> 
of a liberal state congresswoman "on personal grounds" during his first 
gubernatorial re-election campaign.

As for the Beltway establishment's obsession with Perry's gaffes, it's almost 
not worth even asking the question if voters really care. Was George W Bush 
elected president? Gaffes are a feature of politicians and the electoral 
process, not a bug. Rick Perry puts on a good show. He may have ditched his 
cowboy boots for nerd glasses, but he's still as captivating as a rodeo clown.
 