
Hi Pravesh, what can you tell me about Rifco?

I founded Rifco <http://rifcoarts.com/> in 1999. I and a few friends got 
together to make theatre that our families might want to see. Much of the 
British Asian plays being produced back then were adaptations of English 
classics and there were few that spoke about our stories and experiences from 
the inside – the unique fusion of being British and South Asian. From this came 
our first show. It completely sold out, and to a new kind of family audience - 
one that didn’t go to the theatre. Which got me thinking: why is there so 
little work for this ready, large and new audience?

We are a small team, with three full-time staff members covering many roles. 
We are also a national portfolio organisation funded by Arts Council England 
(ACE) and a resident company atWatford Palace Theatre 
<http://www.watfordpalacetheatre.co.uk/>. Overall, our mission is simple: we 
want to make accessible theatre with a British Asian focus and celebrate the 
contemporary fusions in our society. We want to entice new audiences into 
theatres and make high-quality, entertaining and challenging new work.

What are the challenges you face in your role as artistic director?

One of the main challenges is convincing other producers and theatre venues to 
share our vision for new British Asian work and writing. Often we create work 
that isn’t known to western markets, so every time I pitch something to 
potential producers and venues, I have to explain the cultural context, the 
language and a lot of the nuances of the work. Another big challenge is getting 
mainstream producers to come and see our work, because it’s often seen as niche.

What do you make of the news that half the directors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/08/theatre-directors-survey-low-wages-britain>
 working in British theatre are earning less that £5,000 a year?

I’m just glad this is now out in the open. We directors have been discussing 
this for years. When you look at all the pre-production work, rehearsals and 
production meetings, directors end up doing so much more than directing. Sadly, 
the pay is often even lower than the actors’. Yes, we do it for love, but we 
all have bills to pay. This has had a huge impact on future creative talent, 
especially people like me, from non-wealthy, diverse backgrounds.

Half of theatre directors in Britain earning less than £5,000 a year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/08/theatre-directors-survey-low-wages-britain>
The key is that we look at the pay scales and job again, or maybe even pay 
directors daily fees for anything outside the rehearsal room. If I was a 
freelance director, fitting in even four plays or musicals a year, I wouldn’t 
be able to make ends meet. It’s an issue that must be addressed, otherwise 
future talent will go to other industries or abroad, which is already 
happening. I know many creatives who have gone to the US, India and Australia 
to get work, and they’re making a good living.

Do you welcome ACE’s new strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/08/arts-council-england-make-progress-diversity-funding-axed-bazalgette#opt-in-message>
 to encourage diversity by holding organisations to account?

I do. Some funded organisations are not doing enough for their audiences and 
artists, so they should be held accountable for tax payers’ money. Britain is a 
multicultural society, and if its artistic community cannot represent this, 
what hope do we have? I realise some organisations will find it hard when they 
are already pinched, but diversity does not always mean cost.

I’ve been touring theatre productions for over 15 years now. I meet and talk 
to many theatre-makers, audiences and critics. The theatre industry is often 
perceived as predominantly white and middle-class – in some places more and 
others much less. Many theatres are very clear about who they want to make work 
for and who they don’t. In times such as these, with the rise of right-wing 
political parties, it’s becoming even more important that the diverse voices of 
Britain get louder and we celebrate it from all corners, regardless of colour, 
creed, faith, sex or age.

Good theatre should be seen by everyone. Isn’t that what the arts is all about?

Pravesh Kumar is artistic director of Rifco <http://rifcoarts.com/home>, which 
you can follow on Twitter@Rifcoarts <https://twitter.com/rifcoarts>

More like this

• The Birmingham Hippodrome’s Paul Kaynes on the Birmingham arts scene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/oct/07/interview-paul-kaynes-birmingham-hippodrome>
• Stopgap Dance Company’s Lucy Bennett on diversity in dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/apr/08/stopgap-dance-company-disabled-artists>
• More Arts head interviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/series/arts-head>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 