
I owe my existence to skiing. At least that’s what my grandparents believed. 
Just before the Second World War they fled Prague for England with other Czech 
Jews, and after travelling across the border by train, stopped at a hotel for 
the night. Everyone was understandably tired and most went to bed early. But my 
grandfather stayed at the bar and, over a few drinks, got talking to the owner.

As it turned out, they shared a love of skiing and of the emerging sport of 
biathlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2014/feb/04/biathlon-ski-shoot-olympic-medallist-video>
, which combines cross-country skiing with shooting at targets. That night, 
there were knocks on the hotel room doors. Shouts from soldiers. The footsteps 
of people being led away.

My grandparents were the only ones at breakfast the next morning. Everyone 
else had been rounded up by the Nazis. They never got to speak to the owner, 
but they believed to their dying day that while he had not been able to save 
everyone, he had told the soldiers that their room was empty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fskiing-shooting-biathlon-valloire-france-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23cac85fcdb7aeb247290f614183a649a45ca418%2F0_94_1417_850%2F1417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Right%20on%20target%3A%20skiing%20and%20shooting%20in%20the%20French%20Alps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fskiing-shooting-biathlon-valloire-france-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Right%20on%20target%3A%20skiing%20and%20shooting%20in%20the%20French%20Alps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fskiing-shooting-biathlon-valloire-france-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23cac85fcdb7aeb247290f614183a649a45ca418%2F0_94_1417_850%2F1417.jpg>
 Slope style: the pretty ski chalets in Valloire 
As a child, I spent Sundays at my grandparents’ flat – and part of the ritual 
was to watchSki Sunday. Yet while my grandfather would mutter knowledgeably 
about the slopes of the French Alps, or of the Austrian mountains, my only 
personal experience of skiing was a disaster. On a French exchange I was 
plonked on skis and given no instruction whatsoever. Hardly surprisingly, I 
developed a proper fear of steep slopes.

Now, with children of my own, I wanted to conquer that fear. So in January we 
travelled to Valloire, a charming town located at the foot of the Galibier pass 
in the French Alps, and used mainly by French tourists. The warmest winter 
since the late 1980s meant there wasn’t much snow in the town itself, but with 
78 pistes served by 34 ski lifts – including some over 2,500m – there was no 
problem finding somewhere to ski.

I lay in the snow, eye focused on the target, finger on the trigger

With the children enrolled in the École du Ski Français in the care of 
enthusiastic but gentle instructors, my husband and I met up with our own 
teacher, Thierry. I felt wobbly with nerves, but he started us at the very 
bottom of the gentlest slope, and worked on the most basic of skills: stopping. 
Then it was up the button lift to my first descent. On the third descent, I 
felt my speed start to increase, panicked slightly, and ended up sliding down 
on my bottom. I was more than happy to come back down and take those boots off.

It’s just as well because away from the slopes there is much to recommend 
Valloire. The town is friendly and beautiful, home to some good restaurants, 
cafés and bars, but small enough to walk around. Unlike the better-known skiing 
hotspots, prices are more than reasonable: ski passes are £146 for six days, 
compared to £208 for Val d’Isère. Good chalets and family-run hotels abound and 
even at the mountain-top restaurant, an espresso is less than €2. The view is 
spectacular.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fskiing-shooting-biathlon-valloire-france-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F178585809ad2a0feda5e46f62d59e1b4ba29aed8%2F0_140_2250_1350%2F2250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Right%20on%20target%3A%20skiing%20and%20shooting%20in%20the%20French%20Alps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fskiing-shooting-biathlon-valloire-france-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Right%20on%20target%3A%20skiing%20and%20shooting%20in%20the%20French%20Alps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fskiing-shooting-biathlon-valloire-france-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F178585809ad2a0feda5e46f62d59e1b4ba29aed8%2F0_140_2250_1350%2F2250.jpg>
 Heading for a fall: Kate Carter’s children at the ski school 
There are also lots of activities for all the family. Later that day we went 
for a llama walk – the llamas arrived by mini van which somewhat spoiled the 
effect, but my children adored it, despite almost being towed away when the 
llamas spotted some tasty greenery. We also tried mountain walks and one cold 
but lovely evening we watched the local children perform at the ice skating 
rink, where there was a star turn from Thierry’s daughter.

And the skiing improved. As the week went on, I mastered the basics and 
Thierry told me that I could start going faster. I can’t say I was any more 
taken with the experience than I was at the start, however I did jump at the 
chance to visit a biathlon course just outside the town. Bruno, our instructor, 
offers classes for small groups, including ski equipment and laser rifles, 
which are considerably more high-tech than the proper cartridges my grandad 
would have fired. It wasn’t very martial – families are welcome and Bruno 
generally starts the youngsters at about eight.

After being shown how to hold the laser gun I lay in the snow, eye focused on 
the target, finger on the trigger. Still as can be. Click, pop. Click, pop. 
Five shots, five targets hit. Bruno nodded in approval, and narrowed the target 
area so only a shot right in the centre would count. This time, much to his 
surprise, I hit four targets from my five shots. Next, I tried shooting 
standing up. Another four from five. More praise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fskiing-shooting-biathlon-valloire-france-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F759858cff78601e0af078ad34b1e9d2b67a4e68e%2F0_113_1772_1063%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Right%20on%20target%3A%20skiing%20and%20shooting%20in%20the%20French%20Alps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fskiing-shooting-biathlon-valloire-france-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Right%20on%20target%3A%20skiing%20and%20shooting%20in%20the%20French%20Alps&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fskiing-shooting-biathlon-valloire-france-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F759858cff78601e0af078ad34b1e9d2b67a4e68e%2F0_113_1772_1063%2F1772.jpg>
 Sun-downer: dusk settles over the Alpine village. 
It made for a fun afternoon – my seven-year-old daughter enjoyed it, too. The 
key to biathlon is not just to have good aim, but to have good aim when you are 
out of breath, your chest heaving from the effort of skiing. So Bruno sent us 
dashing around markers in the snow.

And I was amazed to discover that this was where I felt a connection. I’ve 
barely so much as picked up a virtual gun in a computer game, yet this focus, 
this narrow world where all you are is an eye, a finger and some breath, I 
loved. I’m no speed demon, but perhaps a small part of my grandfather’s winter 
sport genetics has been passed on after all.

Essentials

Crystal Ski Holidays (crystalski.co.uk <http://www.crystalski.co.uk//>; 020 
8939 0726) offers a week’s self catering in Valloire from £499 per person 
(based on four sharing) including a six-day lift pass, flights and transfers 
departing on 19 March 2016 (valloire.net 
<http://www.valloire.net/uk/index-winter.aspx>). Nordik Gliss runs biathlon 
classes in Valloire, from €40 per person (nordikgliss.jimdo.com 
<http://nordikgliss.jimdo.com/>).
 