
Rio Ferdinand <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rio-ferdinand> has agreed 
to put aside his acrimonious differences with John Terry and Ashley Cole to 
appear on the same team for a charity game with the two footballers he came to 
regard as sworn enemies during the criminal trial that brought some of 
England’s highest-profile players into a damaging race case.

Ferdinand will line up in a back four alongside Terry and Cole as part of the 
Match for Children, to be staged at Old Trafford on 14 November, when the 
former Manchester United defender will share a dressing room with the player 
who was caught on camera shouting “fucking black cunt” at his younger brother, 
Anton, whenChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> played at QPR 
in October 2011.

Rio Ferdinand wants to take lead in battle for more black managers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/12/rio-ferdinand-racial-barriers-management>
Terry was acquitted of the charge of racial abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/13/john-terry-anton-ferdinand-racial-abuse-trial>
 when he appeared at Westminster magistrates’ court in July 2012, where Cole 
gave crucial evidence on his behalf, but alater Football Association charge was 
proven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/sep/27/john-terry-verdict-chelsea-guilty>
 and the Chelsea captain was banned for four matches as well as being fined 
£220,000. The case in effect ended Terry’s international career and led to 
Fabio Capello’s resignation as England manager because of the Italian’s 
grievances with the Football Association’s decision not to let the accused 
player continue as captain while the case was pending.

Ferdinand’s relationship with Cole, once a close friend, was shattered by the 
court case, and brought a separate disciplinary action when the dispute 
escalated on Twitter.Ferdinand appeared to endorse another user describing 
Cole, then at Chelsea, as a “choc ice” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/14/ashley-cole-choc-ice-rio-ferdinand>
, a slang term meaning someone who was black on the outside but white on the 
inside.

Three years on, the three former England internationals have all agreed to 
take part in a match, in aid of Unicef, when Sir Alex Ferguson will manage a 
Great Britain team, captained by David Beckham and also featuring Jamie 
Carragher, Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, David Seaman, Michael Owen and Andy Cole. 
On the opposite side a Rest of the World XI, led by Zinedine Zidane and managed 
by Carlo Ancelotti, will include Ronaldinho, Luis Figo, Patrick Vieira, Cafu 
and Patrick Kluivert.

Edwin van der Sar and Ole Gunnar Solskjaer will also return to their old 
ground for the charity event and Ferdinand’s involvement suggests a possible 
change in his attitude; he had previously condemned Terry and stated that he 
would never speak to Cole again.

Ferdinand’s book, published last year, made it clear there was still lingering 
animosity. “Cole, who’d been a good friend of mine and had known Anton since he 
was a kid, betrayed that friendship,” Ferdinand wrote. “The biggest idiot of 
all wasJohn Terry <https://www.theguardian.com/football/john-terry> who could 
have saved everyone a lot of pain by admitting immediately that he had used the 
words in the heat of the moment but was no racist. I think that’s probably what 
happened and what the truth is. We would have accepted that but he never gave 
us the chance.”
 