
Harold Pinter's plays were so often staged at the Comedy Theatre that it was 
once suggested he change his name to Harold Comedy. By that score, perhaps it's 
timeAlan Ayckbourn <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanayckbourn> renamed 
himself Alan Harold Pinter.

Following last year's stellar revival of Absent Friends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/feb/10/absent-friends-review>, 
Ayckbourn's 1984 comedy A Chorus of Disapproval will be the second of his plays 
staged at the recently rechristened West End theatre.

Comedian Rob Brydon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/rob-brydon> will make 
his West End acting debut in the production, which will be directed by Trevor 
Nunn. The Welsh actor will play Dafydd, the zealous director of The Pendon 
Amateur Light Operatic Society's staging of The Beggar's Opera, as it unravels 
into chaos.

The cast also includes Extras star Ashley Jensen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashley-jensen>, returning to the 
stage for the first time in more than a decade, and former EastEnders actor 
Nigel Harman, who won an Olivier award earlier this year for his performance in
Shrek: the Musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/14/shrek-the-musical-review>.

A Chorus of Disapproval, which will preview from 17 September before running 
until 5 January 2012, was Ayckbourn's 31st – of 76 – andoriginally premiered in 
Scarborough before transferring to the Olivier, starring Michael Gambon, Imelda 
Staunton and Bob Peck 
<http://achorusofdisapproval.alanayckbourn.net/ACOD_Background.htm>.

Meanwhile, a national tour of his earlier play, Relatively Speaking 
<http://relativelyspeaking.alanayckbourn.net/>, has also been announced and 
could culminate in a West End run next year.

Lindsay Posner's production will star Felicity Kendal and Kara Tointon, who 
returns to Ayckbourn following her appearance in Absent Friends. It opens at 
the MalvernTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> on 29 August, 
before a week's run in Richmond a month later, with further dates to be 
announced in due course.

The play, Ayckbourn's seventh, focuses on a confused love triangle and its 
1965 premiere production starred Kendal's Good Life co-star Richard Briers when 
it transferred to the Duke of York's Theatre in the West End two years later 
<http://relativelyspeaking.alanayckbourn.net/RS_Timeline.htm>.
 