
Robert Peston’s new politics show on ITV attracted just 166,000 viewers on 
Sunday, a tenth of the 1.6 million who watchedAndrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> on BBC1.

A guest lineup including the chancellor, George Osborne, and broadcaster Louis 
Theroux <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/louis-theroux> did not keep 
viewers indoors on the hottest day of the year. The programme was scheduled 
immediately after its BBC rival, from 10am, during which it also performed 
worse than BBC1’s than Big Questions, which attracted more than 700,000 viewers 
for an hour-long special on the legacy of the British Empire.

The chance to front his own show was one of the deciding factors in Peston’s 
move from BBC business editor to becomeITV’s political editor last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/04/robert-peston-leave-bbc-itv-political-editor>
.


Rough edges, Screeny and a new haircut: Robert Peston launches Sunday show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/08/robert-peston-goes-for-the-jugular-with-george-osborne-in-new-sunday-show>
Reviewers have welcomed a more relaxed approach than its BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> rival, with guests including Osborne 
appearing without ties and comments from an also-tieless Peston on how nervous 
he was on the show’s debut.

The programme has also made audience participation central to its attempts to 
distinguish itself from Marr, with tweets displayed on a TV called Screeny 
McScreenface in reference to the controversy over thenaming of the UK’s new 
research vessel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/06/boaty-mcboatface-ship-to-be-called-rrs-sir-david-attenborough>
.

As Mark Lawson presciently wrote in the Guardian on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/08/peston-on-sunday-review-bleeding-edged-blade-old-school-ties>
: “Despite showing promising signs, amid inevitable first-morning nerves, of 
being lively and likeable, Peston on Sunday risks winning the energy medal but 
losing the ratings war to the tie-knotted, old technology Marr.”

However, the slow start may not faze Peston, who said last week that he was 
“not obsessed” with ratings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/04/robert-peston-itv-politics-editor-news-agenda-ratings>
.
 