
Robert Plant has announced plans to tour with a new group, resurrecting the 
name of the band he formed before joining Led Zeppelin.The Band of Joy 
<http://www.led-zeppelin.org/reference/index.php?m=int15> will play 12 US dates 
before releasing an album later this year.

"I'm enjoying such creativity and vitality," Plant said in a statement. The 
new project has little in common with Led Zeppelin, or even with the original 
Band of Joy. Plant is the only holdover from the little-known blues act, which 
briefly rocked Birmingham in the late 1960s. LateLed Zeppelin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ledzeppelin> drummer John Bonham was also a 
member.

Instead, the rekindled Band of Joy seems more in line with Plant's most recent 
project, his bluegrass outfit with singerAlison Krauss 
<http://www.alisonkrauss.com/site.php>. The act's lineup is drawn from the 
American folk and country scene, including singer-songwritersPatty Griffin 
<http://www.pattygriffin.com/>, Darrell Scott <http://www.darrellscott.com/>, 
bassist Byron House, drummer Marco Giovino and guitarist/singer Buddy Miller. 
Miller will also co-produce the group's debut. Several of these musicians have 
played before with acts likeEmmylou Harris <http://www.emmylouharris.com/>.

"It's been a remarkable change of direction for all of us and as a group we 
all seem to have developed a new groove," Plant said in a statement. The Band 
of Joy will reportedly release an album with Rounder in the late summer or 
early autumn, with more extensive touring to follow. It's not clear whether 
this is a solo project for Plant, or whether the other members share 
songwriting duties.

As for working with Krauss, Plant said he would love to follow up their 
Grammy-winning 2007 record, Raising Sand. Just not right now. Krauss is touring 
and recording with her long-time band, Union Station, and the pair have nothing 
planned for 2010. Nonetheless, "Alison and I get together quite often," Plant 
said. "Sometimes we dance."
 