
A controversial film about the discredited link between autism and 
vaccinations has been pulled from Robert De Niro’s Tribeca film festival, after 
the actor consulted “the scientific community” and found “concerns with certain 
things in this film”.

Robert De Niro steps into autism vaccination row by screening film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/26/robert-de-niro-autism-vaccination-tribeca-andrew-wakefield-vaxxed>
The father of an autistic child and co-founder of the festival, De Niro at 
first defended the decision to premiere Vaxxed: from Cover-Up to Catastrophe, 
despite outcry from doctors and researchers.

Repeated <https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/feb/05/health.children> 
studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/20/autism-link-to-vaccines-dismissed-by-studies-of-more-than-a-million-children>
 involving more than a million children have found there isno evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/21/no-link-between-mmr-and-autism-major-study-concludes>
 to link childhood vaccines to autism. But a small movement of activists 
persists inthe belief  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/24/parents-who-keep-anti-vaccination-stance-a-secret-put-others-at-risk>
that vaccinations might somehow harm children.

On Saturday De Niro released a statement to explain the new decision. “My 
intent in screening this film was to provide an opportunity for conversation 
around an issue that is deeply personal to me and my family,” he said.

“But after reviewing it over the past few days with the Tribeca film festival 
team and others from the scientific community, we do not believe it contributes 
to or furthers the discussion I had hoped for.

“The Festival doesn’t seek to avoid or shy away from controversy. However, we 
have concerns with certain things in this film that we feel prevent us from 
presenting it in the Festival program. We have decided to remove it from our 
schedule.”

The controversial film was directed by Andrew Wakefield, a disgraced British 
former doctor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/andrew-wakefield-struck-off-gmc>
who published a study in 1998 that claimed links between a vaccine for measles, 
mumps and rubella (MMR) and autism. The paper was quickly found to contain 
numerous flaws and was deemed by the British Medical Journal “an elaborate fraud
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2011/jan/12/andrew-wakefield-fraud-mmr-autism>
”.

The Lancet, which originally published the study, retracted it in 2010, the 
same year that Wakefield lost wasstripped of his licence to practise medicine  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/andrew-wakefield-analysis-ethics-science>
in the UK.

Wakefield appears in the trailer for his film, and claims that the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention have hidden evidence that would support his 
discredited claims. The trailer also asks “are our children safe” over the 
image of smoke swirling out of a syringe.

Prominent scientists and film-makers urged the festival to remove the film, 
arguing that De Niro and organizers legitimized the claims made by Wakefield by 
premiering it at their prestigious festival.
 