
A disgraced former British surgeon’s new documentary about the discredited 
link between autism and childhood vaccination has putRobert De Niro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro> at the centre of a medical row 
that threatens the reputation of his prestigious film festival in New York.

De Niro, the father of an autistic child and co-founder of the Tribeca film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tribeca-film-festival>, is standing 
by the decision to premiere Vaxxed: from Cover-Up to Catastrophe, which has 
been directed by the controversial Andrew Wakefield. To the dismay of a number 
of doctors, health campaigners and filmmakers, De Niro conceded it was not 
usual for him to be so directly involved with programming the festival. But he 
said the issue was “very personal to me and my family”.

The trailer for Wakefield’s film opens with ominous music as the words “Are 
our children safe?” appear through a spiral of billowing smoke seeping from a 
syringe.

A key element of the documentary, the trailer claims, will be the testimony of 
a whistleblower from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the US 
public health body, who is to allege fraud inside an organisation that “knew 
that vaccines were actually causing autism”. Wakefield then appears saying, in 
a reference to the MMR vaccine: “Wow, the CDC had known all along there was 
this MMR autism risk!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Frobert-de-niro-autism-vaccination-tribeca-andrew-wakefield-vaxxed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F397bcb3ef428438404127aa5f057aec0d25ea66d%2F0_26_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20De%20Niro%20steps%20into%20autism%20vaccination%20row%20by%20screening%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Frobert-de-niro-autism-vaccination-tribeca-andrew-wakefield-vaxxed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20De%20Niro%20steps%20into%20autism%20vaccination%20row%20by%20screening%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Frobert-de-niro-autism-vaccination-tribeca-andrew-wakefield-vaxxed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F397bcb3ef428438404127aa5f057aec0d25ea66d%2F0_26_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Andrew Wakefield in 2010. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
The Tribeca website promises 
<https://tribecafilm.com/filmguide/vaxxed-from-coverup-to-catastrophe-2016> 
“revealing and emotional interviews with pharmaceutical insiders, doctors, 
politicians, parents” filmed in an effort to “understand what’s behind the 
skyrocketing increase of autism diagnoses today”.

Wakefield gained notoriety in Britain in 1998 with a research paper, later 
discredited, that argued the joint measles, mumps and rubella vaccine was a 
potential cause of autism and bowel disorders. Wakefieldwas struck off the UK 
medical register in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/andrew-wakefield-struck-off-gmc>
when a statutory tribunal held by the General Medical Council found him guilty 
of “dishonesty” and said he had subjected children to invasive medical 
procedures they did not need.

No link between MMR and autism, major study concludes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/21/no-link-between-mmr-and-autism-major-study-concludes>
Now, in support of his debunked theory, Wakefield interviews Dr Jim Sears, the 
son of the American doctor who developed an “adjusted” vaccination schedule 
still favoured by parents who distrust national recommendations on protecting 
their children.

But the suggestion that vaccination can be harmful remains a dangerous area of 
speculation, according to American doctors who have criticised the screening.

“Unless the Tribeca film festival plans to definitively unmask Andrew Wakefield
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, it will be yet another 
disheartening chapter where a scientific fraud continues to occupy a spotlight 
and overshadows the damage he has left behind in the important story of vaccine 
safety and success,” said Dr Mary Anne Jackson, a professor of paediatrics at 
the University of Missouri-Kansas City.

The award-winning documentary maker Penny Lane has published an open letter 
accusing festival programmers of making “a very serious mistake” with a 
screening that “threatens the credibility of not just the other film-makers in 
your doc slate, but the field in general”.

Lane recently made the documentary film Nuts! about Dr John Romulus Brinkley, 
an eccentric who built an empire up during the Depression era with an impotence 
cure. She describes herself as “a documentary filmmaker concerned about 
quackery”.

While she admits the ethics behind documentary making can be complex, Lane 
argues that “this one should have been easy” for Tribeca to rule upon. “The 
anti-vaccination hoax has been completely discredited by now ... Very possibly, 
some people will walk away from your festival having been convinced, in part 
because of your good name and the excellence and integrity of your documentary 
programming, not to vaccinate their children. And very possibly people will die 
as a result,” she argued.

De Niro and his wife, Grace Hightower, issued a statement on Friday, defending 
the screening. “Grace and I have a child with autism and we believe it is 
critical that all of the issues surrounding the causes of autism be openly 
discussed and examined. In the 15 years since the Tribeca film festival was 
founded, I have never asked for a film to be screened or gotten involved in the 
programming.

“However this is very personal to me and my family and I want there to be a 
discussion, which is why we will be screeningVaxxed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/vaxxed>. I am not personally endorsing the 
film, nor am I anti-vaccination; I am only providing the opportunity for a 
conversation around the issue.”

The Tribeca film festival defended its right to screen contentious material. 
“Tribeca, as are most film festivals, is about dialogue and discussion. Over 
the years we have presented many films from opposing sides of an issue. We are 
a forum, not a judge,” it said in a statement.

Wakefield’s film is due to premiere at Tribeca on 24 April, and is to be 
followed by a panel debate.
 