
Robert Rauschenberg’s 1954 work Untitled 
<http://www.rauschenbergfoundation.org/art/artwork/untitled-5> is an upright 
wooden box supported by a white, colonial-era table leg over an open stage-like 
enclosure in which a stuffed Dominique hen struts next to a nostalgic 
photograph of a tall man in a white suit. Walk around this oddly compelling 
array – every surface of which is covered in old pictures, newsprint and 
smeared paint – and you find a pair of shoes, painted white. Do they belong to 
the man in the portrait? Who was he? Why does this constellation of stuff 
trigger such an undeniable, unforgettable sense of mystery?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Frobert-rauschenberg-tate-modern-cy-twombly-jasper-johns-autumn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9e933746f417915bcef6eec4e943d40199fe7a4%2F0_0_3953_5586%2F3953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20the%20leader%20of%20American%20art's%20great%20m%C3%A9nage%20%C3%A0%20trois&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Frobert-rauschenberg-tate-modern-cy-twombly-jasper-johns-autumn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20the%20leader%20of%20American%20art%27s%20great%20m%C3%A9nage%20%C3%A0%20trois&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Frobert-rauschenberg-tate-modern-cy-twombly-jasper-johns-autumn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9e933746f417915bcef6eec4e943d40199fe7a4%2F0_0_3953_5586%2F3953.jpg>
 Mourning the era … Retroactive II, 1963. Photograph: MCA Chicago 
Visitors to Tate Modern’s Rauschenberg retrospective, which opens on 30 
November will find themselves puzzling over many such haunting, complex and 
allusive objects and images. They will be dazzled and moved by the richness and 
poetry of his art, while always feeling it harbours a secret just out of reach. 
That’s because, as well as being one of the most powerful bodies of work of the 
20th century, Rauschenberg’s “combines” – the paint-spattered assemblages of 
found stuff he started making in 1954 – and the silkscreen montage paintings in 
which he later mourned the Kennedy era, are part of a private game played 
between three friends who happen to be the most important artists of the past 
six decades: Rauschenberg,Jasper Johns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/johns> and Cy Twombly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/cy-twombly>. 

They were a conspiracy of outsiders: three southerners in Manhattan, gay men 
in the straight 1950s, disciples ofMarcel Duchamp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/duchamp> in an era dominated 
artistically byJackson Pollock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jackson-pollock>. They were to 
develop in different directions, on different time lines – while Johns was the 
first to make it big with his 1954-5 replica of an American flag in which 
half-visible newspaper clippings hang in waxy paint, the slower-maturing 
Twombly would only win fame for his passionate, painterly graffiti from the 
1970s onward. Yet all three share an obsession with hinting at stories they 
never quite make explicit. Their art rejoices in teasing, with their own lives 
hidden in its sepia paint-stained depths.

Rauschenberg was at the heart of the group and the centre of the game. Johns 
and Twombly were, at different times, his lovers. It was on a European holiday 
with Rauschenberg that Twombly would discover Italy, where he was to spend most 
of his life. Rauschenberg is, at his very best, the greatest and most ambitious 
of these intertwined artists. His combines are as formidable as the most 
challenging cubist paintings. They are the first completely open works of art, 
moving off the wall into the gallery, incorporating movement and space into 
their very nature. You walk around them: when they were first seen, Merce 
Cunningham’s dancers sometimes danced around them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Frobert-rauschenberg-tate-modern-cy-twombly-jasper-johns-autumn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1bb9269bdf46dfea70b78fd96ff7769b52e5640%2F0_0_1000_2234%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20the%20leader%20of%20American%20art's%20great%20m%C3%A9nage%20%C3%A0%20trois&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Frobert-rauschenberg-tate-modern-cy-twombly-jasper-johns-autumn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robert%20Rauschenberg%3A%20the%20leader%20of%20American%20art%27s%20great%20m%C3%A9nage%20%C3%A0%20trois&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Frobert-rauschenberg-tate-modern-cy-twombly-jasper-johns-autumn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1bb9269bdf46dfea70b78fd96ff7769b52e5640%2F0_0_1000_2234%2F1000.jpg>
 The difficulties of love … Bed, 1955. Photograph: The Museum of Modern Art, 
New York/Scala, Florence 
Pioneering installation art and anticipating interactive art is just a side 
effect of the brilliance of Rauschenberg’s free-flowing assemblages of tyres, 
taxidermy and furniture that come together like people meeting in a crowd. All 
their influence would just be academic point-scoring if his art was not so 
profound.

The game of coded private allusions the three friends played – for instance, 
in Rauschenberg’s 1955 work Bed, the pillow is covered with Twombly’s 
scribblings, so their relationship is for ever commemorated by this modern 
masterpiece – is far more than a shared secret joke. It is a sustained 
meditation on the elusiveness of experience and memory, and the difficulties of 
love. The artists resemble novelists in their acute and detailed evocation of 
what it is to live in the modern world. They are difficult but rewarding ones – 
and Rauschenberg is the most epic of the three.

All the art movements that have appeared since the 1950s were anticipated by 
Rauschenberg and co, often in collaboration with their composer friend John 
Cage. Rauschenberg helped to invent conceptual art when he borrowed a drawing 
by Willem de Kooning and promptly erased it. His 1961 “portrait” of the 
gallerist Iris Clert is a telegram that simply states: “This is a portrait of 
Iris Clert if I say so.”

Rauschenberg was generous, big-hearted and political. God knows what he would 
be thinking in the current American election – he’d certainly be campaigning 
for Clinton, as he campaigned for many Democrat candidates and liberal causes. 
In later years, his art lost energy, but that doesn’t matter any more, for he 
is one of America’s creative titans, the leader of its greatest artistic 
triumvirate, the author of great American novels made from chair legs and 
pictures of astronauts.


 