
The majority of us have told the occasional white lie, or buried our heads in 
the sand when faced with an awkward problem, but some issues can become so 
great that they cannot be explained away or ignored any longer. For the digital 
media community that problem is the total uncertainty around what proportion of 
ads purchased online are actually seen v those that end up being served to 
robots.

An unprecedented £19bn will be spent on online advertising during 2014, but 
according to the Interactive Advertising Bureau 
<http://digiday.com/platforms/advertising-fraud-iab/>, 36 per cent of all web 
traffic is now non-human. So if a third of online ad spend is being wasted on 
ads that are delivered to robots, not to mention those ads that end up not 
being in view on a web page, the ad industry has big problem.

There is a fraudulent economy emerging within digital advertising and unless 
it is stopped soon, the future business value of marketing departments will be 
undermined as they are crippled by the bot nets.   

Invasion of the bot nets


The buy and sell of ad impressions over automated ad exchanges, or 
programmatic buying, is enjoying a huge surge in popularity because of its 
ability to maximise marketing spend and generate broad awareness. But, 
ironically, it is the automated nature of how the online advertising lifecycle 
works that has created a perfect environment in which bots may thrive. Bot nets 
have emerged as dubious people have begun to spot the loophole in the automated 
advertising market and exploit the system for financial gain.

These people build websites whose sole purpose is to host ads, not real 
content. They then feed their site directly into ad exchanges, often using fake 
domain names or impersonating reputable ones. The ad inventory that is then 
sold on behalf of these imitation websites is snapped up on behalf of brands, 
all of whom remain blissfully unaware of where their content is really ending 
up.

The people who build these websites are incredibly good at fooling the ad 
exchanges. They will often host a collection of links to supposed content, but 
then when clicked upon the link takes you off site to another destination.

The ostrich effect 

While investing in digital advertising might be a great way of attracting more 
"eyeballs", if your marketing spend is funding fraudulent websites and goes 
unseen, it is being wasted. So why is the issue not being addressed?

Awareness at the brand level is a big issue. A surprising number of in-house 
marketers are in the dark when it comes to knowing where their ad content is 
appearing, with significant number still having no way of monitoring their ads. 
There is a major transparency issue when it comes to online ad placement; that 
should be apparent from the number of ad impressions that appear on malware or 
illegal phishing sites every year (nearly eight billion) without the knowledge 
of the advertisers paying for the space.

But while this lack of awareness is something to overcome, a somewhat larger 
problem is that the issue is being ignored or buried by the industry for fear 
of self-incrimination. Unfortunately, almost every element of the ad ecosystem 
benefits from fake traffic. For example, publishers get paid regardless of 
whether the traffic is real, and so do the ad exchanges over which the 
inventory is traded.

On the advertising buy side of the equation, ad agencies are staffed by busy 
people, all with targets to meet and multiple clients to please, so why would 
they take it upon themselves to stamp it out?

Everyone involved in digital advertising has an important decision to make. 
Will they make a move to stop the bot invasion or continue living a lie and 
sweep the robots under the rug? One thing is certain: questions will continue 
to be asked and the industry will eventually have to confront the issue.

Andrew Goode is chief operating officer at Project Sunblock 
<http://www.projectsunblock.com/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications sent direct to 
your inbox, sign up for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.
 