Thrill rating 8/10 

Danger rating 8/10


Fitness rating 8/10


In a nutshell ...

You know the drill: rope, rock face, you, contorted positions ... But did you 
know that the UK boasts some of the best rock climbing in the world, and more 
and more people are taking to these here mountains to practise the sport, 
currently believed to be one of the fastest growing in the world? And it's 
probably one of the oldest, too.

What's the buzz?

Reaching places people can't normally get to, surrounded by spectacular 
scenery and (normally) delicious silence, is a life-affirming experience. 
Climbing a sheer rock face is all about mind over matter, and, once conquered, 
the sense of being able to do anything stays with you, pushing you to tackle 
ever bigger challenges. Addiction is almost guaranteed: before you know it 
you'll be driving through the night to reach the UK's most far-flung climbing 
destinations.

Thrill a minute?

You betcha. There's a constant buzz of don't-look-down-induced adrenaline 
which stays with you until both feet are planted firmly on solid ground. You'll 
have jelly limbs for days, but nothing can beat the thrill of taking on a 
formidable rock face and winning.

Adrenaline peak

Simple: reaching the top. And when your chosen summit is Scotland's Ben Nevis 
or the Peak District's Stanage Edge, this feeling of achievement is magnified 
by the spectacular views. Feel free to insert your own "on top of the world" 
cliche here.

Where to do it

Britain's cliffs may not be as high as some other countries', but they are 
famous for their incredible variety of rock. Climbers come from all over the 
world to tackle Yorkshire's unique gritstone, while other hot spots include the 
Peak District, Lake District, north Wales and Scottish Highlands. Use the 
British Mountaineering Council (BMC) website to find a climbing club near you, 
to help get you started on this wonderful sport.

Who can do it

More or less anyone can rock climb, but remember a group is only as strong as 
its weakest member, so only ever tackle a climb that you're all confident with. 
Female climbers tend to be outnumbered by men, but there are female-only 
courses available to get women into the sport. Try Mountaingirl's three-day 
"Learn to Love Trad" course to equip you with all the skills and confidence 
needed to get out and up there.

What to take

Proper equipment is vital when out in the mountains, so consult an expert 
before setting off and don't leave home without waterproofs, warm clothing and 
climbing shoes. Keep a weather eye on the weather at all times; it can change 
frighteningly quickly at high altitude.

Typical prices

Beginners' courses start at around Â£150 for two days, excluding accommodation. 
But once you've had the training and got the gear, rock climbing is relatively 
inexpensive - thankfully, mountains don't charge admission.

Impress your pals

Rock climbing really kicked off in this country with Walter Parry Haskett 
Smith's solo ascent of Napes Needle in the Lake District in 1886 - for which he 
used no safety equipment whatsoever. Although now revered as "the father of 
rock climbing", the old Etonian's example is obviously not one to follow, as 
without proper safety equipment and training, rock climbing can be deadly.

YouTube searchwords  'climbing, cambusbarron'

Good links

thebmc.co.uk <http://www.thebmc.co.uk>

mountaingirl.eu <http://www.mountaingirl.eu>

rockfax.com <http://www.rockfax.com>

rockandice.net <http://www.rockandice.net>

pyb.co.uk/courses/rock-climbing.php 
<http://www.pyb.co.uk/courses/rock-climbing.php>


Get immersed in the joys of sea-cliff climbing

While some traditionalists believe that scaling snow-covered mountains is the 
only true form of climbing, a small group of climbers prefer testing their 
stamina on sea-cliffs. This has the advantage of taking climbers to some of 
Britain's most isolated and beautiful shores, with only nesting birds and 
territorial seagulls for company.

Martin Chester, chief instructor at the National Mountain Centre, Plas y 
Brenin in Wales, is a big fan. He has been climbing for 25 years, across 
mountains, bluffs and all types of rock faces, but says sea-cliff climbing 
holds a special attraction. "Sea-cliff climbing couples everything that is 
great about being at sea - the sea air, the sense of being just a small part of 
the greater scheme of things - with everything enjoyable about climbing."

Most climbs start with either the climber scrambling down to the base of a 
cliff and then traversing across to the start or, in the case of trickier ones, 
abseiling down first and then climbing back up. Climbing a sea stack (the lone, 
pillar-like core of an ancient volcano) is even more tricky if surrounded by 
water. "The most common way is for the first person to swim across, rig up a 
rope and then the others would follow," Chester says.

Of course, this isn't a sport for climbing novices. "You need to serve an 
apprenticeship on land first. In mountain climbing if something goes wrong, you 
can just go back down - you don't have that option in sea-cliff climbing. It 
immerses you straight in. Your knowledge of the sea, of the tides and the 
weather - plus all your climbing knowledge - needs to be applied. But when you 
get it right, that is a great feeling."

More information at pyb.co.uk <http://www.pyb.co.uk>
 