
Roland Rees, who has died aged 74, was a leading fringe and touring theatre 
director of the 1970s and 80s, whose company,Foco Novo 
<http://www.blackplaysarchive.org.uk/explore/companies/foco-novo>, presented 
important new work, including The Elephant Man (1977). Written by Foco Novo’s 
co-founder Bernard Pomerance, the play was acclaimed for the performance of 
David Schofield as the Victorian Victorian fairground exhibit Joseph “John” 
Merrick, and entered the repertoire of the National Theatre in 1980, while 
another, simultaneous, production ran on Broadway.

The Elephant Man <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/12/22/sideshow-2> is 
now performed all over the world – David Lynch’s 1980 film starring John Hurt 
is a very different kettle of kippers – and every revival honours the 
bare-bones, Brechtian style of the structure and composition, its economy of 
language and Foco Novo stagecraft; it’s all written in.

The company’s name, translated from the Portuguese as “new starting point”, 
caught the full tide of the early fringe endeavour, with first-generation 
immigrant comedies (one of the best, and funniest, wasMustapha Matura 
<http://mustaphamatura.com>’s As Time Goes By, 1971), and outspoken adversarial 
political drama by Howard Brenton,Trevor Griffiths 
<http://www.trevorgriffiths.co.uk> and Tunde Ikoli. These plays toured on the 
new circuit of arts labs, campus theatres and Labour party halls, usually 
finding a London date at the Royal Court’s upstairs studio, the ICA, the 
Tricycle in Kilburn or, more often, the Hampstead theatre then run with its 
artistic director, Michael Rudman, by Foco Novo’s third founding member, the 
producer David Aukin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Froland-rees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441729298596%2Fff520a0d-b6c4-485c-a330-9acf0064ac1e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roland%20Rees%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Froland-rees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roland%20Rees%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Froland-rees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441729298596%2Fff520a0d-b6c4-485c-a330-9acf0064ac1e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Foco Novo’s production of The Elephant Man was directed by Roland Rees. 
Photograph: John Haynes 
Rees was a quiet and thoughtful, bear-like bearded man with an unwavering 
commitment to new theatre which he developed while living in New York in the 
mid-60s and completing a PhD on the black activist Marcus Garvey at Columbia 
University. He immersed himself in the artistic energy of that time – jazz, 
installations, happenings,Joe Chaikin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jun/26/guardianobituaries1>’s intensely 
physical Open Theatre and the utopian visions of the Living Theatre – before 
returning to London with a clear idea of what he might contribute. Foco Novo 
operated successfully for 17 years before the Arts Council summarily withdrew 
its revenue funding in a major cuts bloodbath in 1988 reflecting the aversion 
of the prime minister,Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
, to subsidised “political” (ie leftwing) theatre.

Rees was the elder son of Roland Gwyn Rees, a barrister at Lincoln’s Inn 
Fields, and his wife Margaret (nee Snowden), a physiotherapist. Born and raised 
in Llanishen, near Cardiff, he took a history degree, and specialised in the 
American civil war, at Aberystwyth University. On his return from New York, he 
introduced Afro-American writers such as Ed Bullins andLeRoi Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/10/amiri-baraka> at Ed Berman’s 
Inter-Action lunchtime theatre and commissioned Matura’s first play, Black 
Pieces.

With Foco Novo, the repertoire extended to the plays of Alfred Fagon and 
Ikoli, Brenton’s Gum and Goo (1971), CP Taylor’s Bread and Butter (1973), John 
Berger’s A Seventh Man (1976), a study of migrant workers in Europe adapted by 
the poetAdrian Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/books/adrian-mitchell>, 
and, also in the 70s, a series of lesser known Bertolt Brecht plays – Drums in 
the Night with Stephen Rea, Petra Markham and William Hoyland, A Man’s a Man 
with Stefan Kalipha, Peter Marinker and Sheila Reid, and his controversial 
version of Christopher Marlowe’s Edward II in 1982. That year, Brenton adapted 
Brecht’s Conversations in Exile, and in 1983 Rees directed a wonderful version 
of the potent fable Puntila and His Man Matt.

This invaluable thread of Foco Novo work outside the subsidised mainstream 
continued with Bloody Poetry (1984), Brenton’s superb phantasmagorical 
recreation of the friendship of Byron and Shelley in Switzerland and Italy from 
1816-22, the last years of Shelley’s life. The cast includedJames Aubrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/11/james-aubrey-obituary>, Jane 
Gurnett and Fiona Shaw. The following year, Nigel Williams’s version of Jean 
Genet’s Deathwatch starred Sean Bean; then came Sue Todd’s production of 
Marguerite Duras’s lyrical sea-bound memory play Savannah Bay (1988), with 
Faith Brook and Alexandra Mathie.

After 18 years of, as one colleague put it, biting the Arts Council hand that 
fed him, Rees set about a written record of his time in fringe theatre, Fringe 
First (1992), an essential volume including interviews with playwrights, 
actors, musicians and administrators. He worked for the British Council, and 
with drama students at Rada, travelled to India and in 1997 founded theAlfred 
Fagon award <http://www.alfredfagonaward.co.uk> for playwrights of African or 
Caribbean descent.

Latterly, he was affected by Parkinson’s disease, dementia and a debilitating 
stroke. His lifelong partner, the costume designer Sheelagh Killeen, whom he 
married in 2003, survives him. 

• Roland David Gwyn Rees, theatre director, born 13 January 1941; died 2 
September 2015
 