
Rolls-Royce has been tipped to make a possible bid for Finnish ship and power 
plant engine maker Wärtsilä, in a deal which could be worth around £8bn.

The two sides recently announced Rolls had made a preliminary approach but the 
talks had ended without agreement. But Finnish newspaper Helsingin Sanomat said 
the UK aero-engine maker - which is believed to have no debt - could be 
plotting a €50 a share offer for Wärtsilä. Analyst Rob Stallard at RBC Capital 
Markets said:
 Rolls is in the cash consumptive stage of the aerospace cycle as it ramps up 
for Trent XWB volumes, and management is under pressure to deliver improved 
profitability and cash generation. This could mean that investors are a little 
weary of such a big deal despite possible material accretion. That said, there 
is limited scope for Rolls to do M&A around engines so doing a deal when debt 
is cheap is not without merit, and as far as we know Wärtsilä has a quality 
portfolio that probably has synergy for Rolls' Marine and Power Systems 
divisions. 
Rolls dipped 3p to £12.46, as leading shares paused for breath after seemingly 
heading for their best closing high since December 1999.

The FTSE 100 finished 2.47 points higher at 6834.26 having climbed as high as 
6867. Early optimism was sparked by news the People's Bank of China had acted 
to supply liquidity into the banking sector to ease fears of a credit crunch.

But an opening fall on Wall Street as the US markets re-opened after Martin 
Luther King day on Monday soon sent UK shares into reverse. Reports that the US 
Federal Reserve may continuing trimming its $75bn a month bond buying programme 
rather than pausing for a while seemed to do much of the damage. By the time 
London closed, the Dow Jones Industrial Average was down around 114 points or 
0.7%.

Mining shares fell back on profit taking after recent gains, despite the 
positive news from China. SoRio Tinto dropped 104.5p to 3231.5p, Antofagasta 
fell 25.5p to 819.5p andAnglo American lost 37p to £13.56.

But African Barrick Gold added 5.9p to 206.5p after a positive production 
update.

Elsewhere Unilever rose 43p to £24.80 following well received results, but 
SABMiller slipped 8p to £30.86 as weaker beer volumes led to disappointing 
third quarter sales.

Back with the risers, testing group Intertek rose 92p to £30, lifted by a 
positive update from Swiss peer SGS, which reported rising profits and said it 
expected revenues to grow over the next three years.

Elsewhere Standard Chartered added 30p to £13.58 on renewed talk its recent 
share price weakness could leave it vulnerable to a bidder 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/0bd13682-8208-11e3-87d5-00144feab7de.html?siteedition=uk#axzz2r1o8zNwb>
, with Australia's ANZ the latest name added to the list.

William Hill fell 6.6p to 355.4p and rival Ladbrokes lost 8.1p to 158.6p after 
JP Morgan cut its price target on both and gave them an underweight rating, 
based on possible restrictions on gaming machines in betting shops as early as 
spring or autumn this year.

Finally, Promethean World put on 4.125p to 29p after the interactive learning 
specialist said it expected 2013 results to be ahead of expectations, with 
earnings up from £5.1m to £9m, despite continuing constraints on education 
budgets. But it added that its continued investment in software and the 
challenging market conditions meant that 2014 would not be much different to 
market forecasts.

Analyst Julian Yates at the company's broker Investec said:
 The company has seemingly stabilised, but we expect it will be some time 
before growth returns. We continue to see Promethean as a 'special situation' 
with the 2013 improvement in the cash position having supported our buy. With 
the cash balance improving further and indications that a stabilisation in 
trading is being reached, we move our target price to 30p (from 25p) and 
accounting for the half of our 2014 estimated cash balance.

Meanwhile JP Morgan Cazenove repeated its own 30p price target on the shares.
 