
Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> has called 
in a leading law firm to help it deal with bribery allegations and a Serious 
Fraud Office (SFO) investigation.

Slaughter and May has been brought in while the SFO investigates allegations 
of bribery and corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/27/rolls-royce-second-investigation-brazil-petrobas>
 at the FTSE 100 engineer.

Rolls-Royce was initially accused of paying bribes to win contracts in China 
and Indonesia, but it has also been linked tothe corruption scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/21/ex-treasurer-workers-party-sentenced-prison-petrobras-corruption-scandal>
 facing Brazil’s state-owned oil company Petrobras, and the SFO has said it is 
looking into several of the UK company’s divisions.

Rolls-Royce faces second investigation in Brazil corruption scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/27/rolls-royce-second-investigation-brazil-petrobas>
The news that Slaughter and May, one of the UK’s top five law firms, is 
working withRolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup> 
underlines the seriousness with which the company is treating the 
investigation, launched in December 2013.

Rolls-Royce hired the New York law firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jan/10/rolls-royce-lord-gold-anti-corruption-procedures>
 Debevoise & Plimpton in 2012 to conduct an internal investigation after the 
SFO requested information from the company, after a whistleblower made 
allegations about its conduct in China and Indonesia. This investigation led to 
Rolls-Royce handing further information to the SFO, which launched a formal 
inquiry into the company.

It is understood Slaughter and May was initially hired by Rolls-Royce two 
years ago as its joint legal counsel, meaning it worked for the company on 
financial transactions.

However, it is now also advising Rolls-Royce on the corruption allegations, 
with leading litigation partners drafted in, and is thought to be the company’s 
principal adviser.

Slaughter and May has a history of helping major British companies deal with 
corruption allegations. It defendedGlaxoSmithKline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/glaxosmithkline>, Britain’s biggest 
pharmaceutical company, over an investigation into its conduct in Iraq during 
Saddam Hussein’s regime. The firm’s partners Richard Swallow and Jonathan Clark 
are working with the engine maker on the investigations.

Rolls-Royce, which makes engines for the Airbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> A380 superjumbo, has said it is 
cooperating with the SFO and authorities in Brazil investigating Petrobras.

The company is facing one of the biggest challenges in its history. As well as 
the SFO investigation, Rolls-Royce hasissued four profit warnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/rolls-royce-and-bae-to-cut-jobs-as-march-of-the-makers-stumbles-again>
 in the past year and faces calls to be broken up.

ValueAct, an activist investor, has built a 5.4% stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/31/rolls-royce-break-up-valueact-capital-stake>
 in the company, and wants Rolls-Royce to sell off its marine division, badly 
affected by the decline in the oil price, to focus on producing engines for 
civil aeroplanes.

Warren East, the new chief executive of Rolls-Royce, has rejected ValueAct’s 
calls and refused to offer the investor a seat on the board.

East will outline his strategy for Rolls-Royce at an investor day next 
Tuesday. However, he gave a glimpse into his plans last week when he issued
another profits warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/rolls-royce-and-bae-to-cut-jobs-as-march-of-the-makers-stumbles-again>
 and said the company needed to cut costs to be more agile.

Rolls-Royce and BAE to cut jobs as march of the makers stumbles again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/rolls-royce-and-bae-to-cut-jobs-as-march-of-the-makers-stumbles-again>
Rolls-Royce blamed its profit warning on falling demand for corporate jets in 
Brazil, China and south-east Asia, a decline in maintenance and servicing 
revenues from its engines for large planes and energy industry customers being 
affected by the slump in the oil price. The Derby-based group now expects 
profit “headwinds” of £650m next year, more than double the £300m cut to 
profits identified earlier in the year.

In response, East wants to reduce costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/30/rolls-royce-profits-halve-jet-engine-demand-down>
 by up to £200m a year at the same time as improving decision-making, which 
will lead to Rolls-Royce cutting jobs some of the 2,000 senior managers it 
employs around the world.

Rolls-Royce is struggling largely as a result of investing in wide-bodied 
aircraft, such as the A380, at a time when demand is focused on narrow-bodied 
passenger plans. Rolls-Royce abandoned the narrow-bodied market in 2013 when it 
pulled out of a joint venture with its rival Pratt & Whitney so it could focus 
on wide-bodied aircraft and the next generation of single-aisle planes that 
should follow the Airbus A320neo and Boeing 737 Max.

Analysts at Agency Partners said Rolls-Royce faces “existential risks”, 
including a decline in the use of its older engines – which will reduce the 
aftermarket sales that Rolls-Royce enjoys – and a general weakening in the 
aerospace market.

The analysts said: “The last point is important, as the crisis to date has 
been largely specific to Rolls-Royce and has occurred against the background of 
unprecedented sustained strength in civil aerospace markets – overlaying a 
sector downturn on Rolls-Royce own crisis would make life yet more difficult.

“We believe Rolls-Royce is well into a familiar aerospace and defence sector 
‘near death experience’ pattern, which suggests that the shares have another 
40% and six-plus months to fall.”

All parties declined to comment.
 