
After months of controversy including a turf war and a petition to block it 
from happening, thePanorama music festival <http://www.panorama.nyc/passes/> 
will finally debut in this weekend.

Its entrance into the New York festival scene parks its tanks firmly on the 
lawn of the more established festivalGovernor’s Ball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/06/governors-ball-2016-review-cancellation-kanye-west>
, which takes place on Randalls Island each June. The prospect of a new 
festival entering the city caused such a stir that Governor’s Ball organizers 
started apetition <https://www.change.org/p/bill-de-blasio-support-gov-ball-nyc>
 to ask Mayor Bill de Blasio to deny a permit on Panorama’s original location: 
Flushing Meadows Park in Queens.

Panorama, which is organized by AEG Live and Goldenvoice, the company behind 
the huge California festivalCoachella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/coachella>, later received a permit to hold 
the festival on Randall’s Island – albeit incontroversial 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/20/nyregion/friend-gave-to-de-blasio-just-as-client-won-permit-to-stage-festival.html>
 circumstances – the same place as Governor’s Ball.

The lineups also target a similar demographic, with Kendrick Lamar, Arcade 
Fire and LCD Soundsystem headlining Panorama, and Governor’s Ball boasting 
Kanye West, the Strokes and the Killers – though West didn’t play asthe final 
day of the Governor’s Ball due to bad weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/06/kanye-west-webster-hall-new-york-street-riot>
.

Panorama’s debut in New York has raised concerns that festivals may be 
reaching saturation as organisers compete for the same space. It remains to be 
seen whether New York has the appetite for two large and similar targeted 
events. While festivals have grown in the US exponentially in the last decade, 
2016 has seen some slowdown in ticket sales.

Panorama has not sold out but the event’s producer Mark Schulman said the 
organisers were happy with ticket sales. “We’re really pleased with the ticket 
sales for the first year,” Schulman said. “We have surpassed our expectation.”

Paul Tollet, the promoter of AEG and Goldenvoice, told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/19/arts/music/panorama-festival-paul-tollett-coachella.html>
 that they were not promoting the festival aggressively in the first year.

However Larry Miller, the director of music business program at NYU’s 
Steinhardt school said that he had noticed an increase in print and radio 
promotion in the week leading up to the festival, a traditional last-ditch 
marketing technique to boost lower than expected sales. Also, at the time of 
publication three-day passes wereavailable on resale sites 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/20/nyregion/friend-gave-to-de-blasio-just-as-client-won-permit-to-stage-festival.html>
 for $100 below face value, further indication of a lack of demand.

There is also some warning signs of a national slowdown in the festival boom 
America has witnessed over the past decade.

In 2014, the market was buoyant. Coachella, Bonnaroo and Lollapalooza each 
sold to capacity, moving hundreds of thousands of tickets. Nielsen Musicreported
 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/music-festivals/6539009/music-festival-statistics-graphic>
 that 32 million Americans said they go to at least one US festival per year – 
half of them being millennials, the crown jewel of marketing demographics.

However, Panorama is not the only festival to have suffered slow ticket sales 
in 2016. Bonnaroo’ssales 
<http://consequenceofsound.net/2016/07/bonnaroo-2016-was-the-least-attended-year-in-the-festivals-history/>
 were the lowest in the festival’s 15-year history and a 46% drop from its peak.

An Eventbrite survey 
<https://www.eventbrite.com/blog/academy/top-3-challenges-facing-music-festivals-ds1a/>
 of festival organizers, producers and production companies found that 45% of 
those who hold large festivals – with 50,000 or more attendees – were concerned 
about market saturation. The growth of the number of festivals has also shrunk 
the pool of sponsorship money, a key factor in making festivals profitable.

Miller believes there may be a limit on the growth potential of music 
festivals.

“Maybe we are reaching the saturation point, certainly of the mega festivals,” 
Miller said. “I think we are beginning to bump up against the price ceiling.”

In New York, the number of small festivals has also grown dramatically over 
the past 10 years, in line with the national trend.

Folk and jazz festivals have existed in New York since the 1960s, including the
Schaefer music festival, which ran in Central Park from 1968 to 1976 
<http://www.fillmore-east.com/schaefer.htm>and the Kool Jazz festival 
<http://theconcertdatabase.com/concerts/1st-annual-kool-jazz-festival>, which 
arrived in the city from Newport in 1972. However, Governor’s Ball gave New 
York its first mega-festival when it began five-years ago and now attracts 
50,000 fans each day for three days. Meanwhile the number of niche festivals 
such asAfropunk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/21/afropunk-the-festival-that-takes-black-punk-pride-worldwide>
 and theBrooklyn hip-hop festival <http://www.bkhiphopfestival.com/> has also 
grown.

Tom Russell, a partner in Founders Entertainment and founder of Governor’s 
Ball, believes there remains a demand for festivals in New York – but it is not 
limitless.

“In New York City, it’s [the appetite] definitely growing,” Russell said. “I 
think you’ll see more and more festivals pop up, but I think you’ll see the 
best of the best succeed, and remain and then you’ll see there’s ones that just 
can’t make it, not pan out.”

Founders was previously an independent company but recently partnered with the 
corporate concert organszer Live Nation in order to ensure it can compete with 
the deep pockets of AEG Live.

Other large US cities such as Chicago and Los Angeles have several large 
festivals a year but Miller explains that the New York market is difficult for 
several reasons. This includes real estate availability, cost of operation, and 
competing for people’s attention with so many offerings on any given night. 
Using his students as a sample, he believes that there is still a strong 
appetite for festivals but that at less than two months apart, Panorama may 
have been scheduled too close to Governor’s Ball.

Panorama’s organizers contend that there is more than enough room for both 
festivals in the city. Schulman also said that he doesn’t want the event – 
which is inspired by the 1964 World Fair 
<http://creative.nydailynews.com/worldsfair> – to be described as simply a 
festival. It will feature installations from local artists and several 
interactive exhibits as the organizers wanted to fuse the art, technology, and 
music landscapes of New York.

It remains to be seen if two festivals targeting the same audience – on the 
same grounds – can survive in New York City.

“If they’re serious about building a lasting festival brand in New York, they 
need to be prepared to play a long game,” Miller said. “Not simply judge 
whether to do a second festival next year on the basis whether they made or 
lost money this weekend.”

 * This article was amended on 21 July 2016. The director of the music 
business programme at NYU’s Steinhardt school is Larry Miller, not Wilson.
 