
Plenty of people are intrigued by their family history. Growing up as the son 
of West Indian immigrants who moved to London in the 1950s and 60s, I was 
especially fascinated by anecdotes about the lives of my Guyanese relatives, 
which seemed a million miles away from Tottenham’s Broadwater Farm estate. For 
most, this interest in family history is usually satiated by a Sunday afternoon 
spent talking to grandparents, or nowadays a month’s trial subscription to an 
online genealogy site. Few go to the lengths ofAlex Haley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2007/sep/16/malcolm-x-scaring-white-america>
, whose epic retelling of his family’s history in Roots finally brought the 
experience of the transatlantic slave trade to a mass audience.

How a Tory councillor played a key role in Hollywood remake of slavery epic 
Roots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/12/kunta-kinte-remake-of-roots>
Written in 1976, following on from the rise of the American civil-rights 
movement, Haley’s novel vividly describes the life of Kunta Kinte, an 
18th-century young Gambian man who is captured and sold to a Virginian 
plantation owner. The novel took 10 years to write, won Haley a Pulitzer prize 
and was turned into a hugely successful mini-series that had millions glued to 
their TV sets.

At the outset, Haley dedicates 200 pages to a masterful description of Gambia 
– a country where ritual, religion and rhythms of daily life are intermingled 
with concerns of famine and worries about “toubob” (white people). Haley’s 
fully developed characters and descriptions of a country rich in cultural 
history did much to move writers away from the Eurocentric and stereotypical 
depictions of Africa previously offered by the likes ofJoseph Conrad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/josephconrad>, and provided the backdrop for 
a novel intent on empowering black people and former slaves.

Kunta’s journey on the slave ships to America is as hellish as one could 
possibly imagine. Haley describes Kunta shackled in a “nightmarish bedlam of 
shrieking, weeping, praying and vomiting”. Unsurprisingly, his graphic 
depictions sent shockwaves around a white liberal readership – and provided an 
African-American and black diaspora an education about the slave trade that 
textbooks in western schools missed out.

At the heart of Roots lies a battle for individual autonomy, against slave 
owners, and then against an America intent on marginalising black people. One 
of the ways in which Kunta is shown to retain his autonomy is through the 
passing on of stories to his descendants, who marvel in the tales of their 
African heritage. This tradition is shown to have continued throughout the 
generations, to Haley himself. Haley reveals the power of oral history, and the 
possibility of recovering identity against the odds. In so doing, he, likeMaya 
Angelou <https://www.theguardian.com/books/mayaangelou>, paved the way for the 
next generation of storytellers, from the likes ofSteve McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/steve-mcqueen> to Zadie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/zadiesmith>, whose work picks up where Roots 
left off.

Much time and energy has been spent accusing Haley of plagiarising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/nov/23/comment.stephenmoss> various 
aspects of Roots. Personally, I think that to dwell on this criticism is to 
totally miss the significance of the novel, which told for the first time a 
story that had remained largely unknown to white audiences in America and 
Britain. Whether fact, fiction or “faction”, Roots opened the eyes of western 
audiences to the oppression of their black brothers and sisters, and encouraged 
second- and third-generation immigrants to take pride in, and ownership of, 
their cultural heritage.
 