
Rose Byrne <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rose-byrne> will return to the 
Australian stage for the first time in more than a decade in 2016, playing the 
female lead in David Mamet’s Speed-the-Plow for Sydney Theatre Company, 
artistic director Andrew Upton has announced.

Jonathan Church appointed Sydney Theatre Company's artistic director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/jonathan-church-appointed-sydney-theatre-companys-artistic-director>
Mamet’s Hollywood tale, which Upton will direct, is the last show in his final 
program for the theatre company he has run since 2008.

In December, Upton and his wife Cate Blanchett hand over the keys of the Wharf 
theatresto British director-producer Jonathan Church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/jonathan-church-appointed-sydney-theatre-companys-artistic-director>
, but not before gifting their successor a season full of heavyweight writers, 
actors and directors.

Veteran Australian film actor John Howard, another stranger to STC of late, 
will return opposite former artistic director Robyn Nevin, in Arthur Miller’s 
All My Sons, whileman of the moment Ryan Corr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/25/ryan-corr-banished-holding-the-man-gay-marriage>
 is already the poster boy for a new production of Tom Stoppard’s Arcadia.

“I was very mindful of it as my last [season] and someone’s first,” said Upton 
of his choices. “So I put all of my sturdiest hopes in there – Arthur Miller,
David Mamet <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/davidmamet>, Tom Stoppard – 
where you know the plays are solid and good.”

Upton has also adapted Feydeau’s A Flea in Her Ear and programmed the first 
Noël Coward of his time at STC, Hay Fever. But it won’t all be old and/or dead 
white men. The 2016 season includes two premieres by Australian writers – Machu 
Picchu by Sue Smith (starring Lisa McCune) and Angela Betzien’s Melbourne-set 
thriller The Hanging – as well as the Australian premiere of Ayad Akhtar’s 
Pulitzer-winning play Disgraced.

STC has also commissioned Power Plays – five new shorts from Melissa Bubnic, 
Michele Lee,Nakkiah Lui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/27/nakkiah-lui-i-dont-like-the-word-leader-especially-when-used-about-me>
, Hannie Rayson and Debra Thomas – and Declan Green is back after the success 
of Calpurnia Descending by Sisters Grimm, only this time with the Listies for a 
new children’s show: Hamlet, Prince of Skidmark.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Frose-byrne-returns-to-sydney-stage-in-david-mamets-speed-the-plow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dba33042a8325aeebd57d06c5790ca24e1286a0%2F0_323_2362_1419%2F2362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rose%20Byrne%20returns%20to%20Sydney%20stage%20in%20David%20Mamet's%20Speed-the-Plow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Frose-byrne-returns-to-sydney-stage-in-david-mamets-speed-the-plow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rose%20Byrne%20returns%20to%20Sydney%20stage%20in%20David%20Mamet%27s%20Speed-the-Plow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F03%2Frose-byrne-returns-to-sydney-stage-in-david-mamets-speed-the-plow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dba33042a8325aeebd57d06c5790ca24e1286a0%2F0_323_2362_1419%2F2362.jpg>
 Mike Bartlett’s King Charles III will open in March 2016. Photograph: Almeida 
Theatre/Sydney Theatre Company 
Despite not knowing who his replacement would be, Upton picked King Charles III
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/12/king-charles-iii-review-shakespeare-mike-bartlett-wyndhams-tim-pigott-smith>
 as STC’s major international import for 2016, directed by Jonathan Church’s 
protégé Rupert Goold. Mike Bartlett’s satire is the newest work on Guardian 
theatre critic Michael Billington’s list ofthe 100 greatest plays ever written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/02/michael-billington-101-greatest-plays>
. Experimental British theatre company 1927 will bring their latest show, Golem.

Kip Williams, a hot tip for a while to succeed Upton, will direct both Arcadia 
and A Midsummer Night’s Dream, as well as Louis Nowra’s The Golden Age, last 
seen inSydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> directed by 
Neil Armfield, whose sell-out production of The Secret River also makes a 
welcome return in 2016.

If his final season has a signature, Upton said, it’s that he programs with 
his playwright’s hat on. “There was a list that Cate and I wrote when we first 
got the job, with 60 plays on it. In our time together, we did more than 100 
and I’ve done more than 150. Not only am I only halfway though but, weirdly, 
it’s got longer!”

Rose Byrne: 'I couldn't do standup, my comedy comes from character, not jokes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/29/rose-byrne-i-couldnt-do-standup-my-comedy-doesnt-come-from-jokes>
Upton also maintained a wishlist of actors he wanted to work with before 
leaving – including Byrne. The Bridesmaids star was last seen at STC in Anton 
Chekhov’s Three Sisters, directed by Benedict Andrews, who will make his own 
Sydney comeback in 2016 whenhis new play, Gloria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/01/benedict-andrews-returns-to-australia-with-new-play-gloria>
, premieres at Griffin theatre company.

Byrne, who studied at David Mamet’s Atlantic theatre company before her 
Hollywood career took off,earned five stars  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/29/you-cant-take-it-with-you-review-broadway-james-earl-jones>
from the Guardian for her recent Broadway turn in You Can’t Take It With You. 
The challenge was finding time in her filming schedule, said Upton.

“I live with a fairly in-demand actress, so I understand that! But Rose knows 
that it’s good for her craft, she knows it’s a company she loves and she knows 
it’s a good role. [Speed-the-Plow] has been misdone a number of times because 
of the woman’s role – you’ve got to cast someone at the top of their game.”
 