
It was one of those experiences where you remember everything: who you were 
with, what you were wearing, what time of day it was.

It was my first Arthur Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/miller>. I 
was 16 years old. I’d been a nerdy drama student for about eight years, but I 
hadn’t seen that much live theatre and I’d never seen any of Miller’s plays 
performed.

I was with one of my oldest and best friends, Nadia Townsend. We were 
passionate acting students, in year 11 at Bradfield College, and she was my 
partner-in-crime for all things dramatic. I wore a short, second-hand 60s dress 
with lemon and lime flowers and capped sleeves, and Blundstone lace-up boots – 
it was the 90s. It was a matinee performance, we were 16, we were out by 
ourselves and there was a feeling of tension and fever in the audience because 
the production was so good.

I was very naive. I didn’t know anything about the story of A View From the 
Bridge, so I went in blind. Although the play is set in 1950s New York, it’s 
essentially a Greek tragedy. Eddie Carbone is an Italian-American longshoreman 
married to Beatrice. He’s a good man but he has an unhealthy obsession with his 
wife’s niece, Catherine, who lives with the couple. When the brothers Marco and 
Rodolpho arrive, his obsession starts to bleed into the rest of his life, with 
tragic consequences.

This production was directed by Adam Cook at Company B, with an extraordinary 
cast.Essie Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/09/the-thousand-faces-of-essie-davis-people-dont-realise-im-the-same-person>
 played Catherine. She was 23, had just graduated from NIDA and was this 
stunning ingenue. Marshall Napier played Eddie Carbone. Justin Monjo and 
Gillian Jones were also in it.

It made me uncomfortable in the best possible way. There were so many moral 
lines in the sand that I was conflicted about. I had never felt that before. I 
felt empathy for Eddie but I was scared of him; I was worried for Essie as 
Catherine but I also wasn’t sure if I trusted her. As the complexity of the 
story built and built and built, my heart was in my throat as I wondered what 
was going to happen. It was electric, and when the lights went up for half time 
everyone was holding their breath.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Frose-byrne-arthur-millers-a-view-from-the-bridge-took-my-breath-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F105dc126c2fd0684106ff4b9922421f9e88f9154%2F0_32_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rose%20Byrne%3A%20'Arthur%20Miller%E2%80%99s%20A%20View%20from%20the%20Bridge%20took%20my%20breath%20away'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Frose-byrne-arthur-millers-a-view-from-the-bridge-took-my-breath-away%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rose%20Byrne%3A%20%27Arthur%20Miller%E2%80%99s%20A%20View%20from%20the%20Bridge%20took%20my%20breath%20away%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Frose-byrne-arthur-millers-a-view-from-the-bridge-took-my-breath-away%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F105dc126c2fd0684106ff4b9922421f9e88f9154%2F0_32_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Actor Rose Byrne with Speed-the-Plow director Andrew Upton and co-stars Damon 
Herriman and Lachy Hulme. Photograph: James Green/Sydney Theatre Company 
There was also a true sense of company on stage, of everybody bouncing off 
each other, everyone passing the baton; there was a dance of tension and fear 
and love, hot in the air. But it was the exploration of the greyness of the 
moral boundaries which I had never really felt before.

The play was the beginning of my journey of searching for those sacred 
experiences that you have in the theatre, and wanting to be a part of that. 
It’s like lightning in the bottle, trying to capture that thrill that can come 
on stage, and it’s very rare. I can count on two hands the number of plays I’ve 
seen where I’ve felt like that, but this was the first one.

It’s like the first time you fall in love, the first time you have your heart 
broken – these are the seminal moments in our lives. For me, this was the first 
time that theatre crossed over the boundaries of just being entertainment, to 
become something far greater, more complex, more confronting and profound.

This was the first time that theatre crossed over from just being 
entertainment, to become something far greater

As best I can, I’ve sought out work like this – with those shifting moral 
boundaries – throughout my career. And as I’ve got older, I have returned to 
touchstones like this. Like when I first saw Sam Shepherd’s True West, or Tracy 
Letts’s August Osage County, or when I first heard a Cat Power ballad when I 
was 21. These are the touchstones of art that really changed me; that’s what 
great art can do.

And those first experiences are special, so I return to them when I’m feeling 
slightly despaired or uninspired, all of those things that can come with time 
and age in this business. A View From the Bridge is an emotional touchstone for 
what’s in my gut and in my heart.

It’s still my favourite Arthur Miller play. The playwright explored the grey 
areas of life in all his works, including Death of a Salesman and The Crucible, 
but for me this play encapsulates the ambiguity best.

It was first performed in 1956, and like many of his plays it stands the test 
of time. And just like any great work of literature or theatre or film or 
music, it still makes us laugh or cry or think or be inspired.

As told to Alexandra Spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alexandra-spring>

• Rose Byrne will appear in David Mamet’s Speed-the-Plow 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2016/speed-the-plow> at 
Sydney Theatre Company from 8 November to 17 December
 