
Hi Sarah, what can you tell me about the Royal Shakespeare Company and your 
role there?

The Royal Shakespeare Company <http://www.rsc.org.uk/> (RSC) creates theatre 
at its best, made in Stratford-upon-Avon and shared around the world. Everyone 
at the RSC – from the actors and armourers to the musicians and technicians – 
plays a part in creating the world you see on stage. All our productions start 
at our Stratford workshops and theatres, before we bring them to the widest 
possible audience through our touring, residencies, live broadcasts and online 
activity. So wherever you experience the RSC, you experience work made in 
Shakespeare’s home town. As head of digital development, I create new artistic 
digital initiatives and partnerships. I also have responsibilities for digital 
activity throughout the company.

Your session at today’s Digital Utopias 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/jobs-and-conferences/conferences/digital-utopias/>
 event will be about designing performance. How is performance at the RSC being 
enhanced by new tech?

Digital is not just online and virtual; it’s also personal and everyday. 
Technology has changed our workforce, relationships, maps, economies and 
priorities. However, artists can invert this so the technology itself becomes 
changed, enabling new thinking. Performance design can challenge technology to 
dance with an actor on stage: an email becomes a story; a text becomes a killer 
line; anInstagram <http://instagram.com/> shot becomes a painting; a Vine 
<https://vine.co/> becomes a scene; an LED gauze becomes a cloak of 
invisibility. Digital is the live conversation of the day and the arts is the 
crucible where we come together to shape, evolve and make sense of what is 
before us.

At the event I’ll be referencing several key examples from our online space, 
myShakespeare <http://myshakespeare.rsc.org.uk/>, where we commissioned 
artists, poets, technologists, coders, writers, musicians and students to 
create new work that interpreted Shakespeare online. We created a data 
aggregator calledBanquo <http://myshakespeare.rsc.org.uk/banquo/>, which showed 
us Shakespeare’s world through Twitter,Flickr <https://www.flickr.com/> and eBay
 <http://www.ebay.co.uk/>. We also turned Shakespeare quotes into news 
headings. Platforms such asTumblr <https://www.tumblr.com/> and YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/> became a canvas for writers. Video mapping traced an 
actor’s movements on stage. We placed sensors around the building to bring it 
alive online and tell the story.

Another example happened in 2013, when we explored what A Midsummer Night’s 
Dream would look like online andthrough social media <http://dream40.org/>. It 
was an ambitious experiment that saw us commission a group of artists to work 
with a wider online community, who uploaded user-generated content. The 
performance took place over three days. More than 3,000 pieces of content were 
shared (one-third of which were created by the public) and reached 30 million 
people on social media.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjan%2F20%2Frsc-digital-development-tech-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F20%2F1421754196017%2F8dbc5205-e31c-4bf1-88dc-88a6c9c8c8a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RSC%20head%20of%20digital%20development%3A%20tech%20must%20inform%20creativity%2C%20not%20trump%20it%20%7C%20Arts%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjan%2F20%2Frsc-digital-development-tech-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RSC%20head%20of%20digital%20development%3A%20tech%20must%20inform%20creativity%2C%20not%20trump%20it%20%7C%20Arts%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fjan%2F20%2Frsc-digital-development-tech-shakespeare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F20%2F1421754196017%2F8dbc5205-e31c-4bf1-88dc-88a6c9c8c8a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A Raspberry Pi unit 
We also recently produced a prototype theatre book with creative duo Davy and 
Kristin McGuire, funded byReact <http://www.react-hub.org.uk/>. It’s a 
beautifully-crafted physical object that uses the structure of a pop-up book, 
so when you turn the page, the story comes to life with pinpoint 
projection-mapped accuracy through carefully positioned mirrors and 
micro-projectors connected byRaspberry Pi 
<http://www.raspberrypi.org/help/what-is-a-raspberry-pi/> computer units.

What are the challenges in combining performance with digital platforms and 
technology?

Although some technologies, such as those involving devices, have become 
cheaper, there are still considerable costs involved. Projection mapping, 
coding and programmer time – technical expertise found outside the arts sector 
– are often far greater than an arts budget can afford. I think that will 
change as more technology skills are developed in-house and within the sector, 
but it’s a challenge for now.

Guaranteeing the functionality and reliability of new technologies are also 
challenges. RSC productions are performed every day in theatres around the 
world, so the technology needs to be robust, reliable and fixable.

Is there ever a danger the tech can trump the creative elements of a 
performance?

You have to ask yourself: is it a performance or a showcase? Are you telling a 
story or presenting a piece of tech and need a story to support it? Why are we 
using this technology to do this job? Could it be done by something else? So 
long as the tech is there to inform the creativity, rather than the other way 
round, it shouldn’t be a problem.

Do you think arts organisations could do more to embrace digital?

Yes, organisations are doing more to embrace digital and we should keep 
encouraging them to do so. A wave of early adopters and digital pioneers within 
organisations did a huge amount to create the conditions we have now.Digital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/digital> is a 
mainstream conversation for the arts and we’re mapping that landscape together. 
Support and development still have a way to go, but we’re at a different stage 
to what we were a few years ago.

I’ve seen a lot of great practice over the past few years from a wide range of 
organisations:Watershed <http://www.watershed.co.uk/>, Tate 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/>, the V&A <http://www.vam.ac.uk/>, Storythings 
<http://storythings.com/>, Caper <http://wearecaper.com/>, Culture 24 
<http://www.weareculture24.org.uk/>,  <http://www.blasttheory.co.uk/>Abandon 
Normal Devices <http://www.andfestival.org.uk/>, Blast Theory 
<http://www.blasttheory.co.uk/>, Coney <http://coneyhq.org/h/> and Pilot Theatre
 <http://pilot-theatre.net/> are all – in their own ways – shaping, questioning 
and defining digital narratives in the arts. There are also plenty of 
individual innovators in the sector with exploration in their DNA. They are 
essential and need a different framework for their findings to come through, 
which organisations can support.

Digital will open up fantastic possibilities but also bring challenges. An 
over-reliance on digital as a solution will create an imbalance and won’t bring 
people with you. It’s important that we don’t try to create a one-size-fits-all 
digital doctrine for the arts or reduce the cultural value debate to hits 
online. We are in the digital age and it’s people’s imaginations and ingenuity 
that can use technology to turn this into something amazing.

Find out more about the Digital Utopias conference here  
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/jobs-and-conferences/conferences/digital-utopias/>

Sarah Ellis is head of digital development at the Royal Shakespeare Company  
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/>

More like this

• Rifco chief: ‘Diversity does not always mean cost’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jan/13/rifco-theatre-pravesh-kumar-interview>
• Mary Rose Trust chief: from commanding officer to museum CEO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jan/06/mary-rose-trust-museum-john-lippiett>
• More from our Arts head series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/series/arts-head>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.

• The headline of this article was amended on 20 January 2015
 