
Russell Brand <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/russell-brand> is in talks 
with the BBC about presenting his first TV programme, a film about addiction, 
for the broadcaster since being forced out over a prank phone calls row in 2008.

The comedian – eager, it would appear, to mend fences after the scandal – has 
said he would waive any fee to forestall criticism of the proposedBBC3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc3> programme.

Discussions are continuing, but it is thought the film will explore the issue 
of addiction in a similar way to howStephen Fry tackled depression for BBC2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/jul/21/mentalhealth.broadcasting> in 
2006.

Last year, after the death of his friend and fellow addict Amy Winehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse>, Brand paid tribute to her, 
saying they "shared an affliction, the disease of addiction".

Brand left the BBC in 2008 following a row over a prank phone call he and 
Jonathan Ross <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jonathan-ross> made to the 
actor Andrew Sachs about Sachs's granddaughter. Since then Brand has gone on to 
appear in a number of Hollywood films.

He has returned to broadcasting in the UK – in 2009 he co-hosted a sports show 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1170294/Russell-Brand-makes-radio-return-Noel-Gallagher--wont-BBC.html>
 with Noel Gallagher on TalkSport, and in 2010 appeared as a guest on Dermot 
O'Leary's BBC Radio 2 show – but has not fronted a TV programme since leaving. 
His only recent appearance on BBC screens has been in BBC4 reruns of his BBC2 
documentary, On the Road.

A BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> spokesman said: "We are working 
with Russell on a programme about addiction in the UK but it's currently only 
in its early stages."

Brand, who has spent time in rehab, has often called for addicts to be treated 
as "sick people in need of care".He also said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jul/24/russell-brand-amy-winehouse-woman>
: "We need to review the way society treats addicts … we need to look at the 
way our government funds rehabilitation. It is cheaper to rehabilitate an 
addict than to send them to prison, so criminalisation doesn't even make 
economic sense."

The BBC is also in talks about airing a charity concert planned by Winehouse's 
family andComic Relief <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comic-relief>, 
at which a number of star names are likely to perform.

It is expected that some of the money raised by the concert will go to 
charities that help addicts and tackle addiction.

Last year the Amy Winehouse Foundation <http://www.amywinehousefoundation.org/>
 was set up in the singer's memory to help young people suffering with ill 
health, disability, financial woes or addiction.

Winehouse died in July 2011 from alcohol poisoning after a drinking binge 
following a period of abstinence during which she was trying to conquer her 
problems with alcohol.

A Comic Relief spokesman said: "There are no confirmed plans at the moment."

• This article was amended on 18 April 2012 to remove a phrase, inserted 
during the editing process, which said discussions were continuing as the 
corporation weighed the sensitivities. The final discussions do not concern 
that issue.
 