
A Russian airliner that crashed in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, killing all 224 people on board, 
broke up in the air, a Russian aviation official has said.

Viktor Sorochenko, an official with the Intergovernmental Aviation Committee, 
speaking after inspecting the crash site on the Sinai peninsula, said it was 
too early to talk about conclusions from the crash, Russian news agencies 
reported.

A militant group affiliated to Islamic State in Egypt claimed responsibility 
for bringing down the KogalymaviaAirbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> A321 on Saturday “in response to 
Russian airstrikes that killed hundreds of Muslims on Syrian land”. However, 
the Egyptian prime minister disputed the claim, suggesting militants in 
northern Sinai, where the country is fighting an Islamic insurgency, did not 
have the weaponry to hit a flight at 9,000 metres (31,000ft). The Russian 
transport minister also expressed scepticism about the militants’ claim.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Frussian-metrojet-airbus-a321-crashes-in-sinai-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russian%20Metrojet%20Airbus%20A321%20crashes%20in%20Sinai%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Frussian-metrojet-airbus-a321-crashes-in-sinai-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russian%20Metrojet%20Airbus%20A321%20crashes%20in%20Sinai%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Frussian-metrojet-airbus-a321-crashes-in-sinai-video-report&media=>
Russian Metrojet Airbus A321 crashes in Sinai. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/nov/01/russian-metrojet-airbus-a321-crashes-in-sinai-video-report>
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, an ally of Syria’s 
president, Bashar al-Assad, launched airstrikes against opposition groups in 
Syria, including Isis, on 30 September. The fact that the airliner broke up in 
the air does not necessarily indicate a bomb was the cause.

Russia’s emergencies ministry has sent more than 100 workers to Egypt to help 
recover bodies and examine evidence. Staff from the French accident 
investigation agency, BEA, were also on assigned to the task because the Airbus 
A321-200 was designed in France.
Metrojet crash locator 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/sinai_crash-zip/giv-311147RHZiodBeGHh/>
The agency said its team would be joined by two investigators from its German 
counterpart, the BFU, because the aircraft was manufactured in Germany, and 
four from its Russian counterpart, the MAK, because the plane was operated by a 
Russian company. They will join emergency services and aviation specialists 
already at the crash site, which is spread over more than 5.8 sq miles.

At least 163 bodies have been recovered and transported to various hospitals 
and morgues, including the Zeinhom morgue in Cairo, according to a cabinet 
statement. With the exception of four Ukrainians and one person from Belarus, 
all of the victims were Russian.

Isis-linked group in Egypt 'not capable of downing plane'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/01/isis-linked-group-egypt-not-capable-downing-plane-experts>
Russia’s emergencies minister, Vladimir Puchkov, said in a televised statement 
that 120 bodies had been examined and were being prepared to be flown home. 
They were expected to begin arriving in St Petersburg late on Sunday or early 
on Monday.

Russia’s transport safety watchdog, Rostransnadzor, said it had ordered the 
Kogalymavia airline, which is also known as Metrojet, to ground its fleet of 
Airbus A321s until the cause of the disaster was established, according to the 
Russian news agency Interfax.

But an official from Kogalymavia said it would take its Airbus A321 planes out 
of active use one by one for safety checks. Oksana Golovina at THC Holding, 
which owns Kogalymavia, told Reuters that its flight schedule would not be 
affected and that the airline was discussing the timing of the safety checks 
with Russian transport authorities.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmourners-light-candles-pray-victims-russian-metrojet-airbus-a321-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F1%2F1446382619367%2FKP_574209_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia%20holds%20day%20of%20mourning%20for%20Sinai%20plane%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmourners-light-candles-pray-victims-russian-metrojet-airbus-a321-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%20holds%20day%20of%20mourning%20for%20Sinai%20plane%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmourners-light-candles-pray-victims-russian-metrojet-airbus-a321-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F1%2F1446382619367%2FKP_574209_crop_640x360.jpg>
Russia holds day of mourning for Sinai plane crash. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/nov/01/mourners-light-candles-pray-victims-russian-metrojet-airbus-a321-video>
An Egyptian ground service official who examined the plane before takeoff said 
it appeared to be in good condition. “Everything checked out in 35 minutes,” he 
told the Associated Press.

A Russian TV channel, however, quoted Natalya Trukhacheva, identified as the 
wife of co-pilot Sergei Trukhachev, as saying he had complained before the 
flight “that the technical condition of the aircraft left much to be desired”.

Airbus A320 safety record in spotlight after Russia plane crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/31/airbus-a320-safety-record-in-spotlight-after-egypt-plane-crash>
Local media reported that the A321 had flown 16 times in the week before the 
tragedy and had suffered one previous accident, when the tail struck the runway 
on landing in Cairo in 2001, after which it underwent extensive repairs.

It was built in 1997, reportedly making it one of the oldest A321s in service 
anywhere, and had previously been operated by Libyan company Middle East 
Airlines, Turkish company Onur Air, Saudi Arabian Airlines and Syrian company 
Cham Wings Airlines. It had flown 56,000 hours in nearly 21,000 flights.

Kogalymavia failed a safety inspection in 2014 but reportedly rectified the 
violations and its planes had not been involved in large crashes before. A 
Kogalymavia Tu-154 caught fire on the runway in Surgut on 1 January 2011, 
however, killing three people and injuring 44.

The aircraft took off at 5.51am Cairo time (0351 GMT) and disappeared from 
radar screens 23 minutes later, Egypt’s civil aviation ministry said in a 
statement.


According to FlightRadar24, an authoritative flight tracking service based in 
Sweden, it descended rapidly at about 1,800 metres a minute.

The Airbus A321 is a medium-haul jet that has been in service since 1994. 
There are more than 1,100 in operation worldwide and it has a good safety 
record.
 