Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F6qmj5mhDwJQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F6qmj5mhDwJQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F6qmj5mhDwJQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click to view <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6qmj5mhDwJQ>

Whether because of deep personal ambition or a sense of having come to 
American cinema as an outsider, the New Zealand-born Russell Crowe's role 
choices have often suggested a desire to belong to great Hollywood traditions.

Gladiator looked back to historical blockbusters such as Cleopatra and 
Ben-Hur, Cinderella Man joined the line of boxing movies that includes Raging 
Bull, and Robin Hood directly overlapped with one of the signature performances 
of an earlier leading man from the Antipodes, Errol Flynn. Even Crowe's recent 
cameo in Man of Steel – as Superman's dad – happened to take on a part formerly 
played by a cinematic legend, Marlon Brando.

And now the history man seems to be at it again. His big 2014 release, Noah, 
channels Charlton Heston and the biblical extravaganzas such as Cecil B De 
Mille's The Ten Commandments, that were popular in the 1940s and 50s. By 
striking coincidence, Crowe asNoah <https://www.theguardian.com/film/noah>, 
directed by Darren Aronofsky, will be going head to head with Christian Bale as 
Moses in Ridley Scott's Exodus, another retro-religious film.

As these movies follow the 10-hour American series The Bible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/the-bible> (shown in the UK on Channel 5), 
it's clear that God is hot in US culture for reasons that may combine the 
current cultural power of the religious right, the cheapness of the material 
(scripture is out of copyright) and the fact that many of the set pieces in 
the good book – floods, plagues, sieges at walled cities – happily parallel the 
plots of disaster movies.

Revealingly, the marketing line on Noah, in posters and an early trailer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6qmj5mhDwJQ>, presents the bearded boat-builder 
as "a man trying to protect his family", and one of the clips released so far 
shows Crowe delivering the line, "It begins!", which traditionally cues the 
unleashing of the special effects in apocalyptic films. The biblical story of 
the Flood is essentially The Day After Tomorrow with a bit of a theological 
sub-plot about divine intervention.

Actors like to talk about their character's "arc" and, in playing someone who 
has an ark as well, Crowe has selected a figure with many contemporary 
resonances. The raging elements against which the rain-lashed father fights can 
surely be taken – if members of the audience so choose – as metaphors for 
terrorism, the economy or, indeed, in these environmentally conscious times, 
the weather. And cinemagoers in the Bible Belt and certain Republican senators 
and former governors may particularly warm to the story's subtext of a divine 
cleansing of the world.

For Crowe, Noah feels like a canny choice. It is a role in which for an actor 
suddenly to look older – Crowe will reach 50 next year – will be regarded as 
realism rather than deterioration; it would look odd if he hadn't gone grey and 
whiskery. And Noah's arc requires him to be tremendously brave and macho, while 
also demonstrating notable kindness to animals: a crowd-pleasing combination of 
attitudes that would be hard to bring off in, for example, a film about a dad 
protecting his kids against terrorists in modern Detroit.
 Russell Crowe as divinely inspired action hero in Noah, due for release in 
March. Photograph: Niko Tavernise/Paramount Pictures 
Ever since Robin Hood, the accent has been on the performer's vocal choices, 
and the trailer suggests that Crowe has gone for a throaty rumble that might 
well be the speaking voice of a man who has spent a lot of time persuading 
large and dangerous animals to walk up a plank in pairs.

And, for Crowe, the performances continue to come in two-by-two: walking by 
the side of Flynn in Robin Hood, Richard Burton in Gladiator, Brando in Man of 
Steel and, now, Charlton Heston in Noah.

• Noah is released on 28 March
 