
Russian and Egyptian investigators are working to establish the cause of the 
crash of a Russian airliner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crashes-in-sinai-egyptian-pm-says>
 in the Sinai peninsula that killed all 224 people on board, including 17 
children.

The plane crashed 23 minutes into its flight from Sharm el-Sheikh to St 
Petersburg on Saturday. Most of those on board were Russian tourists.

Airbus A320 safety record in spotlight after Russia plane crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/31/airbus-a320-safety-record-in-spotlight-after-egypt-plane-crash>
A group that said it was speaking on behalf of terrorist group Isis later 
posted an online statement claiming: “Soldiers of the caliphate were able to 
bring down a Russian plane above Sinai province.”


But Russia’s transport minister, Maksim Sokolov, said the claim “can’t be 
considered accurate”.


Mohamed Samir, Egypt’s army spokesman, also disputed the claim. “They can put 
out whatever statements they want but there is no proof at this point that 
terrorists were responsible for this plane crash. We will know the true reasons 
when the Civil Aviation Authority in coordination with Russian authorities 
completes its investigation. But the army sees no authenticity to the claims.”

Several radical Islamist groups have called for attacks on Russian targets 
since it began airstrikes on Isis forces in Syria in late September, but 
experts were sceptical that militants had weapons able to reach the plane, 
which was flying at an altitude of more than 30,000ft.

Lufthansa, Air France KLM and Emirates said they would be avoiding the Sinai 
route as a precaution until the cause of the crash became clear.
Approximate area of crash 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/10/sinai-planecrashroute/giv-31114a26z3MaSdApV/>
The Russian aviation regulator, Rosaviatsia, urged caution while the cause of 
the crash was being investigated, saying: “Until there is reliable evidence 
about the circumstances of what happened, there is no sense in putting forward 
and discussing any versions.”

However, the claims are likely to impact on the Russian public’s attitude to 
the country’s involvement in Syria, where Vladimir Putin, president ofRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, has launched airstrikes in support 
of President Bashar al-Assad and against Isis fighters.

Investigators said they were checking fuel samples from the last refuelling 
stop, in the Russian city of Samara, and have focused on the possibility that a 
technical failure could have caused the 18-year-old plane to crash.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmourners-light-candles-pray-victims-russian-metrojet-airbus-a321-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F1%2F1446382619367%2FKP_574209_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia%20holds%20day%20of%20mourning%20for%20Sinai%20plane%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmourners-light-candles-pray-victims-russian-metrojet-airbus-a321-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%20holds%20day%20of%20mourning%20for%20Sinai%20plane%20crash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmourners-light-candles-pray-victims-russian-metrojet-airbus-a321-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F1%2F1446382619367%2FKP_574209_crop_640x360.jpg>
Russia holds day of mourning for Metrojet Airbus A321 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/nov/01/mourners-light-candles-pray-victims-russian-metrojet-airbus-a321-video>
A spokesman said investigators were questioning people who were involved in 
preparing the aircraft and its crew and were carrying out searches at Moscow’s 
Domodedovo airport where the airline that operated the plane was based.

Kogalymavia, which is also known as Metrojet, was quoted by news agency Ria 
Novosti as saying that there were “no grounds” to blame the tragedy on human 
error. Captain Valery Nemov, 48, had 3,682 hours of flight time and had learned 
to fly the A321 at a training centre in Turkey in 2008.

Various reports suggested that a mechanical problem could have played a role. 
Security sources said an initial examination of the crash site showed the plane 
went down due to a technical fault, Reuters reported. Ria Novosti quoted a 
source in Sharm el-Sheikh airport as saying that the crew of the A321 appealed 
to the airport’s technicians due to “engine start failures several times over 
the past week”.

Russia’s day of mourning for 224 dead in Sinai air crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russia-day-mourning-224-dead-plane-crash-egypt>
The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, spoke on the phone to his Egyptian 
counterpart Abdel Fatah al-Sisi to discuss the crash, the Kremlin said in a 
statement. Sisi offered deep condolences and Putin promised the widest possible 
participation of Russian specialists in the investigation into the cause of the 
crash, the Kremlin said.

Distraught relatives gathered throughout Saturday at St Petersburg’s Pulkovo 
airport, where the flight had been due to land at 12.10pm local time. The 
youngest victim of the crash was believed to be 10 months old.

Viktoria Sevryukova, 24, was another of the names on a passenger list 
published by Russia’s Association of Tour Operators. She had posted photographs 
of herself relaxing on the beach during her holiday in Sharm el-Sheikh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Frussian-plane-crash-investigators-seek-cause-of-a321-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d46643412bd883c9f9049d7dd5218bb62102934%2F0_0_1080_1080%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russian%20plane%20crash%3A%20investigation%20begins%20into%20cause%20of%20Sinai%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Frussian-plane-crash-investigators-seek-cause-of-a321-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russian%20plane%20crash%3A%20investigation%20begins%20into%20cause%20of%20Sinai%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Frussian-plane-crash-investigators-seek-cause-of-a321-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d46643412bd883c9f9049d7dd5218bb62102934%2F0_0_1080_1080%2F1080.jpg>
 Viktoria Sevryukova who was on board the Russian plane. Photograph: instagram 
Sevryukova’s friend, Yevgenia Beryozina, told the Guardian she felt emptiness 
and could not believe the news. “She was my best friend – she had waited for 
this trip like I don’t know what,” Beryozina said. “And now she’s gone. Just 
like that, she’s gone.” Beryozina described Sevryukova as “positive, smart and 
sociable” and that “everything was just starting to work out” in her life. 
“It’s just not fair,” she said.

“I now see a tragic scene,” an Egyptian security officer at the site told 
Reuters by telephone. “A lot of dead on the ground and many who died whilst 
strapped to their seats. The plane split into two, a small part on the tail end 
that burned, and a larger part that crashed into a rockface. We have extracted 
at least 100 bodies and the rest are still inside.” The officer asked to remain 
anonymous.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Frussian-plane-crash-investigators-seek-cause-of-a321-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fa6631fc44da07069bd88475a468a7ad0972738%2F861_398_3235_2519%2F3235.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russian%20plane%20crash%3A%20investigation%20begins%20into%20cause%20of%20Sinai%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Frussian-plane-crash-investigators-seek-cause-of-a321-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russian%20plane%20crash%3A%20investigation%20begins%20into%20cause%20of%20Sinai%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Frussian-plane-crash-investigators-seek-cause-of-a321-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fa6631fc44da07069bd88475a468a7ad0972738%2F861_398_3235_2519%2F3235.jpg>
 Egyptian Prime Minister Sherif Ismail examines the Russian plane’s black box 
at the crash site. Photograph: EPA 
 Both black boxes of the plane had been found, Mohamed Hossam Kemal, the civil 
aviation minister, told a news conference.
 