
Yet another Russian reporter suffered from a potentially lethal assault at the 
weekend.Oleg Kashin, a reporter with the daily newspaper Kommersant, was 
attacked by two men near his Moscow home,leaving him with a fractured skull, a 
shattered jaw and a broken leg. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/nov/07/nationalist-thugs-attack-russian-journalist>

That news broke soon after a raid by armed police on a bank owned by Alexander 
Lebedev 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2010/nov/03/alexander-lebedev-moscow-bank-raid>
, one of the owners of the Moscow newspaperNovaya Gazeta (and, in Britain, The 
Independent and the London Evening Standard).

A second raid soon followed on another part of Lebedev's business empire when 
tax officials burst into his Crimean hotel resort in Ukraine. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/nov/05/alexander-lebedev-hotel-raid-ukraine>

All three events are (probably) unconnected. But there is an undeniable 
pressure on independent media owners and workers withinRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, and the events should be viewed in 
that context.

Following the first raid, Novaya Gazeta's editor-in-chief, Dmitry Muratov, 
said: "There's no other way to look at this other than as an attempt to 
intimidate Lebedev. He is completely independent and promotes civil society and 
a free press. This doesn't please the security men in power."

I hope Lebedev raises questions about the Russian government's tenuous 
understanding of press freedom when he gives the opening lecture next Sunday at 
theSociety of Editors' conference 
<http://www.societyofeditors.co.uk/page-view.php?page_id=142&parent_page_id=0> 
in Glasgow.

There is much to say. Consider the recent history. It was in June 2006 that 
Gavin O'Reilly, the president of the World Association of Newspapers, made a 
speech in Moscow in which he called on Russia's president,Vladimir Putin, to do 
more to protect press freedom 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/organgrinder/2006/jun/05/mondayworldnewspapercongres>
 in his country.

O'Reilly, in explaining WAN's decision to hold its conference in Russia that 
year, said it had made the choice "precisely because of the concerns of our 
community about the press freedom situation here and the apparent lack of 
progress towards the establishment of strong, independent media that can fulfil 
their proper role in democratic debate."

With Putin present, O'Reilly spoke of "widespread scepticism... about whether 
there exists any real willingness to see the media become a financially-strong, 
influential and independent participant in Russian society today."

Putin was quick to deny that there was a problem and did not given an inch. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2006/jun/08/pressandpublishing1> His line was 
that, with 53,000 periodicals in Russia, "it would be absolutely impossible to 
control them, even if the state had any interest in doing so."

In the four years since O'Reilly's excellent address and Putin's disingenuous 
response, the press freedom situation in Russia has grown steadily worse.

Within months, the award-winning investigative journalist Anna Politkovskaya 
was murdered. Three men were acquitted after an unsatisfactory trial in 2009.

Politkovskaya worked for Novaya Gazeta, the paper co-owned by Lebedev, the 
former Russian presidentMikhail Gorbachev and an editorial collective. 

Three other members of the paper's staff have been murdered: Igor Domnikov was 
beaten to death in 2000;Yuri Shchekochikhin was poisoned in 2003; and Anastasia 
Baburova was shot dead in 2009.

Many other journalists on other newspapers and broadcasting outlets have been 
killed, threatened and intimidated in the past 10 years since Putin came to 
power.

One of the most recent mysterious deaths involved Olga Kotovskaya, who plunged 
to her death from a 14th-storey window in Kaliningrad in November last year.

Officials initially claimed she had committed suicide 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/dec/01/olga-kotovskaya-journalist-death-kaliningrad>
, but that made no sense in view of her having, just the day before, secured a 
court victory by regaining control of a TV channel that had been seized by 
bureaucrats.

In September last year, the New York-based press freedom watchdog, the 
Committee to Protect Journalists <http://www.cpj.org/>, issued a report Anatomy 
of injustice: the unsolved killings of journalists in Russia 
<http://www.cpj.org/reports/2009/09/anatomy-injustice-russian-journalist-killings.php>
 that named 17 journalists killed in retaliation for their work.

The following month, the International Federation of Journalists published an 
online database,Journalists in Russia: deaths and disappearances 
<http://journalists-in-russia.org/journalists/index/motive:nJ/incident:homicide/impunity:trial,%20conviction>
.

There is a Wikipedia entry specifically devoted to listing the deaths of 
Russian journalists. 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_journalists_killed_in_Russia#cite_note-5> 

According to the annual press freedom indexes produced by Reporters Without 
Borders <http://en.rsf.org/>, in the past seven years Russia has never risen 
above 140th place in its rankings.

What is striking, and most worrying of all, is the fact that the people who 
murder, maim and threaten journalists in Russia do so with impunity.

Full disclosure: I write a media column for the London Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard>.
 