
Negotiations are dragging out on a final document at a major conference on aid 
effectiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
 as African countries, led by Rwanda, are pushing for a firm deadline on ending 
tied aid.

Sherpas (negotiating officials) had hoped to have a draft outcome document all 
wrapped up before their bosses – about 100 ministers, including Hillary 
Clinton, the US secretary of state, and Andrew Mitchell, the UK international 
development secretary, arrive from Tuesday.

Rwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> has emerged as a strong 
advocate for rich countries to end by 2013 all tied aid – the practice of 
linking aid to purchases from companies in donor countries. Civil society 
organisations firmly back the demand.

Sherpas are now working on the sixth draft of the outcome document.

Researchers estimate that $69bn – more than half of the total official 
development assistance – is spent each year buying goods and services for 
development projects. But much of this money is "boomerang aid" – funds that 
flow to developing countries only on the books and may never leave the donor 
countries.

Ten years ago, aid donors pledged to end tied aid. The UK formally untied all 
development assistance in 2001, with the justification that "tied aid reduces 
value for money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/sep/07/aid-benefits-donor-countries-companies>
" and tends to lead to inappropriate and expensive projects that do little to 
tackle the needs of the poorest.

But in September a report from the European Network on Debt and Development 
<http://www.eurodad.org/>, a network of 54 NGOs from 19 European countries, said
many countries have reneged on their promises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/sep/07/aid-benefits-donor-countries-companies>
 and at least 20% of all bilateral aid remains formally tied. It is estimated 
that tied aid reduces the purchasing power of aid by an estimated 15% to 40%.

The footdraggers on untying aid include the EU, France and Japan. In the last 
round of pre-conference, Japan argued that ending tied aid would sap support 
for its aid programme, an assertion that led to much derision among aid 
campaigners.

Other areas of disagreement in the final document include demands from NGOs 
for specific commitments on freedoms of association and speech as governments, 
such as Cambodia and Ethiopia, have introduced legislation making it harder for 
civil society groups to operate. The Busan conference marks the first time 
civil society is at the negotiating table, working alongside government 
officials on the draft outcome document. In past high-level fora on aid 
effectiveness in Paris and Accra, civil society organisations were observers, 
not direct participants in negotiations.

"What is happening since Paris is that governments are shrinking space for 
civil society organisations in which to operate effectively," said Carolyn 
Long, director atInterAction <http://www.interaction.org/>, an alliance of 
US-based NGOs.

It is not just NGOs who have low expectations of the Busan conference. Stephen 
Groff, vice-president of the Asian Development Bank, thinks that the need to 
satisfy such diverse actors as OECD countries and new players such as China and 
Brazil will lead to low common denominator.

"The risk is that because we are trying to find common ground we will not end 
up with a stronger basis for a global partnership," said Groff. "Maybe there 
isn't that common ground."

More than 2,000 delegates are due in Busan for the three-day conference that 
seeks to establish common principles for aid effectiveness taking into account 
the emergence of new players such as China and large private foundations such 
as theBill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Pages/home.aspx>. Some NGOs have accused the 
OECD countries of using China as a pretext to backtrack on what was agreed in 
Paris and Accra on the need for aid recipients to have "ownership" of aid 
programmes, and greater transparency and accountability.
 