
Samuel stands in the shade of a mango tree with a small baby in his arms. He 
does not look down at the wriggling bundle but into the distance, his eyes 
sunken and sad. At his feet two young children sit unsmiling in the red dust 
and fiddle with a pile of stones.

"These children have lost their mother," Samuel says quietly, his voice 
breaking on the word 'mother'. "And I have lost my wife. I could do nothing to 
help. Nothing but pray - and what use was that?'

The previous day, Samuel had been full of hope. His wife, Edith, sat next to 
him. Eight months pregnant, she stroked her belly as she stirred the pot of 
beans on the fire. Their boys played happily nearby with friends, shouting and 
laughing as the sun went down over the huts of Amida Camp, Northern Uganda. But 
this cosy scene was soon to be shattered. Suddenly Edith began to experience 
strong painful contractions. Her labour had begun. She was in desperate need of 
immediate medical attention.

As in most parts of rural Africa, transport for the people living in Northern 
Uganda is a problem. However, it is made more complicated by the conflict 
situation that the local population are forced to endure. The threat from the 
rebel group known as the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) is constant. Their record 
for terrorising the area for more than twenty years means that thousands of 
innocent people live in fear of their lives.

If Samuel were to take Edith to the nearest medical centre, a five mile walk 
away through the dark of night, he would be putting both their lives at risk 
from the LRA. If he did not take her, he knew that Edith and her unborn child 
were at risk of dying because of a lack of medical assistance. Trying to 
comfort Edith, he sent his eldest son to fetch Joyce, a health care assistant 
who lives on the other side of the camp. By the time, Joyce arrived an hour 
later, Edith, lying on a shawl on the floor of their tiny windowless hut, was 
delivering the baby's head. Her scream was tortured, animal-like. Samuel, who 
held the baby's head in his shaking hands looked to Joyce with terror in his 
eyes and shouted over his wife's screams:

"Please help her. There is so much blood."

According to the World Health Organisation, 99% of maternal deaths occur in 
developing countries, more than half of these in sub-Saharan Africa. It is this 
health indicator that reflects the most striking difference between the 
developing and developed world. And yet, international organisations such as 
Marie Stopes International (MSI) and the United Nations Population Fund (UNPFA) 
insist that the tragically high rate of maternal mortality would be avoidable 
if simple co-ordinated solutions were to be put in place.

Joyce, Amida's health care assistant, agrees with this and the main causes of 
death listed in MSI and UNPFA reports, and her frustration at the situation is 
clear.

'I know that basic things could be done to improve the chances for women like 
Edith," she says wringing her hands. 'Basic drugs to prevent haemorrhaging, 
convulsions and infection would be cost-effective and make so much difference. 
Facilities for women to stay overnight and be treated by skilled staff could 
save lives every day, so could access to transport. But we cannot change things 
without the support of our government.'

The Ugandan government have, however, not been pro-active in their approach to 
maternal mortality. The Ugandan Demographic and Health Survey 2006, puts the 
level of death was 435 in 100,000. Since this survey report was released, 
health care staff such as Joyce have seen no evidence that the Uganda 
government at district or national level is taking this problem onto their 
agenda.

In March this year whilst speaking at an event in the capital of Kampala to 
mark International Women's Day, President Museveni was questioned on the issue. 
His response reflects the lack of commitment to this issue seen all over Africa:

"There is still a problem of maternal mortality," Ugandan newspapers New 
Vision and The Observer quoted him as saying. "I am aware of it but I have not 
studied it thoroughly."

One district of Uganda does however provide both hope and confirmation that 
basic changes could make motherhood safer. 280km north-east of Kampala, Soroti 
district has in seen a marked improvement in the level of maternal mortality 
with figures going from 750 deaths in 2000 to 190 deaths for every 100,000 live 
births in 2006.

These encouraging statistics have been made possible by the World Health 
Organisation programme, Make Pregnancy Safe, which was piloted in the area 
between 2001 and 2004. The programme has proved that it is not a huge overhaul 
of current systems that is needed, but basic management and provisions.

The success of Make Pregnancy Safe, which has also been piloted in countries 
including Bangladesh, Zambia and Indonesia, is straightforward according to WHO 
spokesperson, Dr Quazi Monirul Islam.

'It is evident enough that with proper technical, financial and social 
support...and by working directly with local governments and health workers, we 
can make a difference.'

Despite positive initiatives such as Make Pregnancy Safe, maternal mortality 
remains the aspect of the Millennium Development Goals, set by the G8 in 2000 
that is most off track. And for people like Samuel that has to follow the lead 
of programmes like the one in Soroti. Change needs to happen and soon.

Left to contend with the harrowing grief of losing his beloved wife, Samuel is 
now facing the daunting and lonely prospect of bringing up three children on 
his own. He didn't have the chance to feel the difference that simple changes 
to the health care system could make.

As he slowly takes his children inside the hut where their mother died the 
previous night, Joyce is left sitting with her anger and frustration.

'That is a death that could have been avoided,' she says wearily. 'That was a 
wife, a mother, a member of our community that could have been saved. I know 
what needs doing, and yet I feel so powerless to do anything. And so have to 
watch as basic human rights are denied and lives are needlessly lost.'

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 