
Man of the week

Lord Sugar – warning Sky’s £4.17bn will go straight through football “like 
prune juice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/shortcuts/2015/feb/11/prune-juice-effect-alan-sugar-football-rights-deal-sky-bt-sport>
” and hurt the England team – 23 years afterhe urged them 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/the-alan-sugar-story-the-day-i-told-249316>
 to pay more for the rights. Sugar told Sky, purchasers of his Amstrad dishes: 
“Bid £60m per season – blow ITV out of the water.”

Still finding a balance

Premier League head Richard Scudamore – last week “not uncomfortable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/11/richard-scudamore-premier-league-responsibility-living-wage>
” with clubs refusing to pay the living wage, but last month “really proud” of 
their co-funding of thePL Kicks scheme 
<http://www.premierleague.com/content/premierleague/en-gb/communities/2014-15/150115-boris-johnson-leads-praise-for-premier-league-kicks-at-millwall-event.html>
 – extended in London to tackle “poverty, deprivation and a lack of 
self-esteem”. Scudamore: “The clubs have stepped up yet again to make a real 
difference to young people’s lives.”

Football family news

• Mixed week for: Sepp – passing Fifa’s in-house election candidate integrity 
check 
<http://www.fifa.com/aboutfifa/organisation/president/news/newsid=2522449/index.html>
, part of Fifa’s transparency agenda; and facing allegations from Germany’sDer 
Spiegel that officials doctored a critical 2014 ethics report in his favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/08/sepp-blatter-fifa-lawyer-report-changes>
. Fifa deny wrongdoing.

• Good week for: Sepp’s nephew Philippe, head of Fifa’s first-choice marketing 
agency Infront – staying on as chief executive under the firm’s new Chinese 
owners. Wanda Group,who paid €1.05bn 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/retailandconsumer/leisure/11402762/Fifa-Blatters-nephew-seals-1bn-deal-with-Chinas-second-richest-man.html>
, say Infront are “best-positioned to actively support China’s bidding efforts 
for major sports events”.

Elsewhere: breaking down barriers

Seven-term Confederation of African Football president Issa Hayatou, 68 – 
looking to modernise CAF by dropping an out-dated rule obliging executives who 
reach 70 to step down. CAF say they are “bringing the policy into line with 
Fifa’s”.

PR news: most upbeat

• Alassane Ouattara – president of Ivory Coast, poverty rate 42.7% – signing 
off $3.4m bonuses for his Africa Cup of Nations winners,including a free house 
each 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/world-football/africa/16386-ivory-coast-puts-up-houses-and-cash-bonuses-for-toure-and-afcon-teammates>
 – illustrating how “Ivory Coast is united once more. This is a lesson in 
rallying people together.”

• Less content with it all: Equatorial Guinea’s 34-year-term millionaire despot
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/equatorial-guinea-human-rights-africa-dictatorship-tutu-alicante>
Teodoro Obiang, pinning the semi-final riots which hit his nation’s image on a 
“childish” element – “the enemies of progress and peace for the people of 
Equatorial Guinea”.

From the boardroom

Last week’s FA headlines:

• Belgium FA head Steven Martens resigning amid allegations of financial 
mismanagement 
<http://www.insideworldfootball.com/world-football/europe/16382-martens-quits-belgian-fa-after-financial-losses-trigger-questions>
, which he denies, after an audit revealed questionable contracts and a 
€206,000 deficit on revenue of €60m. “It’s been four fantastic years.”

• Italy FA president Carlo Tavecchio setting aside last year’s comments about 
black players being “banana eaters” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/fifa-italian-fa-president-carlo-tavecchio-banana-eaters>
 by launching his new “Racists? An ugly race” campaign. Tavecchio: “We’re a 
dynamic federation – only through education can we keep our game healthy.”

Manager news: moving on last week

• 30 Jan: Barcelona B coach Eusebio Sacristan. “It’s great to know I have the 
president’s backing, to know we’re as one.” President Josep Maria Bartomeu: “He 
has our confidence. We’ve not even thought about sacking him.”8 Feb: Thinks 
about it.9 Feb: Sacks him 
<https://twitter.com/FCBarcelona/status/564775655469248512>.

• 28 Jan: Villa chief executive Tom Fox: “When things aren’t going well, fans 
bay for blood. But that’s not the way that I or the owner will make a decision. 
To put it all on the manager – that’s a bit of a false narrative”11 Feb: Puts 
it all on the manager 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/aston-villa-paul-lambert-upset-8633256>
.

• 11 Feb: Cheltenham chairman Paul Baker on lazy journalism: “Yes I did meet 
with Paul [Buckle] but unfortunately the papers are less well-informed about 
the outcome of the meeting … It’s business as usual.” Buckle: “I have no 
concerns … the chairman told me to do what we can to avoid the drop. I’m 
crystal clear about the future … we have to get the team together, get some 
spirit and harmony around the group and get everyone on the up again.”13 Feb: 
Leaves by mutual consent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/13/cheltenham-paul-buckle-leaves>
.

• 18 Jan: Recreativo Huelva president Pablo Comas calling for an end to the 
tension around coach José Luis Oltra. “Dismissal hasn’t entered our heads. 
Let’s all be calm, have some tranquillity, patience, confidence, and we’ll find 
a solution.”10 Feb: Finds the solution 
<http://www.marca.com/2015/02/10/futbol/equipos/recreativo/1423592671.html>.

Court case of the week

Chile: Prosecutors alleging a substitute at Alianza Patagual’s game against 
Alianza San Rafael reacted to a refereeing decision by “threatening the official
with a revolver, then a shotgun 
<http://sipse.com/deportes/amenaza-arbitro-armas-de-fuego-partido-de-futbol-amateur-chile-136973.html>
”. Prosecutor Gabriela Fuenzalida alleged the player took his kit off and tried 
to hide among fans when police arrived. The case continues.

Best intervention

Colombia: Deportivo Cali coach Fernando “Freckles” Castro explaining why he 
ran down the touchline andthrew a stretcher on to the pitch 
<https://vine.co/v/OPWpVbjjhmn> five minutes before the end of a tight 2-1 win. 
“I wasn’t time-wasting. My player was hurting bad and the Red Cross did 
nothing. Do you have to be dead these days to get a stretcher? I was there to 
help.”
Fernando “Freckles” Castro: not wasting time. Source: Te Quiero Cali /Vine 
Most gleaming

Diego Maradona: denying he had a facelift after press reported eye-bag removal 
and a skin peel,with a photo 
<http://www.marca.com/albumes/2015/02/13/cambio_radical/> captioned: “Diego 
appears gleaming with his girlfriend, 30 years his junior”. “I had nothing 
done, I just got thin. I put the champagne back in the fridge.”

Plus: love news

Brazil: Model Amanda Pinheiro on the enduring need for class. “Many Wags 
desire fame, they take advantage and show off in the press, go out with anyone, 
and that’s up to them. I’m just more discerning. I do take delight in players’ 
bottoms – but I do nothing to lead them on.”
 