
Sainsbury’s will be shipping more tea to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> as its expands an online trial with 
the website Tmall Global.

The British supermarket is doubling the number of products it sells via the 
international shopping site ofAlibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/18/alibaba-and-the-40-facts-ipo> 
– a China-based company similar to Amazon – to 100, including olive oil, tea 
bags, pasta and coffee.

It will be the only international retailer highlighted during Tmall’s “super 
brand day” promotion on 8 August, one of China’s biggest sales events outside
Singles’ Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/11/china-singles-day-new-record-online-shopping-alibaba>
 in November.

John Rogers, the chief financial officer at Sainsbury’s, said: “Chinese online 
shoppers are increasingly demanding high quality international products. Many 
customers also want to replicate tastes and occasions that they have enjoyed or 
heard about through international travel.

“Products to make a British breakfast and English afternoon tea have therefore 
proved hits and top-selling lines to date include Sainsbury’s Taste the 
Difference granola with raisins, honey and nuts, tea, shortbread andUHT milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2005/dec/20/ethicalliving.lifeandhealth>
.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fsainsburys-makes-online-push-in-china-tmall-global%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8daa39ecda4a0e307e0936a7a7808384136b149a%2F0_38_3499_2100%2F3499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sainsbury's%20steps%20up%20online%20push%20in%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fsainsburys-makes-online-push-in-china-tmall-global%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sainsbury%27s%20steps%20up%20online%20push%20in%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fsainsburys-makes-online-push-in-china-tmall-global%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8daa39ecda4a0e307e0936a7a7808384136b149a%2F0_38_3499_2100%2F3499.jpg>
 British products are becoming popular sellers online in China. Photograph: 
Suzanne Plunkett/Reuters 
Sainsbury’s first began selling on Tmall in September last year. It joined a 
growing number of British brands now have virtual stores on Tmall including 
Asos, Burberry and Waitrose, which sells via Royal Mail’s virtual store on the 
Chinese site. Amazon has a branded site on Tmall, despite being a direct 
competitor.

China is the biggest international consumer of British products online, 
accounting for 25% of overseas online shoppers purchasing goods from the UK, 
according to Royal Mail.

Operating online offers a way for brands keen to benefit from demand from 
China’s growing middle class without having to invest heavily.

In 2010, Sainsbury’s considered opening stores in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/sep/26/sainsburys-explores-china-stores>
, following Tesco, which developed a small chain but has since sold all but a 
20% stake in its business there.

Rogers said: “Our trial with Tmall has enabled us to learn a lot about China’s 
huge digital market, including the importance of sales events such as Singles’ 
Day ... Alibaba’s expertise in this rapidly growing market will be a huge asset 
to us as we grow and develop our business in China.”
 