
Sam Raimi is set to direct a remake of Oscar-nominated French thriller A 
Prophet <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jan/21/a-prophet-review>.

Spider-Man 3 'didn't work' says director Sam Raimi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/31/spider-man-3-didnt-work-says-director-sam-raimi>
According to Deadline 
<http://deadline.com/2016/01/sam-raimi-a-prophet-remake-french-crime-thriller-sony-1201677706/>
, Raimi, best known for his Evil Dead and Spider-Man franchises, is in early 
talks to take on the film, which will be produced by Neal H Moritz, known for 
his involvement in the Fast & Furious franchise. Moritz’s producing credits 
also includeI Know What You Did Last Summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/11/my-guilty-pleasure-i-know-what-you-did-last-summer>
, Sweet Home Alabama and Urban Legend.

The script will be written by acclaimed crime author Dennis Lehane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/24/dennis-lehane>, whose books 
Mystic River,Shutter Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/11/shutter-island-review> and Gone 
Baby Gone have all been made into successful films.

The original film was directed by Jacques Audiard and told the tale of a man, 
played byTahar Rahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/09/tahar-rahim-always-refused-play-terrorists>
, who becomes an integral part of a crime syndicate after being sent to prison. 
It was nominated for best foreign language film at the Oscars.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl69ARbQt-Ko&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl69ARbQt-Ko>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dl69ARbQt-Ko&media=>
Watch the trailer for Jacques Audiard’s A Prophet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l69ARbQt-Ko> 
Audiard told the Guardian that he is “not interested” in the remake. 

“It’s no longer my film,” he said during an interview at last year’s Cannes 
film festival. “I don’t think that films are works of art. They are just goods 
and commodities. I don’t feel like I own them. Once someone pays the copyright, 
it’s none of my business.”

If Raimi signs on, it would be his first film as director since 2013’s Oz the 
Great and Powerful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/07/oz-the-great-and-powerful-review>
, which made $493m worldwide but received largely negative reviews. He has 
since been involved with Ash vs Evil Dead, the TV series based on his horror 
franchise.
 