
Labor has indicated it will continue to call for a ban on foreign donations 
after the resignation of Senator Sam Dastyari from the shadow ministry.

The government’s position appears to be shifting, with several figures 
indicating they are open to reviewing foreign, union and corporate donations 
but none prepared yet to give a clear direction on which reforms theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> would accept.

On Wednesday Dastyari stepped down from the frontbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
, saying the issue of gifts from a wealthy Chinese businessman had become a 
distraction for the Labor party.In asking for and accepting a payment of 
$1,670.82 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/04/sam-dastyari-donation-legal-but-way-outside-voter-expectations-says-labor>
 from Minshen Zhu, Dastyari said he had “fallen short” in his duty as a member 
of parliament.


Dastyari's donations reveal a bigger story of links and largesse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/dastyaris-donations-reveal-a-bigger-story-of-links-and-largesse>
On Thursday the Liberal leader of the house, Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne>, said Dastyari 
had “quit for the wrong reasons” and he should have resigned “because it was 
wrong to have his debts paid by Chinese businessmen and change his position on 
the South China Sea”.

When asked on Radio National if the government would consider banning foreign 
donations, Pyne said Australia needed a “wider discussion about donations” from 
unions, businesses, foreign donations and third-party campaigns.

He said the political system was skewed by tens of millions of dollars of 
union campaign spending which allowed Labor and the unions to outspend the 
Liberal party by “two or three to one”.

“We do need to look at third-party campaigning, how that fits with the 
constitution, because there is an implied right to freedom of speech,” he said. 
“I don’t think that anyone in the political world believes we can leave things 
as they are.”

Pyne did not set out a concrete path for the way forward on campaign finance 
reform and said the issue would wait until Malcolm Turnbull returned from 
overseas.

He said that in 2007 he had argued that only individuals should be able to 
donate to political parties and noted thatTurnbull had said the same 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/03/turnbull-restates-belief-in-donations-cap-but-does-not-commit-to-act>
. The position is shared by ministers including Steven Ciobo and Darren 
Chester, and thebackbench MPs Cory Bernardi and Craig Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/06/cory-bernardi-joins-calls-ban-foreign-corporate-union-donations>
.

But such a change faces constitutional hurdles because the high court found in 
2013 that a New South Wales law limiting donations to individualsbreached the 
implied freedom of political communication 
<http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/judgment-summaries/2013/hca58-2013-12-18.pdf>
.

Pyne said he was “unfussed about foreign donations, as long as they are 
properly declared and they are from individuals”. “People are entitled to 
support the political party of their choice.”

The shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mark-dreyfus>, told ABC’s AM that 
Dastyari had not broken the law and had disclosed the gifts.

The resignation was “the end of it”, he said, but he added there was the 
prospect Dastyari could return to the frontbench in the future if caucus and 
the leader wanted him to.

“It’s given us a reason to focus on the question of foreign donations, and 
donations more generally,” he said.

Dreyfus noted that a number of Coalition figures had backed a ban on foreign 
donations and said it was “time for the government to seriously sit down with 
Labor and work through what those changes should be”.

“A starting point should be more transparency, a starting point should be 
lowering the threshold [to declare donations], and very importantly –John 
Howard was talking about this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/john-howard-urges-turnbull-and-baird-to-change-rules-of-nsw-liberal-party>
 – we need to have more timely disclosure. Real-time disclosure should be 
possible.”

Dreyfus noted that Chinese business interests had donated $500,000 to the West 
Australian branch of the Liberal party 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/foreign-minister-julie-bishops-links-to-chinese-political-donors-20160823-gqzauy.html>
 andthat the foreign minister, Julie Bishop, had received a tablet computer and 
free trip to China 
<http://www.smh.com.au/it-pro/government-it/chinese-tech-giant-huawei-courts-mps-20120326-1vtnn.html>
 from Huawei.

Dastyari affair: goodbye, second-chance Sam. But we really need donation 
reform | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/dastyari-affair-goodbye-second-chance-sam-but-we-really-need-donation-reform>
The deputy leader of the opposition in the Senate, Stephen Conroy, said on 
Radio National that Australians would be “horrified by the fact the Liberal 
party supports foreign companies being able to donate”. He said most western 
countries – 118 in total – had banned foreign donations.

Speaking in Germany Bishop said there was “absolutely no correlation between 
political donations from, in some cases, Chinese-Australian residents and the 
circumstances that Sam Dastyari found himself in – touting for a personal 
payment from another entity”.

A spokeswoman for Bishop told Guardian Australia: “Many members, on all sides 
of politics have accepted sponsored travel from time to time.

“The foreign minister has complied with the register of interests. The foreign 
minister’s decisions on all matters are taken in the national interest.”
 