
Back to the bad old days of bonuses at Barclays â€“ and back to the days of 
hefty minorities opposing the remuneration report. The refusal of 34% of voting 
shareholders to support the pay report compares with just 6% a year ago, when 
hopes were high that new chief executiveAntony Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins> would stamp out the 
nonsense of bonuses massively exceeding shareholders' dividends.

Jenkins and his chairman, Sir David Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sir-david-walker>, cut more sympathetic 
figures than their unlovely predecessors, Bob Diamond and Marcus Agius. But, on 
substance, it's hard to spot a major difference on pay. Sir John Sunderland, 
head of the pay committee, even thought it appropriate to have a pop at 
Standard Life, a big Barclays shareholder, for (he claimed) failing to voice 
its concerns during private meetings. Not smart, Sir John: Standard Life 
represents people who ultimately pay your fees.

Walker, at least, tried to show how tricky these bonuses and pay decisions 
supposedly are. The co-heads of the US-based bond trading desk, plus two-thirds 
of their management team, threatened to quit to join a rival or rivals in the 
middle of last year, he reported. That seems to have been the moment when
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> abandoned its 
freshly-minted pledges about paying less and instead threw money at the 
would-be defectors to persuade them to stay (with only partial success) in 
order to "defend the franchise". Walker invited investors to think the board 
had been bold.

Unfortunately, its timing may have been awful. Since the third quarter of last 
year Barclays has been reporting soft numbers from fixed-income and bond 
trading, and did so again on Thursday.

This is a fine illustration of how quickly the breezes shift in investment 
banking and underlines how hard it will be for Jenkins, in his latest overhaul 
of the division, to find a consistently winning formula.

The new grand plan will be unveiled on 8 May and Barclays' broad idea seems to 
be to cut the losing and sub-scale activities and reinforce the winners. But 
perfect foresight is not possible. If it was, Jenkins would not now be engaged 
in his second major strategic overhaul within 15 months.

In the circumstances, Standard Life's idea that Barclays should display "more 
clarity" in determining bonus ratios was entirely reasonable. A fixed 
bonus-to-income ratio would at least give shareholders some confidence that the 
board isn't merely blown about by events and has a plan it is willing to defend 
and be judged against.

Sunderland, instead of bleating about the lack of advance warning from 
Standard Life, would have done better to study its constructive suggestion. He 
will soon depart as chairman of the pay committee. Not before time.
 