
Samit Patel followed the example of Nick Compton with an unusually blunt 
response to his England exclusion after hitting a valuable century for
Nottinghamshire <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nottinghamshire> against 
Warwickshire at Trent Bridge.

Patel would seem to have been cast aside by England after playing in all three 
forms of the game last off-season in India and New Zealand, and expressed his 
disappointment that his positive response in county cricket has apparently been 
ignored.

"All I can do is get hundreds here," said the 28-year-old, after passing 1,000 
first-class runs for the season in an innings of 117 which rescued 
Nottinghamshire from deep trouble at 10 for three. "Actually, I'm very 
disappointed that England haven't been in contact in any format of the game. 
I'm very shocked and surprised but I think that's the way it goes. My stats at 
the end of the year should get me back in that team.

"I just got told I wasn't consistent enough, which I thought was very wrong, 
very harsh. Geoff [Miller, the national selector] said I wasn't consistent, 
which I wasn't happy about. It's unfair but you've just got to get on with it. 
Hopefully my stats in white ball cricket this year, they can't ignore that for 
too much longer.

"I need another crack at playing one-day cricket for England, that's for sure. 
I thought I had a great chance to be in the one-day squad against Australia but 
they've only picked one spinner and that's just the way the selectors go, I 
suppose."

Compton made broadly similar complaints, agreeing with a suggestion that he 
had not been given "a fair crack of the whip" by the selectors after his 
exclusion from the Ashes squad. He has not been selected since.

Nottinghamshire, who have been dragged into relegation danger, ended the 
second day in a strong position with Warwickshire 27 for two in their second 
innings, still 34 runs behind.
 