
“We spend six months researching each show,” says James Harkin. “I think you 
can tell. I don’t know how you can tell, but you can. It feels like it 
shouldn’t make a difference, but somehow it does. And I think that’s the 
difference betweenQI <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/qi> and other 
panel shows that do comedy.”

Harkin is one of “the elves” (or researchers) on QI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/qi>, which after 13 years on air is 
making the probably-scarier-than-anyone-would-admit change fromStephen Fry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/feb/18/stephen-frys-best-moments-as-qi-host-video>
 as presenter toSandi Toksvig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sandi-toksvig>. “But then sometimes,” 
interjects Andrew Hunter Murray, another elf, “you see something that’s 
front-page news and think, ‘I’m having that.’”

I had a terrible crisis in my 40s, getting very depressed and angry. So I set 
out to find the meaning of life
John Lloyd 
John Lloyd – architect not only of QI but also of most that is worthwhile in 
modern British TV, fromBlackadder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/aug/24/blackadder-returns-cunning-plan-where-when-set>
 toSpitting Image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/apr/15/how-we-made-spitting-image> – 
has a near-religious reverence for facts. “I really do believe that 
‘interestedness’ is the panacea for everything,” he says, weighing each word, 
distributing credit equally and elegantly to all of the programme’s 
participants, expressing himself with puckish sincerity, approaching a pizza 
with the doleful expression of one who knows only too well the discourteous 
amount of chewing it will entail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1217b7622c91e219d0e82f76867490225a90959f%2F85_352_7275_4366%2F7275.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sandi%20Toksvig's%20QI%3A%20'I'm%20not%20here%20as%20a%20mini-me%20for%20Stephen%20Fry'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sandi%20Toksvig%27s%20QI%3A%20%27I%27m%20not%20here%20as%20a%20mini-me%20for%20Stephen%20Fry%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1217b7622c91e219d0e82f76867490225a90959f%2F85_352_7275_4366%2F7275.jpg>
 ‘It’s very tiring mentally’ … Alan Davies (right) with Gyles Brandreth. 
Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
“If everyone was as interested as the elves,” he explains boldly, “there 
wouldn’t be any wars. Not to be gender specific, but as a woman, I bet you’ve 
noticed this: men think you’re interesting if you listen.” I decide to swerve 
this point, because surely this makes it a socially useful thing that men like 
women who listen, but Lloyd’s passion is endearing – and hard won. Twenty-five 
years ago, he had just won two Baftas: one for Blackadder, the other a lifetime 
achievement award. “My wife and I were conventionally successful, I ran massive 
television companies, she ran a massive publisher. You don’t think you’re a 
martinet or a dictator, but you’re used to getting your own way.

“Then I had a terrible crisis in my early 40s, because everything began to go 
wrong. I started getting fired from everything. I tried to start things; they 
didn’t happen. I didn’t seem to be in control of my own life. I got very 
depressed and very angry, actually. The core questions were, ‘What’s it all 
about? Why are we alive? How do we get to be alive?’ I set out to find the 
meaning of life. I started off with physics, then philosophy. You have a 
completely different take on the Bible if you’ve studied Chinese philosophy. 
You can see what it’s getting at.”

Is it like a family? 'There’s a fair amount of nepotism. It is familial in 
that sense'
Alan Davies 
Many things were probably born from this, but one of them was QI, which began 
as a book idea and became a panel show. It then spawned books, spinoffs (The 
Museum of Curiosity radio show, theNo Such Thing As a Fish podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/23/no-such-thing-as-a-fish-freakonomics-podcast-reviews>
) and apps – an entire culture of interestedness, which in its main incarnation 
alone is as significant a cultural export as Doctor Who.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fstephen-frys-best-moments-as-qi-host-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20Fry%E2%80%99s%20best%20moments%20as%20QI%20host%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fstephen-frys-best-moments-as-qi-host-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20Fry%E2%80%99s%20best%20moments%20as%20QI%20host%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fstephen-frys-best-moments-as-qi-host-video&media=>
Stephen Fry’s best moments as QI host 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/feb/18/stephen-frys-best-moments-as-qi-host-video>
I guess – this will sound bad – I have managed to relish the show for all its 
13 years without noticing how seriously they took the quiz element, thinking it 
was mainly about the surreal genius ofAlan Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-davies> and its alchemical 
reaction with Stephen Fry’s headmasterly omniscience, with other comedians 
acting as fresh meat and the answers more of a garnish. I don’t even know what 
makes a good fact.

Being chased by a male yeti is more frightening than being chased by a female 
yeti

Anne Miller and Anna Ptaszynski, more elves, try to explain. “It makes you 
want to go and tell someone,” Miller says. Ptaszynski adds: “So if I said, ‘The 
capital of Peru is Lima …’” We all nod, having established the rock-bottom 
comprehension that this is not an interesting fact. She continues: “But if 
somebody said, ‘The reason it’s called Lima is that the first person to 
discover it loved limes, or it was full of lemurs and it’s the result of a 
misspelling.” Unfortunately, I am still not interested.

“It has to be about something you’re familiar with already,” says Hunter 
Murray, “and then it has to tell you something unusual about that thing. If 
it’s about pencils, the world’s biggest pencil is in Malaysia, which is also 
the biggest exporter of rubber.” Now I’m panicking that I’m the kind of 
uninterested person who starts wars. Miller tries a different tack. “It’s very 
difficult to do something about facts that aren’t real, so vampire facts and 
yeti facts are quite difficult. But you can do it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff618f532a147e0b7f2341c3aca80806f52c01bd8%2F614_0_4995_2619%2F4995.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sandi%20Toksvig's%20QI%3A%20'I'm%20not%20here%20as%20a%20mini-me%20for%20Stephen%20Fry'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sandi%20Toksvig%27s%20QI%3A%20%27I%27m%20not%20here%20as%20a%20mini-me%20for%20Stephen%20Fry%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff618f532a147e0b7f2341c3aca80806f52c01bd8%2F614_0_4995_2619%2F4995.jpg>
 That’s showbiz … Jimmy Carr talks to accountant turned researcher James 
Harkin. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
Their ideas elf, Dan Schreiber, has a favourite yeti fact, she says. “If 
you’re being chased by a male yeti, it’s more frightening than if you’re being 
chased by a female yeti, because a female yeti has such large breasts that she 
has to fling them over her shoulders, which gives you time to escape.” Um, a 
bit interesting. “And in vampire lore, a good way to protect your house is to 
sprinkle grains of rice around it, because vampires love to count, so they 
wouldn’t be able to come in until they’d counted them.” I love that fact. 
Perhaps we all have a varying aptitude for interestedness and these researchers 
– as a hand-picked super-interested elite – can coax it out. “They’re all 
obsessive,” Lloyd says admiringly. “They keep worrying the bone like a dog.”

I certainly witness a lot of mutual admiration on my visit to the QI set: of 
everyone for the elves, of the elves for the director (Ian Lorimer has directed 
every episode), of producers for the guests. It’s all nicknames and jokes that 
have lasted a decade. “It’s almost sickening how nice everybody is,” Lloyd 
agrees. “There’s very little grit in the shoe.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9027afaac0d46e2313d45235c31c716a6943d338%2F0_329_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sandi%20Toksvig's%20QI%3A%20'I'm%20not%20here%20as%20a%20mini-me%20for%20Stephen%20Fry'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sandi%20Toksvig%27s%20QI%3A%20%27I%27m%20not%20here%20as%20a%20mini-me%20for%20Stephen%20Fry%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9027afaac0d46e2313d45235c31c716a6943d338%2F0_329_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘You need to make it your own’ … Sandi Toksvig waits in the wings. Photograph: 
Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
In fact, without Alan Davies’s wry whingeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/19/alan-davies-comedian-new-tour-little-victories-interview>
, delivered so winningly that it cannot be reproduced on a page, the show might 
be a bit unbearable. “It is very tiring mentally,” says Davies. “I’m 50 now, so 
it’s even more tiring than it was when I was 40. And I’ve got all these babies, 
the house is full of babies. So all in all, I find it quite fatiguing.” But 
it’s the best job ever, right? Like a family? “There’s a fair amount of 
nepotism, quite a lot of the people who get hired are people’s friends and 
family members. It is familial, in that sense.”

That’s not true of all the elves, though. Harkin was working as an accountant 
in Salford, “finishing my work very quickly each month, and they wouldn’t give 
me any more, so I spent a lot of time on the internet”. He won a lot of QI 
competitions and was then offered a job. He didn’t want to take it because he 
didn’t like the sound of TV, so Lloyd offered him some accountancy on the side. 
But, generally, Davies is right: a lot of elf journeys start with someone’s 
uncle bumping into some executive at a conference. Lloyd says the programme 
doesn’t find people, the people find the programme.

Anyway, that’s showbiz. Back to Davies, who offered to leave when Fry left, in 
case Lloyd wanted a clean sweep. Predictably, Lloyd demurred. In the episode I 
saw being filmed, as in most I’ve seen, Davies makes the show. Toksvig, 
meanwhile, is a total pro, inhabiting the quizmaster role completely: 
idiosyncratic, gleeful, bringing the nous of years on the News Quiz but neither 
replicating that persona, nor trying to ape Fry’s. She says it was the only job 
in TV she’d ever wanted. “You have to make it your own,” she adds. “I’m not 
here as a mini-me for Stephen.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6760af904800d352d7563b22e9f9acb8ae43c1c7%2F1268_844_6092_3656%2F6092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sandi%20Toksvig's%20QI%3A%20'I'm%20not%20here%20as%20a%20mini-me%20for%20Stephen%20Fry'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sandi%20Toksvig%27s%20QI%3A%20%27I%27m%20not%20here%20as%20a%20mini-me%20for%20Stephen%20Fry%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbehind-the-scenes-at-qi-sandi-toksvig-alan-davies-new-season-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6760af904800d352d7563b22e9f9acb8ae43c1c7%2F1268_844_6092_3656%2F6092.jpg>
 Toksvig warms up the QI audience. Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
QI is a show with a lot of moving parts: tons of facts and four comedians, not 
all of them hilarious all the time, some not funny at all. But there is a 
deftness and depth to Davies, lifting conversations out of cul-de-sacs, drawing 
them into whirlpools, choreographing something quite complex and daring, while 
insisting that he’s just clowning about.

But I continue, wilfully, to miss the point. QI is not about anyone in 
particular, nor is it even about the chemistry of the panel. “People sometimes 
say it’s like radio on television,” Lloyd says, “but that doesn’t come close to 
the visual richness. The pictures are delicious, and they’re meant to give you 
a sense of how beautiful, strange and interesting everything is. 
Interestingness was the core. When I discovered that, I felt like I’d 
discovered a new chemical element.”

• QI <http://qi.com/television/> begins on BBC2 this autumn.
 