
Saudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> has cut 
diplomatic relations with Iran in a sharp escalation of tensions between the 
two regional foes following the execution of the Saudi Shia cleric Sheikh Nimr 
al-Nimr.


Saudi executions put ball of regional tension in Iran's court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/02/saudi-mass-execution-iran-syria-yemen-impact-sheikh-nimr>
The Saudi foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir, told a news conference that Iran’s 
diplomatic mission and related entities in Saudi Arabia had been given 48 hours 
to leave. He said Riyadh would not allow the Islamic republic to undermine the 
Sunni kingdom’s security.

The move on Sunday evening came after two days of outrage among Shia 
communities across the Middle East and in south Asia at the death of Nimr, a 
prominent critic of the Saudi and Bahraini monarchies, whose cause as a 
prisoner since 2012 had been championed by Tehran and the United Nations. It 
signals a further hardening of Riyadh’s position towardsIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, with which it is locked in a bitter 
battle for regional influence.

Iran’s foreign ministry on Monday accused Saudi Arabia of stoking regional 
tension. A spokesman said: “Saudi Arabia sees not only its interests but also 
its existence in pursuing crises and confrontations and attempts to resolve its 
internal problems by exporting them to the outside.”

Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, Iran’s deputy foreign minister, on Sunday said that 
by cutting diplomatic ties Riyadh could not cover up “its major mistake of 
executing Sheikh Nimr”.

The US, Saudi Arabia’s biggest backer in the west, responded to the cutting of 
ties by encouraging diplomatic engagement and calling for leaders in the region 
to take “affirmative steps” to reduce tensions.

“We believe that diplomatic engagement and direct conversations remain 
essential in working through differences and we will continue to urge leaders 
across the region to take affirmative steps to calm tensions,” an official of 
Barack Obama’s administration said.

Muslim leaders stepped up their condemnation of the execution of Nimr at the 
weekend, urging a robust response from Riyadh’s western backers, as protests 
spread toPakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> and Indian 
Kashmir.

Anger remained palpable on the streets of the Lebanese capital, Beirut, and in 
Bahrain and Baghdad, hours after the Saudi embassy in Tehran was set ablaze by 
protesters angered by the execution of the senior cleric. Small protests were 
also held in Islamabad and Quetta, home to members of Pakistan’s Shia minority.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhundreds-protest-against-execution-of-shiite-cleric-nimr-al-nimr-in-tehran-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F3%2F1451843734153%2FKP_1185326_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hundreds%20protest%20against%20execution%20of%20Shi'ite%20cleric%20Nimr%20al-Nimr%20in%20Tehran%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhundreds-protest-against-execution-of-shiite-cleric-nimr-al-nimr-in-tehran-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hundreds%20protest%20against%20execution%20of%20Shi%27ite%20cleric%20Nimr%20al-Nimr%20in%20Tehran%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhundreds-protest-against-execution-of-shiite-cleric-nimr-al-nimr-in-tehran-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F3%2F1451843734153%2FKP_1185326_crop_640x480.jpg>
Hundreds protest against execution of Shi’ite cleric Nimr al-Nimr in Tehran on 
Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/03/hundreds-protest-against-execution-of-shiite-cleric-nimr-al-nimr-in-tehran-video>
However, in what appeared to be a move to calm tension, the Iranian president, 
Hassan Rouhani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani>, said the 
attack on the Saudi embassy was unjustifiable, and urged the capture of the 
perpetrators. “I have no doubt that the Saudi government has damaged its image, 
more than before, among the countries in the world, in particular [among] 
Islamic countries, by this unIslamic act,” Rouhani said.


The Guardian view on the Saudi execution: unjust, and an unwise provocation | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/03/the-guardian-view-on-the-saudi-execution-unjust-and-an-unwise-provocation>
In a cautionary tone, he added that “rogue elements” would not be allowed to 
use the incident and “carry out illegal actions that damage the dignity” of the 
Islamic republic. “I call on the interior minister to identify the perpetrators 
of this attack ... so there will be an end to such appalling actions once and 
for all,” Rouhani said.

Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, called on Saudi’s 
western backers to condemn the execution, which came three years after Nimr’s 
arrest over his vocal support for anti-government protests in Bahrain and in 
Riyadh.

“This oppressed cleric did not encourage people to join an armed movement, nor 
did he engage in secret plotting, and he only voiced public criticism ... based 
on religious fervour,” said Khamenei.

The Iranian leader criticised “the silence of the supposed backers of freedom, 
democracy and human rights” over the execution. “Why are those who claim to 
support human rights quiet? Why do those who claim to back freedom and 
democracy support this government?”

The UK’s Treasury secretary, David Gauke, became the most senior UK figure to 
react to the execution, claiming al-Nimr’s death was a worrying development. 
The US state department earlier said the move risked “exacerbating sectarian 
tensions at a time when they urgently need to be reduced”.

Pressed on the development, Gauke repeated a government line that Riyadh had 
passed on information that had been critical to stopping terror plots in the 
UK. “We have a relationship with Saudi Arabia where we are able to speak 
candidly to them, where these issues are raised on a regular basis by the 
foreign secretary and the prime minister and our representatives in Riyadh,” he 
said. “We are able to have that relationship where we can tell them what we 
think and clearly it is a worrying development.”

The execution took place despite pleas for clemency delivered personally by 
the UN secretary general,Ban Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon>. “Sheikh Nimr and a number of 
the other prisoners executed had been convicted following trials that raised 
serious concerns over the nature of the charges and the fairness of the 
process,” Ban’s spokesman said.

Riyadh, meanwhile, stuck to its position that Nimr had committed acts of 
terrorism. He was executed along with 46 other accused terrorists in the early 
hours of the new year, many of whom had been convicted for bombings or 
assassinations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsaudi-arabia-cuts-diplomatic-ties-with-iran-after-nimr-execution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63735d4a2ae8f1c778895b558dbb81797ca632fc%2F0_81_4590_2753%2F4590.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Saudi%20Arabia%20cuts%20diplomatic%20ties%20with%20Iran%20after%20execution%20of%20cleric&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsaudi-arabia-cuts-diplomatic-ties-with-iran-after-nimr-execution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Saudi%20Arabia%20cuts%20diplomatic%20ties%20with%20Iran%20after%20execution%20of%20cleric&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F03%2Fsaudi-arabia-cuts-diplomatic-ties-with-iran-after-nimr-execution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63735d4a2ae8f1c778895b558dbb81797ca632fc%2F0_81_4590_2753%2F4590.jpg>
 Lebanese Shia clerics listen to Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah, who strongly 
condemned Saudi Arabia for executing Nimr al-Nimr. Photograph: Hassan Ammar/AP 
Many were Shias who had taken part in anti-regime protests, while others were 
convicted members of al-Qaida. One of those put to death had allegedly been 
part of a team of gunmen who had shot the BBC correspondent Frank Gardner on 
the streets of Riyadh, leaving him paralysed.

Nimr’s execution could have been stopped by royal pardon and clemency had been 
repeatedly sought by officials in Tehran. However, in a sign of Riyadh’s 
hardening position towards its arch-rival in the region, the Saudi monarch,King 
Salman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/king-salman>, refused to intervene.

Saudi officials had been convinced that Nimr was a central figure in attempts 
to stir dissent among the country’s Shia minority, which makes up about 15% of 
the population and is viewed by Riyadh as being a subversive threat, urged on 
by the Iranian leadership.
 