
Madam Speaker, sorry is supposed to be a feeling, not a tactic.


The feeling is supposed to flow from an understanding that you have done the 
wrong thing, not from a dawning realisation that public fury isn’t “blowing 
over”, that you might not be able to “tough it out” and that many of your own 
colleagues think your position is untenable.


You have said you are sorry for “an error of judgment” and that you are 
repaying expense claims that “don’t look right”. But you continue to insist you 
haven’t broken the rules. You seem to be apologising for the look of what you 
did, not for the actions themselves.


And you’re doing it three weeks after the initial revelations, and only when 
your position is obviously under threat and with a no confidence motion in your 
position as Speaker looming.


You say your travel claims coinciding with two colleagues’ weddings are 
technically within the guidelines, but you are now repaying them anyway.


Surely taking secret meetings with unnamed sources to justify taxpayer funding 
for social engagements can’t be OK

If that’s the case why not answer questions about them? You say you held 
meetings to do with your position as a committee chair. Why can’t you tell us 
who you met or what you talked to them about or how the conversations informed 
the work of the committee?


If everything’s actually above board why not answer questions at a press 
conference? Somehow, during your apology interview on theAlan Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> radio show, he forgot to ask you 
any of these things.


Surely taking secret meetings with unnamed sources to justify taxpayer funding 
for social engagements can’t be OK. Surely that’s just wrong, as well as being 
a “bad look”, as you quite rightly say.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fbronwyn-bishop-sorry-helicopter-apologise-alan-jones-2rb-audio&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438216516630%2FBishop-chair-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bronwyn%20Bishop%20tells%20Alan%20Jones%3A%20I%20really%20want%20to%20apologise%20for%20my%20error%20of%20judgment%20-%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fbronwyn-bishop-sorry-helicopter-apologise-alan-jones-2rb-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bronwyn%20Bishop%20tells%20Alan%20Jones%3A%20I%20really%20want%20to%20apologise%20for%20my%20error%20of%20judgment%20-%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F30%2Fbronwyn-bishop-sorry-helicopter-apologise-alan-jones-2rb-audio&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438216516630%2FBishop-chair-014.jpg>
 Bishop takes to Macquarie Radio to apologise for her error of judgment.Link to 
audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jul/30/bronwyn-bishop-sorry-helicopter-apologise-alan-jones-2rb-audio>
And surely repaying the money doesn’t negate the questions because you signed 
the forms certifying that you were on committee business at the time. Could you 
possibly be worried about the consequences of making a false certification – is 
that why you find yourself having to be sorry about the vibe rather than the 
substance? Because if anyone makes a false certification that would mean they 
had done something very, very wrong.


To be fair, Madam Speaker, you aren’t the only politician who sees expenses 
scandals in terms of tactics and what they can get away with. Most politicians 
on both sides of politics look at them that way.


It’s why in the heat of the scandal everyone says oh, yes, the system must 
change, but then despite numerous inquiries over the years (an audit office 
report,the Belcher inquiry 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/publications/review-of-parliamentary-entitlements-committee-report/docs/review-of-parliamentary-entitlements-committee-report.pdf>
,the Williams inquiry 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/publications/review_of_the_administration_of_parliamentary_entitlements/docs/review_parliamentary_entitlements.pdf?v=2>
) usually following yet another expenses or travel claim scandal, nothing 
substantial has changed in the way politicians travel claims are scrutinised.


Bronwyn Bishop apologises for 'error of judgment' over travel claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/30/bronwyn-bishop-apologises-error-judgment-travel-claims>
It’s why the party whose MP is under fire scours the records for instances of 
possible wrongdoing on the other side, so the whole thing descends into 
mutually assured destruction until the immediate scandal blows over and they 
call a truce. (Anyone notice how the radio jocks were well armed on Thursday 
morning with lists of past Labor trangressions?)


It’s why the major parties then huddle around the Minchin protocol 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20131022001722/http://www.maps.finance.gov.au/docs/Protocol_on_Allegations.pdf>
, established after the Howard government’s first travel scandal and named 
after the then special minister of state, Nick Minchin. It says when an 
allegation is relatively minor, an MP will be allowed to explain and repay any 
improperly or mistakenly claimed money. That’s fine, as far as it goes. It’s 
fair enough that the vast majority of politicians who try to do the right thing 
have a chance to rectify honest mistakes.


But while the public is convinced it doesn’t go far enough, the major parties 
have actually resisted most calls for greater scrutiny – independent oversight 
or, heaven forbid,a federal version of Icac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/29/labor-conference-rejected-push-federal-anti-corruption-commission>
.


This time, Madam Speaker, because your claims are seen as so egregious and 
because your apology is so conditional and so late, the voters – and some of 
your own colleagues – are demanding an act of actual contrition, that you stand 
aside. Your real feelings have been obvious for too long. Your tactics may have 
come too late.

 