
With regard to David Kynaston’s recent letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/21/the-two-cultures-and-bobby-charlton>
 (22 November) in which he claims that “science can learn far more from the 
humanities than the other way round”, this exemplifies a misunderstanding of 
what CP Snow was saying. Yes, he was pointing out that there are two cultures, 
but he did not believe this was a good thing. He also reported that, while in 
the company of scientists he would expect them to have a reasonable knowledge 
of, say, the works of Shakespeare, in the company of those from the humanities 
he would hardly ever obtain an understanding of the laws of thermodynamics.

Unfortunately, the debate will continue along its misguided path. Some years 
back, I attended a meeting with a high-ranking civil servant with a background 
in the humanities who asked the scientists in attendance whether government 
should stop financing science and let others (eg the US) do it instead. The 
natural response was that this would lead to the UK being very poor 
technologically and disadvantaged in terms of the translation of research into 
business. More importantly, however, it missed the important point that the 
culture of our country is heavily influenced by science and technology, viz 
Newton, Bacon, Boyle, Hooke, Darwin and Wallace, the Hunter brothers, 
Rutherford, Sanger and so on...
Professor Bernard Moxham
Cardiff

• The sciences may indeed help remind us that the universe doesn’t revolve 
around us, but can they care about that knowledge? It’s the humanities that 
give us the values that enable us to make some sense of what we’re doing here, 
including the desire to find out more about how the universe operates. Surely 
we need both an understanding of the facts of life and how the cosmos function, 
as well as what adds meaning and purpose to our awareness of being alive, 
conscious, and human. Otherwise, what is the point of us simply being around?
Yair Klein
London

• David William Evans (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/23/a-poor-choice-of-words-to-describe-rich-people>
, 24 November) says we should not imagine that the universe revolves around us. 
Ludwig Wittgenstein, who had a few good ideas in his time, once said that, 
although you could persuade someone who had thitherto thought the sun went 
round the Earth that the opposite was true, it would still be right for that 
person to think of the sun rising in the east and setting in the west.
Michael Bulley
Chalon-sur-Saône, France

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 