
Children's laureate Malorie Blackman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/malorie-blackman>, the poets Roger McGough 
and Michael Rosen, former poet laureate Andrew Motion and biographer Michael 
Holroyd are among scores of authors, illustrators and librarians who are 
pressing the government to take "urgent" action to make sure all schools have a 
good school library.

In the wake of the report last week from the Libraries All Party Parliamentary 
Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/08/school-libraries-cross-party-report-mps-libraries-all-party-parliamentary-group>
, which asserted that it was "vital" that all schools "have a good library to 
ensure children develop essential literacy and digital literacy skills in order 
to fulfil their potential", more than 200 authors have written to the Guardian 
calling on the Department for Education to "act immediately on the report's 
conclusions". These include instructing Ofsted to look at libraries when 
inspecting schools, and collecting data on the number of school libraries and 
librarians.

Signatories to the letter, published in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/15/scrutinise-schools-on-library-provision>
, also include the novelist Kathy Lette, the children's authors Melvin Burgess, 
Philip Pullman, Anne Fine, David Almond, Francesca Simon, Mal Peet and Meg 
Rosoff, and Christine Blower, general secretary of the National Union of 
Teachers.

"We, authors and illustrators, teachers, librarians, parents and others, are 
keen that this recommendation does not just become another piece of wishful 
thinking and call on the Department for Education to act immediately," they 
write. "This is urgent.Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> 
lost 280 librarians last year. At the very least the Department should convene 
a working group including librarians', authors', head teachers' and teachers' 
representatives to draw up an action plan to realise the aim of a good library 
in every school."

Alan Gibbons, the Carnegie-shortlisted author who has been a major voice in 
the campaign for the UK's libraries, is the author of the letter. He said he 
had been "very encouraged" by the cross-party group of MPs report last week, 
and by the initial response from schools minister David Laws, who said on its 
release that that "the school library is an incredibly important way to ensure 
that children have a good choice when choosing books, a dedicated space for 
reading, and effective encouragement and stimulation from librarians to develop 
their literacy skills".

But Gibbons added: "We also know that there is some distance between 
recommendations, even by a parliamentary committee, and thriving libraries run 
by valued librarians in our schools. There are 280 fewer school librarians this 
year, after all. We would like to see the education ministers meet 
representatives of librarians, teachers, head teachers and authors to see how 
these proposals can be implemented."

The "ultimate" aim, said Gibbons, "would be statutory school libraries", 
because "every child has the right to read".
 