
Former SBS reporter Scott McIntyre has been granted permission to sue the 
broadcaster for unfair dismissal at the Fair Work Commission after he lost his 
job fortweeting controversial views about Anzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/18/sports-reporter-scott-mcintyre-to-sue-sbs-for-sacking-over-anzac-day-tweets>
.

At the Fair Work Commission on Thursday, commissioner Ian Cambridge referred 
to the freedoms the Anzacs fought for, saying McIntyre deserved a fair hearing 
and his “day in court”.

Sports reporter Scott McIntyre to sue SBS for sacking over Anzac Day tweets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/18/sports-reporter-scott-mcintyre-to-sue-sbs-for-sacking-over-anzac-day-tweets>
“It is perhaps sadly ironic that many members of the Australian defence force 
lost their lives in the earnest pursuit of the protection of rights and 
freedoms such as the access to a fair hearing which the applicant is entitled 
to obtain,” Cambridge said.

The experienced football reporter was sacked by SBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/26/sbs-sports-reporter-scott-mcintyre-sacked-over-direspectful-anzac-tweets>
 after he questioned the Anzac legend and the jingoism associated with the 
centenary of the Gallipoli landing.


SBS’s managing director, Michael Ebeid, dumped him the morning after he posted 
the series of tweets, which the then-communications minister,Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, described as 
“despicable”.


McIntyre began his tweets by criticising what he said was the “cultification 
[sic] of an imperialist invasion”.


“Remembering the summary execution, widespread rape and theft committed by 
these brave Anzacs in Egypt, Palestine and Japan,” he said.


McIntyre was asked by SBS <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs> management 
to delete the posts but he refused to do so.


Turnbull criticised him, posting on Twitter: “Difficult to think of more 
offensive or inappropriate comments than those by @mcintinhos. Despicable 
remarks which deserve to be condemned.”


Malcolm Turnbull denies influencing SBS sacking of Scott McIntyre for Anzac 
tweets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/27/malcolm-turnbull-denies-influencing-sbs-sacking-of-reporter-for-anzac-tweets>
In May his lawyers, Maurice Blackburn, said the case would focus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/18/sports-reporter-scott-mcintyre-to-sue-sbs-for-sacking-over-anzac-day-tweets>
 on whether the views expressed by McIntyre constituted political opinion and 
whether SBS terminated his employment for expressing those views.


SBS challenged the application for unlawful termination of employment but 
Cambridge said under the exceptional circumstances of the case the application 
should proceed.


“McIntyre had been wrongfully advised to pursue a case of discrimination based 
on political opinion because the anti-discrimination law in NSW does not make 
it unlawful to discriminate against a person on the basis of their political 
opinion,” the commission heard.


“In the circumstances of this case the applicant does not seek multiple 
proceedings or remedies but simply seeks to have his day in court,” Cambridge 
said. “The circumstances surrounding this matter are unusual.


“The public controversy regarding the applicant’s social media comments on 
Anzac Day <https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day> and his subsequent 
dismissal have understandably introduced an elevated level of tension between 
the parties in respect to the litigation involving challenge to that dismissal. 
Unfortunately, that litigation has now generated some unusual circumstances of 
its own making.”


Turnbull has admitted that he contacted Ebeid “as soon as I was made aware of 
the tweets by Mr McIntyre”.


“Mr McIntyre, as a private citizen, is entitled to express his political 
views, but in his capacity as a reporter employed by SBS he has to comply with, 
and face the consequences of ignoring, the SBS social media protocol, a number 
of provisions of which were breached by him with his offensive tweets,” 
Turnbull wrote on his blog.


“The management of SBS, however, not the government, is responsible for 
staffing decisions at SBS,” he said.
 