
The Turnbull government is offering to sacrifice about half the $6bn in budget 
savings from itsstalled family tax benefit cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/youth-payments-widened-in-budget-but-family-tax-benefit-cuts-go-ahead>
 in order to get an amended policy through the Senate before the end of the 
year.

Single parents will be hardest hit by budget cuts to family tax benefits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/single-parents-will-be-hardest-hit-by-budget-cuts-to-family-tax-benefits>
The treasurer, Scott Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison>, has retained 
responsibility for the long-running negotiation, which he began as social 
services minister, and has floated new compromise options with crossbench 
senators in recent weeks.

The government needs $3.5bn in total savings to come from the $6bn in family 
tax benefit cuts that were announced in the 2014 budget, but remain blocked in 
the Senate, because it has hypothecated these savings as a way to “pay” for a 
$3.5bn childcare shake-up that was the centrepiece of this year’s budget. Some 
of the savings could also come from $1bn in proposed cuts to paid parental 
leave.

While the childcare changes are not scheduled to start until 2017, they would 
be harder to spruik in the 2016 election year if the government had failed to 
secure its self-identified funding stream.

In the talks, the treasurer and his advisers have offered to ditch the plan to 
freeze the indexation of family tax benefit part A payments (received by 
families earning up to $100,000), which is booked in the budget to save $2.6bn 
over four years.

Instead of stopping family tax benefit part B (paid to sole parent and single 
income families) when the youngest child turns six (the current cut off is 18) 
they have floated a compromise cut off when the youngest child turns 12 – a 
move that would significantly erode the estimated $1.8bn in savings from that 
change.

Annual end-of-year “supplements” paid to family tax benefit recipients would 
over time be rolled into the fortnightly amounts that families receive, with 
proposed cuts part of the phase in.

And the negotiations have also included the promise to pay an additional 
$1,000 a year to stay-at-home parents with a child under one, which was also 
promised as part of new prime minister Malcolm Turnbull’s coalition agreement 
with the National party.

It is unclear whether the watered-down changes can pass the Senate, but they 
are are unlikely to win the backing of the Australian Council of Social 
Services, which is pleading with the government to rethink its policy and focus 
on the original intention of family tax benefit payments, rather than a search 
for a specific quantum of savings.

Malcolm Turnbull urges 'empathy and concern' in paid parental leave debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/14/malcolm-turnbull-urges-empathy-and-concern-in-paid-parental-leave-debate>
Acoss has backed the idea of removing family tax benefit B for single income 
couple families when their youngest turns 12, but is strongly opposed to any 
cuts to payments to sole parent families. And it is proposing the government 
restore more generous indexation to family payments, saying lower indexation 
rates and freezes imposed by successive governments have significantly eroded 
the real value of the payments.

“Family payments were intended to ensure that households with children had an 
adequate income ... the minimum wage is set at a level adequate for a single 
person, the family payments system was supposed to make it adequate for a 
family,” said the Acoss chief executive, Cassandra Goldie, one of the leaders 
who attended last week’s summit with Turnbull.

“We want the government to defend the core purpose of the family payment 
system ... we need to make sure we aren’t cutting spending to exacerbate 
poverty for children. We think there is a real risk that bad policy could come 
out of this process.”

But the crossbench senators have varied priorities, with Family First senator 
Bob Day saying his backing for a compromise plan would depend on the government 
at least promising to look at “income splitting”, which allows single income 
families to reduce their tax.

Others are considering the new options, and Motoring Enthusiast senator Ricky 
Muir will meet Morrison next week.

The 2015 budget cuts to paid parental leave are also languishing in the 
Senate, having beencondemned by employers and unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/20/employers-and-unions-unite-to-try-to-force-changes-to-paid-parental-leave-plan>
, who said they would not work in practice.

Under the changes, the government will no longer fund paid parental leave 
those whose employer already paid as much, or more, than the taxpayer-funded 
scheme – about 34,000 mothers each year.

The Abbott government's proposed changes to paid parental leave explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/21/the-abbott-governments-proposed-changes-to-paid-parental-leave-explained>
The taxpayer-funded scheme, available to women earning up to $150,000 a year, 
is worth $11,500 to each mother, or 18 weeks at the minimum wage. The 
government says the $11,500 is a “safety net” for those who don’t receive at 
least that amount from their employer – and that those who have been accessing 
both schemes are “double dippers”.

But employers, including the chief executive of the Australian Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry, Kate Carnell,told Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/10/ending-double-dipping-on-parental-leave-unlikely-to-save-money-business-group>
 the move was unlikely to achieve savings in the private sector because 
employers would switch generous parental leave payments to other employee 
benefits and unions had similar concerns.

New social services minister Christian Porter told the West Australian 
newspaper his brief was to tackle middle class welfare and “payments that end 
up directed at recipients on more substantial incomes”.

Senators said they assumed the government would continue to seek additional 
savings if this revised set of changes passed the upper house.
 