
The online TV service SeeSaw is aiming to launch by March, with content from 
partnersincluding BBC Worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/dec/02/seesaw-bbc-worldwide-deal>, 
Channel 4 and Channel Five.

The service, built from the assets of ITV, Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide's 
defunct Project Kangaroo video-on-demand venture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/24/arqiva-project-kangaroo>, will 
start a closed, invite-only trial tomorrow.

SeeSaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/seesaw> is hoping to build up the 
number of users for its trial over the course of about a month to 10,000, with 
the aim of offering about 3,500 hours of TV content at launch by March.

It is understood that the service will offer a combination of free 
advertising-supported content and paid-for programming, the latter mostly from 
the US.

SeeSaw is also understood to be closing in on a deal with the IOC for a range 
of "best moments" from the Olympics. SeeSaw is likely to look to build its 
profile as a provider of sport content, given that chief executive Pierre-Jean 
Sebertis a former managing director of British Eurosport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/31/sebert-join-arqiva>.

It is thought that SeeSaw also has deals in place with Channel 4 and Channel 
Five, which have not officially been announced. ITV remains reluctant to strike 
third-party deals for its content.

As a completely new brand to the burgeoning UK video-on-demand market, SeeSaw 
is backing its launch with a £5m ad campaign that will include a massive TV 
spend. It has been experimenting with the strapline "A great place to watch TV".

SeeSaw has chosen Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/29/arqiva-seesaw-online-tv-fallon>, 
the agency behind hugely popular ad campaigns including "Gorilla" for Cadbury 
and "Balls" and "Paint" for Sony, to make the brand a household name.

The company, which aims to be a "one stop shop" aggregator for online TV 
programming, is already looking ahead to getting the service distributed on 
other platforms beyond the PC.

It is understood that discussions about launching on internet-enabled 
television and with Project Canvas, the joint venture from partners including 
the BBC and ITV that aims to bring video-on-demand to Freeview and Freesat 
digital TV homes.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 