
SeeSaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/seesaw>, the online TV service that 
will launch in the coming weeks, has unveiled a string of programming deals for 
shows including Footballers' Wives, The Apprentice, Skins, Neighbours and 
Kingdom.

The video-on-demand service, which is aiming to launch by March with more than 
3,000 hours of content, has struck deals with the independent production 
companies Talkback Thames and Shed Media, as well as for 50 made-for-TV movies 
with the US producer RHI Entertainment.

SeeSaw's deal with Shed Media, brokered by Shed's distribution arm Outright, 
includes the ITV dramas Footballers Wives and Bad Girls. The deal with Talkback 
Thames includes The Apprentice.

An agreement with distributor Digital Rights Group will see ITV1 dramas Doc 
Martin and Kingdom become available on the online TV service.

SeeSaw will also launch a dedicated sport section. The first deal is with 
Perform, which provides streaming services to 80 Premier League and Football 
League clubs, for a package of topical football programming based around the 
2010 World Cup in South Africa.

The company, which is owned by the transmission firm Arqiva, also confirmed 
deals with Channel 4 and Channel Five 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/25/seesaw-online-tv-test-launch>.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> content will include 
Peep Show, The Inbetweeners, Skins and Grand Designs. A multi-year deal with 
Channel Five covers programmes including the Gadget Show, Neighbours and Home 
and Away made available.

The catch-up services Five on Demand and 4oD will also be accessible on SeeSaw.
BBC Worldwide <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide> is also 
providing a range of content including old episodes of Doctor Who and That 
Mitchell and Webb Look.

"The breadth and depth of the content announced today instantly establishes 
SeeSaw's position as a very significant player in the online TV marketplace," 
said John Keeling, platform controller at SeeSaw.

"As a free, homegrown television platform, scheduled for British audiences and 
advertisers, we look forward to raising the curtain on SeeSaw in the coming 
weeks."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 