
SeeSaw, the video-on-demand website born from the ashes of the failed Project 
Kangaroo <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/24/arqiva-project-kangaroo>
, has launched a paid-for service with 1,000 hours of programming from 99p per 
episode up to £17.99 for a series.

The VoD operator, which is owned by Arqiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva>, officially launched in February 
offering 3,000 hours of free programming including Home and Away, Neighbours, 
Hollyoaks, Skins, Kingdom and Doc Martin. This programming will remain free.

SeeSaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/seesaw> has today unveiled 1,000 
hours of new content as part of its subscription offering, including new deals 
with Comedy Central for programmes including South Park and MTV for shows such 
as The Hills and Laguna Beach.

The paid-for content also includes new BBC Worldwide shows such as Fawlty 
Towers, Planet Earth, Spooks, Top Gear, the Royle Family, Gavin & Stacey, I'm 
Alan Partridge and Only Fools and Horses. It is also thought that a deal has 
been struck with Disney to allow users to rent programming including Lost and 
Ugly Betty.

The company has launched a rental model that will allow single programmes to 
be rented for up to 30 days with 48 hours for viewing to be completed once a 
show has started to be watched. For whole series, viewers will have 90 days 
rental and 48 hours to complete the viewing of each episode.

Charges are between 99p and £1.19 per episode. For a series, prices will vary 
widely from £3.99 to £17.99 depending on the number of episodes in the series 
and how recently the programme has aired on TV.

The charging structure, and programming that users will have to pay for, is 
broadly similar to the regimes run by rival services such as Channel Five's 
Demand Five.

SeeSaw, which aims to be a "one-stop shop" for online TV programming, is 
planning to increase the amount of content to 5,000 hours and is already 
looking at widening its distribution beyond PCs.

Arqiva is one of the partners in Project Canvas, the joint venture to bring 
VoD content to digital viewers with Freeview and Freesat, which theOffice of 
Fair Trading yesterday cleared of requiring a competition investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/19/oft-project-canvas>.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 