
The online TV service SeeSaw <https://www.theguardian.com/media/seesaw> has 
signed its first content deal, acquiring BBC shows such as the period drama 
Cranford and comedy series That Mitchell & Webb Look.

SeeSaw, built from the assets of BBC Worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide>, ITV and Channel 4's defunct 
Project Kangaroo video-on-demand venture, has also acquired Lark Rise to 
Candleford and classic Doctor Who episodes under the deal.

While not giving details of any other shows included in the deal with the 
corporation's commercial arm, BBC Worldwide, nor of how many hours of 
programming are involved, SeeSaw said it covered "a raft of content across the 
drama, comedy, lifestyle, entertainment and factual genres from theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> archive".

"Today's announcement is a significant milestone for SeeSaw, demonstrating our 
commitment to deliver a rich and varied range of British programming," said the 
service's chief executive, Pierre-Jean Sebert.

"Confirming great content from BBC Worldwide is just the beginning," added its 
platform controller, John Keeling. "With unrivalled depth in comedy, drama, 
factual and lifestyle programming, SeeSaw will change the way Britain chooses 
to watch great television. Watch this space."

Expected to launch in the first quarter of next year, SeeSaw will offer a 
mixture of free and paid-for content from a variety of broadcasters and 
producers, both British and international.

SeeSaw is owned by the transmission company Arqiva, which bought the Kangaroo 
technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/23/arqiva-project-kangaroo> after 
the venture had been blocked by the competition commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/feb/04/project-kangaroo-blocked-by-competition-commission>
.

Arqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> is not the only company 
interested in developing on-demand television.

The US portal Hulu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/06/online-tv-internet-iplayer> – 
co-owned by the Fox, ABC and NBC networks along with the private equity group 
Providence – has been making overtures to British broadcasters and content 
owners in recent months, while Google-owned video site YouTubethis week 
launched an advertising campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/nov/27/youtube-full-length-tv-shows>
 to promote the full-length shows available on its service, many acquired as a 
result ofa landmark deal with Channel 4 signed in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/15/youtube-channel-4-google-deal>.

As part of SeeSaw's preparations for launch, it has appointed the ad agency 
Fallon and the media agency Vizeum to prepare a £5m campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/29/arqiva-seesaw-online-tv-fallon> 
andrevealed branding for its logo and animated idents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/nov/03/seesaw-online-tv-idents>, which 
feature a pair of "play" triangles.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 