
This week's comedy news

Standup, sitcom, gameshow, podcast … now Jerry Seinfeld is taking up hip-hop 
<http://www.nypost.com/p/pagesix/jerry_seinfeld_working_on_rap_album_LMJhHjc8mANRejycRIHsmJ>
. According to reports, the comedian is working on a new album with the
Nigerian-American rapper Wale 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/feb/16/new-band-wale>. The musician has 
previous history with Seinfeld, havingreleased an album back in 2008, The 
Mixtape About Nothing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/aug/14/wale-seinfeld-rap-mixtape-tv>, 
based on the star's hit sitcom. Now, they're collaborating. "Wale called me, he 
came to my show, we hung out a little bit,"Seinfeld said in a video posted on 
YouTube <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xot7j-m7Hes>. "He wanted me to do 
something with him. I didn't understand it, but he did." At which point 
Seinfeld concluded: "Hip-hop's words, right? So, I do words. Why don't you take 
my words and do something with it?" he asked Wale. "I don't know how to do it, 
but I thought: just take the words." A place on the stage of a new festival may 
now beckon for Jerry, as Tenacious D launch theFestival Supreme, a new one-day 
event uniting rock and comedy <http://www.nme.com/news/tenacious-d/68232>. One 
half of Tenacious D, the actor Jack Black, has named Flight of the Conchords, 
Spinal Tap and Tim Minchin as acts likely to play the 19 October gig.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fxot7j-m7Hes%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fxot7j-m7Hes%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fxot7j-m7Hes%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on a mobile? Watch video here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xot7j-m7Hes>

The government's proposed Public Order Act has been amended after a campaign 
by comedian Rowan Atkinson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2012/oct/23/rowan-atkinson-freedom-speech-frankie-boyle-wins>
, who claimed that the sanction against "insulting words or behaviour" was a 
threat to free speech. Home Secretary Teresa May told the House of Commons last 
week that the government would not overturn an amendment supported by the Lords 
last December, which sought to remove the word "insulting" from Section 5 of 
the act, as part of the crime and courts bill. Atkinson's argument had been 
that "the clear problem of the outlawing of insult is that too many things can 
be interpreted as such. Criticism, ridicule, sarcasm, merely stating an 
alternative point of view to the orthodoxy, can be interpreted as insult." 
Speaking of which, a Thai activist and comedian,Jeng Dokchik, has been jailed 
for two years <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-21055202> for insulting the 
monarchy in a 2010 speech.

The comic actor Greg Hemphill also has his campaigning hat on, according to 
this Scotsman story 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/arts/still-game-star-greg-hemphill-accuses-bbc-of-stifling-culture-1-2748533>
. The star of BBC Scotland's Still Game has revived the argument that the BBC 
undervalues its Scottish output, based on the assertion that BBC iPlayer does 
not allow overseas audiences to watch any Scottish content.On Twitter, Hemphill 
wrote: <https://twitter.com/greghemphill69> "My brother lives in Canada along 
with six million other folk of Scots descent, but on BBC iPlayer he can't watch 
any BBC Scotland shows." Hemphill added: "BBC London does not let Scotland 
promote itself to the world. BBC London is Margaret Thatcher." On a cheerier 
note, the actor has offered to send box sets of Still Game toHMV customers left 
with useless vouchers 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2013/01/15/16959/ill_redeem_your_hmv_vouchers> 
after the store went into administration last week.

On telly, meanwhile, Avalon is to produce a new panel show for BBC1, Trumped! 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/tv/4753523/New-panel-show-for-bbc-from-harry-hills-burp-makers.html>
, in which comedians assess the merits of funny video clips. And in theBritish 
Comedy Guide's annual awards <http://www.comedy.co.uk/awards/2012/>, Miranda 
has been voted comedy of the year in a poll of readers.

Best of the Guardian's comedy coverage

• "At the moment there are [comedians] who are not that great and all they are 
doing is causing offence" – Alan Davies on modern comedy, inthis interview with 
Bruce Dessau 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2013/jan/20/alan-davies-comedian-interview-jonathan-creek>
.

• "A comic poet of self-loathing and artistic angst" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2013/jan/17/comedy-gold-zach-galifianakis>: 
Leo Benedictus covers beardie US funnyman Zach Galifianakis in this week's
Comedy Gold slot 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/series/leo-benedictus-comedy-gold>.

• "If I can't connect to it through reality, I don't worry about it. I do it 
anyway."Louis CK on the sitcom of the moment, Louie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2013/jan/19/louie-is-finally-coming-to-uk>
, ahead of its UK debut.

• Me. A medieval castle. Two men with plastic shopping bags on their heads. 
It'smy interview with Irish hip-hop comedy sensation The Rubberbandits 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2013/jan/16/the-rubberbandits>, now 
performing their debut London gigs.

• "Luckily I am a comedian, not a leading man, so my appearance doesn't 
matter":Fast Show star and standup Simon Day 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/2013/jan/19/what-see-in-mirror-simon-day> 
tells us what he sees in the mirror.

Controversy of the week

A dildo, or not a dildo? That was the question facing Ofcom this week, as it 
adjudicated onthe nature of a large pink balloon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/mediamonkeyblog/2013/jan/21/keith-lemon-celebrity-juice-ofcom>
 held by the rapper Example on a trailer for Keith Lemon's show Celebrity 
Juice. Take a look atthe screenshot, posted on Chortle 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2013/01/21/16994/was_that_a_dildo%3F>, and 
you'll see that Ofcom didn't have the most taxing of judgments to make. "In our 
opinion," said the regulator, "Example wore a strap around his waist from which 
protruded at the front a pink object which resembled an erect penis." It 
therefore ruled that ITV had breached the section of the broadcasting code 
designed to protect children from unsuitable material.

ITV insisted otherwise, however: the protuberance, it claimed, featured only 
"very mild innuendo" that "had no overtly sexual content". The appendage in 
question was named a "pricket bat", and it was used to burst balloons. "The 
pricket bat was not a strap-on prosthetic phallus which might suggest an actual 
sex toy," ran ITV's official response to the charge, "nor did we consider that 
it bore any close resemblance to the anatomical shape of an actual penis." The 
station has nevertheless been prevailed upon to withdraw the footage from any 
further trailers for the show. Glad that's cleared up.

Best of our reader comments

Ricky Gervais announces a new standup tour, Matt Trueman reported on Monday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2013/jan/21/comedy-comedy#comment-20766037>, 
which teed up a debate on the Smirking One's skills in the live arena.They are 
few, argued DQ17 <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/20766037>:

Ricky Gervais <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ricky-gervais>, while a 
talented writer for television ... is not a good standup comic. Most good 
standup comics do it for years before breaking through. Even the dull Michael 
MacIntyre or throwback John Bishop spent years on their craft. Gervais didn't. 
Though he sells out his tours, he is doing that on name brand recognition, not 
through talent as a standup. Which is fine because he has so much money that he 
can do what he wants, and if the tours were free no one would complain. But 
there is nothing worse than spending money to sit through a bad standup gig for 
90 minutes, especially if 50% of it is just him grinning at his own cleverness, 
[which] has been tired since Episode 2 of The Office.

Ouch. TheRumpDiary cut Gervais a little more slack 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/20763626>. Average standup, 
yes, but still a force for good:

[Standup is] certainly not his strength and ultimately, with the 
disappointment of the dwarf thing (not being facetious, genuinely can't 
remember its name) people will use it to try and knock him off his perch... 
[But] he's still an incredibly gifted writer, and has a brilliant ability to 
recognise tragedy and then expose it in both a heart- and gut-wrenching 
scenario, usually better utilised in his ridiculous characters who are so close 
to his life – Karl as Karl, Steve being gawky, Maggie's virtual social autism.

There was plenty of chat after my interview with Dave Chambers and Bob 
McGlynn, aka The Rubberbandits 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2013/jan/16/the-rubberbandits> – much of it 
focused on the question of whether they were celebrating or satirising the 
(poor, drugged-up, ignorant) characters they depict. Tocubarocks, it was 
uncomfortably close to the latter 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/20673044>:

A question arises: do Irish "satirists" ever mock the rich these days, or the 
"artistic elite"? It's easy to mock various dumb-asses, but what about the rich 
and powerful? Any sly digs at "journalists"? Christ, there's more than enough 
material with which to ridicule Ireland's "journalistic" elite, given their 
dismal record over the past decade. Funnily enough, Ireland's "satirists" don't 
seem keen on taking the piss out of the elites.

Which brought a swift rebuff from TruculentSheep 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/20673807>:

The Rubberbandits don't mock the poor. Often they find what's good about 
people in the gutter and celebrate it – qf, "Spoiling Ivan", "I've a horse 
outside" and "Spastic Hawk", not to mention "I wanna fight your father" – 
they're all about supposed losers with dreams, aspirations and even something 
that's admirable, whether it's a love for a girl so intense that means you will 
have a fight with her disapproving dad, or being the one hawk who manages to 
fly free of its cage. Or, indeed, having a horse outside, which trumps all 
arguments by default.

The Bandits are at Soho theatre in London 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/the-rubberbandits/> until the end of next 
week, so there's plenty time to settle this argument for yourself.
 