
Self-publishing has always been possible and, indeed, for centuries was part 
and parcel of literary culture 
<http://www.pw.org/content/notable_moments_in_selfpublishing_history_a_timeline>
. Then it became expensive and, frankly, less prestigious, until digital books 
came along and made it affordable. Now price and success, too often the 
determinants of value, havemade it respectable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/24/self-publishing>.

The idea of writers being able to bring their creations directly to readers is 
widely touted as a radical advance in authorial control and a revolution in the 
creative process. Itspopularity has soared  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/11/self-publishing-boom-increase-diy-titles>
and its champions, such as the writer and founder of theAlliance of Independent 
Authors <http://allianceindependentauthors.org/>, Orna Ross, proclaim it as 
something "radical,really revolutionary within my world". 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/may/09/self-publishing-personal-read-revolutionary-readers>
. Self-publishing is the revolution du jour, the change that will liberate 
writers and democratise publishing.

Unfortunately, self-publishing is neither radical nor liberating. And, as 
revolutions go, it is rather short on revolutionaries. It is actually 
reactionary, a contracted version of the traditional publishing model in which 
companies, who produce for a wide range of tastes and preferences, are replaced 
by individual producers each catering to very narrow range.

Self-publishing is supposed to democratise publishing. For Nicholas Lovell, 
writing in the Bookseller 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/blogs/what-digital-strategy.html>, "publishers no 
longer have an ability to determine which books get published and which books 
don't." In other words, democratisation is nothing more than the expansion of 
the publishing process from the few to the many. But this both overestimates 
the barriers to traditional publication – the vetting and selection process may 
be deeply flawed, but every writer can submit a manuscript – and underestimates 
the constraints of the marketplace. It also fails to consider whether the 
democratisation of publishing produces a similar democratisation for the reader 
by making literary culture more open.

By definition, self-publishing is an individualistic pursuit in which each 
writer is both publisher and market adventurer, with every other writer a 
potential competitor and the reader reduced to the status of consumer. 
Publishing then becomes timid, fearing to be adventurous and revolutionary lest 
it betray the expectations of its market. This is a natural tendency in 
traditional publishing but it is one restrained by the voices of its authors 
who are free to put their work first and entrepreneurship a distant second. 
With authorship and entrepreneurship now equal partners, thenew authorpreneurs 
<http://thefutureofink.com/author-or-authorpreneur/> have thrown off the 
dictatorship of the editor to replace it with the tyranny of the market.

You can see this thinking best in the proclamations of the industry that has 
risen to support these new businesspeople. Dana Lynn Smithdefines readers  
<http://bookmarketingmaven.typepad.com/>as "people who buy the book to read … 
the most obvious category and it includes your primary audience (the 'ideal 
customer' that the book was specifically written for)". Or you can see it in 
the anger which greetedWill Self's confession  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/05/will-self-umbrella-booker-interview>
that he doesn't "really write for readers".

When writers fear readers, who remains bold enough to push the boundaries?

The risks that are an inescapable part of an industry where every book is a 
gamble make traditional publishers very conservative. But they are far more 
liberal, far more radical than self-publishing in its current form. 
Cross-subsidies from commercial titles support poets, academics and writers of 
new and daring literary fiction who will never appear on bestseller lists. Such 
concerted action is impossible in a fragmented world where each writer pursues 
individual success.

Can a literary culture where writers are producers and readers are consumers 
be truly open? Only if your definition of an open society is one ruled by the 
market.

The individualism of the self-publishing authorpreneurs, is disturbingly close 
toAyn Rand's Objectivism <http://www.aynrand.org/ideas/overview>, in which the 
greatest goal is individual fulfilment. No wider context needs to be considered 
because these wider goals will take care of themselves if every individual 
pursues a personal objective without regard to anyone else. It is the 
philosophy of pure laissez-faire capitalism that rejects community and mutual 
responsibility.

If self-publishing is to be a radical and revolutionary force it will be 
forged by creative collectives, groups of committed writers and artists who 
inter-publish, contributing to the publication not just of their own work but 
of the work of the others in the group across diverse genres and literary 
forms. Collectives, such asYear Zero Writers 
<http://yearzerowriters.wordpress.com> and Pankhearst  
<http://pankhearst.wordpress.com> offer the best hope that self-published 
authors can produce innovative, challenging writing and ensure that all 
literary forms and genres are represented, for all readers. That would be a 
true democratisation of publishing.
 