
Risky business

Croydon's Warehouse, the Theatre Royal in Margate and the Darlington Arts 
Centreare among 49 theatres that are "at risk" 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/36691/uk-theatres-at-risk-revealed>
, according to a warning from conservation body the Theatres Trust. Its Theatre 
Buildings At Risk Register, which the organisation releases annually, ranks 
venues across the UK under threat from demolition or redevelopment. This year, 
there were 17 new entries, though the overall number of theatres at risk 
actually decreased from 56. Sadly, that's not such good news at is sounds:some 
of the venues removed from the list have been lost permanently 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2012/jul/05/theatres-at-risk-register>.

Hipp, hipp, hooray

Good news, though, for two of London's historic theatre buildings. The London 
Hippodrome, now rebranded as a casino,reopens on Monday, with performances in 
its cabaret room 
<http://www.whatsonstage.com/news/theatre/london/E8831338564169/Hippodrome+Casino+to+host+live+performance+.html>
 from Tony Christie. Meanwhile, Wiltons Music Hall – one of the long-term 
fixtures on the "at risk" list – has been awarded apreliminary grant from the 
Heritage Lottery Fund 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/36654/wiltons-music-hall-gets-funding-boost>
, so it can begin a major refurbishment. It is one of the theatres removed from 
the Theatres Trust list for all the right reasons.

Capital gains


Over in the West End, detailed box office results for the 2011 season have 
been released by the Society of London Theatre. They confirm that 2011 was a 
record-breaker – with revenues of more than £528m. Meanwhile, ticket prices 
have continued to increase (although notably more slowly than the rate of 
inflation): theaverage face value of a ticket is now £46.40 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/36692/average-west-end-ticket-price-nears-47>
.

It's behind you

Not such good results outside London, though, where a number of theatres and 
theatre producers have been struggling to find audiences. Thelatest company to 
go into administration is Pele Productions 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/36683/panto-producer-pele-goes-into-administration>
, probably best known for producing a number of pantomimes at the Lowry in 
Salford. Sadly,they are the latest in a string of theatre companies to go under.
 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/36371/bruce-james-productions-goes-bust>

Minimum rage

London's Old Vic Theatre has been under fire from unions for some time for not 
paying the minimum wage to interns working at the venue. This week,the dispute 
seems to have reached some kind of resolution 
<http://www.thestage.co.uk/news/newsstory.php/36695/old-vic-forced-to-suspend-unpaid-intern>
(although, arguably not an ideal one), after the theatre suspended one of its 
internship programmes amid renewed pressure from both technical union BECTU and 
Arts Council England.

RIP Eric Sykes

A sad loss for the world of entertainment, with the death of comedian and 
actor Eric Sykes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/2012/jul/04/eric-sykes-dies-aged-89?newsfeed=true>
, who passed away following a brief illness, at the age of 89. Sykes had a 
varied career, ranging from writing and appearing in sitcoms to providing a 
voice on the Teletubbies.

And finally …

 Mayor of London Boris Johnson and Arlene Phillips dance at St Pancras 
International Station during the launch of Big Dance 2012. P Photograph: Lewis 
Whyld/PA 
Big Dance, the UK's annual celebration of just that, launched this week at St 
Pancras Station. Mayor of LondonBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> was on hand to share some of his 
own well-worn moves.

Follow Friday – my theatrical Twitter tips

@marcusromer <http://twitter.com/#!/MarcusRomer/> – Marcus Romer, the artistic 
director of Pilot Theatre and one of the theatre world's most prolific users of 
social media. This week he's running the#shifthappens conference  
<http://shifthappens.ning.com/>in York.

@theharewood  <https://twitter.com/#!/THEHAREWOOD>– stage and screen actor 
David Harewood. As well as tweeting about what he's up to work-wise (such as
Homeland <http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/homeland>), he does an 
interesting line in famous quotes about acting. An example: "The most important 
thing in the face is the eyes, and if you can make the eyes talk, you're 
halfway there." (Ian Holm)

@theobosanquet  <https://twitter.com/#!/TheoBosanquet>– Theo Bosanquet is the 
editor of theatre websiteWhatsonstage.com <http://www.whatsonstage.com/>. Often 
to be found reviewing theatre around London and interviewing big names from the 
theatre world – most recently casting directorDavid Grindrod 
<http://www.whatsonstage.com/interviews/theatre/london/E8831341484687/Brief+Encounter+with+...+Superstar+casting+director+David+Grindro>
.

Alistair Smith is deputy editor of The Stage. You can follow me @smithalistair 
<https://twitter.com/#!/smithalistair>
 