
Many visitors to the sultry southern Spanish city of Seville stick to a set 
route of cathedral, Alcázar palace and the Jewish quarter of Santa Cruz, 
without venturing further afield. While these monuments and flower-filled 
plazas, dotted with traditionally tiled tapas bars, shouldn't be missed, if you 
head into the less touristy areas of La Alameda and La Macarena (both no-go 
areas 15 years ago) you'll find a mix of avant-garde eateries, communes and 
independent shops – without a flamenco apron in sight.

1. Get your bearings at Las Setas <http://www.setasdesevilla.com/>, 
architect-artist J Mayer H's soaring cluster of six parasols in the form of 
giant mushrooms that houses a market, a rooftop walk, a bar and an 
archaeological museum. It landed, somewhat controversially, like a spacecraft 
on an old car park three years ago and kickstarted a new wave of shops opening 
in the surrounding area.

2. Walk over the waffly waves of Las Setas to Calle Regina, a pedestrianised 
street crammed with tempting spots, starting withEl Gato en Bicicleta 
<http://www.ungatoenbicicleta.com/> at no 8, a bookshop-cum-art gallery packed 
with tomes on sex, design and poetry. A few doors up, at no 15, Latas y 
Botellas is a treasure trove of suitcase-friendly Spanish food goodies andLa 
Cacharreria <http://lacacharreriadesevilla.blogspot.com.es/> , at no 14 over 
the road, is good for a late breakfast at an outside table.
 Wabi Sabi, Seville 
3. Turn left into Calle Viriato where fashion, art and furniture emporium Wabi 
Sabi <http://wabisabigallery.com/> (Calle Viriato 9) is a light, lofty space 
perfect for showing local artists' paintings, and an eclectic collection of 
pieces: a turquoise planter's chair (€527) sits next to vintage bags (€37) and 
graphic-print dresses (around €62).

4. Red House <http://www.redhousespace.com/> (Calle Amor de Dios 7 ) is a 
roomy, cafe/art space that captures this area's relaxed vibe, where guests sit 
on curvy art deco armchairs surrounded by lamps made from soda siphons and 
birdcages – all for sale – and listen to poetry readings and DJ sets. The 
dynamic artist owners, Alvaro and Cristina, have opened a restaurant nearby –
No-Lugar <http://no-lugar.com/> (Calle Trajano 16 ) – which has a vintage-y 
interior with ex-army workbenches and Moroccan ceramics. The fish tagine (€11) 
is reliably good .

5. For lunch, take a tapas hop around Macarena's Feria market. Start at the 
unassuming but innovativeQuilombo <http://quilombobar.sociosg.com/> (Peris 
Mencheta 6 ) with a smoked cod, courgette and orange salad, then cross to the 
market itself on Calle Feria; it is one of the city's oldest. Sample grilled 
sardines and razor-clams (€2.50) with a glass of manzanilla sherry (€1.50) atLa 
Cantina 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/La-Cantina-en-el-mercado-de-Calle-Feria/10150147311945328>
 orsalchichon iberico (€2.20) at tables tucked under the 13th-century 
Moorish-gothic basilica's stone wall.

6. A few yards away is the Palacio de los Marqueses de la Algaba 
<http://participasevilla.sevilla.org/?page_id=35>, a beautiful 15th-century 
palace that houses the Mudejar Centre. Mudejar was the architectural style 
practised by Moorish artisans under Catholic rule; the tall, arched window on 
the palace's market-facing facade is a perfect example. Inside the centre, you 
can see carved wood ceilings, and theazulejos (ceramic tiles) with intricate 
geometric patterns that Seville is famous for.

7. The main thoroughfare of the Macarena district is the narrow Calle San Luis.
Pass the blue-and-white tiled dome of the eponymous baroque church, to the 
mould-breakingRompemoldes <http://rompemoldes.com/> at no 70, a sleek, 
contemporary version of Seville's craftsmen's quarter. This is an open, shared 
courtyard where you can see designers, artists and sculptors at work in their 
studios; many live upstairs.
 No Kitchen 
8. After a traditional Seville siesta, head to the recently opened No Kitchen 
<http://www.nokitchen.es/> (Calle Amparo 50). Simple, airy decor – white walls, 
wooden tables – focuses attention on the food: lightly (or no)-cooked dishes 
such as tender seared Iberian pork loin (€3.60) and smoked salmon with vodka 
and beetroot. Theceviche trend has hit Seville – scallop or sea bass come with 
kikos (small toasted corn kernels, €8.15).

9. Roof terrace bars are all the rage, for the welcome breezes and, of course, 
the views. One of the best isRoof 
<https://www.facebook.com/CasaRomanaHotelyRoofSevilla?ref=ts&fref=ts> on top of 
theCasa Romana hotel <http://www.hotelcasaromana.com/> (Calle Trajano 15), 
which has a terrace where you can watch the Setas glow other-wordly blue and 
pink.

10. Local's tip

Elizabeth Bond, translator
Don't miss out on the free open-air events along the Alameda. On any summer 
evening, you'll stumble across dance performances, live music, street 
entertainers and craft stalls for kids.

11. Where to Stay 

Seville isn't big on hip hotels, but the Sacristia de Santa Ana 
<http://www.hotelsacristia.com/index.php?lang=es> (22 Alameda de Hercules, 
doubles from €79) is a good spot. A converted 17th-century mansion, the feel is 
dreamy and romantic: with restored French antiques (many for sale), 
hand-painted headboards and rooms wrapped around a pretty wooden-balconied 
courtyard. Its suite (room 407) has three huge windows looking onto the 
Alameda. You can't beat the location for neighbourhood vibes, though 
street-facing rooms can be noisy, especially at weekends.
 