
If you look closely – really closely – at the stars on the red carpet at last 
night's Golden Globes, you might be able to detect a hint of horror. That's not 
because they were about to settle intothree hours of tedious smuggery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/12/golden-globes-2014-tina-fey-amy-poehler>
, but because they might have been traipsing their expensive frocks through 
human waste. Moments before the red carpet opened, emergency crews were drafted 
in to mop up a flood. Some say a faulty sprinkler was to blame, but it's also 
been claimed that the flood was caused by a burst sewage pipe. If that's the 
case, it'd rank as one of the least glamorous awards show moments of all time, 
were it not for these.

Christine Lahti, 1998
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlmRhE8xBHpI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlmRhE8xBHpI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlmRhE8xBHpI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Chicago Hope's Christine Lahti famously wasn't around to accept her Golden 
Globe in 1998because she was on the toilet 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lmRhE8xBHpI>. It was a mortifying moment, made 
more mortifying because Robin Williams valiantly tried to salvage her mistake 
by leaping on stage and having the sort of multi-part conversation with himself 
that you'd normally expect to hear from red-eyed lunatics at bus stops at 3am.

Oscars streaker, 1974
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2IIl3zSYL8k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2IIl3zSYL8k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F2IIl3zSYL8k%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The 1974 Oscars contained the single most 1974 moment in all of history; 
late-period David Niven refusing to be ruffled by the sight of along-haired, 
moustachioed streaker jogging on stage 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2IIl3zSYL8k> and giving the peace sign.

The entire Golden Globes, 2008

The Writers Guild of America's strike meant that the glitz and glamour of the 
Golden Globes was replaced with astaid hour-long press conference from a hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jan/14/awardsandprizes.usa>. For a brief 
moment, we caught a glimpse of how efficiently an awards show could be run. 
Then, the following year, it was crying and dresses and backslapping as normal. 
Still, we'll always have 2008.

Foaming red carpet, 2002
 Colin Firth and his wife at the 'foaming carpet' Baftas, 2002. Photograph: UK 
Press/Getty Images 
Holding an awards ceremony in London when the weather's at its worst is an act 
of unstoppable stupidity, but that's the Baftas for you. To make matters worse, 
in 2002 a combination of torrential rain and fire-retardant chemicals caused 
the red carpet to bubble and foam, which in turn causedKate Winslet to pull a 
face like a terrified old man 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-1355199/Baftas-2011-Tantrums-tears-wardrobe-malfunctions-scenes.html>
.

Eddie Redmayne, 2013

Les Misérables star Eddie Redmayne was meant to present the Bafta for best 
original screenplay with Sally Field last year, but Field walked on stage 
alone. "Eddie is backstage puking his guts out 
<http://metro.co.uk/2013/02/10/bafta-awards-eddie-redmayne-pukes-his-guts-out-during-bafta-ceremony-3401152/>
," she told the legions of assembled dignitaries. Stay classy, Sally.

Isabelle Allen, 2013

Redmayne's 10-year-old co-star Isabelle Allen didn't even complete the SAG 
awards red carpet last year. She was taken back to her hotel after reportedly 
contracting a bug and throwing up. Two Les Misérables stars vomiting at awards 
shows in the same year. Coincidence, or proof of what can happen when you're 
forced to listen to Russell Crowe sing? Maybe we'll never know.

• Peter Bradshaw's reaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/13/golden-globes-2014-american-hustle-12-years-a-slave>
• Hadley Freeman: 10 things we learned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/13/golden-globes-best-moments-2014>
• Xan Brooks: six surprises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jan/13/golden-globes-surprises-emma-thompson-harvey-weinstein>
• Guardian Film Show: 'What the hell?' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/jan/13/golden-globes-2014-video-reaction>
 