
This month marks 10 years since the first detainees were taken to Guant치namo 
Bay <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>, the notorious US 
Navy-run detention centre in Cuba.

One of those still being held there is Shaker Aamer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jan/11/shaker-aamer-guantanamo>, a 
45-year-old former UK resident whose family live in south London. In February 
he will havespent 10 years in prison without charge or trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/31/last-briton-guantanamo-bay-captivity?INTCMP=ILCNETTXT3487>
.

Originally from Saudi Arabia, Aamer is married to a British citizen and moved 
to London in 1996, where he worked as an Arabic translator for a firm of 
solicitors who specialise in immigration cases. Given indefinite leave to 
remain in the UK, he is the father of four children but has never met his 
youngest son, who was born after his imprisonment.

In 2001, after travelling to Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> to undertake voluntary work, he 
was detained by Afghan forces and held at the US military prison at Bagram, 
among other places. Later he was transferred to US custody, and then taken to 
Guant치namo.

At Guant치namo Bay, Aamer has been involved in protests against conditions at 
the camp, including hunger strikes, and has spent much of his time in solitary 
confinement. He alleges that he has been subject to torture, both before his 
arrival and while there, describing one instance whenhe says he was left alone 
in an interrogation room with a gun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/06/guantanamo-gun-abuse-cia-mi5?INTCMP=SRCH>
, after days of sleep deprivation and beatings.

The UK government has repeatedly asked for him to be returned to his wife and 
children in the UK. The US government is obliged to either bring criminal 
charges against Shaker Aamer and give him a fair trial, or release him. Sign a 
petition calling for the closure of Guant치namo, and write a letter for Shaker 
Aamer,here 
<http://www.protectthehuman.com/petition_actions/10-years-on-end-detentions-at-guantanamo-bay?utm_source=aiuk&utm_medium=homepage&utm_campaign=SWHR&utm_content=Guantanamo_petition>
.
 