
Earlier this year, I was in Havana meeting a new generation of Cubans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/30/cuba-havana-music-art-restaurants-tech-tattoos>
 building their own businesses, projects and subcultures in the city. One 
person lots of them recommended to me was 32-year-old hair stylistDorian 
Carbonell Fernandez 
<https://www.facebook.com/search/str/Dorian%2BCarbonell%2BFernandez/keywords_top>
, who was one of the first to introduce international hair fashion to young 
Habaneros. His salon, Donde Dorian, is now a favourite among celebrities – kids 
hang out at the cafe in the front just to spot them, I was told. I’d been in 
Havana around a week and I did need a haircut, so I hopped in a taxi to Vedado 
to pay Dorian a visit.

The salon – which is pretty difficult to find, so be prepared to ask – is a 
small shop in a predominantly residential area. The decor is simple. Don’t 
expect a minimalist chic interior with techno bouncing around mirrored walls 
and tiled floors; this is Havana after all. But you know you’re in the right 
place because there will be a line of young guys with dyed quiffs and harsh 
undercuts looking like they’re a boyband waiting to get a fresh trim for Friday 
night. Given that Dorian’s client list includes several Cuban pop stars, they 
might actually be in a boyband.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhavana-salon-cuba-sharpest-haircuts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F072fd4753837b04528d128f0ff212522c1c07453%2F0_341_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Short%20sides%20and%20swept-up%20top%3A%20the%20salon%20with%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20sharpest%20haircuts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhavana-salon-cuba-sharpest-haircuts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Short%20sides%20and%20swept-up%20top%3A%20the%20salon%20with%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20sharpest%20haircuts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhavana-salon-cuba-sharpest-haircuts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F072fd4753837b04528d128f0ff212522c1c07453%2F0_341_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
 Dorian, left, with a happy customer 
Within about 10 minutes of us meeting, Dorian had me in the chair and was 
spinning me left and right while artfully snipping my hair into shape. He told 
me how he trained as a hairdresser and worked in government service, but never 
felt like he could express himself fully. His frustration led him to opening 
the business. “The idea was to bring international trends and fashion from 
around the world and redesign styles for the Caribbean,” he said. “The 
difference with our work and other salons is our aim to continue to create. We 
set the trend of hair fashion in Cuba.”

In this case, hair fashion seems to mean seriously short sides and a middle 
section swept up over the top of the head, possibly with bold colouring, too. I 
wasn’t brave enough to go for this, but it was hard not to be impressed by the 
impeccable cuts of the young guys working in the salon – styles I recognised 
from bars and clubs in the city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhavana-salon-cuba-sharpest-haircuts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1e04e59f63482e772ef26a77e1c3beb8956b0e6%2F0_272_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Short%20sides%20and%20swept-up%20top%3A%20the%20salon%20with%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20sharpest%20haircuts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhavana-salon-cuba-sharpest-haircuts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Short%20sides%20and%20swept-up%20top%3A%20the%20salon%20with%20Cuba%E2%80%99s%20sharpest%20haircuts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fhavana-salon-cuba-sharpest-haircuts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1e04e59f63482e772ef26a77e1c3beb8956b0e6%2F0_272_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Dorian’s success among young Habaneros is not happening in a vacuum - Cuba’s 
economy is growing, the internet becoming more accessible and international 
exchange is increasing.

“Youth culture is changing for the better across all aspects,” said Dorian, 
who has done hair fashion pop-ups at galleries, clubs andHavana’s flagship arts 
centre, FAC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/15/havana-fac-fabrica-de-arte-cubano>
. “Ten years ago the Cuban people had less interest in design and personal 
image, but young people now can see more possibilities. By the evening it’s so 
busy here – people come here ready to go to the disco. They get a haircut and 
just go. Sometimes we go with them …”
• Calle 25/26 y 28, Vedado, dondedorian.com 
<http://salon.dondedorian.com/dorian/>
 