
The largest mural painting in South Africa

During the apartheid era, the Orlando power station 
<http://landlopers.com/2014/04/13/orlando-towers> towers in Soweto used to work 
as a coal-burning plant for electricity that supplied the northern suburbs of 
Johannesburg, while local residents remained without electricity. The only 
“benefit” to the Sowetans was the polluted air. After years of neglect, they 
have been transformed into an entertainment area – bungee jumping and a 
restaurant – and they also serve as giant billboards, one specifically with 
artistic murals encompassing the lifestyle in Soweto and its people.
Ebony Walden

Boutique hostel with fascinating history
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10074528e8972f478c874f589b86deb2cec27f12%2F0_110_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers'%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers%27%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10074528e8972f478c874f589b86deb2cec27f12%2F0_110_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Pack and pedal … Curiocity Backpackers hostel 
Curiocity Backpackers <http://www.curiocitybackpackers.com/> is an incredible 
boutique hostel in Maboneng. It used to be the premises of Pacific Press, which 
published a rebel publication, Black Sash, during the apartheid era. It’s 
rumoured that Nelson Mandela and Desmond Tutu sought refuge in the building on 
a number of occasions so, as you can imagine, it has an amazing atmosphere. 
It’s operated by a young, talented photographer calledBheki Dube 
<http://www.inyourpocket.com/johannesburg/15-Minutes-with-Bheki-Dube_73894f> 
and his influence is everywhere – the hostel decor is fantastic – think 
industrial-chic warehouse apartment with lots of quirky touches. The hostel 
organises regular events including walking tours, bike excursions and community 
volunteering projects to encourage guests to get under the skin of this city.
lucymellor100

A bookshop in which to lose yourself

The Collectors’ Treasury 
<http://www.antiqbook.com/bookdealer.phtml?o=collectorstreasury>, at 244 
Commissioner Street, in the weather-beaten central business district (CBD), is 
a secondhand bookstore spread across several floors and comprised of many 
thousands of books you’d have difficulty finding anywhere else on this 
continent. You truly can lose yourself in this haven of books. At first blush, 
utterly chaotic, the collection of book are actually carefully curated, with 
most topics edging happily into esoteria.
JeanetteSerdyn

Indie bliss and urban regen at 44 Stanley
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c7cefbfbdecdf492b23648fa54c50dd18cc5c01%2F0_0_1417_850%2F1417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers'%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers%27%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c7cefbfbdecdf492b23648fa54c50dd18cc5c01%2F0_0_1417_850%2F1417.jpg>
My advice is to embrace the urban regen spots that sit around Braamfontein on 
the edge of the city centre – the guidebooks can talk about Constitution Hill 
and the rest but after you’ve done that, head to44 Stanley 
<http://www.44stanley.co.za/beeryard.html> for a beer or a bite to eat. This 
buzzy complex with art studios and the like exudes indie character and I 
enjoyed a drink in the olive tree’d garden and a glass of pinotage in one of 
the great little restaurants inside this urban oasis. Urban regen in Jozi 
should be supported, so get out of the northern suburbs and into town if you 
can.
nickjhilton

Soweto cycle tour

A cycle tour round Soweto <http://sowetobicycletours.com/> was a “fun” way to 
hear of that part of the apartheid history and see the people there, without 
feeling intrusive or like it is “poverty tourism” – it’s not, people want you 
to visit. Guided from a little backpackers’ hostel in the heart of the town, 
you cover all areas, from the poorest “suburb” of Soweto up to Mandela’s house, 
and Tutu’s. Eat local food and listen to local musicians in the shebeens. Even 
better is the bar crawl with local historians, who take you right in to town to 
dance and eat and chat with the locals until the early hours.
Charlotte Elizabeth Bradford

Where football stars are born: Diepkloof, Soweto
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff3e750378e121c2860f283661148a3a222f797b%2F0_29_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers'%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers%27%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff3e750378e121c2860f283661148a3a222f797b%2F0_29_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 A football pitch at Diepkloof. Photograph: Matla Seetelo 
Diepkloof in Soweto has consistently produced world-class soccer players, from 
Kaizer Chief and national team star Jimmy Tau to Lucas Radebe, who played for 
Leeds United during the late 1990s. This is the – very dusty – field that most 
have had to go for their dreams. It is next to a school andkota (street food 
sellers) hang out just across the road. The atmosphere is epic and, if you want 
to explore and enjoy the township football atmosphere, make your way to DK.
Matla Seetelo

Joburg Red Bus
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4b5c8d0ed2c32f2b7022c3c1a65ee895715140%2F0_0_833_500%2F833.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers'%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers%27%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4b5c8d0ed2c32f2b7022c3c1a65ee895715140%2F0_0_833_500%2F833.jpg>
The red sightseeing bus <https://www.citysightseeing.co.za/johannesburg> is a 
good way to get around Johannesburg. What you should do, though, is see which 
other places you want to visit that are within 5km of the stops, to make the 
most of the ride as a form of transport – because the city doesn’t have proper 
public transportation. Apart from that, make sure you stop at the Apartheid 
Museum, andNeighbourgoods Market 
<http://www.neighbourgoodsmarket.co.za/johannesburg> (great food, and cheap).
nafisaakabor

Johannesburg Apartheid Museum (Jam)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feffd00dc590a39a6dd8ac796811b0ac9b994fdc3%2F0_345_5097_3059%2F5097.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers'%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers%27%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feffd00dc590a39a6dd8ac796811b0ac9b994fdc3%2F0_345_5097_3059%2F5097.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
I love museums and am yet to find a better curated museum than the Jam 
<http://www.apartheidmuseum.org/>. Visitors begin their navigation by being 
allocated a race card and this determines your experience in the first part of 
the exhibition. The museum then goes chronologically through the history of 
South Africa, starting with our ancient cave dwelling ancestors, culminating in 
the democratic republic. It is a superb museum dealing with the issue of 
apartheid in a sensitive yet educational way. There is a life-size solitary 
cell that you can enter. I often time myself but rarely last longer than a 
minute. You can also enter a riot van to see the brutality of the apartheid 
police. The latter parts are triumphant and celebrate the ending of this awful 
regime. I often take friends to Soweto afterwards to visitNelson Mandela’s old 
house <http://www.mandelahouse.co.za/>, or to wander the streets. Discussions 
turn to politics but also to the music filling the streets and where to eat 
authenticpap or ngqush.
shupiwe

An injera worth supporting


Little Addis Cafe <http://littleaddiscafe.wix.com/kassalittleaddiscafe> in the 
Maboneng Precinct is a delightful little hole-in the-wall, which serves a tasty
injera-with-all-the-extras for a pittance. Service is brisk and low-key. The 
passing parade provides a colourful tableau vivant as you savour the range of 
subtle flavours, and discolour your fingers.
JeanetteSerdyn

Cube Tasting Kitchen, Parktown North
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02697f56cb8cf18938d868a92473de68a14be4e9%2F732_453_1140_684%2F1140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers'%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sights%20to%20see%20in%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa%3A%20readers%27%20travel%20tips&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fjohannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02697f56cb8cf18938d868a92473de68a14be4e9%2F732_453_1140_684%2F1140.jpg>
For a great dining experience comprising 10 courses (using fresh sustainable 
produce) paired with a drink, you have to tryCube Tasting Kitchen 
<http://www.cubekitchen.co.za/> in Parktown North. It only seats 30 people and 
it’s in demand, so you have to book in advance. A nice touch is that the chef 
explains each dish to you. You need to set aside three hours for this 
extraordinary experience.
nafisaakabor

Newtown: site of activists past and present

Activism, like social and economic turbulence, is not at all a thing of South 
Africa’s past. Regularly I’m distracted from my work by the unmistakable sounds 
of an approaching demonstration. Luthuli House (the ANC headquarters), Beyers 
Naudé Square, theChamber of Mines <http://www.chamberofmines.org.za/> or any of 
the provincial government buildings in the area are popular destinations for 
demonstrations: I’ve seen groups of 25 people, as well as a march by 50,000. 
With its street vendors and little shops trading shoes and spices mixed with 
bank employees and lawyers on their way to the Magistrate Court, the area 
already lends itself to engagement with people from all walks of South African 
life.
Josine Overdevest









 