
So, it's farewell Ghana as the group stages end and Paul Doyle takes over from 
me as GU's man on the ground. All good things must come to an end, and Ghana 
2008 for me has been very, very good. Football-wise this is the best Cup of 
Nations yet. For atmosphere, too, it is fantastic - and it will only get better 
in the build-up to Ghana v Nigeria on Sunday.

My last full day was another long one, starting at 7am with a visit to a 
football academy and a look at a 10-year-old who seems destined for great 
things. Then it was off to the only privately owned African conservation centre 
south of the Sahara and a meeting with Edward Yeboah-Danso, one of the world's 
top green campaigners, who is regarded locally as 'that madman who plants 
trees'. Next stop wasIvory Coast v Mali 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zvnz72Edj6Q> in Accra, and another imperious 
performance by the Elephants, who look capable of trampling everyone in their 
path. And to round it off a group of British journalists attended a reception 
in their honour that was stunningly swanky and, to be frank, far too good for 
the likes of us.

Several of the country's top industrialists and telecommunications executives 
were there, along with VIPs from the US and American embassies, local political 
leaders, PR chiefs, newspaper men, architects, the head of Ghana's and 
Cameroon's Olympic committees, and many many more. The Campari was flowing, for 
the second time this week, and that made it easier when I had to give a little 
speech. The only thing I complained about was the music, which compared to Mali 
2002 (the best tournament by far on that front) was very poor. Apparently there 
was an attempt to bring Salif Keita in for a pre-tournament concert. Pity it 
failed.

I don't think Mr Yeboah-Danso of the Ahyiresu Naturalist Centre would have 
warmed to everyone at the evening get-together. He feels very strongly about 
deforestation, pineapple farming (which kills indigenous plants), the 
widespread use of weedkiller, the burning of undergrowth, and many more 
practices that have endangered so much of Ghana's plant life. He has spent 30 
years working on preserving indigenous plants - some 2,000 of them - on his 
50-acre site, where he treated us to a fresh coconut and fresh oranges. Lovely 
place, made a nice change from the football.

The 10-year-old in question, Arme Yaw, played in an Under-11s game last week 
put on for a visiting British scout, Colin Harvey, who is in Ghana for Bolton 
Wanderers. "He said it was the best youth team game he'd seen in eight years," 
said Tom Vernon, the man who runs theRight to Dream academy 
<http://righttodream.com/>, near Aburi, where the game was played. I dread to 
think what the score would be if they played in my son's Under-11s league in 
Brighton. The boys looked awesome.

They are not just there to play football, though. They have to complete a 
formal education, and the aim is to get them a place in university or a 
football club, or anything that gives them 'a positive opportunity to improve 
their life'.

Two of the latest graduates signed for Fulham, and three for the University of 
the West of England in Gloucester. If only there had been such a place for 
football and school when Nii Odartey Lamptey was a teenager - it might have 
saved him from his life of hell (you can read all about it in this Sunday's 
Observer).

The Fulham boys, aged 18 and 19, are playing for Beerschot in Belgium awaiting 
work permits. Apparently one of them, called simply King, is very useful. And 
he is so grateful to Vernon's academy that he sends back Â€400 a month, to 
sponsor young Arme Yaw. Good for him.

And good luck to the Elephants.
 