Thrill rating 8/10 
Danger rating 9/10

Fitness rating 10/10

In a nutshell ...

Most skiers rarely, if ever, see the "real" mountains - where gentle winds 
sough across open snowfields glistening in the sunlight, the drip of melting 
snow can be heard on a distant crag, and your voice carries for miles. But for 
ski tourers this is all part of a normal day in the hills. Forget ski-lifts and 
their attendant queues, busy mountain restaurants and groomed pistes - ski 
touring is about hitting the hills under your own steam, enjoying the high 
country in all its natural glory, and earning your turns through (ideally) 
pristine, untracked powder fields.

What's the buzz

To be travelling on skis through the mountains, miles from civilisation, is a 
buzz in itself. And then there's the camaraderie that develops from being out 
in the wild, self-sufficient, with just a few friends. And did I mention those 
huge, long powder runs all to yourself?

Thrill a minute?

You probably won't be thinking of thrills as you slog uphill for what seems 
like forever, but when you finally reach your high point, you can enjoy a 
magnificent mountain panorama before hooning downhill and exalting in every 
thrilling metre of the untracked descent.

Adrenaline peak

This comes when floating through glittering powder on one of the descents, 
surrounded by magnificent crags and summits - and all of it yours to savour 
while hoi polloi in the resorts bounce off one another in the lift queues.

Where to do it

The snowbound peaks of the Cairngorms offer plenty of ski touring options, 
with Glenmore Lodge near Aviemore being a good place to take a course. And if 
you can deal with the frequently changing conditions of the Scottish mountains, 
you'll probably cope more than adequately with the Alps and other, higher 
mountains.

Who can do it?

For the introductory course at Glenmore Lodge, it's recommended you have "a 
good level of hill and ski fitness" along with "a minimum of two weeks' 
downhill skiing, with the ability to descend red runs in control."

Essentially, you need to be able to cope with a wide variety of snow 
conditions and to handle long climbs on your skis (this is done with "skins" 
which attach to the base of the skis and grip against the snow, and bindings 
which release at the back so you can lift your heel). You should also be able 
to navigate in the mountains and have a good understanding of potential terrain 
and avalanche hazards; hence the need to take a course and employ a local guide.

What to take

You'll need to carry in your pack absolutely everything you might require, 
including spare clothes, avalanche transceiver, probe and shovel, food, bivvy 
bag etc.

Typical prices

A five-day introductory course at Glenmore Lodge costs Â£415, with equipment 
provided.

Impress your pals

Once you've got some experience under your belt, consider taking on the 
classic ski tour of the Alps - the famous Haute Route.

YouTube searchwords 'snow, scotland, snowboarding'

Good links

eagleskiclub.org.uk <http://www.eagleskiclub.org.uk> (the UK's largest ski 
touring club)

glenmorelodge.org.uk <http://www.glenmorelodge.org.uk> (Scottish National 
Outdoor Training Centre)
 