
What’s the big news this season? 


Sam Haddad, editor of coolermag.com <http://cooler.mpora.com/>
As someone who always panics that I’ll have picked a resort with the worst 
conditions in the region, I’m excited about the Nomads powder bus 
<http://www.letsbenomads.com/sector-two-bern/>, an old American school bus 
converted into a powder-chasing hostel on wheels, with beds from €50 a night. 
It’ll be based in Berne, Switzerland, for January and February, and Chambéry in 
the French Alps for March and April.

Mark von Roy, editor-in-chief, Downdays <http://freeski.downdays.eu/>
At the Nine Knights <http://nineknightsski.com/> event in Livigno, Italy (4-11 
April), you can watch the best freeskiers performing crazy tricks on an immense 
snow castle. It’s also a time for crazy parties and catching some spring powder 
if the clouds align. Livigno is a tax-free zone on the border with Switzerland, 
in a valley accessed by a single-lane tunnel. It offers great all-mountain 
skiing, from groomers, to freeride lines, to park skiing and lively après ski.

Sam McMahon, online editor, Whitelines magazine 
<http://whitelines.com/author/sammcmahon>
For the first time, the Freeride World Tour 
<http://www.freerideworldtour.com/news-detail/items/announcement-of-the-full-calendar-2015.html>
 will be heading to the dream destination:Alaska. With some of the best riders 
on the steepest ridable faces in the world, it’ll be the event to watch online 
this season. Closer to home, the finals of the FWT take place on the Bec des 
Rosses in Verbier in March. The gnarliest terrain on the tour will meet the 
world’s top skiers and boarders, but you’ll be able to view it live from the 
Mont Fort piste on the other side of the valley in relative comfort.

Nicola Iseard, editor, Fall Line <http://www.fall-line.co.uk/>
There is a lot going on in Utah. Its 15th resort, Cherry Peak 
<http://www.skicpr.com/> is open for this season. It’s in the foothills of 
Richmond near Logan, and while on the small side (only three lifts), the tree 
skiing looks to be epic, given Utah’s mega annual snowfall.

John Stifter, editor, Powder <http://www.powder.com/>
Completion of the $133m Helbronner tram on the Italian side of Mont Blanc in 
spring 2015 could really put that area on the map. Until now, it has been off 
the radar of most skiers because the terrain is so wild and the 
easily-accessible, manicured slopes of Courmayeur are right across the street.

Thomaz Autran Garcia, editor-in-chief,  Method magazine 
<http://www.methodmag.com/magazines>
The Air & Style snowboarding contest series (now under the auspices of 
two-time Olympic gold medalist Shaun White), stops inInnsbruck on 16-17 January 
and it would be an awesome weekend jaunt (there are daily easyJet flights). You 
could check out the event at the legendary Bergisel Stadium – which includes 
the world’s best snowboarders as well as live concerts – and also get in some 
quality riding. Families with kids from six to 14 get in for free for the first 
time this year.

Jens Heig, online editor, Snowboard Magazine <http://snowboardmag.com/>
The two biggest developments that have happened in snowboarding this year are 
the acquisitions ofPark City Mountain Resort 
<http://www.parkcitymountain.com/site/index.html>, Utah, by Vail Resorts, as 
well as theMammoth Mountain Ski Area <http://www.mammothmountain.com/> 
purchasingBear Mountain and Snow Summit resorts 
<http://www.bigbearmountainresorts.com/index_winter.php> in California. There 
was a tremendous controversy surrounding PCMR and Vail due to a lease dispute 
and it remains to be seen how the development of the two resorts together will 
affect the Park City area as a whole. We’re confident that the moves at Mammoth 
are going to benefit snowboarders with the creation of theMammoth Mountain 
Cali4nia pass <http://www.cali4niapass.com/>, giving riders the opportunity to 
snowboard at Bear Mountain and Snow Summit using one lift pass.

Which is the ski destination for 2014/15?
 South Korea scores points for originality and will host the 2018 Winter 
Olympics 
South Korea scores points for originality. Ski Safari 
<http://www.skisafari.com/Ski-South-Korea-Ski-Asia-Safari-Safari-Details.aspx> 
has a two-week package to the resort ofYongpyong 
<http://www.yongpyong.co.kr/eng/ski/overview.asp>, which will host the 2018 
Winter Olympics, combined with a few days’ skiing in Niseko, Japan, from 
£1,970pp including flights. Early signs sayCalifornia may be set for a long 
overdue good winter. Lake Tahoe in the Sierra Nevada has been a bit rubbish for 
places to stay but the newBase Camp Hotel <http://www.basecamphotels.com/> 
could change that: it looks awesome without being super expensive (eight-bed 
dorm for $199 a night).SH

The Dolomites: they had great snow last year and it’s an area that has 
interesting mountains and terrain – chutes, couloirs and easily accessible 
backcountry that’s not so typical of the Alps. It’s mellow and not particularly 
steep, but it’s fun terrain.MVR

Japan, always. No argument. Bottomless powder, amazing culture and some of the 
friendliest people you’ll ever meet – it’s snowboarding’s mecca. Niseko is a 
great place base, but do make some day trips to some of the micro resorts, and 
nearby Rusutsu.SM

Ischgl <http://www.ischgl.com/en> in Austria is gearing up for an exciting 
winter. The resort’s €40m investment is starting with the replacement of the 
24-year-old four-seater Pardatschgratbahn gondola with a plush 28-seater 
tri-cable system. Whisking skiers and boarders from the village to the top 
station in just over nine minutes, it will have the biggest height difference 
of any gondola of this kind. Last season saw the opening of the eagerly awaited 
Piz Val Gronda cable car, which opened up 100 hectares of powder fields 
originally only accessed by ski tourers and those towed up by snow cat. Bring 
fat skis.NI

I’d say Revelstoke in British Columbia, which is about three hours from 
Calgary. It has the longest lift-served vertical in North America, gets over 
400 inches of snowfall a year, and offers great steep, powder skiing. It’s 
almost a sure bet that it will snow while you’re there. And the local scene is 
great fun, with great beers and pizza atThe Village Idiot bar and grill 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Village-Idiot/255679352600?rf=161202267247547>
 in Revelstoke.JS

The best resort for a snowboarder in Europe is Laax, in Switzerland. There is 
a very healthy scene, and it’s refreshing to go to a resort that treats 
snowboarders with respect. They invest a lot of time and money on shaping the 
best, most progressive freestyle terrains, and they are constantly changing the 
features in their many parks throughout the season. It is also the home of the 
best superpipe in the Alps.TAG

There are several areas I’m really excited about. Southern Colorado, which 
includes:Durango Mountain Resort <http://www.durangomountainresort.com/>, 
Silverton Mountain <https://www.silvertonmountain.com/page/home>, and Wolf Creek
 <http://www.wolfcreekski.com/> are hidden stashes of incredible terrain. What 
makes this area great is how it can easily receive 400 inches of snow a year. 
And is vast expanse of ridable terrain and huge amounts of snow makeWhistler 
Blackcomb <http://www.whistlerblackcomb.com/> one of the top resort 
destinations in the world. If you’re looking for a resort experience, Whistler 
is definitely a phenomenal choice.JH

What is the must-have piece of kit?
 Get your kit on … Armada Ripton pullover; Dragon X2 snow goggles; Haglofs’ 
Vassi suit 
GoPro has launched an entry-level sports action video camera, the Hero 
<http://shop.gopro.com/EMEA/cameras/hero/CHDHA-301.html>, for £99, so I expect 
to see plenty of those around, but in New Zealand’s winter it was all about
drone camera photography 
<http://media.newzealand.com/en/news/move-over-selfies-%E2%80%93-new-zealand-launches-dronies/>
 – and they will surely be buzzing around the Alps for our winter. More of a 
service than a piece of kit,Finnish Lapland is offering a free, locals-on-call 
service <http://www.onlyinlapland.com/meetthelocals/>, where you can contact 
locals – via text, Instagram, Twitter, email or Facebook – about the conditions 
that day.SH

Armada <http://armadaskis.com/products/outerwear/mens/> is the most 
progressive brand in the industry at the moment. They have always been on the 
cutting edge of design, whether in ski shapes or outerwear and mid layers. The 
Armada Ripton Pullover jacket for men (£260) is my favourite soft item this 
season. It combines functionality with progressive style and colours.MVR

Dragon <http://europe.dragonalliance.com/> has updated its X2 goggle (from 
€290) and given it the easiest interchangeable lens system going – you can even 
swap them wearing mittens. But the best news is that designers are finally 
realising that people want outerwear that looks goodand performs well: look out 
forsweet-looking jackets and pants from Airblaster 
<http://www.myairblaster.com/collections/womens-jackets>, Volcom 
<http://www.volcom.co.uk/snow-shop/snow-shop-women/snow-shop-women-jackets.html>
 andBurton <http://gb.burton.com/default/womens-jackets> that all feature 
Gore-Tex, to keep you as warm and dry as you’ll ever be.SM

Think all-in-ones scream 1980s? Think again. This season, Haglofs’ Vassi Suits 
<http://www.haglofs.com/en-US/products/clothing/activities/ski/women/vassi_q_suit_en-us.aspx>
are the gear to be seen in. Waterproof and breathable Gore-Tex, with bright 
colours and a bold design, they promise to turn heads (even if your technique 
doesn’t). They do retail at around £1,000, though!NI

Völkl Mantra <http://www.volkl.com/skis/freeski/all-mountain/mantra.html> skis 
(£450) for inbounds speed, Faction Candide 3.0 (£570) for off-piste fun, and
Dynafit Beast bindings (from £465) for touring and aggressive fall-line 
charging versatility.JS

Snowboards with creative shapes are everywhere this year. Think blunt or 
pointy tips, spoon noses, pin tails, essentially anything that doesn’t look 
like your typical tongue depressor-shaped snowboard. Also,asymmetrical sidecuts 
<http://whitelines.com/snowboard-gear/buying-guides/asymmetric-sidecuts-explained.html>
 seem to be on the up – it’s an old-school technology that creates a shorter 
radius on the rider’s heel edge, making for easier turning and more freestyle 
control.TAG

There has been a resurgence in snowboard shape exploration in the past couple 
of seasons, such as the Flow Darwin, RIDE Alter-Ego, Nitro Quiver Pow and 
Salomon Derby; boards that offer a different riding experience than your 
traditional twin-tip or directional board. For your feet, the brand newadidas 
Energy BOOST is going to be one of the most comfortable and responsive boots on 
the market, with midsole foam that allows for high-performance energy transfer 
between you and your board.JH

And the top party destination? 
 Snowbombing festival, Mayrhofen, Austria 
The new hostel with a nightclub in the base from Rude Chalets 
<http://www.rudechalets.com/winter-holidays/morzine/the-rude-lodge/> in Morzine 
is sure to go off this winter, especially as beds start at just £28 a night.SH

The Frostgun invitational <https://www.facebook.com/frostgun> (10-12 Feb 2015) 
inVal d’Isère is always a gigantic party. It’s organised by Danish people and 
there are thousands of Danes there – and they know how to party.MVR

The Snowboxx <http://snowboxx.com/#/index> festival (21-28 March) is moving 
from Andorra toAlpe d’Huez, in the French Alps, offering cheap-as-chips 
partying and riding (£339pp for a week, including accommodation, lift pass, 
festival pass and flights). Mountain festivals are great – there’s no better 
cure for a hangover than a face full of snow!SM

La Folie Douce <https://www.facebook.com/lafoliedouce.stgervais.megeve> is 
opening its fifth bar on 20 December, inMegeve, France. It’s not your typical 
party town, but that could all change once this cooler-than-cool après-ski bar 
opens its doors at the top of Mont Joux. Expect lots of dancing on tables in 
ski boots.NI

Jackson Hole is pretty trendy these days, although the original culture has 
changed quite a bit. Aspen, Whistler, and Telluride all remain hot spots for 
après adventuring. In Whistler, just go to theLonghorn Saloon 
<http://www.gibbonshospitality.com/longhorn/> at the base of the Blackcomb 
Gondola, and you’ll find everything you need to know. For food, hit up Sushi 
Village for a unique take on sushi, with a fun atmosphere. Order a strawberry 
margarita and commence the party.JS

Snowbombing <http://www.snowbombing.com/> in Mayrhofen, Austria (6-11 April), 
always has some pretty big acts – including Basement Jaxx and Rudimental this 
year. It’s at the tail end of the season so there’s plenty of sunshine and 
balmy temps. As for trendy spots for a tipple, I’d say the bars at theRider’s 
Palace <http://www.riderspalace.ch/home.html> and Indy Club 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/INDY-Club-LAAX/180565125303065> in Laax and the 
Arena <http://www.arenaflims.com/en/nightlife/club> in Flims. TAG

Whistler Blackcomb is always a solid choice if you’re looking for a party. 
Great energy and tons of bars:El Furniture Warehouse <http://warehousewhis.ca/>
, andMoe Joe’s Nightclub <http://moejoes.com/> are filled with snowboarders 
ready to get loose after a day of riding.JH

Who should we be following?
 Snow photographer Matt Georges <http://instagram.com/matt_georges> 
On Instagram I follow UK pro snowboarder Aimee Fuller 
<http://instagram.com/aimee_fuller>, plus the US boarders Marie-FranceRoy 
<http://instagram.com/MarieFranceRoy>, Leanne Pelosi 
<http://instagram.com/leannepelosi> and the amazing snow photographer Matt 
Georges <http://instagram.com/matt_georges>. They infuse their pics with a 
sense of awe and adventure. I also followJenny Jones 
<https://twitter.com/jennyjonessnow> on Twitter to keep up with the Olympic 
medallist’s travels and contest news; she has anew show about extreme sport on 
BBC Radio 5 live 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2014/jenny-jones-5live>. SH

Check out Instagramers @alothebigone <http://instagram.com/alothebigone>, 
Jeremy Bernard <http://www.oninstagram.com/profile/hellojeremyphoto>, Daniel 
Ronnback <http://instagram.com/danielronnback> and Florian Breitenberger 
<http://instagram.com/florianbreitenberger>. And don’t miss The Bunch on Vimeo 
<http://vimeo.com/thebunch>: this young Swedish crew has some ridiculously 
creative videos on their stream. AndJulien Régnier  
<http://instagram.com/julienregnier>is one of the original freeskiers and gets 
up to all sorts of adventures.MVR

British Olympian Jamie Nicholls  <http://instagram.com/jamienichollsuk>is 
getting better each year so check him out on Instagram. And I’m also excited to 
see what Japanese rider Kazuhiro Kokubo  <http://instagram.com/kazukokubo>has 
been cooking up!SM

Check out Freeski.downdays.eu <http://freeski.downdays.eu/> for ski news and 
inspirational videos. We’re excited to see what this winter holds for Sweden’s
Lotten Rapp <http://instagram.com/lottenrapp>. The 29-year-old came first in 
the Freeride World qualifiers so is entering the Freeride World Tour main draw 
for the first time. If her fearless cliff-hucking is anything to go by, we’re 
in for quite a spectacle.NI

Go to Powder’s Instagram account <http://instagram.com/powdermagazine> and 
follow photographersGarrett Grove, Adam Clark, Bruno Long, and skier Candide 
Thove. JS

I am a huge fan of Scott Stevens <http://vimeo.com/82640790>’ boarding – it’s 
just so creative and unique.Jed Anderson <http://vimeo.com/tag:jed+anderson> 
has a very skate-oriented style and an effortless grace about him.TAG

Liam Gallagher <http://instagram.com/liamogallagher> is a photographer and 
filmmaker in the Pacific Northwest chasing powder with great people;Cyril Müller
 <http://www.cyrilphoto.com/> produces some of the most stunning snowboarding 
imagery out of Switzerland; andRip Zinger <http://instagram.com/ripzinger> is a 
Japanese photographer who is always on the move and will never cease to make 
you smile.JH

Who is the coolest instructor?
 Elooa runs snowboarding camps throughout the Alps 
Tammy Esten from Mint Snowboarding 
<http://www.mintsnowboarding.com/en/snowboard-school-in-morzine,-avoriaz-les-gets/about-mint/tammy-esten.aspx>
 is one of very few snowboard coaches allowed to operate in France. She’s very 
funny and patient, and brilliant at both freeride and freestyle. She’s also 
leading the way in kids’ snowboard teaching in Europe.SH

In Kitzsteinhorn <http://www.kitzsteinhorn.at/en/freeride-xxl/freeride-monday>
, Austria, they have a cool thing calledFreeride Mondays  
<http://www.kitzsteinhorn.at/en/freeride-xxl/freeride-monday>where locals who 
know their way around will take you out and show you all the good spots 
(€85pp). It runs every Monday from 24 Nov.MVR

Easy! British freeriding hero James Stentiford 
<http://www.stentifordsnowboarding.co.uk> (full day from £400 for five people) 
is going into his second season, offering splitboarding and backcountry 
freestyle courses in Chamonix. If he’s good enough for BBC presenter Ed Leigh, 
he’s good enough for the rest of us.SM

Backcountry guru Martin Chester <http://martinchester.co.uk/> is a qualified 
guide who has made it his life’s ambition to find the best untouched powder on 
Earth, a mission that has taken him from British Columbia to the Himalayas. All 
trips are bespoke and not cheap; a six-day hut tour with Martin would cost 
about £1,500pp, excluding flights.NI

Joe Schwartz at Selkirk Wilderness Skiing 
<http://www.selkirkwilderness.com/about_us/our_people/joe> and pretty much any 
guide atRetallack <http://www.retallack.com/> in British Columbia. JS

There is a really cool company called elooa <http://www.elooa.com/> that runs 
camps throughout the Alps. It’s very professionally run and all the coaches are 
professional snowboarders. They have all sorts of different camps, from 
freestyle to freeriding, even splitboarding. As for a guide, my absolute 
favourite isHubertus Klimmer <https://www.facebook.com/hubertus.klimmer>, in St 
Anton, Austria. He is a real character, a true mountain man and very funny. He 
can be reached throughArlberg Guides 
<http://www.outdoor-adventures.at/team.html>. TAG

If you want a truly unique snowboarding experience go to Baldface Lodge in 
Nelson, British Columbia, for world class heli and cat-boarding, it will change 
your life.JH
 