
Before and after the second world war, the White Hare Ski Club organised for 
hundreds of Britons to travel by train to a small village in the Ursern Valley, 
two hours south of Zurich, to learn to ski. Among them, in 1958, was my then 
19-year-old mum.

Andermatt was great value. The club magazine for that year, which mum still 
has, carries an advert for theHotel Badus <http://www.hotelbadus.ch/home/> 
(still going strong today) which offered full board from 16 Swiss francs a day, 
then just over £1.

The mountains around Andermatt were said by locals to be riddled with tunnels 
used to store the nation’s gold, although the only thing Mum brought home from 
Switzerland was Dad.

British visitors kept going until the 1980s, when ski resorts elsewhere added 
new lifts and small, cheap holiday apartments. Andermatt didn’t follow suit, 
and the Brits were replaced by adventurous Dutch and Scandinavian skiers, who 
still come for the knee-deep powder, free-riding and the legendary off-piste 
couloirs on the 2,961-metre Gemsstock mountain.

Until recently there had been little development of the village or local 
infrastructure, but a CHF1.8bn (£1.2bn) investment in the resort by Egyptian 
billionaire Samih Sawiris is under way. The SkiArena Andermatt-Sedrun project 
will see six new lifts linking Andermatt with the high plateau at Oberalp and 
the Sedrun ski area by the 2017/18 season, creating the largest ski area in 
central Switzerland.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fandermatt-skiing-switzerland-alps-sedrun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415290609001%2F6a631222-0dda-400c-9fdb-0f240c729686-1020x641.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Skiing%20in%20Andermatt%3A%20changes%20afoot%20to%20a%20resort%20with%20awesome%20off-piste&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fandermatt-skiing-switzerland-alps-sedrun%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Skiing%20in%20Andermatt%3A%20changes%20afoot%20to%20a%20resort%20with%20awesome%20off-piste&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Fandermatt-skiing-switzerland-alps-sedrun%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415290609001%2F6a631222-0dda-400c-9fdb-0f240c729686-1020x641.jpeg>
 The five-star Chedi Hotel, Andermatt 
Last winter, the resort’s first luxury hotel opened in the oak and granite 
form of theChedi <http://www.thechedi-andermatt.com/>. And as part of the lift 
project, six hotels, a pool, 490 apartments and 25 chalets will be built.

I prefer the old Andermatt. The Aurora hotel <http://www.aurora-andermatt.ch/>
, across the road from the Gemsstock cable car, is warm and cosy. Its sauna and 
homely restaurant – full, on my trip, of rugged Swedes planning off-piste 
adventures – makes it a winner.

For me, a large part of Andermatt’s appeal is that to access some of the best 
runs you hop on a little red train. Some find this a pain but I think it gives 
the resort a unique identity, chugging steeply through three tunnels towards 
ski lifts at Nätschen (10 minutes) and on for a further five minutes, spraying 
snow, to Oberalp. In the opposite direction, you could alight along the valley 
at Realp, where the Swiss team trained for the Sochi Olympics, if cross-country 
skiing is your thing.
 Skiers near the summit of the 2.961-metre Gemsstock mountain, which overlooks 
Andermatt. Photograph: Martin Ruetschi/Keystone/Corbis 
Here the language changes from Swiss German to Romansh and ski tourers can 
hire a guide, put on their skins and head in glorious solitude towards the 
hamlet of Tschamut, while the rest, me included, can zig zag down red runs via 
Calmut, Val-Val, Cuolm Val, Milez and Mulinatsch to Sedrun, before taking the 
train back, which is included in the local lift pass.

To prepare my ski legs I took the open, red Sonnenpiste run to the mid station 
at Gurschen, politely turning down the Swedes’ invitation to join them on the 
challenging Guspis off-piste route towards the neighbouring village of 
Hospental, for lunch in the Gasthaus St Gotthard. In all, Andermatt is better 
for intermediates and off-pisters than beginners, but the new lifts will really 
open things up.
 A cable car takes visitors up Gemsstock. Much of the area’s ski 
infrastructure is set to be upgraded as part of the SkiArena Andermatt-Sedrun 
project. Photograph: Alamy 
There’s little in the way of après ski, but I joined the Swedes for a drink in 
the fun Spycher bar, and you can enjoy traditional Swiss dishes such as
Älpermagronen (a belt-busting mix of pasta, potatoes, cheese, cream, butter and 
onions) at theDrei Könige <http://www.3koenige.ch/home.html>, Toutoune 
<https://www.facebook.com/RestuantToutoune> or Sonne 
<http://www.hotelsonneandermatt.ch/> – a local told me its menu hadn’t changed 
in 20 years.

For the time being, Andermatt remains somewhat hushed and staid. It’s more 
functional than chocolate-box pretty – although a good dump of snow does 
wonders on that front, and along Gotthardstrasse there are some handsome 
buildings including the traditional Sonne Hotel and the old coaching inn, the 
Drei Könige und Post. Those in the know accept Andermatt for what it is – a 
base for awesome skiing. But those hardy off-pisters will soon find themselves 
sharing it.

Way to go

The trip was provided by Swiss Tourism (myswitzerland.com 
<http://www.myswitzerland.com/en-gb/home.html>). Hotel Aurora (+41 41 887 1661, 
aurora-andermatt.ch <http://www.aurora-andermatt.ch/>) has B&B doubles from 
£130 and is near the Gemsstock cable car. Swiss (0845 601 0956,swiss.com 
<http://www.swiss.com/gb/en>) flies to Zurich from Heathrow and Manchester from 
£146 return. Swiss Railways (sbb.ch <http://www.sbb.ch/en/home.html>) runs an 
hourly service from Zurich Airport to Andermatt (change twice; 2.5 hours total) 
from £75 return. More information fromandermatt.ch 
<http://www.andermatt.ch/en/index.cfm>
 