
A definitive comic novel about the human experience of Caribbean immigration 
to Britain was named the finest Orange prize winner of the past 10 years last 
night.

Andrea Levy's Small Island emerged as the "Orange of Oranges" - a riposte by 
the women-only award to the Man Booker prize's "Booker of Bookers" won by 
Salman Rushdie's Midnight's Children.

The pomp and ceremony with which the honour was conferred on Levy in front of 
an audience of hundreds at a theatre in London's West End last night was an 
additional riposte to the late Auberon Waugh's forecast, when the Orange was 
founded in 1995, that it would turn out to be a lemon.

Pippa Dunn, a director of the prize's sponsor, described the event as a 
milestone. "Ten years ago the prize shook up the literary world when we 
launched one of the most controversial literary prizes. Today, it is recognised 
as one of the UK's most powerful and prestigious awards."

Levy, 48, was born in London to Jamaican parents. Her three previous books - 
Every Light in the House Burnin', Never Far from Nowhere and Fruit of the Lemon 
- explore problems faced by black British-born children of immigrants.

Small Island, which has sold 466,000 copies in the UK, is set in 1948 and 
draws poised comedy from the misunderstandings and illusions, sometimes shading 
into prejudice, of the small pre-Windrush postwar generation of immigrants and 
the curious natives they settled among.

Its heroine is Hortense Joseph, fresh off a boat from Jamaica to join her 
husband, Joseph, who came over earlier to serve in the RAF. Among her earliest 
discoveries is that war-battered London is not the glamorous imperial capital 
of her school textbooks; instead it tends to be mean, shabby and rather less 
well-off than her homeland.

The novel has already been garlanded with honours, having won the Â£50,000 
Whitbread book of the year award and this year's Commonwealth Writers prize.

Rodney Troubridge, Waterstone's fiction buyer, said the award was a great 
honour. "With yet another accolade to add to her mantelpiece,Andrea Levy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy> is without a doubt one of the 
biggest literary success stories for a number of years ... I am envious of 
those still to read and enjoy this book and extremely proud of Andrea's 
achievement."

The other nine Orange winners are: 1996, A Spell of Winter by Helen Dunmore; 
1997, Fugitive Pieces by Anne Michaels; 1998, Larry's Party by Carol Shields; 
1999, A Crime in the Neighborhood by Suzanne Berne; 2000, When I Lived in 
Modern Times by Linda Grant; 2001, The Idea of Perfection by Kate Grenville; 
2002, Bel Canto by Ann Patchett; 2003, Property by Valerie Martin; and 2005, We 
Need to Talk about Kevin by Lionel Shriver.

The judges were drawn from panels who participated in all the 10 years.

Extract: Small Island

I was sure this house could once have been home to a doctor or a lawyer or 
perhaps a friend of a friend of the King. Only the house of someone high born 
would have ... glass stained with coloured pictures as a church would have. It 
was true that some were missing, replaced by cardboard and strips of white tape 
... A woman's voice started calling, 'All right, all right, I'm coming! Give us 
a minute.'

I stepped back down two steps, avoiding a small lump of dog's business. I 
adjusted my hat in case it had sagged in the damp air and left me looking 
comical, I pulled my back up straight.

'Is this the household of Mr Gilbert Joseph?'

'I beg your pardon?'

'Gilbert Joseph?' I said, a little slower.

'Oh, Gilbert. Who are you?'

'Mr Gilbert Joseph is my husband - I am his wife.'

The woman's face looked pleased and puzzled all at one time ... 'Didn't he 
come to meet you?'
 