
As well as the bands and boozing, South by Southwest is the place the 
international music business comes to chew the fat about its many challenges. I 
caught three of these sessions, held in Austin convention centre, which had 
varying degrees of insight.

The least insightful – but the most entertaining – came from Friday’s keynote 
speakerSnoop Dogg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/06/snoop-dogg-lion-interview>. The 
rap legend didn’t really give a speech but was interviewed on stage by his 
manager Ted Chung. For this reason, a hard-hitting interrogation was not on the 
cards, but the Dogg still managed to entertain.

Dressed for business is gold-rimmed specs, a posh white shirt and bow-tie, 
Snoop offered his thoughts on how he’s managed to stay popular and relevant. He 
said it’s all down to studying the music business and always paying attention 
to new artists, who in turn show him respect: ‘I’m Uncle Snoop’, he said, to 
guffaws from the crowd.

Snoop said that he remembered an older generation of artists, like Dionne 
Warwick, heavily criticising him when he was a young gangsta rapper: “everyone 
was onSnoop Dogg <https://www.theguardian.com/music/snoopdogg> like I’m the 
worst black man ever created,” he said. He said it “rubbed him the wrong way”, 
and so “I try not to rub young homies the wrong way.” It’s not difficult to see 
why other musicians want to collaborate with him – while his records have 
occasionally wavered in quality, he is still demonstrably cool, with a voice 
you could listen to all day, whether rapping or in conversation.

Snoop also seems remarkably mellow after over two torrid decades in the music 
industry, though this could be due to the fact that he says the first thing he 
thinks about in the morning is smoking weed. He is involved in a range of 
activities from painting to his Youth Football League, which puts inner city 
children on the road to college, including his son, Cordell Broadus, who is 
going to UCLA - the first person in Snoop’s family to go to college. Very 
sweetly, Snoop said that seeing Cordell pick his school was the happiest day of 
his life.

The funny moments came when Snoop discussed his friendship and collaborative 
partnership with Willie Nelson <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1KbKH4A7VFY>, 
based on a shared love of “animals, good music and grass”. Snoop painted a 
vivid picture of the pair playing dominos while stoned in Amsterdam - “he was 
whoopin’ my ass”. Weed also inspired another of his unlikely pursuits – 
abstract painting. He was in “the Versace hotel in Australia” when he started 
to make the painting, which was inadvertently finished off with some ash from 
Snoop’s spliff. It now hangs on the hotel wall.

Snoop has a natural flair for social media, and it was no surprise to hear him 
praise it. The rapper professes himself “for the people”, and social media 
allows him to put his money where his mouth is. He loves having a close 
relationship with his fans, and hearing the words, “Snoop! Give me a selfie!” 
“It’s a love thing,” the rapper smiled. (Incidentally, at Art Basel in December 
the MoMA curator Klaus Biesenbach recommendedSnoop’s Instagram account as one 
of his favourites <https://instagram.com/snoopdogg/>.)

There was less love but probably more insight in a panel about “the celebrity 
economy in music” on Thursday which featured the Nobel-winning economistPaul 
Krugman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/06/paul-krugman-got-it-wrong-austerity-jeffrey-sachs>
and Will and Win Butler from Arcade Fire, along withBerger Management’s 
<https://twitter.com/bergermgmt> Nicky Berger and Nielsen’s Tatiana Simonian 
<https://twitter.com/tatiana>. Krugman said that in revenue terms, things have 
changed for artists less than you might think – touring was always around seven 
times more lucrative than selling records.

There was a discussion about sponsorship and whether bands should accept it, 
with Simonian saying that she used to be against it but “street credibility 
didn’t pay my bills ... the dialogue has changed.” She said that Chipotle were 
sponsoring new bands, and that as a young performer “I would have been stoked 
to get free burritos.”

This cut no ice with Win Butler, who immediately said “It’s selling out. You 
can afford to get a Chipotle burrito if you’re running your tour right.”

This moment of truth was followed up by Krugman memorably describing the New 
York Times as “an advertising platform for luxury goods wrapped in a little bit 
of news”. Increasingly, brands will want to involve themselves with bands, 
though less overtly than in times gone by. Berger approvingly said that the 
American salad bar chain Sweet Green has a festival called Sweet Life – though 
this got a snort from Win Butler. “Artists are always screwed over, only now 
it’s different people,” he said. They are, he said “always giving more value 
than you’re getting.”

So with revenues from record sales declining, how will bands be able to afford 
to play in 10 years? Will Butler pointed outsomething that has become 
increasingly apparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jan/26/working-class-hero-posh-britain-public-school>
– that more and more, it’s bands’ parents who pay for them to make music. “As 
the rich get richer their kids can do whatever the hell they want.” This 
analysis was backed up by Krugman, who added that the share of cash going to a 
few bands at the top – presumably the likes of Madonna and the Rolling Stones – 
has increased, meaning that everyone else gets a shrinking size of the pie.

The only real cheer was provided by Will Butler, who pointed out that the 
internet has facilitated “a golden age of folk art – all these stupid internet 
jokes. In terms of creativity we’re in a really good place, but music is less 
of a golden age.”

Something definitely not having a golden age is the music press. Friday saw a 
panel called “Should music mags survive or get killed off?” It included US 
music press royalty includingAnn Powers 
<http://www.npr.org/people/140955737/ann-powers>, Jim DeRogatis  
<http://www.jimdero.com/>and Jaan Uhelszki <https://twitter.com/jaanuhelszki>, 
but I didn’t feel as though the question was really answered – not that music 
magazines are going to be saved by a panel of hacks arguing about whether or 
not old copies of Creem had been preserved on microfilm, as these did for what 
seemed like an eternity.

One of few bright spots in an hour of nostalgic bellyaching was provided by 
Powers, who pointed out that the internet has enabled a whole crop of talented 
women to write about music, who would have been marginalised in the boys’ club 
of the music press. DeRogatis complained: “but they don’t know where the comma 
goes,” his point being that writers need editors, lawyers and the rest of the 
infrastructure a magazine can bring.

No-one made the obvious point, that while there is a plethora of music 
journalism, and it’s often brilliant, it’s usually now found outside music 
magazines.
 