
In the nearly nine months since the Edward Snowden revelations began on this 
website, some of the most jaw-dropping surveillance news has involved a company 
called RSA, which for years has been one of the top computer security firms in 
the world. Boiled down, RSA isalleged to have weakened 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/12/20/us-usa-security-rsa-idUSBRE9BJ1C220131220>
 a core element of a widely used encryption product at the behest of the 
National Security Agency, receiving $10 million in the process of providing a 
“back door” for government snooping.

RSA issued what amounted to a non-denial denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/23/security-company-rsa-denies-installing-nsa-back-door>
 after Reuters’ Joseph Menn broke a key part of the story back in December. 
This week, at its annual cyber-security conference here in San Francisco, the 
company was on defense at an event usually reserved for looking forward, not 
back. Its CEOsaid that any weakness was inadvertent 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/02/25/usa-cybersecurity-rsa-idUSL1N0LU29Y20140225>
, at least on RSA’s part, and not the result of some nefarious deal with the US 
government. Respected cryptographer and university professor Matt Blazesummed 
it up nicely <https://twitter.com/mattblaze/status/438842253751365633>: 
“Everyone to RSA: Did you deliberately sell us out, or are you incompetent? 
RSA: We’re incompetent”.


It’s too early to tell whether this incompetence – or betrayal, take your pick 
– will hit RSA and its $51bn parent company, EMC, where it should: on the 
bottom line. And despite a boycott by some scheduled speakers here, the RSA 
conference was well-attended. As one security expert who’s expressed contempt 
for the company’s behavior told me, it’s still his best chance to catch up, 
face-to-face, with other top people in this still burgeoning field.

But the episode did spark another gathering, held Thursday across the street 
from where RSA held its conference, where the topic of the moment wasn’t 
security, per se. It was trust, a commodity in short supply these days.

“TrustyCon <https://www.trustycon.org/>” – short for the Trustworthy 
Technology Conference – came together in a hurry after Mikko Hypponen, chief 
research officer for F-Secure, a Finnish security company, announced in January,
in a public letter to RSA 
<http://www.f-secure.com/weblog/archives/00002651.html>, that he was canceling 
his scheduled RSA conference talk and that his own company would skip the event 
entirely. Hypponen, a rock star in the computer security world, gave the 
opening keynote at TrustyCon instead. It was a pessimistic assessment of 
technology users’ chances to have a computing and communications they can 
genuinely trust in an age when nation-states have taken over as the most 
dangerous – even malicious – hackers on Earth.

“Our worst fears turned out to be fairly accurate,” Hypponen said of what’s 
transpired in the security world over the past few years. And he’s right: in 
the past nine months, it’s become clear that many of the people once derided as 
paranoid were, if anything, understating the reality of how much we’re all 
being watched. Certainly,Thursday’s revelation on this website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/27/gchq-nsa-webcam-images-internet-yahoo>
 that spy services had become outright peeping toms by hijacking webcam images 
would have sounded ridiculous not so long ago.

Alas, from betrayal rose a glimmer of hope in this insidery community – that 
privacy might make an everyday comeback, and maybe even sell.

At TrustyCon, for example, technologists updated the audience on an important 
security service for whistleblowers and the journalists to whom they leak 
documents. This was “SecureDrop <https://pressfreedomfoundation.org/securedrop>
”, a project started by the late Aaron Swartz and now run by the Freedom of the 
Press Foundation which ensures safe communications by relying on the Tor 
web-anonymity system. No one says SecureDrop is perfect. But it is easy to use 
and robust, a vast improvement over what journalists have typically deployed.

Early this week, meanwhile, I downloaded the new version of a free 
Android-based messaging app called “TextSecure 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.thoughtcrime.securesms>”. 
It’s open-source, easy to use and designed with privacy in mind. As its maker, 
Whisper Systems,observed on its blog 
<https://whispersystems.org/blog/the-new-textsecure/>: “A user simply sends a 
message, and it’s encrypted end to end, every time. Unlike other IM services, 
there is no distinction between ‘private’ chats and ‘normal’ chats. Private is 
normal”. The app has a number of excellent features that, from my perspective, 
make it the current leader in the field. It’s not going to supplant WhatsApp or 
the other mega-popular messaging software anytime soon, but for people who 
truly value their privacy, well, it looks like the one to beat. (Whisper 
Systems also offers an encrypted mobile voice app,RedPhone 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.thoughtcrime.redphone>.)

 Another positive development, during an annual week of surprises turned 
necessarily sour, was the release of “Blackphone <https://www.blackphone.ch/>”, 
a mobile phone created by people with serious credibility in the security 
community. It’s also built for privacy from the ground-up. Blackphone is based 
on the Android operating system but has a number of changes and enhancements 
that make it much more secure than Google’s standard version of Android. At 
$629, it’s not cheap , and the company can’t guarantee absolute security 
against, say an NSA-level attacker of core mobile technologies out of the 
company’s control, but I can imagine a real market for this device.

“Market” is a key word. The predations of the NSA and other agencies in the US 
and around the world have, at long last, sparked serious interest in products 
and services designed to protect users of technology from assaults of all 
kinds, criminal, corporate and governmental. Venture capital, not just 
taxpayers’ money, has long poured into technology designed to invade our 
privacy, so it’s gratifying to see some investment going into ways to protect 
it from snoops of all kinds.

 Political and social activists – many of whom will be in San Francisco next 
week forRightsCon <http://rightscon.org>, a conference where human rights 
people exhort technologists to work for social justice, not just money – are 
glad to see a growing security consciousness among average people who never 
used to give this stuff a second thought. In a better world, we wouldn’t have 
to pay extra for privacy and security. In this one, we do – if it’s available 
at all. Just having the choice will represent progress.

“We’re not going to solve this today,” Alex Stamos, a security expert and 
principal organizer of TrustyCon, said as he opened the event. “But we hope to 
start the conversation about what it means to build trustworthy systems.”
 