
Recently my colleague Paul Owen shared his experiences about being an 
Englishman in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/08/america-guide-englishman-new-york>
, from the volatile customer service, to the way bragging is completely normal. 
This was after AmericanScott Waters Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/iScottFL/posts/10207706696650031> about being won 
over by the England’s quaint villages where pubs are “community living rooms” 
went viral.

I lived and worked in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney>, Australia, for two years 
until this July, and I got to know its people and its outsider’s view of the 
rest of the world. Australians know something of the English – there are enough 
expats over there, and they also still have our Queen. Here’s my take on 
Australiana.

A (very) rough guide to America from an Englishman in New York | Paul Owen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/08/america-guide-englishman-new-york>
1) Government policies on asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/10/europe-must-not-mimic-australias-tough-talk-on-asylum-seekers>
,prime ministerial cock-ups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/may/21/tony-abbott-winking-video> 
and sports achievements drive the international perception of Australia.

2) Don’t feel guilty about not tipping – unlike the US, businesses are 
responsible for paying staff decent wages and benefits, so anything extra you 
give doesn’t serve to prop up pay, but is a bonus. Cuts to take-home pay on 
weekends and public holidays, though,is a big current issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/06/plan-to-cut-penalty-rates-draws-scepticism-from-unions-and-labor>
.

3) Many Australians are the sons and daughters of migrants from all over the 
world, and have incredible stories of their journey to the country. And they’ll 
share these with you.

4) Australians have the gift of the gab, you can expect to hear some great 
stories.

5) There’s never a wrong time to strike up a conversation – the taxi driver, 
the barista, the dentist, the guy fixing your internet – they will ask how you 
are and tell you about their day. And why wouldn’t you want to hear their 
opinion on Tony Abbott’s latest blooper?

7) But a word of warning, Australians can be sensitive – convict jokes will go 
down like a lead balloon.

8) In fact, making quips about Australia – unless you’re Australian – is a big 
no no.


9) Europeans in Australia are ubiquitous. Try not to fall into the trap of 
only hanging out with other British people, as many others do – how else will 
you ask them aboutPeter Andre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/peter-andre> and Shane Warne?

10) Whether it’s state, postcode, sports, media, or politics, competition 
between teams can fierce. Pick your side and be loyal. This is truest for 
contests like State of Origin – a rugby league match between states where the 
real prize of winning is the feeling of superiority.

11) In politics, even within parties, rivalries can go on for years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/23/the-killing-season-kevin-rudd-says-entirely-possible-he-leaked-to-undermine-julia-gillard>
.Prime ministers come and go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/australian-leader-tony-abbott-ousted-by-malcolm-turnbull-after-mps-vote>
, ousted by colleagues driven on by the spectre bad opinion polls. They are 
usually replacedby a former PM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/26/labor-leadership-spill-kevin-rudd>
 whose resentment has been bubbling for years. It’s the Dynasty of political 
entertainment.

12) Politics is the entertainment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/sep/14/tony-abbott-top-10-bloopers-of-his-prime-ministership-video>
. Live, routine interviews with politicians’ scripted responses is considered 
prime time television. No one seems to get bored with impromptu press 
conferences, maybe because the rerun shows on other channels are about as 
interesting as watching paint dry. It’s either that or sports.

13) A politics/current affairs show <http://www.abc.net.au/tv/qanda/> is the 
most popular TV programme. Q&A is a politer version of a Question Time panel 
because why would they interrupt each other? British comedians and Greek 
singers are invited to make the panel more lively. And if you don’t watch it, 
you’ll be completely out of the loop with stories in the newspapers for the 
next few weeks.

14) Many politicians become big media presences. Like Clive Palmer, the 
Australian version of Donald Trump. He was a billionaire, says what he thinks 
and before he was an MP he was the owner of a dinosaur park andtwerked for the 
public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/aug/27/clive-palmer-twerks-kyle-jackie-o>
.

It’s true! Some other politicians have done strange things, too, like threaten 
Johnny Depp’s dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/17/barnaby-joyce-defends-threat-to-put-down-johnny-depps-dogs>
, oreat raw onions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/13/tony-abbott-eats-raw-onion>
.

15) Remember when Australia passed the law mandating plain packaging for 
cigarettes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/sifting-the-evidence/2014/nov/17/study-finds-cigarette-smokers-in-australia-now-support-plain-packaging>
 and another oneimposing a price on carbon 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2011-11-08/carbon-tax-passes-senate/3652438> and 
people thought they were a new progressive force in the world? Now theycan’t 
even pass gay marriage legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/11/same-sex-marriage-coalition-party-room-rejects-free-vote-for-mps>
, even with widespread public backing.

If you didn’t guess it yet, everyone’s really into politics. 

And sport.

17) Football is Australian rules football (AFL), and football is soccer or 
A-league, rugby league is NRL. Or you could just follow the international 
cricket – but don’t mentionthis year’s Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/ashes-2014-england-win-series-australia-fifth-test>
.

19) Fancy learning to surf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/10/create-your-own-yoga-and-surfing-retreat-in-byron-bay>
? It will only take years of practice and dedication to tame those waves – and 
most of the time you’ll feel like you’re drowning and being slammed against the 
bottom of the sea floor. And if you break surfing etiquette, you’ll feel the 
hard anger of professional surfers and wave police.

20) The birds are beautiful, but why can’t they just stop squawking in the 
mornings and respect that you need a lie-in?

22) Cockroaches will enter your home without fear, swivel their antennae and 
scuttle across your floor.

23) Queues are non-existent. Apart from when you wait to get a sandwich at 
lunchtime as they’re making it from fresh ingredients for every customer.

24) A sip of coffee is nectar to your lips, and even the cheap coffee is good. 
Some places even measure the water to the “perfect” temperature in chemistry 
beakers, and guys with big bushy beards hand you your flat white in the street.

25) A daily commute for some people is sailing past the Opera House and the 
Harbour Bridge, watching the occasional pod of dolphins.

25) People regularly sell all of their unwanted clothes and furnishings in 
front gardens, like an impromptu garage sale. You can go out for a walk and 
return with an old salad bowl.

26) Cars are king of the roads and cities mainly have highways running 
straight through them. If you do walk in the centre of cities, the minutes 
spent waiting for the lights to change will feel like an eternity. Jaywalking 
is illegal though, so you’ll need to not let impatience get the better of you.

27) Avocado is fresh, ripe and ubiquitous. Order it served on toast with some 
lemon and pepper and you will be told it’s the best brekkie in the world. It is.

28) Vegetables aren’t sold in packages of plastic. Then again, it’s just 
easier to eat out; Vietnamese pho is one of the great migrant dish imports.

29) If you get homesick, there’s a UK shelf in some supermarkets that stocks 
Marmite, PG Tips and Tunnocks caramel wafers

30) There are English people everywhere. Most still believe they’ll move home 
one day.

31) There are none of the familiar comforts of high-street chain stores. No 
Marks & Spencer, Primark, or WH Smith. Small independent stores and restaurants 
do a better trade, and you tend to get better quality, individual products

32) Anyone who’s everyone is on social media, and Instagramming every small 
achievement is standard ... breakfast – delicious! New casual sportswear – so 
hot! Selfie on the beach – so amazing!

33) Flying between states is the equivalent of taking a really luxurious bus. 

34) Australian slang – arvo, onya, sledge – is more fun, loose and creative 
than proper English, and the shortness is useful for Twitter. I remember 
hearing “ranga”, though, about someone with red hair and reeling at how mean it 
sounded.


The words are good ammunition for Australian humour that laughs political 
correctness in the face. They laugh at everyone and everything, politicians, 
friends, family, but most of all you. Self-deprecation is a form of modesty, 
guys.

35) Finding a late-night drinking venue is an arduous journey that reaps few 
rewards. You think it’s because you’ve missed hidden spots, but no, they just 
don’t exist. Fun has a curfew of midnight; some Cinderellas have to go home.

And no, one seedy hotel does not count as a late-night venue. What happens is 
that karaoke replaces real going out. Yep, it’s either that or a casino. 
Daytime weekend electronic music festivals also don’t count.

36) Listening to Triple J’s Hottest 100 will keep your finger on the pulse of 
cool.



37) Everyone goes on about which is better – Sydney or Melbourne. What I’ll 
bring your attention to though, is that Brisvegas (Brisbane) has the better 
nickname.

38) Wherever you are, you’ll have a great time commemorating Anzac Day. This 
national day, to mourn and respect soldiers who died at war, is when crowds 
come together to hoot, whoop, get steaming drunk and bet on the winner of ...a 
coin toss <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W3Ox8x0yjvM>.

39) The Australian way to drink beer is: on tap, all day long.

40) Indigenous Australians tend to be ignored on national holidays. They don’t 
really celebrate much – they’ve had their land stolen, their children taken, 
and have high suicide and incarceration rates. Many Australians do care about 
these issues, even though there isn’t a quick fix solution.A referendum in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/06/australians-to-vote-on-indigenous-recognition-in-2017-referendum>
 may give them recognition in the Australian constitution.

41) Most Australians aren’t racist. Not everyone is on board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/11/australian-doctors-rally-over-threat-of-jail-for-speaking-about-asylum-seeekers>
 with the government’s hardline treatment of asylum seekers.

42) Some of the vast outer suburbs of cities have thriving small communities, 
with kick-ass restaurants, though inner city dwellers stay away. This could be 
due to the hours of driving it takes just to get there. Or maybe it’s ruthless 
tribalism – a friend who grew up in Sydney said beach suburb kids weren’t too 
keen on “westies”, and north and south goad each other too.

43) Tasmania in winter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/20/dark-mofo-festival-review-a-newcomers-take>
 is a dark and bleak land of no hope.The exquisite food and wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/jun/22/eat-drink-be-merry-hobarts-dark-mofo-winter-feast-reviewed>
 won’t be therapy enough for seeing barely any human beings. And definitely 
don’t visit Port Arthur in winter, unless you get a kick out of cold, austere 
tragedy.

44) If you want sunset cocktails, Australians decamp to Bali over winter to 
spiritually revive. Or party.

45) Australian women have swagger. They’re confident, powerful and words will 
not puncture them.
 