
On Wednesday, a curious spectacle could be observed in New York. A swarm of 
tech billionaires arrived in their private jets and were whisked to Trump 
Tower, the Louis XV pastiche that is the residence of Trumplethinskin, as the 
tech journalistKara Swisher 
<http://www.recode.net/2016/12/12/13917982/trump-hair-tech-summit-shame-silicon-valley>
 calls the president-elect.

The roll call of assembled tech moguls 
<https://news.vice.com/story/trump-and-a-bunch-of-silicon-valley-ceos-sat-at-a-big-table-and-pretended-to-like-each-other>
 ran as follows: Satya Natella and Brad Smith (Microsoft), Jeff Bezos (Amazon), 
Larry Page and Eric Schmidt (Alphabet, Google’s holding company), Sheryl 
Sandberg (Facebook), Tim Cook (Apple), Elon Musk (Tesla), Ginni Rometty (IBM), 
Safra Catz (Oracle), Chuck Robbins (Cisco), Alex Karp (Palantir) and Brian 
Krzanich (Intel).

Apart from their vast wealth and an aversion to paying tax, what linked these 
notables? Answer: a deep loathing of Trumplethinskin. Yet when he issued the 
summons to his preposterous “summit” they all came running. Why?

In order to implement any of his proposed policies on border control, Trump 
will need a database. A very large database

For the answer, we need to delve into the darker recesses of human nature. 
First of all, there was naked fear. During the election campaign, 
Trumplethinskin had made no secret of his contempt for the tech companies. He 
castigated Apple, for example, for not caving in to the FBI’s demand that it 
unlock theSan Bernardino killer’s iPhone 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/technology/la-fi-tn-apple-next-steps-20160330-story.html>
 and for manufacturing the phone in China rather than in the US. He accused 
Amazon of abusing its monopoly power. And so on.

But it wasn’t the abuse that spooked the tech crowd as much as his 
demonstration of what he could achieve witha single tweet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/lockheed-martin-share-prices-donald-trump-tweet>
. At 1:26pm on 12 December his tweet “The F-35 program and cost is out of 
control. Billions of dollars can and will be saved on military (and other) 
purchases after January 20th” instantly wiped $4bn off the value of Lockheed 
Martin, the lead manufacturer of the $100m-a-pop warplane. If he can do that to 
an aerospace manufacturer, what could he do to the tech companies?

In seeking an explanation for the abject obeisance of the tech moguls on 
Wednesday, we should also not underestimate the aphrodisiac effect of power. 
Trumplethinskin may be a repellent demagogue (and we know from off-the-record 
conversations reported by Swisher – the ultimate tech insider – that that’s how 
the Silicon Valley crowd see him), but on 20 January he will be president and 
proximity to power has a funny effect on many people. It causes them to lose 
their marbles, their judgment and sometimes their principles. So it was in New 
York on Wednesday when the assembled titans fawned on their host in his 
blinged-up lair.

Thirdly, there is that old staple – greed. There is money to be made out of 
President Trumplethinskin. One of the first letters he received upon winning 
the election came IBM chief executive Rometty. “Dear Mr President-elect,”it 
gushed <https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/3221038-Letter.html>, “last 
Tuesday night you spoke about bringing the country together to build a better 
future and the opportunity to harness the creative talent of people for the 
benefit of all. I know that you are committed to help America’s economy grow in 
ways that are good for all its people. I am writing to offer ideas that I 
believe will help realise the aspiration you articulated… I do so as the leader 
of the nation’s largest technology employer. Permit me to offer a few 
suggestions.” These included “data analytics, data centre consolidation and the 
use of cloud technologies” to cut government costs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=3%20million%20'criminal'%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=3%20million%20%27criminal%27%20immigrants%20to%20be%20deported%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2F3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video&media=>
3 million ‘criminal’ immigrants to be deported, says Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/14/3-million-criminal-immigrants-deported-donald-trump-video>
This is interesting for two reasons. First, Trumplethinskin isn’t any old 
chief executive but a president-elect who comes to power after a campaign that 
was laced with racism and promises of action against a particular 
ethnic/religious group: Muslims. In order to implement any of his proposed 
policies towards illegal immigrants, border control, etc, he will need a 
database. A very large database.

So who will build it for him? The federal government? Given his contempt for 
the civil service, that seems unlikely. So it will be outsourced to tech 
companies and the question becomes: will they do it? In this respect, the IBM 
chief’s letter might turn out to be an inspired pitch for business. After all, 
the company could be said to have a track record in this line of business. Way 
back in the 1930s,its German subsidiary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/feb/18/historybooks.features> was the 
outfit that provided the Hollerith tabulating machines that were a cornerstone 
of the murder machine that ran the Holocaust.

For the avoidance of doubt, this is not to say that IBM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ibm> was responsible for the Holocaust 
or that Trumplethinskin is a genocidal maniac – just that, to update a 1970s 
feminist phrase, the technological has suddenly become political. Very 
political. So how will Silicon Valley respond when the next presidential 
summons comes? Stay tuned.
 