
Who knew we'd be seeing choreography by Henri Oguike 
<http://www.henrioguikedance.co.uk/>, Rafael Bonachela 
<http://www.rafaelbonachela.com/> and Mark Baldwin 
<http://www.rambert.org.uk/about_rambert/artistic_director> on prime-time 
Saturday TV, or hearing serious discussion of brisés volés?So You Think You Can 
Dance <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00pj22l> may have some of the naffest 
production values on the box, but it's actually done the job of getting dance – 
other than ballroom – into the mainstream. And so far, I'm hooked.

Generally, I don't have the stamina for TV talent shows. I'm allergic to Bruce 
Forsythe. And even with this one I do find myself muttering abuse at the 
screen. One issue I have is with the way the competition pits dance styles 
against each other, usually to the disadvantage of contemporary choreography. 
Most of the numbers are stunt-heavy hip-hop routines, disco, Broadway, lindy 
hop and jazz. In order to compete, and to elicit the mandatory squeals from the 
audience, Baldwin et al have to soup up – and dumb down – their styles. 
Oguike's number looked frankly odd.

There's also the issue of disentangling the talent from the inevitable 
personality contest. I like Robbie from Stockport, but I'm sure I've been 
swayed by the cute snapshots of the support he's been getting back home – the 
tribute cake made by the local baker, the window display in the butcher's shop 
with Robbie's name spelled out in sausages.

Having said that, it's been interesting to watch the dancers' progress as they 
adapt to new steps and styles. And encouraging to see that the good ones are 
mostly coming through. Swedishhip-hop dancer Tommy Franzén 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/so-you-think-you-can-dance/news/a194927/sytycd-profile-tommy-franzen.html>
 may be more emotionally reticent than some of his rivals, and have a less 
conventionally beautiful body, but he is a fantastically intelligent dancer 
with an intuitive grasp of phrasing and style. And so far that's getting him 
votes.

Of course, the show is fudging the issue of what Tommy, or anyone else, will 
become if they win the competition. Britain's favourite dancer? Britain's best 
dancer? Clearly they aren't being pitted against the real contenders for those 
titles, who would include the likes of Carlos Acosta or Darcey Bussell. And 
it's distracting, too, that even within the limits of the show, the playing 
field isn't level. One good reason why dancers like Tommy and Robbie have 
reached the semi-final is that they have solid professional experience behind 
them. Much more solid than poor Yanet, who's just been ditched.

I've been watching some of Sky's rival show Got to Dance 
<http://sky1.sky.com/dance>, and at first assumed it was a more transparent 
competition. Most of the entrants seemed to be teenage amateurs dancing their 
own routines. But it turns out that the 16-year-old Salford schoolboy being 
presented as a real-life Billy Elliot is not the raw, undiscovered talent he 
appears. Google Matthew Koon and you discover he has won several major awards 
and for nine monthsdanced the lead in Billy Elliot 
<http://www.billyelliotthemusical.com/cast/Matthew_Koon.html> on the West End 
stage. Matthew's a lovely dancer and he deserves to win. But you have to feel 
for the kids in theMJ Latin <http://sky1.sky.com/Got-to-dance-mjlatin-bio> 
group, competing against him in the finals. They only have their cute smiles 
and blue eyeshadow to pit against his beautiful ballet-school elevation.

Is it a good trade – major screen time for dance in return for yapping 
presenters, self-promoting judges and emotional manipulation? BBC judge Sisco 
claims that "it gets us [the art form] out of the shadows". And with viewing 
figures at over 7m, it would be curmudgeonly to disagree.

• This article was amended on Monday 8 February. The last sentence of the 
fifth paragraph stated that 17-year-old Charlie had been voted off the show, 
when in fact it was Yanet Fuentes who was being alluded to.
 