
Rare diseases might be called that, but they affect 3.5 million people in the 
UK alone. Most have no cure. Funding research into these diseases is 
challenging. But, when it does take place, it often leads to the discovery of 
potential treatments for chronic conditions from which many more people suffer.

Take statins: developed initially for a rare disease called familial 
hypercholesterolemia, they are now used widely to treat high cholesterol, which 
is one of the main risk factors for heart disease. Or bisphosphonates: a class 
of drugs developed initially for a rare disease called hypophosphatasia, they 
are now used extensively to treat common bone disorders such as osteoporosis.

Recognising the power of studying these rare diseases, Ashoka fellow Nick 
Sireau launchedFindacure <http://www.findacure.org.uk/>. Run as a social 
enterprise, the organisation aims to raise awareness, fund research, unlock new 
insights and discover potential treatments. Rather than rare diseases, they 
speak of "fundamental diseases".

"The word rare has connotations of not being important, or being quirky, not 
affecting many people," says Sireau. "People don't feel affected by it. If it's 
rare, why care? They are fundamental diseases: extreme and exceptional diseases 
that advance our understanding of medicine and help us discover potential new 
treatments."

For Sireau, the quest into medical research started 12 years ago, with the 
birth of his first son. While changing his nappies one evening, Sireau and his 
wife noticed they were red-black. Alarmed, they rang the out-of-hours doctor, 
who said a red cabbage dinner had got into the breast milk and into the baby's 
urine. Unimpressed, the couple consulted their GP and had a series of tests 
done. Within weeks, the real cause was confirmed: Sireau's son suffered from a 
rare genetic disease called alkaptonuria (AKU).

Also called black bone disease, AKU is like an extreme form of osteoarthritis. 
As well as destroying joints and the spine, it also affects the heart, eyes, 
ears, kidneys and prostate. There is no approved cure. Three years after the 
diagnosis of their first-born, the Sireaus' second son was born with AKU.

"We realised early on that only we could take on the task of finding a cure 
for our kids. There was no point waiting for others to do it," says Sireau. To 
date, the AKU Society has raised Â£15m, set up the world's first AKU clinical 
centre, put together a consortium of 13 hospitals, biotechs, patient groups, 
universities and a pharma company, and launched a clinical trial for 
nitisinone, a promising new treatment.

A serial social entrepreneur, Sireau quickly realised that he could use his 
AKU experience to find cures for other diseases. There are an estimated 
6,000-8,000 rare diseases worldwide; barely 200 have treatments. Through 
Findacure, Sireau funds research into these diseases that he believes is 
fundamental to understanding human biology and common conditions.

The organisation uses a venture philanthropy approach to select the best teams 
of scientists and finance them on a long-term basis. It also supports the 
growth of patient groups, because "they are the most committed drivers of 
innovation in this field".

Traditionally, drug development has been done by pharmaceutical companies 
which, as commercial entities, are profit driven. For some fundamental 
diseases, this has led to very high prices and for others a lack of interest.

Governments are trying to cut spending on medicines. Potential profits from 
fundamental disease drugs will in many cases be too small for pharmaceutical 
companies. Sireau and others fear that fundamental diseases will suffer as a 
result.

Through Findacure's non-profit social enterprise called Findacure Development 
<http://www.findacure.org.uk/drug-development/>, Sireau and his team aim to 
change the field of drug development. They will develop drugs for the treatment 
of fundamental diseases. Medicines are sold to the health service at an 
affordable price in order to take the strain off health budgets and make more 
treatments available for more people.

"We use a non-profit business model, low overheads and carefully designed 
clinical trials to keep costs low," says Sireau. "All revenue from sales will 
be re-invested in research and development. With our experience of AKU, we 
believe we can develop trials for the most neglected fundamental diseases at an 
affordable cost."
 