
Adam Annand, associate director, creative learning, London Bubble 
<http://www.londonbubble.org.uk/>

In November 2009, I was in a meeting that included representatives of two 
theatre companies, an arts and education networking organisation, and an NHS 
speech and language therapist. We were discussing the measurable success of our 
three-year Arts Council-funded research project, Speak Out. The project had 
been developed as a response to the need in primary schools for an intervention 
that supported young children’s communication development; it had a thorough 
evaluation and detailed research findings that demonstrated statistically 
significant improvements among children that were otherwise struggling.

The meeting should have been upbeat and celebratory; we had developed a new 
and successful way of working that was creative, joyful and well-received by 
children, parents, schools, therapists and drama practitioners. The problem was 
that we didn’t have any way forward: the project was expensive to run, involved 
partners with varying and competing agendas, and didn’t have any forward 
funding strategy. The meeting was decidedly downbeat and gloomy.

There’s nothing unusual about this story. Throughout the creative sector there 
are organisations that have developed programmes with the potential to make a 
significant difference to people’s lives, but that have withered away. This 
decay is often down to – among other things – short-term funding, the drive to 
develop the new and innovative, or simply because the person who was 
championing the project moved on. In our case, what’s a little unusual is what 
happened next and how we developed the work with a mix of perseverance, support 
and some good luck.

We continued to champion this drama approach to supporting children with a 
communication need and were commissioned by the pupil development centres in 
Southwark primary schools to adapt the programme to work in their settings. Now 
renamedSpeech Bubbles 
<http://www.londonbubble.org.uk/projectpage/speech-bubbles/>, the practice was 
streamlined, making it cheaper to deliver. Training and guidance was put into 
place to enable drama practitioners to achieve consistently successful 
sessions. Research partners were identified to build a robust evidence base.

Finally, we developed a mix of income for the project, including local 
authority commissions, grants from trusts and foundations, and (importantly) 
fees to schools. Schools are increasingly in charge of their own budgets and 
can be persuaded to spend some of that money on interventions that address 
pressing areas of need, as long as there is compelling evidence those 
interventions will be effective.

In 2012, it became apparent that the success of this project, placed alongside 
the increasingly high levels of communication need among pupils, meant that we 
should find ways to reach many more children. We approached theShine trust 
<http://www.shinetrust.org.uk/> and were awarded a grant to scale up the 
programme, training six other theatre companies to deliver the work in schools 
near them. With our support those companies are achieving exactly the same 
levels of success. Without knowing the name for it, we had stumbled upon social 
franchising.

Matt Towner, consultant, the International Centre for Social Franchising (ICSF 
<http://www.the-icsf.org/>)

What is social franchising? It’s is about packaging up a proven model and 
providing carefully selected others (franchisees) with the training and ongoing 
support they need in order to run the project as successfully as the original. 
The franchisor benefits through reaching more of those it aims to help in an 
effective way, while the franchisee benefits from a programme that has a proven 
social impact and the ability to generate sustainable income. Both can also 
benefit from shared learning and increased brand recognition.

London Bubble are not alone in exploring this approach. There’s also arts and 
education charityTender <http://tender.org.uk/>, which has developed a proven 
programme that equips young people to engage in healthy relationships. The 
organisation has recruited two franchisees, who really value the support, and 
are now recruiting more. There is a real opportunity for the arts sector to 
help its best programmes to reach their full potential and enable those who 
have the skills and expertise to implement them through social franchising.

As well as expanding the reach of Speech Bubbles through social franchising, 
London Bubble have stumbled on an approach that could be taken up by others in 
the creative sector, leading to the scaling up of many successful programmes 
with proven social impact.

More like this

• Could arts centres hold the key to UK culture’s future? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/apr/03/art-centres-uk-culture-future>
• Museums on the road: the kids are all right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jan/27/museums-road-kids-cornwall-outreach>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 