
The term welfare is questioned in Denmark. MondayMorning 
<https://www.mm.dk/english>, Scandinavia's leading independent thinktank, 
published the results of a six-month project Ways to Resource Denmark which 
involved 14 municipalities and 11 NGOs. The project investigates the Danish 
welfare system and explores its sustainability.

In Scandinavia, welfare is a service provided by the state, and something we 
take for granted – as long as we pay our taxes, we have done "our part". 
However, growing parts of the population are finding it hard to contribute to 
the society. According to the umbrella organisation for social enterpriseVFSA 
<http://vfsa.dk/>, 670,000 out of a total of 5.6 million Danish citizens of 
working age are unemployed, which is putting an enormous burden on an already 
exhausted welfare system.

Many believe that the answer to this growing problem lies in social innovation.

In Denmark, there are several great initiatives that have inspired both public 
and private sector to take social innovation seriously. Among them is Denmark's
The Specialist People Foundation <http://specialistpeople.com/> (or 
Specialisterne) – an organisation that changes the way society perceives autism 
by transforming it from a handicap to a competitive advantage. The foundation 
employs autistic people, who have a 10 times lower fault rate in software 
testing and other tasks. Every €1 invested in the enterprise delivers an return 
on investment of €6 in savings for public spending, according to a cost–benefit 
analysis conduced by The Specialist People Foundation on their establishment in 
Austria.

The Specialist offers three main services. First, its assessment and training 
programme includes a three- to five month-long individual assessment where 
participants clarify their strengths, weaknesses, special aptitudes, 
capabilities and interests. Here, it map out their needs for support, guidance 
and environmental adjustments in order to perform in a job situation. Second, a 
business services programme helps the 40% of participants who progress to 
become IT consultants inSpecialisterne Denmark <http://dk.specialisterne.com/>. 
Specialisterne now has 34 consultants who solve computer problems for leading 
IT and telecommunications companies around the world. Third, the Specialisterne 
Denmark school has started a three-year education programme for young adults 
aged 16 to 24 with autism spectrum disorder.

The Specialist People Foundation is run by Thorkil Sonne 
<https://www.ashoka.org/fellow/thorkil-sonne> and was driven by Thorkil's 
personal experience. His son Lars was two and a half years old when he and his 
wife noticed that his development started to differ from that of his elder 
brothers; he was later diagnosed with autism. When Thorkil and his wife 
couldn't find the help that they needed from the welfare system he left his job 
of 15 years, remortgaged the house and founded a company aimed at creating a 
fair and better life for their son.

"If our son got a good job, could be respected for his special personality, 
and appreciated for his skills then he would have a good life," Thorkil says.

But as things looked in the Danish society, Thorkil had a hard time seeing how 
his son would be able to fit in. "We didn't see any opportunities for our son 
to get a job since the work model favours people with very good social skills 
and ability to self-organise", he said.

In the following years, Thorkil became involved with the Danish Autism 
Organisation, started studying the Danish welfare model and met many more 
people diagnosed with autism.

"All of them had some great skills and were direct and honest people"' said 
Thorkil. "I saw them as potential great employees if you could just build a 
comfort zone around them."

At that point Thorkil set out to change the way we view and interact with 
[dis]ability in society. Today, The Specialist People Foundation is one of 
Denmark's most successful social enterprises, and has expanded to eight 
countries. According to Thorkil, now is the time to start taking social 
enterprises seriously inDenmark <https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark>.

"The time is right to rethink what kind of value social enterprise can bring 
the welfare state"' says Thorkil. "The welfare system right now is under 
pressure and any crisis is an opportunity to rethink and make things better."

Thorkil and The Specialist People Foundation have set themselves an ambitious 
goal: to provide meaningful and productive jobs for one million people with 
autism and other invisible disorders. There are currently more than 70 million 
people with autism around the world.

To do this, they intend to replicate Specialisterne operations around the 
world to showcase and demonstrate the skills and contribution of specialist 
people. They aim to develop and share a management model,The Dandelion Model 
<http://specialistpeople.com/the-dandelion-model/>, that will enable companies 
and workplaces to hire and manage specialist people. They are also looking to 
increase awareness in society of the positive contributions of specialist 
people.

The Specialist People Foundation has shown that if you are innovative enough, 
you can run a prospering social business with both private and public 
customers, complementing and relieving the public welfare system. But as long 
as the welfare state holds the main responsibility for solving social problems 
in Denmark, social innovation will be challenged by the conditions in this 
strong public sector.

In Denmark, at Ashoka <https://www.ashoka.org/> we're now scouting for more 
talents like Thorkil, who can play a vital part in reimagining the Scandinavian 
welfare model.

Max Parknas is community mobiliser for Join Our Core Denmark. Join Our Core 
<http://www.joinourcore.com/> is competition hosted by Ben & Jerry's 
<http://www.benjerry.co.uk/> which gives young social entrepreneurs around 
Europe the chance to showcase their business plans and win 6-months of business 
training withAshoka <https://www.ashoka.org/>. Click here 
<http://www.joinourcore.com/> to find out more

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To join the Guardian Social 
Enterprise Network,click here 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>.
 