
Today's top Society news and comment

Wakefield found "irresponsible" by GMC over MMR scare 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2010/jan/28/andrew-wakefield-mmr-vaccine>

Ben Goldacre: MMR scare - the media are equally guilty 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2010/jan/28/mmr-vaccine-ben-goldacre>

Datablog: Measles immunisation - how the UK compares 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/2010/jan/28/mmr-measles-vaccine-immunisation>

Michele Hanson: hands off our local A&E  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jan/29/hands-off-accident-emergency-department>

All today's Society Guardian stories 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2010/jan/29/all>

Other news

A christian police group which believes the power of prayer can catch 
criminals has been awarded a £10,000 grant 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/crime/16310000-grant-for-christian-police-who-believe-prayer-can-cut-crime-1882554.html>
by the Home Office to strengthen its links with church groups, reports the 
Independent.

The Wakefield verdict: what the papers say

Ben Goldacre <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/bengoldacre>, writing in the 
Guardian, points out that Andrew Wakefield - wrong as he was - is being blamed 
by journalists as if he was the only one at fault for the MMR vaccine fiasco.In 
reality, writes Goldacre, "the media are equally guilty." 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2010/jan/28/mmr-vaccine-ben-goldacre> But 
the media have not learned any lessons from their shoddy reporting of the MMR 
affair.

"The media have developed no insight into their own role - and for this reason 
there will be anotherMMR <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr>."

There's a weasily self-justification from the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-1246930/MAIL-COMMENT-MMR-lessons-doctors-learn.html>
, one of the papers which championed Wakefield at the height of the MMR scare. 
It blames the government, the legal aid system, Tony Blair, and the fallibility 
of scientists and doctors. Of its own role, and that of the media generally, it 
has nothing to say. It grudgingly accepts that parents should at least feel 
reassured that MMR is safe, but cannot bring itself to accept that the GMC 
ruling was right, or that Wakefield acted dishonestly and recklessly.

"Doubtless his [Wakefield's] research was flawed. But is this paper alone in 
feeling that there has been something of a witch hunt in the determination to 
crush this man and his colleagues? It would be a tragedy if the result of that 
was to deter future scientists from the kind of bold thinking that might one 
day find a cure for autism."

The Daily Telegraph calls the affair "a sorry episode" 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/telegraph-view/7095727/MMR-a-sorry-episode.html>
. But it too cannot admit that the media acted irrationally in its coverage of 
the case - at least the mainstream media.

"There is a developing hostility towards science, fuelled by half-truths and 
false arguments easily disseminated on the internet, which feed a suspicion 
that the truth is somehow always being deliberately hidden."

The Times notes that Wakefield's "descent into professional disgrace" is 
almost complete. He abused his position of trust and brought his profession 
into disrepute:

"More than this he has sown needless panic among parents and corroded their 
confidence in their doctors. The damage that he has inflicted on Britain's 
public health is still being felt. For a profession whose first principle is 
"do no harm", it is a chilling legacy."

Wakefield is not solely to blame for the scare, says the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/opinion/leading-articles/leading-article-the-true-causes-of-a-public-health-firestorm-1882351.html>
. The role of the medical authorities and the government was not beyond 
reproach, it says, and the media has lessons to learn:

The press and television stations were perfectly justified in reporting Dr 
Wakefield's concerns in detail. But, too often, they failed to emphasise just 
how little evidence there was to support his assertions. In all likelihood, the 
MMR debacle would not have occured – and would certainly not have lasted so 
long – without a combination of all these factors.

Jeremy Laurance, the Independent's veteran health editor, was at Wakefield's 
original press conference in 1998, which triggered the scare.He charts how the 
issue became a "classic scare story" 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/jeremy-laurance-the-three-sentences-that-unleashed-mmr-scare-1882282.html>
, and points out Tony Blair's inadvertent role in fanning the hysteria. Blair 
said publically in 2004 that there was no evidence of a link betwseen MMR and 
autism and advised parents to have the jab. Unfortunately, points out Laurance:

"He [Blair] and [his wife] Cherie refused to say whether their own son Leo had 
had the jab. In the fevered atmosphere of the time, that was enough to confirm 
sceptical parents' worst fears." 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/jeremy-laurance-the-three-sentences-that-unleashed-mmr-scare-1882282.html>

We now know of course, that Leo did have the MMR jab 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/politics/article3911758.ece>.

Not all journalists and media failed to report Wakefield's claims critically, 
however. It was a Sunday Times investigation that led to his GMC hearing. You 
can read the work ofreporter Brian Deer <http://briandeer.com/solved/solved.htm>
 here.

Quotes of the week

• "If I see one more stupid comment about "left-wing social workers" and 
"responsibility" I shall start asking why it is that right-wingers don't ever 
want the responsibility of seeing whether their punitive social ideas might 
actually work by becoming social workers (instead of bankers and scribblers) 
themselves." - David Aaronovitch,writing in The Times 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/comment/columnists/david_aaronovitch/article7002241.ece>
, on the Edlington scandal.

• "A young person could be forgiven for believing that the way in which 
economic and social policy is now conducted is little less than a conspiracy by 
the middle-aged against the young." -David Willetts 
<http://www.davidwilletts.co.uk/>, shadow secretary for Universites and Skills 
inhis forthcoming book, The Pinch 
<http://books.global-investor.com/books/445327/David-Willetts/The-Pinch/>

• "We have to stop reducing the complexity of people's lives to simplistic 
tick boxes. They tell us less than ever about who people are, what lives they 
lead, or what services they need. Equality campaigners need to realise that 
mobilising around fixed group identities is alien to a new generation more used 
to facebook groups and flash mobs." - Danny Srikanderajah, co-author ofan IPPR 
pamphlet, calling for a new approach to tackling inequality and discrimination 
<http://www.ippr.org.uk/publicationsandreports/publication.asp?id=725>.

• "Andrew Wakefield cannot be solely held to blame for the MMR-autism debacle. 
His research was supervised by the senior (adult) gastroenterologist at the 
Royal Free; the press conference at which he launched the demand for separate 
vaccines was staged by the Royal Free medical school; the transparently flawed 
study was published by the Lancet...The media too has played a lamentable role 
in this affair, its reputation only salvaged byBrian Deer's courageous 
investigative journalism which resulted in Wakefield belatedly being called to 
account at the GMC. <http://briandeer.com/solved/solved.htm>" - Dr Michael 
Fitzpatrick <http://www.battleofideas.org.uk/index.php/2008/speaker_detail/10/>
, GP and author of Defeating Autism: A Damaging Delusion and MMR and Autism: 
What Parents Need To Know

This week's Society dailies

Catch up with the week's social affairs news and comment

Thursday 28 January: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/joepublic/2010/jan/28/society-daily-teen-drinking>
 stress in the Treasury, cynicism in local authorities, teenage boozers

Wednesday 27 January: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/joepublic/2010/jan/27/hills-report-richest-poorest-divide>
 unequal Britain, unreliable NHS workers, Boris quits

Tuesday 26 January: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/joepublic/2010/jan/26/society-daily-social-attitudes-survey>
 in praise of Tom Reynolds, social attitudes, public services "share" offers

Monday 25 January: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/joepublic/2010/jan/25/society-daily-edlington-attacks-newspaper-coverage>
 Edlington - what the papers said, Sarah's Law, ministerial bad practices.

Society links

Sign up to the SocietyGuardian email briefing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/societybriefing>

Society on Twitter <https://twitter.com/SocietyGuardian>

SocietyGuardian.co.uk <http://www.guardian.co.uk/society>

Get ahead: the Guardian's public and voluntary sector careers information 
<http://careers.guardian.co.uk/public-sector>

Seach hundreds of public and voluntary sector jobs 
<http://jobs.guardian.co.uk/?INTCMP=ILCJOBTXT257>
 