
Although social entrepreneurship is a new term in Sweden, the concept of 
innovation is not. Swedes are innovators, especially strong on the digital 
market. We have fostered many big companies, such asIKEA 
<http://www.ikea.com/gb/en/>, Ericsson <http://www.ericsson.com/uk> and Volvo 
<http://www.volvocars.com/uk/Pages/default.aspx> – the list could go on. Recent 
bright sparks such asSpotify 
<https://www.spotify.com/uk/video-splash/?utm_source=spotify&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=start>
,Skype <http://www.skype.com/en/> and Soundcloud <http://soundcloud.com/> are 
clear indicators that we can expect much more from the cold country up north. 
But what about social innovation?

One of the most important factors to keep in mind when discussing social 
entrepreneurship inSweden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> is that 
social problems have traditionally been the responsibility of institutions 
rather than individuals. The Swedish government is strong and its people have 
traditionally had great trust in its ability to solve the country's most 
pressing social challenges through policymaking. Therefore many Swedes don't 
see the need for social entrepreneurship and the concept itself is difficult to 
comprehend.

But in a rather short period of time Sweden has become increasingly aware of 
the term social entrepreneurship, realising that it can change systems and 
societies. This has resulted in an increasing number of social entrepreneurs 
around the country as well as a continuously improving support structure.

The Swedish government offers financial support to regular entrepreneurial 
start-up businesses, but this service is still relatively absent when it comes 
to social entrepreneurs, exposing a real gap in the support market for 
innovators. One government initiative does provide some support –The Swedish 
Agency for Economic and Regional Growth (Tillväxtverket) 
<http://www.tillvaxtverket.se/ovrigt/englishpages.4.21099e4211fdba8c87b800017332.html>
. They run an initiative offering support to a number of selected social 
enterprises. Last autumn, 29 social enterprises with a total budget of around 
£880,000 were selected from a total number of 138 applicants.

Social entrepreneurship is on the rise in Sweden and gaining more 
acknowledgements in a broad spectrum of institutions. AtAshoka 
<https://www.ashoka.org/> we can clearly see a great and growing interest in 
broader field – the quantity of publications and research about the field and 
number of entrepreneurs wanting to contribute to society through their social 
business ideas. Several universities around the country have recently launched 
programs with specialisations in social entrepreneurship and entrepreneurship, 
as they have seen a growing demand for this kind of education from students. 
Some municipalities are looking into how they can make it easier for social 
entrepreneurs to collaborate and create public-private-partnerships. An early 
such initiative has been reported inInnovators of Society 
<http://socialinnovation.se/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/samhallets_innovatorer_eng_webb_spreads.pdf>
.

There are several examples of great Swedish social entrepreneurs and 
innovators that have entered the scene in the past few years.

One of them is the Swedish Ashoka fellow Johan Wendt 
<http://scandinavia.ashoka.org/johan-wendt-new-ashoka-fellow-swedish> – who 
foundedMattecentrum <http://www.mattecentrum.se/> and is providing free help 
for children who want to improve their maths skills, though after-school online 
learning forums.

Mattecentrum provides free tutoring around 70,000 young people every month. 
This is done in two ways:

• Tutoring sessions 50 times a week in 19 cities in Sweden and Denmark • using 
300 voluntary workers.

• Through online platforms <http://www.mathplanet.com/>, children are given 
video lessons.

Wendt is creating social change by helping those who cannot afford to buy 
private tutoring. Some 35% of the children supported come from immigrant 
backgrounds. In addition to the maths tutoring, a lot of people see 
Mattecentrum as one of few successful integration projects in the region.

In addition to winning the Join Our Core <http://www.joinourcore.com/> 
competition in 2012, John was just announced as one of the hottest start-up 
companies in Sweden by business magazineVeckans Affärer <http://www.va.se/>, 
Sweden's version of Forbes magazine.

Another Fellow, Sofia Appelgren, founder of MittLiv <http://mittliv.com/>, has 
recently sealed a deal with the city of Gothenburg for financial support. Such 
a partnership, between a major Swedish city and a social entrepreneur, is a 
historical first in this region. Mittliv has also partnered with Ben & Jerry's 
to create aseries of short films <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o9APy05_i_M> 
about social entrepreneurship.

A few early examples of Swedish social entrepreneurship have gathered 
international momentum with their social innovations. One example isSolvatten 
<http://www.solvatten.se/>, a portable container harnessing sunshine to provide 
clean and hot water to households. After 10 years of research and testing, this 
product has been rolled out in Kenya and Nepal and is expanding rapidly.As in 
so many other parts of the world, issues such as a growing aging population, 
youth employment, inclusion, environmental problems and poverty are of growing 
concern. More and more people are getting involved in finding new solutions, 
and at Ashoka Scandinavia we expect to find and select several new inspiring 
fellows in this innovative region within the next few years.

Nathalie Mantel is a a trainee at Ashoka <https://www.ashoka.org/> and a 
community mobiliser forJoin Our Core Sweden 
<http://www.joinourcore.com/en/entry-info>. Rebecca Allen Lamptey is editor and 
manager of social media atForum for Social Innovation Sweden 
<http://www.socialinnovation.se>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To join the Guardian Social 
Enterprise Network,click here 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>.
 