
The solitary confinement of mass murderer Anders Behring Breivik risks turning 
into “inhumane treatment”, Norway’s parliamentary ombudsman said in a report 
published on Wednesday.


‘We are taking the island back’: Norway’s long road back to Utøya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/08/we-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya>
Breivik, a right-wing extremist who killed 77 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/24/breivik-verdict-sane-21-years> 
in a bombing and shooting rampage in July 2011, is being held in a 
high-security unit in south-east Norway’s Skien prison, with severely limited 
contact with the outside world.

The 36-year-old extremist, who claimed he carried out the attack in opposition 
to Norway’s multiculturalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/17/breivik-court-boasts-killing-utoya>
, has likened his prison conditions to “torture” and is suing the Norwegian 
state. Court hearings are due to begin in March.

Breivik has also repeatedly threatened to go on a hunger strike.

“The regimen in the very high security unit imposes very strict conditions on 
inmates’ freedom of movement and their possibility to have contact with other 
people,” ombudsman Aage Thor Falkanger, tasked with investigating injustice by 
public agencies, wrote after visiting Breivik’s prison.

“This, and the fact that in reality there is an extremely limited number of 
inmates in the very high security unit, means that this regimen represents an 
elevated risk of inhumane treatment,” he added in his report.

Anders Behring Breivik's 21-year jail term closes Norway's darkest chapter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/24/anders-behring-breivik-verdict-norway-utoya>
The report called for more interaction between guards and inmates to “reduce 
the risk of damage” linked to solitary confinement, as well as a review on the 
adoption of “less intrusive security measures than handcuffs”.

According to public broadcaster NRK, prison authorities have already adopted 
some measures to ease Breivik’s isolation, such as allowing him to engage in 
activities with guards for one hour a week.

On 22 July, 2011, Breivik killed eight people in a bomb attack outside a 
government building in the capital Oslo and later murdered another 69 people – 
most of them teenagers – when he opened fire at a Labour Youth camp on the 
island of Utøya.

In August 2012, he was handed a 21-year prison sentence, which can be extended 
if he is still considered a danger to society.
 