
How much money is there for healthcare in my country? Is more money being 
spent on primary or secondary schools? Is investment in agriculture going up or 
down? These are simple, but crucial, questions. However, for developing 
countries that receive foreign aid, it's notoriously difficult to get complete 
and up-to-date answers. Even in countries where national budgets are relatively 
easy to access and analyse, aid spends are all too often the crucial, missing 
pieces of the puzzle, creating huge headaches for governments and civil society 
groups eager to make sure precious resources are wisely spent.

Part of the challenge is that developing countries, on average, receive aid 
froman increasing number of donors 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/25/busan-explainer-aid-effectiveness>
. While in the past a country might receive aid from two or three, now it more 
likely has to deal with dozens, each with different sets of priorities and 
different ways of allocating and reporting aid. The knock-on effect of this 
confusion, according to aid transparency campaigners, is that without a clear 
picture of where all of these various aid flows are going, governments can't 
properly plan where to allocate their own resources and civil society is not 
given the information it needs to monitor spending and hold leaders to account.

Four years ago, researchers at the London-based Overseas Development Institute 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/> took up the enormous task 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/work/projects/details.asp?id=143&title=uganda-development-partner-division-labour-exercise>
 of trying to figure out how dozens of donors were spending aid in Uganda, and 
how that compared with where the government was allocating its own resources. 
The results were striking: it turned out the Ugandan government was only aware 
of half the aid being spent in the country, despite routinely requesting this 
information from donors.

Also alarming was just how difficult and time-consuming it was to gather and 
analyse this information. Mapping donors' aid spending to a country's budget 
is, unfortunately, not a trivial task, even if the data is available. Donors 
classify and divide their spends in different ways, so researchers had to play 
a herculean matching game, piecing together how donors' spends fit into the 
bigger puzzle.

The Publish What You Fund <http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/> campaign group 
and theOpen Knowledge Foundation <http://okfn.org/> have now produced a 
visualisation of Uganda's aid and budget data for 2003-2006 
<http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/uganda/uganda-with-data.htm#/^/2004/~/aid-and-domestic-spending-in-uganda-br----ugx->
, billed as the first time both sets of data have been displayed together in a 
way that is easy to explore. A quick look shows just how big a piece of the 
puzzle aid spending is – more than 50% of overall resources available in Uganda 
for 2005-2006. The vast majority of this $1.1bn in aid was spent directly by 
donors on various projects, with only a third given to the government to spend 
along with its domestic resources. Interestingly, aid money made up only a 
small proportion of resources for education, while accounting for the majority 
of resources for health, agriculture, water and the environment.

Researchers now plan to refresh this project with more up-to-date data, but 
the real ambition is to be able to track aid money and government spending – 
and monitor their impacts – in real time. TheInternational Aid Transparency 
Initiative <http://www.aidtransparency.net/> (IATI), which is gathering 
significant momentum in advance of next week'sinternational aid effectiveness 
conference in Busan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
, hopes to help make this process not just easier, but also more immediate. If 
donors publish their data to the IATI standard, the prospect is a wealth of 
timely aid data, both about what donors are currently spending and about what 
they plan to spend in the future. This, combined with the World Bank's ongoing 
work to create sets of codes to help match donor aid spends to domestic budget 
lines, should make it easier to get a fuller picture of the resources available 
for development in countries around the world.

While this can all sound dry and overly technical, the implications are 
anything but: this is the kind of aid transparency that aims to put developing 
countries in the driver's seat. With this information, campaigners argue, civil 
society will be better equipped to track down evidence of waste and corruption, 
and will be able to have more informed debates on how their governments are 
spending precious resources. "Ultimately, the aim of aid should be to remove 
the need for it – and this will only happen if recipient countries have 
information that enables them to plan and to be held to account," says Karin 
Christiansen, managing director of Publish What You Fund.

Critics argue that aid and budget transparency movements lack evidence that 
having more freely accessible spending data will make any kind of tangible 
difference to the world's poorest people. Five months after theKenyan 
government launched its national open data initiative 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/jul/13/kenya-open-data-initiative>
, only a few projects have been established to use and investigate it. Will 
this change over time? Or as aid data becomes more available? Who knows. But 
while sceptics can continue to pick away at these efforts, they have yet to 
come up with a convincing case for keeping the books closed.
 