
She’s an Oscar-winner, a Hollywood A-lister and one of the most bankable 
actors in the world – but all that wasn’t enough to getJennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence> financial parity with her 
male co-stars in American Hustle.

The emails from Sony Pictures <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sony-pictures> 
hacked by a group called Guardians of Peace have revealed that Lawrence was 
paid considerably less than Christian Bale and Bradley Cooper. She was paid 
seven “points” (7% of the profits), as opposed to the 9% her male co-stars and 
director David O Russell received.

The Daily Beast reports 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/12/12/exclusive-sony-hack-reveals-jennifer-lawrence-is-paid-less-than-her-male-co-stars.html>
 that an email dated 5 December 2013 sent by Andrew Gumpert, president of 
business affairs and administration for Columbia Pictures, the Sony subsidiary 
which financed American Hustle, details the lack of wage parity.

The email, which was sent to Amy Pascal, co-chair of Sony Pictures 
Entertainment, reads: “Got a steve warren/gretchen rush call that it’s unfair 
the male actors get 9% in the pool and jennifer is only at 7pts.” Warren and 
Rush are Lawrence’s legal representatives.

“You may recall Jennifer was at 5 (amy was and is at 7) and WE anted in 2 
extra points for Jennifer to get her up to 7. If anyone needs to top jennifer 
up it’s megan. BUT I think amy and Jennifer are tied so upping JL, ups AA.” 
“AA” and “Amy” refer to the film’s other female lead, Amy Adams; Megan is Megan 
Ellison, head of Annapurna Pictures, which financed the film with Columbia.

Gumpert added, “The current talent deals are: O’Russell: 9%; Cooper: 9%; Bale: 
9%; [Jeremy] Renner: 9%; Lawrence: 7%; Adams: 7%.”

Pascal, who has been seriously embarrassed by the email leaks this week, 
replied: “There is truth here.”

 The hack, which may have been the work of North Korea-affiliated hackers 
objecting to the portrayal of Kim Jong-un in the Seth Rogen satire The 
Interview,has already revealed a wide gender disparity in pay throughout Sony 
Pictures 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2014/12/05/sony_pictures_hack_reveals_gender_pay_gap_at_the_entertainment_company_and.html>
.


Of the 17 employees at the company who earn more than $1m a year, only one is 
a woman. Michael de Luca, co-president of Columbia Pictures, earns almost $1m 
more than his counterpart Hannah Minghella. A leaked spreadsheet from 
consultancy firm Deloitte revealed that in 2005, 85 out of the top 100 earners 
at Sony Pictures were men.

Meanwhile, one of the few female directors in Hollywood, Ava DuVernay, whose 
film Selma has made her the first black female director to receive a Golden 
Globe nomination, described other embarrassing information revealed by the 
leaks as “sickening and sad”.

Pascal and producer Scott Rudin exchanged racially insensitive emails 
speculating on Barack Obama’s taste in films, suggesting that he would enjoy 
the likes of 12 Years a Slave, The Butler and Django Unchained.

“I have two words: sickening and sad,” DuVernay told the trade paper Variety  
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/selma-director-calls-sony-emails-sickening-and-sad-1201377767/>
at the Washington premiere of Selma.

The film’s producer, Dede Gardner, added: “It’s confusing because it’s 
obviously a private conversation that was exposed and made public to the world, 
and it’s hard, I think, for people who know those people.

“I’d like to think that it can be a very valuable lesson in how powerful the 
slightest words can be, and how lasting and impactful they are,” she said. “It 
is no joke. There are not grades of racism. There’s racism.”

On Thursday, the Rev Al Sharpton condemned the emails, saying: “What is most 
troubling about these statements is that they reflect a continued lack of 
diversity in positions of power in major Hollywood studios. The statements 
clearly show how comfortable major studio powers are with racial language and 
marginalisation. Her apology is not enough; there must be moves by her studio 
and others to respect the African American community and reflect that respect 
in their hiring and business practices.”

Pascal has since been in contact with Sharpton and Jesse Jackson, who also 
criticised the emails.

• This article was amended on 16 December 2014. An earlier version said Sony 
Pictures emails were hacked by a group calling itself Guardians of Democracy.
 