
South Africa and Ghana secured their progress into the quarter-finals of the 
African Nations Cup with victories in the final round of matches in Group B.

South Africa's 3-1 win over Morocco in Segou ensured they won the group on 
goal difference and they will now play the hosts Mali on Sunday. Ghana, who 
beat Burkina Faso 2-1, came second to set up a quarter-final against Nigeria 
also on Sunday.

South Africa, whose first two group matches had finished goalless, were 
inspired by Siyabonga Nomvete, a substitute, who set up the first two goals and 
scored the third. Ten minutes after coming on he crossed to Benni McCarthy, 
whose shot was parried by Morocco's goalkeeper Driss Benzekri only for Sibusiso 
Zuma to follow up and bundle the ball over the line.

Three minutes after half-time Nomvete breezed past a static defence to lay on 
a tap-in for Thabo Mngomeni. Nomvete turned goalscorer after 51 minutes: 
McCarthy cut in from the left before pulling the ball back for him to score 
from close range.

Morocco's only consolation came when Rachid Benmahmoud scored from the penalty 
spot five minutes later after Zuma had brought down Adil Ramzi in the area. 
Nomvete could have added a fourth but he headed wide.

In Mopti, Isaac Boakye came off the bench to force a remarkable victory for 
Ghana after they trailed 1-0 as the match entered its final minute. Boakye 
latched on to a cross in the middle of the penalty area and blasted the ball in 
to level the scores.

With news filtering through of South Africa's victory, both teams knew that 
only a win would keep them in the tournament. In injury-time Boakye stepped up 
again to fire in the winner.

Burkina Faso had earlier thought they would be going through when Amadou Toure 
curled in a free-kick with only seven minutes remaining.

The final round of matches in Group D will take place today: Senegal, who are 
already assured of qualification, play Tunisia while Egypt meet Zambia.
 