
1) Trust. Staff would be more motivated and and productive if they had more 
freedom to exercise professional judgement and were less constrained by 
targets, paperwork and micro-management. How would you restore professional 
autonomy and remotivate public services staff?
Across the public services, we will abolish top-down process driven targets, 
and instead give responsibility to those running public services. In return we 
will make public services accountable to the people who use them â€“ to patients 
and parents. In welfare, this means more payment by results. This change would 
allow us to reduce paperwork and resist micro-management, while ensuring public 
services answer to those who use them.
2) Staff and pay. There are too many unproductive jobs, too far from the 
frontline. There are too many managers, and top salaries are too high. Where 
would you make staffing cuts, will you cap executive pay, and what role in any 
shake up would there be for alternative providers, such as the private, social 
enterprise and voluntary sectors?

We see a much greater role for third sector providers of public services 
funded by the taxpayer. Our reforms to make public services accountable to 
users will put money in the hands of parents and patients, so that taxpayers' 
money gets to the school and hospital, instead of being directed from Whitehall 
through layers of bureaucracy.

3) Sure Start principles. There's too much spending on "picking up the pieces" 
services or knee-jerk policy responses to media headlines. How would you 
rebalance investment to encourage long-term preventative services like Sure 
Start or prisoner rehabilitation schemes, and in which policy areas?

We need a more joined-up and long-term approach to providing public services. 
So for example we will enhance Sure Start by making it more health-led, to 
ensure that public health priorities and family support are more closely 
integrated. In health we will focus on outcomes, including public health 
outcomes, instead of narrow process targets that distort clinical priorities. 
And in welfare, with radical changes to pay providers by results we will ensure 
that we can help more people, faster, and in so doing reduce the long-term cost 
of benefits.

4) People power. Listen to those who use services. Too much spending reflects 
the needs of providers, not users. How would you ensure user "voice" is 
incorporated into commissioning, design and provision of services? How far 
would you hand spending power to users, such as through individual budgets?

We are committed to providing public services like health and education free 
at the point of use, and to getting budgets into the hands of users of public 
services. This will allow those who use public services to drive priorities, 
and will ensure providers' professional responsibility is restored while 
services are also more accountable to users.

5) Scrap grandiose schemes. The billions spent on national databases, like 
those for children, and huge IT systems are better spent on frontline services. 
In a funding squeeze hospital and school building schemes should be scaled 
down. Do you agree?

We would scrap the ContactPoint childrens' database, and are against the 
centralised national health database. Having said that, we will protect the 
health budget, so will ensure that that budget continues to rise in real terms 
despite the very difficult public finance problems we face as a country.
 