
The devastating rise in Alaska’s wildfires is making global warming even worse 
than scientists expected, US government researchers said on Wednesday.

The sharp spike in Alaska’s wildfires, where more than 5 million acres burned 
last year, are destroying a main buffer against climate change: the carbon-rich 
boreal forests, tundra and permafrost that have served as an enormous carbon 
sink.

Northern wildfires must now be recognised as a significant driver of climate 
change <http://pubs.usgs.gov/pp/1826/pp1826.pdf>– and not just a side-effect, 
according to the report from the US Geological Survey.

“This is one of the surprises that we haven’t talked about much,” said 
Virginia Burkett, chief climate scientist at the USGS. “It has tremendous 
implications for the carbon that is locked up inAlaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> soils and vegetation.”

A record wildfire year – such as 2015 which was the worst in Alaska for a 
decade – had a measurable effect on the release of carbon dioxide and methane, 
which are the main drivers of climate change.

“Our scientists found that the balance of carbon storage versus release in 
Alaska was strongly linked with wildfires,” Burkett said. “In years where there 
was high wildfire activity the net carbon balance declined dramatically, and 
then it would rebuild in the absence of fire.”

Alaska is a far bigger storehouse for carbon than the lower 48 states, 
according to the USGS.


The state’s boreal forests, peat-rich tundra, and permafrost hold about 53% of 
US carbon. Alaska accounts for about 18% of US land mass.

Alaska currently absorbs about 3.7m tonnes of carbon a year, the USGS 
assessment found. But that vast storehouse of carbon has been breached by 
warming temperatures, thawing permafrost – and wildfire.

The USGS warned last year that Alaska could lose about a quarter of its 
permafrost by 2100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/09/alaska-permafrost-melting-us-geological-survey-study>
, accelerating climate change.

In an average year, Alaska wildfires devour twice the area burned by wildfires 
in all of the lower 48 – and emit more greenhouse gases than all of those other 
wildfires combined, the USGS said.

Such fires across the northern US and Canada – which last month forced the 
evacuation of 80,000 from the Alberta tar sands town of Fort McMurray – were 
projected to increase over the coming decades as the climate continues to warm.

When it comes to wildfires, there is a triple effect on warming. Carbon stored 
in trees as well as the upper layers of soil is released back into the 
atmosphere during a fire. The burn also exposes the carbon-rich permafrost 
beneath, making it thaw more easily.

The northern US and Canada have already experienced a sharp rise in wildfires 
over the last few decades, with more to come.

Researchers predict a fourfold increase in northern wildfires because of 
warming and changes in rainfall, extending even to areas above the treeline.

The Arctic smashed through earlier heat records over this last winter – with 
temperatures at the North Pole hovering above zero degrees Celsius at the end 
of last year.


There were also shortages of snow, with organisers of the legendary Iditarod 
resorting to importing truckloads of white stuff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/24/iditarod-climate-change-sled-dogs-winter-alaska>
 for the start of the dog sled race.


The hotter and drier conditions were a recipe for more wildfires – with 
lightning strikes igniting more easily in drier soils and vegetation, and 
higher temperatures spreading the flames.

 If average July temperatures top 13.4C (56.1F), there could be a big jump in 
wildfires in tundra regions such as Alaska’s North Slope and the 
Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta that were once too damp and cold to burn, theresearchers 
found 
<http://www.adn.com/alaska-news/science/2016/05/30/warming-fires-warming-fires-how-tundra-wildfires-could-create-an-unstoppable-cycle/>
.
 
<http://www.adn.com/alaska-news/science/2016/05/30/warming-fires-warming-fires-how-tundra-wildfires-could-create-an-unstoppable-cycle/>
 