
In a bar around the corner from Père Lachaise 
<http://www.pere-lachaise.com/perelachaise.php?lang=en> cemetery, Caroline 
Proust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/may/03/meet-spirals-feminist-anti-hero>
 cheerfully discusses the song she has recorded about the end of the world. She 
sets out her plans for a film about the death penalty. And she assures me that 
the next season ofSpiral <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/spiral> will 
be appropriately awful for Laure Berthaud, the ragged yet dogged police captain 
she has played for 10 years. “Of course, it will be horrible,” she says, a grin 
breaking out across her gamine face. “Of course! That’s what people want, I 
guess.”

The gallows humour is perhaps inevitable for someone who has starred for so 
long in the relentlessly thrilling and unflinchingly grim TV series. Spiral is 
known for its watch-through-your-hands crime scenes, so gruesome that 
Berthaud’s colleagues occasionally vomit upon seeing them. Proust explains that 
much of the series is filmed around this patch of eastern Paris and its 
neighbouring, run-down suburbs. She points to an abandoned track that the bar 
overlooks. “We could shoot here, you know? This is the old railway … If you’re 
walking here, you can meet weird people around.” I suggest it could be a future
Spiral <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/spiral> crime scene, but it 
turns out they’ve already filmed one nearby, for season three, in which 
Berthaud’s team chase a serial killer. “You remember the season?” she prompts 
jauntily. “Where the girl is found in a plastic bag?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxF-v_qKLr8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxF-v_qKLr8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxF-v_qKLr8&media=>
Spiral’s Paris is not exactly the city of Amélie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B-uxeZaM-VM> and the Eiffel Tower 
<http://www.toureiffel.paris/en.html>. The show’s great achievement is to offer 
a comprehensive portrait of the French capital’s modern-day malaise by 
combining, asThe Wire did in Baltimore <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire>
, the fine detail of the police procedural; credible characters who we care 
about; and plot lines driven by vital issues. In Spiral’s case, these include 
drugs, sex trafficking, terrorism and immigration.

The last of these is much on Proust’s mind at the moment. At the same time as 
embarking on the earliest preparations for series six of Spiral, she is 
currently appearing, on the other side of town, in a French-language revival of 
Arthur Miller’s A View from the Bridge, directed byIvo van Hove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ivo-van-hove>. She plays Beatrice, the wife 
of Brooklyn longshoreman Eddie Carbone. The arrival of Beatrice’s impoverished 
Italian cousins Marco and Rodolpho, as illegal immigrants in New York, triggers 
the play’s tragic outcome. Marco’s lines about his family’s hunger, and his 
desperation to find a better life, sound as urgent as ever. “We are all in 
tragedy now,” Proust observes, “with this problem of the migrants.” She adds: 
‘“I think there is kind of an empathy with the migrants from everyone, I guess 
– well, not from the far right, of course, those kinds of people … don’t want 
to share anything.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F19%2F1445263370670%2F0c1af6a0-97f3-4809-b1a2-c94b7ebd3961-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spiral's%20Caroline%20Proust%3A%20cast%20me%20as%20anyone%20but%20a%20cop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spiral%27s%20Caroline%20Proust%3A%20cast%20me%20as%20anyone%20but%20a%20cop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F19%2F1445263370670%2F0c1af6a0-97f3-4809-b1a2-c94b7ebd3961-2060x1374.jpeg>
 Caroline Proust in season three of Spiral. Photograph: Nathalie Mazeas/Son et 
Lumiere/Canal+ 
Van Hove’s groundbreaking production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/02/ultimate-production-ivo-van-hove-arthur-miller-theatre>
 was first seen in 2014 at the Young Vic in London, withMark Strong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/23/mark-strong-interview-stark-bare-brutal-arthur-miller>
 as Eddie andNicola Walker 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/10735392/Nicola-Walker-Ive-got-a-feisty-face.html>
 as Beatrice. Proust saw it when ittransferred to the West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/17/view-from-the-bridge-review-ivo-van-hove-arthur-miller>
 earlier this year. The Paris production is staged at theAteliers Berthier 
<http://www.theatre-odeon.eu/en/ateliers-berthier-3>, a former warehouse for 
sets that became a temporary home for the city’s Odéon theatre when it was 
being renovated, and has since served as the Odéon’s second stage. An unfussy 
space with exposed metal beams, it perfectly suits Van Hove and designer Jan 
Versweyveld’s bold reinvention of the play, told on a starkly lit thrust stage. 
The Carbones’ apartment is, as detailed by Miller’s stage directions, clean and 
sparse – but the similarities end there. The stage is largely empty, the actors 
perform barefoot, and the tragedy unfolds to a trance-inducing loop ofGabriel 
Fauré’s Requiem <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UnilUPXmipM>, occasionally 
broken by deathly drum beats.

After reading the play, Proust had her doubts about playing Beatrice. “When 
Ivo proposed the role to me, I asked … if I could speak with him to understand 
more than I read,” she says. “I was very lucky last year. I played in August: 
Osage County [a touring production of Tracy Letts’ Pulitzer prize-winning 
drama]. It’s a great play and I had a great part … I was wondering if I could 
be happy with this part.” She needn’t have worried. In Van Hove’s production, 
the tragedy is convincingly shared by Beatrice and all of the characters – it 
does not just belong to Eddie.

We are all in tragedy now with this problem of the migrants
Caroline Proust 
Miller’s tragedy had its Broadway debut 60 years ago in a one-act version that 
the playwright himself said was “regarded as rather cold” by audiences. He 
expanded the play, developing the female characters, and a two-act version 
premiered the following year in London, directed by Peter Brook. That version 
went on to Paris. So it was Europe that made the play’s reputation and it is 
Van Hove’s version, in these two capitals, that has redefined that reputation. 
(Strong and Walker will now reprise their roles in aBroadway transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/11/young-vic-view-from-the-bridge-broadway-arthur-miller>
, which starts previewing this week.)


Seeing the play in Paris is every bit as electrifying as it was at the Young 
Vic. One of the most powerful scenes, in both stagings, comes when Beatrice 
confronts her husband about their dormant sex life and asks him when she will 
become a wife again. Proust, whose habitual Spiral attire is a grubby vest and 
a leather jacket, wears the same design of drab blouse and skirt worn by Walker 
when she played Beatrice in London. But Proust explains that she decided to 
paint her toenails for this barefoot production. “It’s a grey varnish, very 
light. But I wanted Beatrice to have this. She is definitely trying to keep her 
husband back, in her bed. We need to see that she’s still feminine.”


Voyeurs of tragedy: the intimate designs of Jan Versweyveld
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ng-interactive/2015/aug/18/designs-jan-versweyveld-antigone-view-from-the-bridge>
Van Hove tells me that Proust “understands very well the broad scope of 
Beatrice’s emotional inner world. She can switch smoothly between the loving 
woman and a tough lioness.” In some scenes, she alternates between despair and 
fury in a heartbeat. Her body language – stiff, awkward, uneasy – makes a 
counterpoint to the relaxed, tactile affection shared by Eddie and his 
17-year-old niece, Catherine, for whom he harbours unspeakable feelings and who 
he will not let grow up. Proust says that Beatrice is a “submissive woman” and 
remains a character stuck in the 1950s, but points to how she “helps Catherine 
to be a woman, to have work, and to be independent”.

Proust says she was 17 when she decided to be an actor. She has twin 
14-year-old daughters who are, themselves, “wondering what kind of work to do. 
They don’t know yet what they will become.” Their father, and Proust’s former 
husband, is the César award-winning actor Clovis Cornillac, best known for
playing Asterix on screen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I4IwYe5N1o0> and for 
starring alongside Audrey Tautou in A Very Long Engagement (2004). Proust and 
Cornillac co-starred in several films, including the ultra-violent Scorpion 
(2007), in which she plays a journalist and he is a washed-up kickboxer making 
a comeback.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F20%2F1445337272030%2F462389b3-1a1b-4dc3-9861-e86c83fac859-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spiral's%20Caroline%20Proust%3A%20cast%20me%20as%20anyone%20but%20a%20cop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spiral%27s%20Caroline%20Proust%3A%20cast%20me%20as%20anyone%20but%20a%20cop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F20%2F1445337272030%2F462389b3-1a1b-4dc3-9861-e86c83fac859-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A shared tragedy … (l-r) Pauline Cheviller, Laurent Papot, Nicolas Avinée, 
Charles Berling, Alain Fromager and Proust in Ivo van Hove’s production of A 
View from the Bridge in Paris. Photograph: Jan Versweyveld 
Her CV is littered with such thrillers and crime movies. Proust been typecast 
for years, not just because of Spiral but also because of her earlier role as a 
police officer in the film Le Cousin (1997), directed byAlain Corneau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/aug/31/alain-corneau-obituary>. “I was 
worried about my capacity to be a cop,” she remembers. “I said, ‘I don’t know 
how to carry a gun. I don’t know anything about being a cop.’ [Corneau] said, 
‘Don’t worry, we’ll prepare you. So I went to police school, I worked with real 
policemen.” She went on stakeouts and underwent physical training. “And then I 
did my job, and people believed that I was a cop. And after that I was proposed 
on TV for cop characters … Give me nurse, give me everything, but not cop.”

Even her first English-language role was in a crime series, albeit a cosy one. 
In 2014, she joined a classy cast includingNikki Amuka-Bird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/29/her-work-haunts-me-caryl-by-those-that-have-worked-with-her>
 andPippa Bennett-Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2014/dec/01/devil-in-the-detail-microplay-fashion-guardian-royal-court-video>
 for an episode of the BBC1 Caribbean whodunnitDeath in Paradise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/mar/01/doll-and-em-death-in-paradise-necessary-war-review>
. Proust played the stony-faced personal assistant of an unscrupulous property 
developer who is murdered at his luxurious island home. The gig brought, at the 
very least, a nice view. “It was very fun because they shoot in Guadeloupe. It 
was interesting to shoot in English but it was my first time so I was a bit 
worried. We did it very quickly … and I was not so happy at the end.” She is 
quick to praise her co-stars and the director, but says: “You don’t have any 
time to prepare. That’s always the case – that’s the difference between TV and 
film.” She expresses particular horror at the number of outfits she was allowed 
to choose from.

Recently Proust was in the running for a comedy but didn’t get the part, she 
says, because it was felt that she was too associated with drama. “I’m not a 
cop,” she sighs once more. “I’m an actress, I can do many things.” It’s why 
she’s taking matters into her own hands and originating more projects. Just 
before we meet she has been in discussions with her producers. “We are 
preparing a movie which I’m participating in writing. I brought the idea. It’s 
a love story and a thriller. It’s about the death penalty. A story between a 
French woman who married a man who is on death row.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F20%2F1445337467562%2Fcb924295-e7d1-400e-ba2a-23e4034ce64b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spiral's%20Caroline%20Proust%3A%20cast%20me%20as%20anyone%20but%20a%20cop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spiral%27s%20Caroline%20Proust%3A%20cast%20me%20as%20anyone%20but%20a%20cop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F20%2F1445337467562%2Fcb924295-e7d1-400e-ba2a-23e4034ce64b-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘You think that Berthaud could be happy?’ … Caroline Proust. Photograph: 
Laurentvu/Sipa/Rex Shutterstock 
Like most of the principal actors in Spiral, Proust started out in the 
theatre. She has described herself as a child of Edward Bond, and she cites the 
directorsPatrice Chéreau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/oct/08/patrice-chereau>, Peter Brook, 
Giorgio Strehler and Deborah Warner among her inspirations. Her stage roles 
have included Ophelia, in a 1996 Hamlet directed by Philippe Adrien forThéâtre 
de la Tempête <http://www.la-tempete.fr/>. She came in as a last-minute 
replacement, with one week of rehearsal. “I tried to understand the madness of 
Ophelia. And I understood that she was raped by her father,” she says. “I think 
Polonius raped his daughter and his son … I think Hamlet is about paedophilia.” 
A couple of years later she was in Marivaux’sThe Game of Love and Chance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/1999/apr/28/artsfeatures2>, directed by 
Jean-Pierre Vincent. Its tour went to the Barbican in London, as well as to the 
US. She smiles: “Marivaux is delicious to play.” More recently, she was in a 
Parisian production of Love, Loss, and What I Wore, written by Nora and Delia 
Ephron.

Since starting Spiral, Proust has managed to fit in half a dozen stage roles, 
alongside the movie and TV appearances. It takes between seven and nine months 
to film a season and the episodes are often shot in two or three batches to 
accommodate late changes to the scripts, which are inspired by real cases. The 
showrunner, Anne Landois, consults the police, prosecutors, lawyers and a judge 
while researching the series. “The sixth season,” says Proust, “will be about 
corruption” – in the law, the police and in the characters’ personal lives. “We 
will start shooting in May so you have to be patient.” This means UK audiences 
are unlikely to see it until 2017. At the end of season five, the pregnant 
Berthaud suffers a severe stab wound. Is she going to be OK? “What do you think 
she could be?” laughs Proust. “You think that she could be happy? You think we 
are going to tell a story about, ‘Oh, everything is nice in our nice world, our 
pink world’? … It’s not possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F20%2F1445337770636%2Fc07c32c4-492e-46a6-aa45-52ab8644135e-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spiral's%20Caroline%20Proust%3A%20cast%20me%20as%20anyone%20but%20a%20cop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spiral%27s%20Caroline%20Proust%3A%20cast%20me%20as%20anyone%20but%20a%20cop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Fspiral-caroline-proust-view-from-the-bridge-ivo-van-hove%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F20%2F1445337770636%2Fc07c32c4-492e-46a6-aa45-52ab8644135e-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The Spiral cast in 2006 (l-r): Thierry Godard, Fred Bianconi, Gregory 
Fitoussi, Philippe Duclos, Audrey Fleurot and Proust. Photograph: BBC/Canal Plus
Proust is passionate and proud when talking about Spiral, and clearly loves 
Berthaud and her co-stars dearly, but she admits she is exhausted when they get 
to the end of filming a series. I’d heard that she enjoys singing – perhaps she 
could take time out to record an album? “I don’t have time to do everything,” 
she says. “But I’d really love to do that.” A while back, with a guitarist 
friend, she recorded the Beatles’ Yesterday and Eleanor Rigby, as well as a 
couple of Serge Gainsbourg songs. Those covers led them to record a track 
responding to the Fukushima disaster and a poem about, she says, “the end of 
the world”.

What about something a bit lighter, a bit of a song and dance on stage? Her 
eyes sparkle: “I’d love to be in a musical.” She remembers the joy of hearing 
those songs she recorded with her friend. “When you are an actor, you see 
yourself on the screen and you say, ‘I’m like that? I’m walking like that? I’m 
talking like that? I’m awful! I hate me!” She screws up her face in disgust. 
“But when I heard my voice? I liked it. It was very surprising …”

 * A View from the Bridge (Vu du Pont) is at the Ateliers Berthier in Paris 
until 21 November 
<http://www.theatre-odeon.eu/en/2015-2016/spectacles/a-view-bridge>  