
The 1980s were littered with double acts, some great, others less so: the Two 
Ronnies, Little and Large, Cannon and Ball, Chas and Dave, Kylie and Jason, 
Crockett and Tubbs. Here are some sporting partnerships of the decade, 
including tales of success and failure, arguments, romance and record breakers.

Gordon Greenidge and Desmond Haynes

Where better to start than arguably the finest opening partnership to have 
graced cricket. Gordon Greenidge and Desmond Haynes were the bedrock of the 
West Indian batting line-up for 13 years, including the whole of the 1980s, as 
international bowlers tried manfully to break through at the top of the 
innings, in order to have the joy of bowling at the likes of Richards and 
Lloyd. Although the decade would start with the West Indies' only series defeat 
in New Zealand, the duo still found time to put on 225 inthe drawn second Test 
at Auckland <http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/63260.html>. It was a 
sign of things to come.

Their partnership didn't always succeed, opening the innings in a Test is 
fraught with dangers, but throughout the era of West Indian dominance, 
Greenidge and Haynes delivered regularly. AWest Indian record 296-run 
partnership for the opening wicket against India in St John's 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/63339.html> (beaten by the same 
pair in 1990 versus England); three century partnerships in the Caribbean 
during the 1984 Australian tour, including an unbroken 250 at Georgetown; 
century stands in the tone-setting opening Test of a series on four occasions.

I could continue to list their achievements, but numbers alone do not do 
justice to the axis formed between the Barbadians. Oh OK, I will: in the 1980s 
alone they shared 13 century-plus partnerships, 20 half-century stands, scoring 
5,097 runs in the process. When they were finally parted after Greenidge's 
retirement in 1991, a major part of the West Indian machine had been removed. 
In truth, they have never been replaced, but as England found with Ian Botham, 
and Australia with Shane Warne and Glenn McGrath, how do you cope with the loss 
of greatness?

Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean

A couple that could well feature in a blog of their own one day, Jayne Torvill 
and Christopher Dean are synonymous with the 1980s, their performances on the 
ice rink thrilling a nation. Golds at four World and three European 
championships were enough on their own, but their performance in the 1984 
Olympics to Ravel's Bolero in Sarajevo seemed perfection, nine sixes for 
artistic impression reflecting this.

A reported 24m people watched the gold-medal performance, the vast majority 
probably wondering whether the couple were an item off the rink too, which 
played a tiny part in their appeal to the general public. They may not have 
formed a romantic union, but they were always viewed as a single entity; they 
won the Sports Personality of the Year in 1984 and it didn't seem possible for 
either of the pair to function without the other.

I'll share this with the class: I am not the biggest fan of ice-skating as a 
sport. I much prefer things to be decided through goals, runs, penalties, 
points, seconds, metres and tries, than to leave the outcome in the hands of 
judges (my disgust at the marks given to Torvill and Dean at the 1994 Olympics 
still remains to this day).

But there are times when you simply have to appreciate something for what it 
is, admit that you were perhaps wrong in your judgement and stand up and 
applaud like that Russian President at the end of Rocky IV. I still watch that 
display in Sarajevo and admire the pure genius before my eyes (voted number 
eight in Channel 4's Top 100 Sporting Moments in 2002). In fact, I think I'll 
go and watch it now.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKcCj0xfO3H8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKcCj0xfO3H8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKcCj0xfO3H8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Steve Davis and Tony Meo

On the face of it, snooker is a fairly individual sport, yet during the 
popularity boom of the 1980s, a new concept was introduced that would change 
this outlook. In 1982, a World Doubles Championship was inaugurated, the very 
first winners being the English pair ofSteve Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steve-davis> and Tony Meo. For Davis, 
winning was second nature, but for his partner, it was anything but.

In a way, it must have been hard for Meo to partner such an illustrious man in 
Davis. Win, and people would probably dismiss Meo's role in achieving the 
success, lose and the suspicion would be that Meo was dragging his partner 
down. Either way, it didn't really matter. Meo was a fine doubles player, his 
role in the 1982 victory in particular helping to boost Davis, who had been 
experiencing a relative lack of confidence due to an unusual loss of form.

In all, Davis and Meo would win the Hofmeister World Doubles four times (1982, 
1983, 1985 and 1986), and despite an early exit in the last ever tournament in 
1987, the duo would forever hold their record of being the dominant force in 
this format of the game. Regardless of who was the better player, you can't 
really argue with that.

Martina Navratilova and Pam Shriver

Without doubt, the finest women's doubles partnership of the 1980s, and maybe 
all time. Their partnership was obviously helped by the fact that half of the 
team was one of the greatest women to have ever played the sport, but that 
should detract nothing from Shriver, who was a six-time grand-slam 
semi-finalist, a US Open runner-up, and a top-four player in her own right.

Their roll of honour during the 1980s is remarkable. If you are unlucky enough 
to be involved in a debate about the best tennis doubles team of all-time 
(unlikely I know), then you could simply rattle of the following list of 
achievements, and end it with a David Brent style "Next".

Seven Australian Opens, five Wimbledons, four US Opens, four French Opens, the 
1984 Golden Slam, a 109-match unbeaten run from 1983 to 1985, nine WTA 
Championships in the decade, and being named the WTA Doubles Team of the Year 
from 1981 until 1988. Next.

David Bryant and Tony Allcock

This may surprise you, but this is my first foray into the sport of bowls in 
the 1980s. The iconic figure for me during this period was the pipe-smoking 
David Bryant CBE. Bryant dominated the sport from the mid-1960s and in the 
1980s alone won two outdoors world titles, two indoors titles and was given the 
glory of winning the Pipe Smoker of the Year in 1986.

Challengers came along through the years, and one such rival was Tony Allcock. 
The young pretender to Bryant's throne would have many battles with the elder 
statesman and, although the pair were different in so many ways, there was a 
mutual respect as Allcock admitted in 2003: "David was a god but we were 
actually very close friends despite our different images and close rivalry."

The two players put their rivalry aside and combined their might to 
successfully win six world indoor pairs championsships (three each in the 1980s 
and the 1990s). Not all partnerships involving two greats click – yes Tiger and 
Phil, I am looking at you – but in the case of Allcock and Bryant, it was very 
much a case of the whole and sum of the parts being generally greater than 
anything else that the world of bowls had to offer at the time.

Barry McGuigan and Barney Eastwood

Not all of these sporting marriages have a happy ending. After turning 
professional in 1981, Barry McGuigan teamed up with the Belfast bookmaker 
Barney Eastwood, even living with his manager for a year during the early days 
of his professional career.

Through all the highs and lows, McGuigan would always thank Eastwood in any 
interview, to such an extent that future Father Ted star Dermot Morgan released 
a comedy single mocking McGuigan's catchphrase, which was so popular that it 
was the Christmas Number One in Ireland in 1985.

The pair enjoyed an enormous amount of success together, culminating in the 
unforgettable night at Loftus Road in 1985, when McGuigan defeated Eusebio 
Pedroza to win the WBA World featherweight championship. After two successful 
defences, McGuigan travelled to Las Vegas to take on a supposed no-hoper in 
Steve Cruz. If the story of McGuigan's time at the top ended in the searing 
heat of a car park in Caesars Palace, then unfortunately it was the beginning 
of a whole new saga in the father-son relationship between boxer and manager.

McGuigan's 15th-round defeat was demoralising enough, but what was to follow 
was a sad deterioration in the friendship between the pair. Within a year they 
had split, and as time progressed things worsened. Eastwood accused McGuigan of 
libel after allegations made with regards to the Cruz fight in a video produced 
on McGuigan's career in 1988. He received a reported £450,000 (plus costs) in 
1992 after a court case. As messy divorces go, this was right up there.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyHxrDcAjf60%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyHxrDcAjf60%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FyHxrDcAjf60%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Steve Bull and Andy Mutch

In football, the cool partnerships always seem to be up front, although as an 
Arsenal fan, I do recall fondly the poetry in motion of an offside trap 
orchestrated by Steve Bould and Tony Adams.

A quick analysis of some of the league champions during the decade stresses 
the importance of a fine strike duo: Gary Shaw and Peter Withe, Kenny Dalglish 
and Ian Rush, Graeme Sharp andAndy Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-gray>, John Aldridge and Peter 
Beardsley, and Paul Merson and Alan Smith. But I have chosen a pair who helped 
to rejuvenate a dead giant, one in desperate need of the kiss of life in the 
mid-1980s.

Wolves were in a pitiful state in 1986. Three relegations in succession, 
massively in debt, and with parts of Molineux closed down, the club entered the 
1986-87 season tentatively, in what was to be their first season in the bottom 
flight of English football.

As one dreaded partnership vanished (the Bhatti brothers), another was about 
to form: on 20 November 1986, Steve Bull was signed for a paltry £64,000 from 
local rivals West Brom to team up with Andy Mutch, a player who had been 
playing for non-league Southport until the previous February. The rest is 
history.

Wolves were ninth in the table before the arrival of Bull 
<http://www.statto.com/football/stats/england/division-four-old/1986-1987/table/1986-11-09>
, having scored just 18 goals in 16 matches. Come the end of the season, the 
club had climbed to fourth, narrowly missing out on automatic promotion and 
then losing in the play-offs, with Bull scoring 19 goals along the way.

It was a teaser of what was to follow. In 1987-88, Wolves won the Fourth 
Division with Bull and Mutch scoring 53 of their 82 league goals (Bull scored 
34 league goals and 52 in all competitions; Mutch knocked in 19). Mutch scored 
a goal in the club's Sherpa Van Trophy final win over Burnley (watched by 
80,841 spectators).

They were not finished there. In the 1988-89 season Wolves cantered to the 
Division Three title, the duo netting 58 of the club's 96 league goals (Bull 
37, Mutch 21). They were both rewarded with call-ups to the England B and 
Under-21 squads, Bull going even further by scoring on his full international 
debut against Scotland.

Bull often received the greater recognition, justifiably so giving his 
goalscoring records, but speaking in 1997, he was quick to praise Mutch for the 
role he played in their partnership: "We had a bond, an instinctive thing. I 
never felt Andy got enough credit. He scored over 100 goals here but could have 
had more if he hadn't been so unselfish."

Wolves fans can certainly be thankful that the pair hit it off from the start, 
the Bull and Mutch partnership arriving in the right place at the right time, 
helping to drag the team from rock bottom to happier days.

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>

• This blog first appeared on That 1980s Sports Blog 
<http://that1980ssportsblog.blogspot.co.uk/>

• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter <https://twitter.com/1980sSportsBlog>
 