
Former SBS sports reporter Scott McIntyre is taking legal action against the 
broadcasterafter he was sacked for tweeting controversial views about Anzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/26/sbs-sports-reporter-scott-mcintyre-sacked-over-direspectful-anzac-tweets>
.

His lawyers, Maurice Blackburn, filed a discrimination claim on Monday with 
the Fair Work Commission.

The experienced football journalist was fired 12 hours after posting a series 
of tweets on Anzac Day that the communications minister,Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, described as 
“despicable” on Twitter the same evening.


SBS sports reporter Scott McIntyre sacked over 'despicable' Anzac tweets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/26/sbs-sports-reporter-scott-mcintyre-sacked-over-direspectful-anzac-tweets>
McIntyre began his tweets on the centenary of the Gallipoli landings by 
criticising what he said was the “cultification [sic] of an imperialist 
invasion”.

“Remembering the summary execution, widespread rape and theft committed by 
these brave Anzacs in Egypt, Palestine and Japan,” he said.


Turnbull has admitted communicating his dismay about McIntyre’s posts to the 
managing director of SBS, Michael Ebeid, the night before theSBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs> staffer was sacked.

Ebeid later said McIntyre’s remarks were inappropriate and disrespectful, and 
that they breached the broadcaster’s code of conduct and social media policy.


McIntyre’s lawyers are claiming SBS breached its policies, including its code 
of conduct, and did not follow due process when the broadcaster dismissed 
McIntyre less than 24 hours after he posted his views onTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>.

“The case is not about whether Mr McIntyre’s opinions are correct or not, 
Maurice Blackburn spokeswoman Amanda Tattam said in a statement.


“It will focus on whether the views expressed by Mr McIntyre constituted 
political opinion and whether SBS terminated his employment for expressing 
these views. Section 351 of the Fair Work Act protects employees from adverse 
action by their employer (including sacking) if they express political opinion.

“It is alleged SBS took action without a proper investigation and 
consideration of all relevant issues. It will be contended that Mr McIntyre had 
an unblemished work record and if a proper process had been followed, he would 
still be employed in his chosen career.


Turnbull has denied he influenced SBS to sack McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/27/malcolm-turnbull-denies-influencing-sbs-sacking-of-reporter-for-anzac-tweets>
. “Mr McIntyre, as a private citizen, is entitled to express his political 
views, but in his capacity as a reporter employed by SBS he has to comply with, 
and face the consequences of ignoring, the SBS social media protocol … a number 
of provisions of which were breached by him with his offensive tweets,” 
Turnbull wrote on his blog.

“The management of SBS, however, not the government, is responsible for 
staffing decisions at SBS.”


Ken Shipp, director of sport at SBS, told staff McIntyre was sacked for 
disobeying an order to delete the posts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/27/malcolm-turnbull-denies-influencing-sbs-sacking-of-reporter-for-anzac-tweets>
. SBS said on Monday: “As this is now a legal matter SBS is unable to comment 
at this time.”

McIntyre will be represented by Maurice Blackburn and barristers Michael Lee 
SC and Siobhan Keating. McIntyre was unavailable for comment.
 