
Another week, another chance to wonder whether those loudly vowing to clean up 
sport in our name are really the uncompromised crusaders of their own mythology.

To the Palace of Westminster, then, and a thrilling mention in dispatches for 
our up-and-coming friend the International Centre for Sports Security. Do you 
remember this “sports integrity” outfit,touched upon in this space last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/20/fifa-iaaf-tennis-icss-sport>
? Set up to push for greater transparency in the bidding processes for major 
events and to safeguard nothing less than the integrity of sport, its savagely 
self-satirising punchline is that it is literally funded by the government of 
Qatar, which seems like it really wants to get to the bottom of why it hosted 
more than 40 international events last year, is condemned by any number of 
human rights organisations for the staggering death toll among migrant and 
indentured workers building the infrastructure for such things, and was the 
beneficiary of a bidding process that saw it awarded the 2022 World Cup but 
which is currently under investigation by both the FBI and Swiss prosecutors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/may/27/fifa-officials-arrested-on-corruption-charges-live>
.

Meanwhile, in a development unlikely to send casual observers into shock, it 
was claimed on Tuesday that Doha’s bids for the 2017 and 2019 world 
championships have now beenreferred to the IAAF ethics commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/26/doha-2017-2019-world-championships-bid-under-investigation-iaaf-ethics-commision>
.

The ICSS gets really pissy if you mention the local connection, though. “The 
Qatar government has nothing to do with it at all,”the organisation’s president 
Mohammed Hanzab recently snapped 
<http://www.sportsintegrityinitiative.com/icss-denies-claims-it-is-working-for-qatars-benefit/>
. “It is true that it is 70% funded by the Qatar government” – perhaps that 
accounts for people’s confusion – “and 30% is funded through projects we run 
... I have said to many people: ‘If you can secure me the 70% from other 
governments, from other foundations, then I will be happy, as I will be a free 
man and I will not face this question wherever I go.’”

Adidas to end sponsorship of IAAF over doping scandal – reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/adidas-iaaf-end-sponsorship-report>
I do hope that no one was unmannerly enough to bring it up on Monday night, 
because that was a big staging post on the ICSS’s comic caper of a journey 
towards credibility. Its work was commended at a private event hosted by ICSS 
lobbyists in the Speaker’s state rooms at the House of Commons. Singing its 
praises was none other than New Fifa Now co-founderDamian Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/18/fifa-tory-mp-damian-collins-world-cup-qatar>
. “There has never been a time when debate and scrutiny of the governance of 
sport has been greater than it is today,” Mr Collins declared. “I commend the 
ICSS’s work in taking a lead and promoting good governance and sport integrity 
worldwide.”

Is that what it is up to? It certainly seems to have a constant stream of new 
initiatives. Last summer ICSS lobbyists were in Washington pushing one called 
Financial Integrity and Transparency in Sport. Now they’re in Westminster 
punting the Sport Integrity Global Alliance. I trust the Random Initiative 
Title Generator will throw out something like a Transparent World Alliance for 
Truth in Sport (TWATS) in time for spring.

On this occasion, the reception was obligingly staged by the Speaker to ink an 
agreement between the Commonwealth Games Foundation and the ICSS, which will 
apparently now “independently audit the CGF’s governance model”. As for who 
will independently audit the ICSS’s governance model, that is unclear. I move 
for some kind of supra-supra body headed up byDoha’s Richard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jun/04/richard-keys-world-cup-2022-qatar>
.

I can’t imagine where the money swilling round these type of ventures would 
lead if you followed it. One thing we have to go on is the invitation to the 
event, a copy of which I have seen, which comprises a nebulous call to arms to 
“the industry, including the sports bodies, sponsors, media, governments, 
international authorities, NGOs and other key stakeholders”.

Oof. Hands down, that’s my favourite definition of the tribes that make up 
modern sport, reading like a Who’s Who of people who couldn’t really give a 
toss about it except as far as it aligns with their own interests.

Tennis authorities to review anti-corruption unit after match-fixing 
allegations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/tennis-authorities-to-review-anti-corruption-unit-after-match-fixing-allegations>
Anyone who thinks that sport is truly about the athletes and the fans will 
note that these irrelevances are the only two “stakeholders” absolutely nowhere 
to be seen, and unlikely ever to get a look-in. Yet the need for them to drive 
an actual stake through the heart of this deathless industry has never seemed 
more pressing, as the latest party in a seemingly eternal parade of suits 
arrives to profit from the failings of the last set.

Champagne moment for Keys and Gray

Speaking of Richard Keys, he alerts the world to an important commemorative 
date 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/24/andy-gray-richard-keys-sexist-comments>
. “Happy anniversary Andy,” he tweets this week, with reference to his 
broadcasting buddy Andy Gray. “5 years after one of the biggest carve ups in TV 
history.”

Maybe even in the whole of history. “I had to have a glass tonight!’ concludes 
Richard, above a picture of the pair clinking champagne glasses in an airport 
Caviar House.

A Caviar House – but of course. I confess to finding Caviar Houses a perennial 
sources of fascination when in a terminal. Their patrons always seem to be 
people somehow emboldened by “the airport experience” to act like their fantasy 
version of themselves – which turns out to be someone who’d pay through the 
nose to drink champagne on a leatherette bar stool, their back grandly turned 
on the people browsing universal adaptors a few feet behind them. In the 
airport of the world, I suspect Doha is the Caviar House, and we should 
congratulate Keysy on this most poignant of metaphors.
 