
Spotify's smartphone apps have been important factors in the streaming music 
service's growth, not to mention its ability to convert free users into paying 
subscribers. Now Spotify is hoping to boost its presence on iOS with the 
release of itsSpotify <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/spotify> Embedded 
Player libspotify 9.

It's the first time Spotify has released an API for mobile developers, 
enabling them to integrate the service into their apps. The company has 
released documentation and samples to help developers to start working with the 
API, while also publishing a FAQ on its website.

"We hope this will enable a new category of iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch 
applications with Spotify inside and allow for more immersive music experiences 
within iOS apps,"blogs 
<http://developer.spotify.com/blog/archives/2011/08/31/spotify-inside-your-ios-app/>
 Spotify's director of platform Sten Garmark.

There are, unsurprisingly, some terms and conditions 
<http://developer.spotify.com/en/libspotify/terms-of-use-non-us/>. Developers 
must not "modify, edit, disassemble, decompile or reverse-engineer" the API, 
and they are not allowed to sell access to the Spotify service, or allow anyone 
who isn't a registered (paying) user to log in.

Developers are also barred from selling their application, charging for its 
use, or sell advertising, sponsorships or promotions within it. However, 
companies wanting to use the libspotify API commercially are invited to contact 
Spotify's partner team.

Spotify is not the first streaming music service to release an API for mobile 
developers. In the US, rival Rdio launched its Mobile Playback API in May 2011. 
It has since been used by apps including AOL's Play and The Grammy Awards' 
MusicMapper apps.

Meanwhile, music technology company The Echo Nest has released a series of 
APIs for mobile (and web) developers, providing easy access to music and the 
metadata around it. In May, The Echo Nest partnered with Rdio to make it easier 
for developers working with the latter's API.

The net effect of these and other APIs offered by music companies has been a 
thriving scene of developers mashing up different services with social and 
location-based features. TheMusic Hack Day <http://musichackday.org/> events 
have been at the heart of this. Now Spotify will be able to join the fun.
 