
It’s been six months since extramarital dating site Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> was hacked, and now the 
spouses of former and current users of the site are being targeted by blackmail 
attempts, as well as the users themselves.

Almost as soon as the database was made public, accountholders started 
receiving anonymous blackmail letters, first electronically and then 
physically. The letters demanded payment, in the thousands of dollars, to avoid 
having their membership of the site made public.

The security journalist Graham Cluley reported one such letter in December 
last year 
<https://www.grahamcluley.com/2015/12/ashley-madison-blackmailers-sending-threats-postal/>
, which demanded $4,167 with a threat of exposing the existence of the account 
“to people close to” the victim.

Due to a lack of identity verification on the Ashley Madison, fake accounts 
are prolific. When the database was first made public, accounts under names 
including Tony Blair and Barack Obama were discovered. Theoretically, that 
could allow blackmail victims plausible deniability but in practice many were 
nonetheless worried about their accounts being exposed.

Normal advice in the case of blackmail is to not pay up. The blackmailer can 
always demand more money, and has no motivation to destroy what information 
they have. But one Ashley Madison blackmailer is now taking the scam further 
still, reports Cluley, by posting new letters addressed to the spouses of 
previous targets.

One such letter, obtained by Cluley, begins: “Dear Mrs [Redacted] I am afraid 
this letter contains bad news. Perhaps you remember hearing in the news this 
past summer about a website called ‘Ashley Madison’ being hacked. Ashley 
Madison is a website that facilitates people meeting each other that wish to 
commit adultery. The hackers released the membership and billing details of all 
the members.

“I am sorry to tell you that [Redacted] is a member of that adultery website.”

The letter goes on to demand $2,500 to keep the information private. It also 
has a section addressed directly to the Ashley Madison user himself, in the 
event that he intercepted the letter, warning that he has “one more chance to 
make things right”.

The letters demand payment in Bitcoin, making it harder but not impossible to 
trace the blackmailer through conventional means.

Ashley Madison was initially hacked in July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/20/ashley-madison-hacked-cheating-site-total-shutdown>
, by an anonymous attacker who posted a selection of accounts online, 
accompanied by a demand that the site shut down. The attacker or attackers, who 
called themselves Impact Team, were motivated by the presence of a paid-for 
feature on the site labelled Full Delete. This was sold by Ashley Madison for 
£15 and supposedly allowed users to completely remove all trace of their 
actions from the site.

Impact Team claimed that the Full Delete option left a significant amount of 
data still on Ashley Madison’s servers – a claimthat was borne out the 
following month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madisons-paid-delete-option-left-data-identifying-users-post-claims>
 when the group, seeing that its demands had not been met,released the full 
database of 33m user records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madison-hackers-release-10gb-database-of-33m-infidelity-site-accounts>
. Ashley Madison attempted to use copyright law to scrub the database from the 
internet, butto no avail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/20/ashley-madison-using-copyright-law-to-try-to-limit-attack-leak>
.

• Life after the Ashley Madison affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/28/what-happened-after-ashley-madison-was-hacked>
 