
Thousands of packets of St John’s wort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/08/do-herbal-medicines-improve-our-health>
 tablets have been recalled in the UK as a safety precaution after some were 
found to be contaminated with a toxin which could cause human liver damage.

Health regulators issued an urgent recall of six batches of the herbal 
treatment – 91,800 packets in total – which have been on sale since September 
2013 and are due to expire between May and August 2016.

St John’s wort is extracted from the hypericum perforatum 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/9021/Hypericum-perforatum/Details> plant, and is 
typically used to treat depression, anxiety, loss of appetite and insomnia.

Five things doctors do that they shouldn’t
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/28/five-things-doctors-do-that-they-shouldnt-unecessary-procedures>
The affected tablets, manufactured for Superdrug, Asda and alternative 
treatment specialist HRI Herbal Medicine, were found to be contaminated.The 
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/precautionary-recall-six-batches-of-st-johns-wort-tablets>
 (MHRA) has warned that the affected batches have levels of a toxic 
pyrrolizidine alkaloid above the threshold recommended by theCommittee on 
Herbal Medicinal Products 
<http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/about_us/general/general_content_000264.jsp>
, a European expert body. The St John’s wort in the recalled tablets was likely 
to have been mixed with poisonous weeds when the plants were harvested, the 
MHRA said.

The MHRA is urging consumers to check their medicine cabinets to see if they 
have any of the affected batches, although it stressed the recall was a 
precautionary step and that it had so far not received any reports of health 
problems arising from the affected tablets.

Gerald Heddell, director of inspection, enforcement and standards at MHRA, 
said: “If you have one of these packs don’t take the tablets any more and 
return them to the Herbal Research Company.”

Pyrrolizidine alkaloids can cause liver problems in humans. Symptoms include 
yellowing of the whites of the eyes and/or skin, nausea, vomiting, dark urine, 
abdominal pain and unusual tiredness. Consumers who have taken the tablets and 
experienced any of these symptoms should notify their doctor immediately.

The affected batches contain 30 tablets per pack and are: Asda St John’s wort 
(batch number 14279), Superdrug St John’s wort (batch 14523) and HRI Good Mood 
(batches 14255, 14662, 14498, 14660).

 * Consumers can contact the Herbal Research Company on 01934 838 820 or email 
recall@QP-Services.com <mailto:recall@QP-Services.com> to receive a pre-paid 
return envelope  