
Back in March 2009 a small group of fewer than 20 thugs from al-Muhajiroun 
staged a deliberately provocativepublicity stunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/mar/11/protest-islam-mujahiroun-luton>
 in Luton by demonstrating and holding up some offensive placards at a parade 
for soldiers returning from their tour of duty in Iraq. The event predictably 
resulted in outrage, made national headlines, caused massive embarrassment to 
UK Muslims and – as it was clearly designed to do so – worsened community 
relations in the UK.

Well, the bad news is that al-Muhajiroun is back. In its latest guise of Islam 
for the UK/Islam4UK it hasannounced 
<http://www.islam4uk.com/current-affairs/uk-news/46-uk/352--procession-march-for-shariah>
 that it is to hold a procession called "March for Sharia" on Saturday 31 
October, starting at 1pm outside the Houses of Parliament, where it tells us 
its members will demand the abolishment of the House of Commons, then march 
past Downing Street, and end up at 4pm in Trafalgar Square.

Its flyers tell us that it expects thousands of British Muslims to participate 
in the demonstration. Past experience tells us that it will in fact struggle to 
get more than 100 people, if that – out of a total UK Muslim population of 
about 2 million – to attend.

Normally, I would simply say let them make as much noise as they want and if 
any individuals happen to cross the limits of the law and actually incite 
violence or hatred then the police deal with them. That is how free speech in a 
democracy works, after all – it is for the benefit of everyone, including 
al-Muhajiroun.

However, over the last few months matters have been getting a little bit more 
disturbing, with the emergence of the English Defence League (EDL) – now 
organising its own demonstrations, this time with an overtly anti-Muslim tone. 
Both al-Muhajiroun and the EDL are clearly feeding off one another and appear 
intent on polarising relations between Muslims and non-Muslims in this country 
and provoking trouble.

In recent months we have seen arson attacks on mosques in Luton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/may/08/muslim-mosque-attack-extremists>
,Bishops Stortford 
<http://www.hertsandessexobserver.co.uk/hertsandessexobserver-news/DisplayArticle.asp?ID=423527>
 and Woolwich. Nownews has emerged 
<http://www.peterboroughtoday.co.uk/news/Peterborough-man-charged-with-attempting.5748086.jp>
 of yet another arson attack on a mosque, this time in Sunderland.

Making matters worse is the role played by the Daily Express and Daily Star. 
Both rightwing papers have happily given huge publicity to the antics of 
al-Muhajiroun, and just last week the Expressran a cover story 
<http://www.dailyexpress.co.uk/posts/view/134080> with the headline "Now 
Muslims Demand Full Sharia Law", thereby very mischievously attributing the 
demands of a minuscule outfit to an entire faith group. The story improbably 
claimed that "up to 5000 extremists" would march in support of al-Muhajiroun's 
demands. Unsurprisingly, aDaily Express editorial 
<http://www.express.co.uk/ourcomments/view/134321/Moderate-Muslim-majority-must-confront-extremism>
 denouncing Muslims because if you "give them an inch they will take a mile" 
was reproduced word for word by National Front News.

So what should be done? In recent days I have seen some emails from anxious 
Muslims saying that they have got to publicly put clear distance between 
themselves and al-Muhajiroun. Others have wondered whether they should organise 
a counter-demonstration on the same day at the same venue. I happen to think 
that is an excellent idea and have contacted the Metropolitan police to obtain 
permission for a counter-demo. I have no idea how many people will turn up if 
it goes ahead but I would hope that it won't be too difficult to surpass the 
numbers mustered by al-Muhajiroun.

I have also just registered the domain name for Muslims4UK.org.uk and hope to 
have a bare-bones website up and running by the weekend.

In the meantime, do spread the word. If you are proud of living in a 
multi-faith, multicultural democracy where people are free to practise their 
faith or not to if they so choose, and if you have been appalled at the 
irresponsible antics of al-Muhajiroun and theDaily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> over the years and the harm 
they have caused to social cohesion in the UK then please do come along.

I will be writing another article on Cif early next week to provide an update 
on progress.
 