
"You hardly ever see a handicapped child in a regular school. During my twelve 
years of study in Haiti I don't recall ever seeing a visibly handicapped child 
in any of the schools I have attended," says Caroline Hudicourt, who grew up in 
Haiti and now runs a school in Port au Prince.

Known colloquially as 'cocobai', a Creole word that roughly translates as 
'worthless' or 'disgrace', disabled Haitian children are hidden away and 
completely excluded from mainstream education. A September 2009 report produced 
by Haiti's Ministry of Social Affairs and Work confirmed that only 3.5% of an 
estimated 120,000 disabled children were accessing education. In 2009 there 
were only 2 schools in Port au Prince that specifically catered for children 
with disabilities. Both collapsed in the January 2010 earthquake.

But with over thousands of new amputees resulting from the earthquake, 
including many children and young people, one of the longest lasting effects of 
the earthquake will be a generation of amputees. Disabled children will be more 
visible than ever, and the neglect cannot go on.

It is impossible to list all the reasons disabled Haitian children cannot 
access education, there are so many. To begin with, Haiti's education system is 
extraordinarily dysfunctional. Unesco estimates that only two thirds of Haitian 
children complete their primary education, with the average child receiving a 
total of 2.6 years of schooling. The Inter American Development Bank reports 
that Haiti has amongst the lowest public expenditure on education in the world, 
meaning most schools are run by private organisations with no governmental 
oversight and huge discrepancies in the cost and quality of education. Nearly 
80% of primary school teachers hold no official teaching qualifications, and 
are barely educated themselves.

Education indicators such as enrolment, completion, and literacy rates 
resemble those of a few countries in Sub-Saharan Africa more than those of its 
neighbours in Latin America or the Caribbean. And that was even before the 
earthquake that physically destroyed over half the nation's primary schools.

As is the case in many developing countries, there is explicit discrimination 
against people with disabilities deeply embedded within Haitian culture. "Most 
people feel that a disabled baby will bring harm to other children and often 
abandon them", says Gail Buck of Healing Hands for Haiti, a not for profit 
organisation focussing on increasing public awareness of disabilities and 
empowering disabled Haitians through rehabilitation. Ms Buck observes that "a 
disabled child becomes a burden or a stigma for the family and they are hidden 
away", too embarrassed to send them to school with the 'normal' children.

Then there is the expense of sending children to school. As most Haitian 
schools are private, they are not free and families must pay for uniforms, 
textbooks and supplies in addition to tuition fees. With 96% of the population 
surviving on around Â£1 per day, few can afford to send their children to 
school. "Sending a child to school implies tremendous sacrifices, about 40% of 
a family budget is invested into it. Parents will sometimes have to make 
choices between certain kids. They will therefore choose to send those that 
they consider the most promising," says Ms Hudicourt.

In addition to institutional problems, the Haitian infrastructure makes 
getting to school a virtual impossibility for the disabled. According to 
Josianne Hudicourt-Barnes, a Harvard educated education specialist who returned 
to Haiti after the earthquake to volunteer at her mother's hospital near Port 
au Prince, "Haiti is the least accessible place in the world for handicapped 
people... we have many more handicapped people in Haiti now and the situation 
is dire. There no public accommodation for the use of wheelchairs, there are no 
sidewalks. Life is an obstacle course even for the fully abled."

There are mixed views on what needs to be done to overcome some of the hurdles 
disabled children are up against. "In reality, if anything goes as it is 
supposed to, this earthquake will give quite a shot of life to services to the 
handicapped," says Ms Barnes. "There is a secretary of state for handicap 
affairs which has now paired with an international organisation, Handicap 
International. There is talk of access, of all terrain wheelchairs, etc. None 
of this is a reality quite yet."

Certainly, the earthquake has raised awareness of Haiti and injected millions 
of pounds of aid money into the country. The Inter-Agency Network for Education 
in Emergencies, in its report 'Education in Emergencies: Including Everyone', 
advocates that post emergency education can offer space to look at education 
from a fresh perspective to show that previously excluded people can 
participate in ordinary learning environments. Rebuilding the education system 
in Haiti should therefore be seen as an opportunity to amend past neglect and 
discrimination.

But there are so many problems it is difficult to decide what exactly needs to 
be done, in what order, to build a functional and inclusive education system. A 
draft law on the integration of disabled persons has been presented in 
Parliament, but progress seems to have stalled since the earthquake. In terms 
of the methods of inclusion likely to work best, Ms Hudicourt says: "I wouldn't 
even talk about methods now. I would first try to get them into school".

One thing that is clear is that every effort must be made to create an 
effective government presence over education that, much like Ofsted in the UK, 
focuses on increasing learning and achievement through setting standards and 
monitoring progress of all schools.

Since disabled children are kept hidden, special efforts must be made to 
locate them to ensure they receive the services they need to get them into 
mainstream schools. Temporary and reconstructed schools must be made accessible 
to the disabled, and teachers need training and support to equip them with the 
skills to cater to the needs of disabled children.

And action needs to be taken as quickly as possible, as nothing is more 
threatening to Haiti's future than the near destruction of a school system that 
was already failing children, both disabled and non disabled, to begin with.

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 