
Kenneth Branagh <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-branagh>, whose 
career has often shadowed that ofLaurence Olivier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/06/laurence-olivier-in-the-entertainer-great-performances>
, will tonighttake over <http://www.branaghtheatre.com/the-entertainer/> one of 
his predecessor’s stand-out characters: Archie Rice, the failing music hall 
comic inJohn Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnosborne>’s 
1957 play, The Entertainer.

Angry young woman: female Jimmy Porter looks back at John Osborne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/04/angry-young-woman-female-jimmy-porter-looks-back-at-john-osborne>
Branagh’s revival shows that the part is still a catch for actors. But there 
is greater doubt over whether such a drama could – or should – be written 
today. The Entertainer is a prime example of the genre known as 
state-of-the-nation plays, a metaphor for the condition of the culture.

First seen on stage the year after Britain’s humiliation over the Suez canal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/mar/14/past.education1>, Archie Rice 
– touring seaside theatres often boastingly called the Empire or the Rex – is a 
surrogate for his country: crumpling, bankrupt, living on past glories. A clue 
that Osborne’s approach is metaphorical rather than journalistic is Archie 
being, unusually for his profession, a former public schoolboy. (Max Miller, 
one of the models for him, had left state school at the age of 12.)

As the Shakespearean scholar James Shapiro has shown, Hamlet and King Lear can 
be seen as state-of-the-nation plays, finding in far Denmark and ancient 
England subtle parallels for fears about invasion and the lottery of Royal 
succession that were convulsing the playwright’s country as he wrote.

However, the genre peaked in the decade or so after The Entertainer. Alan 
Bennett’sForty Years On 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/28/forty-years-on-review> (1968), a 
satirical examination of changing postwar Britain, was set in a public school 
nudgingly called Albion. Soon afterwards came The National Health byPeter 
Nichols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2008/oct/01/peter.nichols>, set 
in an underfunded hospital.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIrP-5BvYM68&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIrP-5BvYM68>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIrP-5BvYM68&media=>
 Laurence Olivier in The Entertainer 
Trevor Griffiths’ Comedians (1975) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/20/comedians-trevor-griffiths-racist-sexist-standup-comedy-40th-anniversary>
 used a northern night school for aspiring standups as a setting for a 
stand-off between the forces of traditionalism and innovation. The play’s 
debate about the acceptability of jokes involving gender or race anticipated 
current worries.

The knack of the genre is to find a microcosm symbolic of wider goings-on. The 
newspaper industry, whose biggest titles have often claimed to speak for the 
nation, has been used as an allegory in a long print-run of scripts that 
includesArnold Wesker’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/13/sir-arnold-wesker-obituary> The 
Journalists (1972), Howard Brenton and David Hare’sPravda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/sep/14/theatre1> (1985), and Richard 
Bean’s phone-hacking drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/01/richard-bean-satirical-comedy-great-britain>
, Great Britain (2014).

Although “Britain” is actually the surname of the protagonist, Bean’s title 
declared state-of-the-nation ambitions. By then, though, the form had become 
rare and problematic, mainly because ideas of nationhood were in such a state.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBdDzrmmbb8Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBdDzrmmbb8Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBdDzrmmbb8Q&media=>
 Jonathan Pryce in Trevor Griffiths’ Comedians 
The United Kingdom now contains such distinct constituent populations – each 
further subdivided – that a dramatist has to define the location before 
analysing it. The Entertainer reflects a period when the terms “English” and 
“British” were used almost interchangeably, at least in England. Although 
Osborne was Welsh on his father’s side, in The Entertainer it is “England” that 
has been ruined by Suez, even though the rest of the UK shared the consequences 
of post-colonial overreach.

The library shelf to which The Entertainer belongs now feels as rickety as the 
stages Archie Rice played

Such attitudes understandably encouraged devolution and independence 
movements, which resulted in, for instance, specific state-of-Scotland scripts, 
from John McGrath’sThe Cheviot, the Stag, and the Black Black Oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/14/the-cheviot-the-stag-and-the-black-black-oil-review>
 (1973) toRona Munro <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rona-munro>’s 
eve-of-referendumThe James Plays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2014/aug/07/the-james-plays-sofie-grabol-rona-munro-kings-scotland-video-edinburgh-festival>
 (2014). Similarly specific state-of-England plays were led by Hare’s
Racing Demon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/feb/17/racing-demon-review> (1990), 
its main characters bishops and clergy of the C of E, the country’s established 
but increasingly unworshipped church.

The risk of any theatrical time-piece is that it rapidly dates. But because 
Hare depicts a marginalisation of Anglicanism that has continued, the play has 
retained its relevance in revivals, further helped by the fact that the 
depicted religious tension between orthodoxy and reform apply just as strongly 
to political parties, the health system and broadcasting.

Some of the laments in The Entertainer – immigration, the venality of the 
Tories but ineffectuality of Labour, different rules for the poor and rich, and 
the idiocy of popular culture – also prove surprisingly enduring, suggesting 
that national dissatisfactions tend to take the same conservative-nostalgic 
form.

No modern playwright, though, could make an end-of-pier auditorium – and still 
less an NHS hospital or a school – a metaphor for wider Britain because the 
funding systems and policies across the UK are now so varied.

So, while The Entertainer may continue to be revived, especially around 
anniversaries of the Suez crisis, the library shelf to which it belongs now 
feels as rickety as the stages Archie Rice played. Any theatre hoping to sum up 
a country now would surely be drawn to the portmanteau form: a season of plays 
written by several authors variegated by gender, race, faith and (at the more 
far-thinking venues) even politics. But such a form – fragmented, 
contradictory, argumentative – does feels the right response to the state 
of the nation, or nations.
 