
“Y’know, the soft subjects,” says the boy in maths. “The easy ones: the stupid 
girls in bottom set take them. Extra, pointlessGCSEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses>. Like dance. It shouldn’t even be 
a subject.” We’re choosing subjects for our A-level taster day at school, and 
for some, the prospect of choosing an “arty” option is hilarious. I see the 
raised eyebrows when I explain two of my GCSE options are dance and drama.

At 16, I am constantly baffled by people who believe they can define what is 
of academic value. People see me as an equation – because I am academic, I 
should not choose dance and drama at GCSE.

I am 16 and the education system is destroying my health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/aug/16/i-am-16-and-the-education-system-is-destroying-my-health>
“But you’re, like, clever – why dance?” was one friend’s response.

“What do you even do? An extra A* to prance around?” was the response of 
someone who, needless to say, was not my friend.

Maybe it’s no surprise that this stigma exists: we’re in a society that is 
obsessed with living for the future. I remember at my GCSE options evening, a 
boy who was a talented actor was swiftly moved away from the drama stand by his 
father, who told him that the days of make-believe had been and gone. As early 
as primary school, dance, art and drama were offered in clubs because they 
aren’t the “real subjects” that we need for “big school”.

There’s this stigma with the arts that only “unintelligent” students take 
those subjects. I still struggle to be taken seriously for taking arts 
subjects. I was told by advisers that dance and drama wouldn’t help me to get a 
suitable career, and by other adults that I was wasting my potential. But the 
only potential I was wasting was to be sat in classrooms, with no motivation 
for what would never interest me. My friends told me I’d get bored of dance and 
switch to triple science within the first month.

But more than a year later, I’m reminded daily that taking GCSE dance was the 
best decision I ever made. While everyone complains about the subjects their 
parents forced them into, I am in the dance studio every lunchtime. Dance gets 
me into school. Dance gives me something to pour my head and heart into. It 
gives me a feeling of belonging, creativity, security and freedom.

Then the bell rings and it’s back to Ohm’s law and circle theorems. Back to 
being told that the subject that makes you feel alive also makes you not of 
value. But it’s the arts subjects that get me in to school every day, and get 
me through all my other subjects. Knowing I have something to work for, a 
reason to be motivated and driven. The skills that I get from the arts also 
help me hugely with work across the curriculum, from improving my analytical 
skills to making me more self-confident.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, the education secretary Nicky Morgan has put emphasis 
on science, technology,engineering and maths, saying that students who focus 
exclusively on the arts risk their career paths 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/11221081/Nicky-Morgan-pupils-held-back-by-overemphasis-on-arts.html>
. But it appears Morgan is only peering into the doors of one street, without 
understanding that children are different, and what may be perfect for one 
certainly won’t be for another.


Stopping young people from expressing themselves at such a young age is not 
doing them any favours. Perhaps Nicky Morgan has forgotten to open the door of 
being passionate about your subject, of having a drive to study that subject 
day in, day out. It shouldn’t matter what that subject is.


To study arts subjects, you have to take risks, push yourself emotionally, 
expressively and creatively in every lesson, you have to persevere and be 
interpretive, passionate and collaborative. I’ve worked harder in these 
subjects than I’ve ever worked in my life.


To deprive anyone of the opportunity to find what dance and drama gave me is 
to strip them of a real education that goes beyond the walls of a classroom.

A winter’s tale: don't overlook the value of drama in school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2014/dec/16/drama-school-students-work-study>
I don’t doubt the impact that Stem subjects can have for the people that love 
them. But to encourage children into one bracket is cruel. As much as I try, 
I’m not good at and don’t love physics, biology or maths. I don’t want a career 
in these areas. I understand why these are important subjects but I think I 
should also be encouraged to be a dancer, musician, artist and sportsman if I 
want. The world needs these people too, along with our so-called soft subjects.

There has been a decline in the number of state schools offering arts subjects 
taught by specialist teachers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-31518717>. 
And the ones that remain have it tough. I can’t even imagine how it feels to be 
told that you don’t teach a “real subject” by a year 8 boy. The arts teachers 
I’ve had have completely changed my life, giving so much to me in hours and 
inspiration.

To the teachers, the parents, the government: expand your definition of what 
is possible for the children you know. Let them make their own decisions, let 
them be inspired and live in the present. Let them have a real, unrestricted 
education.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.



 