
Heritage only used to be a concern for the big ballet companies such as the 
Royal Ballet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/royal-ballet>, which has long 
had to navigate a balance between maintaining their repertory of 19th and 
20th-century classics and commissioning new works. But as contemporary dance 
acquires more and more of its own history, and as more of those works are 
filmed and notated for posterity, it’s become an issue for this sector too. An 
art form that was born out of an Oedipal opposition to the past, that was once 
all about making it new, now has to confront the issue of its own growing 
legacy.

Rambert <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rambertdancecompany>, which started 
as a ballet company in 1926 before switching to contemporary dance, is in 
possession of an especially large and complex back catalogue. And recently it 
hosted a panel to discuss the issues that raises. Should Rambert opt to junk or 
preserve its past repertory of works? And if the latter, how does it ensure 
that choreography created for the bodies and sensibilities of a previous 
century remains relevant to audiences today?

'Turn to the pigs for inspiration': how I became a countryside choreographer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/may/19/a-nations-theatre-ben-duke-lost-dog-on-leaving-london>
The response to these issues turned out to be vehement and varied, when the 
panel met last month. One of the seven members was independent choreographer 
and dancerBen Duke <http://www.theplace.org.uk/ben-duke>, who argued strongly 
that the past should – mostly – be left in the past. Duke started his stage 
career as an actor, and was attracted to dance precisely because it seemed to 
him an art form “of the present moment”, each work of choreography 
fundamentally defined by the dancers on which it was been made. A dance, in 
contrast to a book, a film or a painting, cannot ever be exactly reproduced or 
preserved, and it’s that slipperiness, that resistance “to being turned into a 
product”, that Duke cherishes. Even though he was prepared to admit that one of 
his own great experiences in the theatre was watching a revival ofPina Bausch’s 
Rite of Spring <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/feb/14/dance1> 
(choreographed in 1975), that was a rare exception. Normally, Duke does not 
seek out performances of past works, and he never thinks about whether his own 
will survive. The word “heritage” actually makes him think of crumbling castles.

Farooq Chaudhry 
<http://www.akramkhancompany.net/html/akram_khan_biographies.php?id=21>, a 
former dancer and now producer for the choreographerAkram Khan 
<http://www.akramkhancompany.net>, went even further than Duke, arguing that 
heritage is not only an irrelevance to dance, but an impediment to change. He 
believes that we’re still too comfortable with traditional ideas of beauty and 
meaning, too likely to cling to the classics of the past, and, as a result, too 
ready to dismiss and/or misinterpret works being created now.

The remaining members of the panel, however, were committed to the importance 
of heritage: there was a general consensus that it would be as significant a 
tragedy for the works ofPetipa <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/marius-petipa>, 
Ashton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/02/dance-frederick-ashton>, 
Cunningham <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mercecunningham> et al to 
disappear from the stage as it would be for the classics of music, art or 
literature to be lost. Yet while the panel agreed that dance has a duty to keep 
its collective history alive, it also agreed that the issues involved are far 
from simple.

Farooq Chaudhry believes that we’re still too comfortable with traditional 
ideas of beauty and meaning

It costs time, money and human resources to preserve a dance repertory, and 
with these in very limited supply for most companies, the chances are that 
resources spent on reviving old works will have been diverted from the creation 
of new ones. There are political issues involved too. As with any artistic 
canon, the matter of who decides which works are considered worthy of 
preservation can be key. Most crucial and most specific to dance is the 
question of authenticity.

We know that the 19th-century classics we see on stage today look very 
different from when they were first staged. Dancers’ bodies have changed 
drastically in the past century, as have production values and audience 
expectations. Yet the same is true for more recent repertory. Already, 
questions are being asked about whether the great works of the 20th century, by 
the likes of Martha Graham orMerce Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mercecunningham>, can be adequately 
performed by today’s dancers, who are no longer trained intensively in those 
choreographers’ respective styles.

William Forsythe – considered to be one of the livelier choreographers on the 
planet – has asked himself that same question. In fact, he’s started to say 
that when he dies, he wants his work to die with him, because without his 
supervision he doesn’t think it can retain its integrity.

One of the panel members, Tony Dyson, had a fascinating take on this issue. As 
chairman of theFrederick Ashton Foundation 
<http://www.frederickashton.org.uk/foundation.html>, it’s his role to ensure 
the preservation of the choreographer’s repertory. Yet he revealed that when 
Ashton was alive, all he cared about was “the effectiveness” of his works, and 
Dyson now thinks that there is a danger of their spirit being sacrificed for 
the sake of pedantic accuracy. He would like to see practising choreographers 
involved in the revival of Ashton’s ballets, not in order to reinvent them, but 
to bring their own stage craft and artistry to the process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fmodern-dance-the-heritage-debate-rambert-ben-duke-farooq-chaudhry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218819558%2F3966f942-9869-43b5-96d6-5432dbaec440-2060x1375.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stepping%20out%20of%20the%20past%3A%20modern%20dance%E2%80%99s%20heritage%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fmodern-dance-the-heritage-debate-rambert-ben-duke-farooq-chaudhry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stepping%20out%20of%20the%20past%3A%20modern%20dance%E2%80%99s%20heritage%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fmodern-dance-the-heritage-debate-rambert-ben-duke-farooq-chaudhry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432218819558%2F3966f942-9869-43b5-96d6-5432dbaec440-2060x1375.jpeg>
 Sometimes, Even Now choreographed by James Cousins, is a reworking of the 
Robert Cohan classic Cell. Photograph: Camilla Greenwell 
Reinvention can be good though. The dramaturg, festival director and dance 
mentorPeggy Olislaegers 
<http://www.yorkshiredance.com/professional/work-we-support/sketch/peggy-olislaegers>
 argued the case for the thrilling chemistry that can be sparked when 
choreographers and dancers remake the classics of the past, and find a creative 
meeting place between different epochs. (At the recent gala to celebrateRobert 
Cohan’s 90th birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/27/robert-cohan-at-90-review>, 
there were two fabulous instances of this, with younger choreographers James 
Cousins and Tony Adigun respectively re-creating the Cohan classics Cell and 
Forest.)

The discussion moved on to the role of programmers. The two company directors 
on the panel,Mark Baldwin 
<http://www.rambert.org.uk/about_rambert/artistic_director> (Rambert) and 
Petter Jacobsson (Ballet de Lorraine), both advocated the thematic and artistic 
possibilities inherent in mixing old and new works in one evening. Old works 
and new works can combine to give each other different context and different 
resonances.

Also on the panel was art curator and former director of exhibitions at the 
Royal Academy,Kathleen Soriano 
<http://leadingculturedestinations.com/magazine/ambassador-qanda/kathleen-soriano/>
, who drew illuminating parallels with the visual arts world, where it is her 
job to find ways of reinforcing the contemporariness of all art – ancient or 
modern.

Curating has become an overused word, but perhaps dance could take courage 
from the variety and scope of art exhibitions – such asthe current Francis 
Bacon show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/apr/14/francis-bacon-and-the-masters-review>
, which hangs that painter’s work alongside the old masters who inspired it.

In 2013, the centenary year of the Nijinsky-Stravinsky ballet Rite of Spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/03/rite-of-spring-sadlers-wells>, 
the dance world united to become an unofficial festival of Rites, with 
radically different versions of the ballet performed around the globe. On a 
much smaller scale, could contemporary and classical companies not combine to 
“curate” parallel events? I’m very taken byEnglish National Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/english-national-ballet>’s proposal to 
dance, in the same season, the company’s traditional version of Giselle and the 
brand new version commissioned from Akram Khan. It would be fascinating also to 
have the Royal Ballet programme performances of Petipa’s La Bayadère in the 
same season asShobana Jeyasingh’s recent deconstruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/24/shobana-jeyasingh-bayadere-the-ninth-life-contemporary-dance>
. Better yet, would be companies collaborating to perform different versions of 
a work on the same stage on the same night.Balanchine’s Apollo 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollo_(ballet)> alongside the Michael Clark 
<http://www.michaelclarkcompany.com> rewrite O; Nijinsky’s Faune 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Afternoon_of_a_Faun_(Nijinsky)> alongside that of 
Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui’s <http://www.east-man.be/en/people/161/>. I would pay 
good money to see that.
 