
Sterling K Brown <https://twitter.com/sterlingkb1?lang=en> is probably going 
to win an Emmy. A longtime mainstay of the New York theater scene and a 
television actor known for his roles as Roland Burton onArmy Wives 
<http://www.mylifetime.com/shows/army-wives>, Detective Cal Beecher on Person 
of Interest <http://www.cbs.com/shows/person_of_interest/>, and a recurring 
part as the twisted monster hunterGordon Walker on Supernatural 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dpPJxEEwAQ4>, Brown is poised to break out 
into real stardom on the back of his role as prosecutor Chris Darden in FX’s 
miniseriesThe People v OJ Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/the-people-v-oj-simpson-episode-by-episode>
, for which he’s nominated in the best supporting actor in a limited series 
category.

The cast of The People v OJ is stacked with big names including John Travolta, 
Nathan Lane, Cuba Gooding Jr and, of course,David Schwimmer 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=schwimmerssaince&oq=schwimmerssaince&aqs=chrome..69i57.3846j0j4&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8#q=schwimmer+renaissance>
. (Schwimmer and Travolta are also nominated for Emmys.) But the electric, 
lived-in chemistry between Brown and his co-star Sarah Paulson (who plays 
Darden’s fellow prosecutor, Marcia Clark) steals the show. Somehow, Brown and 
Paulson do the impossible: convincing the viewer that Clark and Darden had a 
whirlwind romance during the trial, even though there’s little to no evidence 
suggesting anything romantic actually occurred between them.

Brown, sipping coffee at the Baccarat Hotel in New York, graciously credits 
this to Paulson. “That’s my homie,” he says. “I think she’s one of the most 
brilliant actors I’ve ever worked with, hands down.” As successful as the show 
has been, and as much as Brown’s chemistry with Paulson carried it, he’s 
unaware of the extent to which their play-acted relationship haspermeated the 
internet 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/04/marcia-clark-chris-darden-romance-people-v-oj-simpson-american-crime-story>
. “I had a couple of people come up to me and tell me they call me Hot Darden, 
which is pretty cool,” he says, laughing. “I’ll take it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsterling-k-brown-emmy-people-v-oj-simpson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5a7642a338781ac628af86070763f358d9a0890%2F0_196_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sterling%20K%20Brown%3A%20'I%20allow%20myself%20to%20think%20about%20winning%20an%20Emmy'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsterling-k-brown-emmy-people-v-oj-simpson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sterling%20K%20Brown%3A%20%27I%20allow%20myself%20to%20think%20about%20winning%20an%20Emmy%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsterling-k-brown-emmy-people-v-oj-simpson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5a7642a338781ac628af86070763f358d9a0890%2F0_196_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Sarah Paulson as Marcia Clark and Brown as Chris Darden: electric chemistry. 
Photograph: Fox/BBC 
The People v OJ has landed so hard with viewers in part because it feels so 
relevant today, when seemingly every few months a police officer is acquitted 
of murder – or worse still, not even indicted – in a nightmarish mirror image 
of the eventual verdict in Simpson’s trial. This historical resonance is a boon 
for the show, but also leaves its mark on Brown, who is originally from 
Missouri. “Whenthe officer who killed Mike Brown wasn’t indicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/04/darren-wilson-federal-criminal-charges-michael-brown-shooting>
, I just broke into tears,” he says. Later that night, Brown had to perform in
Father Comes Home From the Wars 
<https://www.centertheatregroup.org/tickets/mark-taper-forum/2016/father-comes-home-from-the-wars/>
, a play by Suzan-Lori Parks riffing on The Odyssey. “Thankfully,” he 
continues, “I had the play to speak for me in a way I couldn’t even articulate 
for myself.”

The subject matter of The People v OJ – and, it should be said, Brown’s role 
as one of the more prominent black members of the cast – means that his 
experience around the series has been a bit broader than simply discussing the 
role. “I’ve definitely been asked a lot more about the state of the world than 
in the previous 14 years of my career,” he says, laughing uncomfortably. Still, 
Brown has opinions, and he wants to share them.

Musing on Jesse Williams’s “incredibly eloquent” speech at the BET awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/27/justin-timberlake-jesse-williams-bet-speech-response-tweet>
, in which the Grey’s Anatomy actor linked the oppression of African Americans 
down the centuries to the white plundering of black culture today, Brown tries 
to articulate his view of his own responsibilities. “Immediately before that, 
withthe loss of Muhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/05/the-guardian-view-on-muhammad-ali-a-life-of-bravery>
, it sort of dawned on me that what you do and who you are are not the same 
thing, and you should not necessarily be placed in a box” – at least 
professionally speaking. “Muhammad Ali was the greatest of all time,” he 
continues. “But what made him even greater was what he did outside the ring.” 
It’s in that light that he feels compelled to speak out when he’s asked about 
current events, especially in the ways they connect to the Simpson trial.

OJ Simpson and the unshakable demons that continue to haunt America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/01/oj-simpson-american-crime-story-fx-espn-tv-shows>
For example: Brown describes Johnnie Cochran’s tactics during the trial as the 
“right message with the wrong messenger”. (Simpson took pains to avoid being 
depicted as a black man and never used his wealth in support of black causes 
until his race helped him get off for murder.) Brown also takes pains to 
separate the spectacle of the OJ trial – which adds a comedic element to The 
People v OJ – from the superficially similar spectacle ofthe seemingly endless 
body camera videos depicting police killings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/14/videos-police-violence-history>
. “They’re related in that they’re all for public consumption, but they’re 
different in terms of the way people were infatuated with the trial.”

Still, the spectacle of the trial continues, not least in the renewed public 
appearances ofMark Fuhrman 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/03/mark-fuhrman-what-happened-after-oj-simpson-trial.html>
, the Los Angeles police officer whose history of racist remarks became a key 
argument for the defense in the trial. Brown is only familiar with his 
talking-head moments inMade in America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/24/oj-made-in-america-espn-review>
, the ESPN documentary about Simpson. “I haven’t seen him in anything else. I 
know he was a correspondent for Fox News in the past.” He pauses, smiles. “Go 
with God.”

Brown recently finished work on Marshall 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/sterling-k-brown-thurgood-marshall-movie-chadwick-boseman-1201766967/>
, a biopic starring Chadwick Boseman as Thurgood Marshall 
<http://www.biography.com/people/thurgood-marshall-9400241> and Josh Gad as Sam 
Friedman, an insurance lawyer who serves as Marshall’s “mouthpiece” during a 
heated, racially charged trial in Connecticut (where Marshall had not passed 
the bar and was prohibited from practicing). Brown plays the defendant, a black 
man accused of raping a white woman.

Reginald Hudlin 
<https://twitter.com/reghud?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, former president of entertainment at BET and director of Marshall, also wrote 
Marvel’s Black Panther comic from 2005 to 2008. Brown recalls reading: “‘Man, 
they’re never gonna make a movie about the Black Panther.’ And here we are, I 
just finished making a movie with the Black Panther ... If I could be a 
superhero, I’d look forward to that, sincerely.”

That’s certainly a plausible outcome, given Brown’s newfound success and Emmy 
nomination. The hype around The People v OJ has led to some strange offers, 
including a “sort ofKirk Cameron <http://kirkcameron.com/> Christian film” that 
Brown rejected because it “didn’t really jive with the way I see God”. Moving 
gingerly into discussing theology, Brown outlines his differences with the 
film’s producers: “I do not believe that any particular religion has any 
monopoly on salvation.” I ask whether that was true of the producers of the 
movie, and he laughs. “Nah.”

Brown takes his religious life seriously, even when it brings him into 
conflict with his own mother. “My mom, who is a very strong Christian woman, 
will often ask me how some of the characters I play glorify God,” he says. “Her 
meaning is that she feels as if every character should be a good Christian 
character, which is not necessarily my interpretation.” For starters, it would 
make consistently engaging drama very difficult.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsterling-k-brown-emmy-people-v-oj-simpson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb6b03677d01213dfd7396b40600176d56888d9f%2F0_0_3000_2119%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sterling%20K%20Brown%3A%20'I%20allow%20myself%20to%20think%20about%20winning%20an%20Emmy'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsterling-k-brown-emmy-people-v-oj-simpson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sterling%20K%20Brown%3A%20%27I%20allow%20myself%20to%20think%20about%20winning%20an%20Emmy%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsterling-k-brown-emmy-people-v-oj-simpson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb6b03677d01213dfd7396b40600176d56888d9f%2F0_0_3000_2119%2F3000.jpg>
 Susan Kelechi Watson as Beth and Brown as Randall in This is Us. Photograph: 
Ron Batzdorff/AP 
But getting to please his mom is part of why Brown is excited for his 
forthcoming role onThis is Us 
<http://www.nbc.com/this-is-us?CID=Search%7CThis-is-us&nbc=1>, the highly 
anticipated NBC series fromCrazy Stupid Love  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/22/crazy-stupid-love-film-review>
writer Dan Fogelman. His mother, Brown says, is “not a TV-MA kind of gal ... 
This is Us is definitely more of her wheelhouse”. Brown plays Randall, a 
successful businessman who reconnects with his absent biological father. 
“Randall is probably much more sure of himself,” he says, in contrast to 
Darden. “He’s wealthy. I ain’t wealthy.”

Brown hasn’t exactly gone for the big bucks in his career. His first theater 
job was a Philip Glass opera adaptation of Kafka’s short storyIn the Penal 
Colony <http://philipglass.com/compositions/in_the_penal_colony/> in which he 
didn’t sing or speak, just moved. He recounts living in Harlem in a 
fourth-floor walk-up, riding the bus across 125th Street for the air 
conditioning, and sleeping naked in a room so hot “there’d be a sweat imprint 
of my body on top of the bed”. “And I couldn’t have been happier. Because my 
overhead, to what I had coming in – the disparity was so great, I was like, 
‘I’m pocketing $270 a week, son, are you kidding me? I’m killing the game!’ And 
that was the time I felt most financially secure, even though I’ve made 
infinitely more money since then.”

So how will he use his newfound fame? Brown wants to form a “repertory troupe” 
of actors who could work on projects together. Besides Paulson (his first and 
most important selection), he lists The Knick’sAndre Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/13/the-knick-andre-holland-interview>
;Brian Tyree Henry 
<https://www.thrillist.com/entertainment/nation/atlanta-paper-boi-actor-brian-tyree-henry>
, who plays rapper Paper Boi in Donald Glover’s new seriesAtlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/06/better-things-atlanta-fx-comedy-donald-glover-pamela-adlon>
; Vice Principals’Kimberly Hebert Gregory 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/08/vice-principals-kimberly-hebert-gregory>
; and Marshall co-stars Boseman and Gad. (“Hashtag ChadGad.”)

Though it now seems like a fait accompli that Brown would be nominated for an 
Emmy, the past few months for him have been a process of slowly accepting the 
possibility that not only might he be nominated, he might well win. He recoils 
slightly when asked about the moment he first realized he could be nominated, 
when the crew responded enthusiastically to a screening of the pilot (that 
Brown and Paulson both skipped) and favorably compared The People v OJ to 
Brown’s favorite show,Fargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/fargo-episode-recaps>. “This 
year, as the nominations were coming, people were telling me, ‘Yo man, you gon’ 
got nominated, you gon’ win,’ and I was like, ‘Thank you, thank you, I 
appreciate that.’ You never know ’til you know.”

Has he allowed himself to consider the possibility that he might win? “I allow 
myself to think about it.” He’s even started thinking about his speech. “I 
remember before, when I watched theEmmys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/emmys> or the Oscars and people had 
speeches, I was like, ‘They knew they was gon’ win.’ But no. You write a speech 
so that you don’t look like a jackass when you get up there and forget your 
wife’s name or anything else – just in case.” How did it turn out? “Talk to me 
September 19 and I’ll tell you how it went.”
 