
Australia captain Steve Smith has hailed his team’s Lazarus-like resurrection 
after completing the Test summer with a 3-0 whitewash of Pakistan on Saturday.

Smith’s men were staring down the barrel of one of Australian cricket’s 
greatest sporting depressions after sinking to an innings defeat against South 
Africa in mid-November.

Australia ease to clean sweep as spinners turn screw on Pakistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/australia-ease-to-clean-sweep-as-spinners-turn-screw-on-pakistan>
The heavy defeat in the second Test in Hobart stretched their losing streak to 
five – including a 3-0 capitulation to Sri Lanka – and resulted in the axing of 
five players and chairman of selectors Rod Marsh.

However Australia responded with four straight Test victories to ensure they 
head to next month’s daunting tour of India riding a wave of success.

Smith admitted the humiliating defeat to South Africa was one of the lowest 
points of his career.

“It was pretty tough times to be honest with you. You lose your first two 
Tests of an Australian summer and you’re not in a good place,” Smith said after 
the 220-run triumph over Pakistan in Sydney.

“But I’m really proud of the way the guys have come in and turned it around 
since then. We’ve played some really good cricket and that’s the kind of 
cricket that I want us to play. I’m really pleased for everyone that’s been 
involved.”

Smith was at the forefront of the resurgence, hitting two centuries and three 
half-centuries in his past six innings to lift his career average to a 
remarkable 60.15.

He is just the fourth batsman, alongside Don Bradman, to average over 60 
through 50 Tests.

The 27-year-old, who was named man of the series, pointed to a change in 
attitude when the team re-gathered in Adelaide after the Hobart massacre as the 
turning point in their fortunes.

“Straight away I felt a shift in attitude, energy and enthusiasm amongst the 
group. We were able to put all of that out onto the middle and get the 
performance we were after,” he said.

“We’ve [since] scored big runs in every game, every first innings. We’ve been 
able to build pressure with the ball, hit good areas, and we’ve caught well 
this series. It’s been a pretty good series for us.”
 