
In October 1998, the New Yorker asked me to photograph a “major-league 
ex-dictator”. I took that to meanIdi Amin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jul/24/fiction.gilesfoden>, but in 
actual fact it wasAugusto Pinochet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet>
. He was renowned for being difficult so I knew it was going to be a tough 
shoot. That’s why the Dorchester Hotel came up. There was a suite there I was 
familiar with. I knew that if I pre-lit five rooms, it would be difficult for 
him to reject them all.

Initially, though, I didn’t know who it was and I thought it would be 
interesting to do the shoot out on the streets of London. When I found out it 
was Pinochet, I decided against that. I knew a number of Chilean people living 
in the city and I didn’t like the idea of having him in the street. I wanted to 
contain the situation.

I was also friends with a young photographer who had lost two brothers in 
Chile’s “disappearings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/aug/11/pinochet.chile>”. That 
definitely added a dimension to how I was feeling, yet there isn’t anybody I 
would refuse to photograph. I was completely aware of what Pinochet stood for, 
that he was a mass murderer, but that didn’t stop me. Where you stand 
politically doesn’t sway whether you should photograph somebody.

He probably won't even acknowledge you

However, my friend’s experience left me uneasy about shaking Pinochet’s hand. 
Jon Lee Anderson, who wrotethe article my portrait accompanied 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1998/10/19/the-dictator>, had already done a 
number of interviews with him. He said that, the whole time, Pinochet had never 
looked at him directly. “He probably won’t even acknowledge you,” he said.

But when Pinochet walked in, he looked at me directly, and walked towards me, 
hand outstretched. I was completely unprepared. There’s nothing you can do when 
somebody puts their hand out to you but shake it, so I did. Once I’d got over 
that, I took him to the first location: beside a big window, with just natural 
light. The flame red background was already there, as were the glasses. His 
hand on the table looked like a claw. I think this shot might even have been 
the first frame of the shoot. That happens a lot – the first and the last are 
the ones that work.

I was distinctly aware, all the time, that I was in the presence of a 
terrible, terrible man – the charges that were laid against him, the thousands 
of people who had disappeared. It’s strange going into a shoot where you know 
the subject’s history: it doesn’t have a bearing on how you photograph, but it 
does have a bearing on how you feel.

He carried himself like a world leader. I’ve photographed a number of people 
who are presidential, or have been leaders of countries, and he had that same 
demeanour. There’s an authoritative arrogance about them. It was the same with 
Blair. I don’t have much respect for those who take on the mantle of power. 
I’ve met quite a few and they never really impress me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsteve-pyke-best-photograph-augusto-pinochet-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f09a087cfead8238b7eaecb072abefd667422e0%2F0_0_1200_1701%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Pyke's%20best%20photograph%3A%20Augusto%20Pinochet%20at%20the%20Dorchester%20hotel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsteve-pyke-best-photograph-augusto-pinochet-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Pyke%27s%20best%20photograph%3A%20Augusto%20Pinochet%20at%20the%20Dorchester%20hotel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsteve-pyke-best-photograph-augusto-pinochet-chile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f09a087cfead8238b7eaecb072abefd667422e0%2F0_0_1200_1701%2F1200.jpg>
 Steve Pyke Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
Steve Pyke’s CV


Born: Leicester, 1957.

Training: “No formal training. I picked up a camera and ran with it.”

Influences: “Irving Penn <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/irving-penn>
,Bill Brandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2004/feb/21/photography.art>, Richard 
Avedon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/oct/02/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries1>
,Nan Goldin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/goldin>.”

High point: “Picking up the camera, I suppose. Understanding that I’m able to 
express myself through it.”

Low point: “I honestly can’t think of any experience as a low point.”

Top tip: “For a portrait photographer, the most important thing is your 
connection with the subject. The technical side of photography doesn’t interest 
me at all.”
 