
The England bowler Steven Finn <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/steven-finn> 
is looking forward to getting home as he prepares to leave England's troubled 
tour of Australia, admitting work on his bowling action has felt like "banging 
his head against a brick wall".

The Middlesex paceman did not take part in any of the Ashes Tests as England 
surrendered the urn with a 5-0 whitewash and was then not selected for the 
opening one-day match as the tourists went down to a humbling six-wicket defeat.

In the aftermath of that loss, the limited-overs coach Ashley Giles announced 
that Finn would be returning home as he was currently "not selectable" due to 
technical problems with his bowling action and the 24-year-old admits it has 
been a frustrating time.

"I've worked very hard on this tour. I've put lots and lots of hours of work 
in to try to make my bowling action right and I arrived on the tour very 
confident that I could play a full part in the Ashes series,"he told the 
England and Wales Cricket Board's YouTube channel 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yxdz65nYrh4>. "As the series went on and as we 
moved into the one-day leg of the tour, it's clear that there are a couple of 
technical issues that I need to address.

"The decision was made by Ashley and [the Middlesex director of cricket] Angus 
Fraser, a liaison between the two of them and people higher above. And going 
home and working on these aspects of my game would be the best place for me to 
do it, to get away from cricket for a couple of weeks because, at times, it's 
felt like I've been banging my head against a brick wall, trying to make it 
right and trying to prepare to play.

"To take myself out of this environment, a competitive environment, to get 
myself back to Middlesex and work with people that I've worked with for a long 
time before, I'm really looking forward to it."
 