
This article is the subject of a legal complaint made on behalf of Mr Dylan 
Frost.

Do mental health issues excuse bad behaviour?

That’s the question dominating Australia’s music scene this week, after 
high-profile Sydney band Sticky Fingers announced an indefinite hiatus. Their 
statement followed a more personal one from frontman Dylan Frost, who 
acknowledgedrecent “unacceptable” behaviour 
<https://www.facebook.com/stickyfingersmusic/posts/1285704598135953> that had 
affected “all people around me”, and wrote he had been “dealing with alcohol 
addiction and mental health issues” and would be “attending rehabilitation and 
therapy”.

The band cited only “internal issues” as the reason for the split, and both 
statements were worded vaguely enough to avoid explicitly acknowledging that 
just days before, fellow Sydney musicianThelma Plum alleged 
<http://musicfeeds.com.au/news/details-emerge-alleged-incident-involving-thelma-plum-sticky-fingers-dylan-frost/>
 Frost had physically threatened, verbally abused and spat at her and her 
boyfriend at Camperdown’s Lady Hampshire pub on Friday night.

“There was an incident between Thelma Plum and Dylan from Sticky Fingers on 
Friday night which left Thelma feeling very shaken,”Plum said 
<http://musicfeeds.com.au/news/thelma-plum-releases-statement-alleged-incident-involving-sticky-fingers-frontman-dylan-frost/>
 in a statement. “Taking responsibility for one’s actions had to happen, it’s 
up to them as a band and people to work towards a solution.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsticky-fingers-dylan-frost-may-have-a-mental-illness-but-thats-no-excuse-for-violence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ebd03bf0092f4bf1a7274832c79e00ec5cc6417%2F469_240_1691_1966%2F1691.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sticky%20Fingers'%20Dylan%20Frost%20may%20have%20a%20mental%20illness%2C%20but%20that's%20no%20excuse%20for%20violence%20%7C%20Alex%20McKinnon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsticky-fingers-dylan-frost-may-have-a-mental-illness-but-thats-no-excuse-for-violence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sticky%20Fingers%27%20Dylan%20Frost%20may%20have%20a%20mental%20illness%2C%20but%20that%27s%20no%20excuse%20for%20violence%20%7C%20Alex%20McKinnon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fsticky-fingers-dylan-frost-may-have-a-mental-illness-but-thats-no-excuse-for-violence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ebd03bf0092f4bf1a7274832c79e00ec5cc6417%2F469_240_1691_1966%2F1691.jpg>
 Sydney singer Thelma Plum alleged Sticky Fingers frontman Dylan Frost abused 
her and her boyfriend last week. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP 
It isn’t the first time Frost’s behaviour has drawn criticism from the Sydney 
music community. In July, Birrugan Dunn-Velasco, a guitarist with Indigenous 
hardcore outfit Dispossessed,accused Frost 
<https://www.facebook.com/IslandOfSuchGreatComplexity/posts/1225641027498855> 
of aggressive behaviour towards them during a show the two acts were 
co-headlining at Marrickville’s Red Rattler. Sticky Fingersdenied allegations 
<http://themusic.com.au/news/all/2016/08/11/exclusive-sticky-fingers-deny-singer-made-racist-taunts-at-sydney-gig/>
 Frost’s behaviour was racist: “[Frost] is actually a Maori, so it kinda 
doesn’t really make any sense … Us being accused of being racists is 
ridiculous.”

Since the Thelma Plum incident, several music websites have published 
first-hand testimonials detailing Frost’s history of similar behaviour and 
taking Australian music journalists to task for not holding figures such as 
Frost more accountable for their actions.

“For the past couple of years now, most people with a passing interest in the 
behind the scenes of Australian music will have heard a story about ‘Diz’”,
writes Troy Mutton of Pilerats 
<http://pilerats.com/written/deep-meaningful/to-thelma-plum-and-others-whove-been-subject-to-abuse-in-aus-music-we-apologise/>
. “Whether it’s allegations of racism, verbal abuse, actual physical abuse, or 
something else, the evidence has been there for some time of a troubled 
individual who needs help.”

The AU Review’s Sosefina Fuamoli 
<http://music.theaureview.com/features/when-internal-issues-become-public-sticky-fingers-and-the-issue-of-accountability/>
 writes that “Frost’s reputation off stage and behind the scenes is not 
breaking news”.

But that’s not the story Frost or Sticky Fingers wanted told. Numerous 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/breaking-news/sydney-band-sticky-fingers-announce-hiatus/news-story/8a31c1a2ae731f15b60cd2511a8adbd2>
media 
<http://musicfeeds.com.au/news/sticky-fingers-announce-breaking-up/#/slide/1> 
outlets 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com.au/2016/12/05/sticky-fingers-frontman-opens-up-following-news-of-the-bands-hiatus/>
 broke the news of the band’s hiatus uncritically, swallowing the “internal 
issues” line, and looking no further. It was only once Plum’s allegations 
started gaining traction that the story began to change. In those first, 
crucial hours of any media announcement, Sticky Fingers did what PR managers do 
best: control the narrative.

In the eyes of thousands of Sticky Fingers fans, Frost’s public image remains 
intact, even bolstered, by the careful wording of the two statements, and the 
damaging allegations levelled against him have been swept aside by a wave of 
understandable concern for his mental health.

“Thank you so much for your honesty Diz it’s so important people talk openly 
about these things,” one of the top comments on Frost’s statement reads.

“These issues are hard to overcome but just know that you’ve got extensive 
amounts of fans out here that love and support you, and will do until the very 
end,” reads another.

All of which turns Frost’s seeming frankness into something else. 

It transforms the perpetrator from someone who should be held accountable for 
the consequences of their actions into the “victim” of some vaguely nasty thing 
that happened to them. In all the sympathetic buzz, the real victims are 
forgotten.

We’ve seen this dance before. Many high-profile men accused of abuse or 
assault have responded in similar ways – by offering vaguely contrite language 
for intentionally ill-defined bad behaviour, redirecting attention on to their 
mental or emotional “struggle”, and reaping the PR rehabilitation that follows.


None of this is to cast doubt on or downplay the seriousness of Frost’s claims 
of mental illness and alcohol abuse. He’s acknowledging he has those issues and 
is seeking treatment, and that’s an important first step.


But having a mental health condition or a substance abuse problem is not a 
licence to assault or racially abuse people. Nor can an apology like Frost’s be 
taken in good faith when it obscures the behaviour it’s supposedly apologising 
for, and directs people’s attentions elsewhere.


Honey, I'm home: Melbourne buzzes as Courtney Barnett plays gig for native bees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/06/honey-im-home-melbourne-buzzes-as-courtney-barnett-plays-gig-for-native-bees>
It’s at best cynical, not least because it conflates mental illness with abuse.


Violence against women has myriad causes, and mental illness can’t be 
discounted as one potential factor among many. But explaining away violent 
incidents as being the result of mental illness reinforces stigma, and bolsters 
the incorrect and dangerous idea that only people with mental health conditions 
are capable of violence.


If perpetrators of abuse use mental illness or substance abuse to avoid 
accountability, we have an obligation to say so. It’s an uncomfortable and 
fraught conversation, but silence is a much worse alternative. We do an immense 
disservice to abuse victims and to ourselves by allowing it to stand. It’s time 
to stop playing the game.

 