
Peter Coates has condemned those Stoke City supporters who subjected Aaron 
Ramsey to shameful chants in relation to thebroken leg the Arsenal midfielder 
suffered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/feb/28/aaron-ramsey-broken-leg-arsenal>
 at the Britannia Stadium six years ago. The Welshman was booed throughout
Sunday’s goalless draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/17/stoke-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
, and Arsène Wenger, the Arsenal manager, expressed his dismay with the 
supporters who sang: “Aaron Ramsey, he walks with a limp.”

Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain gives cause for optimism in reshuffled Arsenal 
midfield | Amy Lawrence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/17/alex-oxlade-chamberlain-arsenal-arsene-wenger-stoke>
Coates said he never heard the chant but the Stoke chairman made it clear that 
he had no time for that sort of behaviour and did not want it to continue. 
“You’re telling me something that I’m completely unaware of. I’ve no idea that 
chant had taken place, but we wouldn’t approve of it at all,” Coates told the 
Guardian.

“I don’t think it’s a minority of fans; I know it’s a minority. People chant 
all sorts of awful things at all sorts of grounds, which I dislike. But do I 
approve of that sort of chanting? Of course I don’t.”

Wenger gave a measured response after the game when asked for his thoughts on 
what had gone on. “I shut my ears and I think that’s the best way to deal with 
it,” the Frenchman said. “I don’t know what to do about it. I have no influence 
on it. When people get together sometimes they forget their individual 
responsibility and maybe when you go home and watch it on television you are 
less proud.”

Coates agreed with Wenger that it is best to turn a deaf ear to those mindless 
enough to sing that sort of song. “You go around football grounds and hear some 
chanting I don’t like,” Coates said. “I wish they didn’t do it but how do you 
control these things? You can’t. The best thing is to shut your ears in a way, 
like he [Wenger] said: switch off and ignore it as best you can.”

Asked whether Stoke would consider in the future issuing a message to their 
fans on the eve of an Arsenal game, in the same way thatManchester United did 
in the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/dec/09/alex-ferguson-arsene-wenger-sick-chants>
 to try to stamp out some of the abuse that Wenger has been subjected to at Old 
Trafford over the years, Coates replied: “I think the sooner we forget about 
these things the better, [otherwise] I think all you do is almost keep it 
going. But this is not something we would want our supporters to be doing.”
 