
How the scientific community united against Tribeca's anti-vaccination film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/29/tribeca-de-niro-anti-vaccination-film-scientists-response>
The life story of disgraced British former surgeon and vaccine campaigner 
Andrew Wakefield is to be told on the big screen,reports Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/callous-disregard-movie-vaxxed-1201762084/>.

In a development likely to reignite concerns that the campaigner’s 
controversial views on the link between autism and childhood vaccination are 
being given fresh credibility, the powerful Hollywood screenwriter Terry 
Rossio, best known for the Pirates of the Caribbean films, has optioned the 
rights to Wakefield’s 2010 book Callous Disregard: Autism and Vaccines – The 
Truth Behind a Tragedy, along with the former doctor’s life rights.

Rossio, the second most successful screenwriter of all time at the North 
American box office 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/people/?view=Writer&sort=sumgross&order=DESC&p=.htm>
 and an Oscar nominee, will work with screenwriter and practicing 
otolaryngologist Dr Jocelyn Stamat on the project.

“Dr Wakefield is clearly a polarising figure, reviled by the general public 
yet also revered by many,” said Rossio in a statement. “The details and drama 
surrounding his life are even more remarkable than generally known.”

Added Stamat: “We look forward to bringing Andrew Wakefield’s personal story 
to the screen and exploring a topic of vast importance to public health and the 
health of the nation’s children.”

It was not immediately clear from the Variety report whether Rossio and his 
team plan a documentary about Wakefield’s life, or a biopic-style feature film.

Vaxxed: an expert view on controversial film about vaccines and autism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/02/vaxxed-film-scientist-interview-vaccines-autism>
Wakefield gained notoriety in Britain in 1998 with a research paper, later 
discredited, which argued the joint measles, mumps and rubella vaccine was a 
potential cause of autism and bowel disorders. Wakefield was struck off the UK 
medical register in 2010, when a statutory tribunal held by the General Medical 
Council found him guilty of “dishonesty” and said he had subjected children to 
invasive medical procedures they did not need.

Wakefield re-emerged into the public spotlight last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/29/tribeca-de-niro-anti-vaccination-film-scientists-response 
http://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/29/tribeca-de-niro-anti-vaccination-film-scientists-response>
, when his documentary Vaxxed: from Cover-Up to Catastrophe was initially given 
a premiere at the Tribeca film festival by founder Robert De Niro. The 
Oscar-winning actor, who is the father of an autistic child, later pulled the 
film from the festival’s screening programme following an outcry from doctors 
and researchers.

Vaxxed had its first US screening at New York City’s Angelika Film Center 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/02/vaxxed-film-premieres-new-york-anti-vaccination>
 earlier this month.
 