
Perhaps it’s because I’ve just finished the Netflix series Stranger Things 
that I’m preoccupied with different yet co-existent realities, playing out on 
different planes simultaneously.


There are several different ways we could characterise this past week in 
politics. If so inclined, we could cast the cartoonish LNP backbencher George 
Christensen asthe most powerful man in Canberra 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-opinion/i-give-malcolm-full-marks-george-christensen-humble-backbencher-seizes-the-limelight-20160915-grgskh.html>
, a characterisation he’d find both apt and delightful.

We could conclude that politics is a bitch by noting that one of the most 
publicly minded, genial and least artful people I’ve met in politics over the 
past 20 years, Ewen Jones – Christensen’s north Queensland Liberal neighbour – 
won’t be representing the voters of Herbert in the new 45th parliament, because 
he was taken out, in part at least, because of the swing to One Nation in 
Queensland. This week,the LNP decided there were no grounds to challenge the 
result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/liberal-national-party-wont-challenge-herbert-election-loss>
. A pity, this, because good souls in politics can be hard to find.

We could scratch our heads about the enigma wrapped up in a riddle that is 
Peter Dutton, who, this week, provided his most heart-starting insight since 
that time during the election campaign when he said asylum seekers would come 
to Australia to steal our jobs and go on welfare. Continuing this quaint trend 
of don’t sweat the obvious internal contradictions, Dutton in the space of one 
day appeared to say two contradictory things. Hesuggested asylum seekers on 
Nauru might be resettled in New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/peter-dutton-open-to-refugees-on-nauru-being-resettled-in-new-zealand>
, something of a thunderbolt, given the government has been saying the exact 
opposite for years. On the same evening, he said he hadn’t said it, then said 
we’d bedealing with Nauru for decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/asylum-seeker-processing-at-nauru-will-continue-for-decades-says-dutton>
.

Asylum-seeker processing at Nauru will 'continue for decades', says Dutton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/asylum-seeker-processing-at-nauru-will-continue-for-decades-says-dutton>
But rather than getting hung up about the multiple parallel universes of 
politics – fun as it is – I think if we stand back a little we can identify a 
significant common thread in this parliamentary week. This week was about doses 
of reality, measured out in different contexts, with different results.

We can start with the political newcomer Liberal Julian Leeser, who achieved 
the rare feat of making Australian politics catch its collective breath whenhe 
shared a personal story 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/julian-leesers-maiden-speech-prompts-the-sound-of-furious-compassion-from-the-house-20160914-grg1gh.html>
 about his father’s suicide in his first speech to parliament.

Leeser recounted the day his mother had woken him from sleep to say Dad had 
gone. “I got up from my bed to comfort my mum, trying to calm her. I went down 
the hall to my father’s office, where he worked late into the night for his 
clients. There I found his pyjamas in a pile and on the glass-topped table in 
the hall, was a note, like so many of the notes from my father, written in red 
pen on the back of a used envelope. It said, simply: I am sorry Sylvia. I just 
can’t cope, love, John.”

Leeser’s stoicism in recounting the tale, his simple desire to say something 
real, to make the personal the political, instantly shamed the B-grade 
melodramas of the sitting week. Truth and clarity rang out in the House of 
Representatives like a bell.

Politics also had to face up to the reality that Pauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> had successfully 
clawed her way back into the subculture she was bundled out of in 1998.

Hanson is back with a new category of “others” to scapegoat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/pauline-hanson-first-speech-senate-calls-for-immigration-ban>
 as a ritualised salve for the alienation of white working-class blokes who 
believe they’ve been stiffed by globalisation, and can’t work out why the 
Australia they were born into in the last century appears almost unrecognisable 
to them in 2016.

Pauline Hanson calls for immigration ban: 'Go back to where you came from'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/pauline-hanson-first-speech-senate-calls-for-immigration-ban>
But this time, Hanson delivered her speech with the Indigenous leader Pat 
Dodson sitting diagonally across from her, hat off, back straight, beard 
flowing down the front of his suit, watching on unflinchingly; and she was 
followed immediately by Malarndirri McCarthy, who opened her first speech in 
her Indigenous language, the words lilting up through the Senate chamber to the 
large group of assembled family and friends, who cheered, and bawled, and held 
the Indigenous flag aloft with a punch of pure triumph.

Politics had changed since 1996, there were now countervailing forces, 
possibly catalysed by the dogged persistence of her public ambitions. Hanson 
had moved on from the “Aboriginal industry” in any case. So 1996.

By Friday, the Labor senator Stephen Conroy articulated his own personal 
reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/16/stephen-conroy-resigns-from-the-senate>
. After 20 years, it was time to move on to the corporate world. He departed 
with the pithy summation: “When you resent being in Canberra because you are 
missing your daughter’s soccer training it is time to retire from the federal 
parliament.”

Colleagues were wrong footed, because Conroy hadn’t told all of them. He 
hadn’t told the party leader, his sometime friend, sometime frenemy,Bill Shorten
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>. Anyone who knows 
Conroy will know that this is how things generally are with him – stuff the 
talking points, snowboard downhill, at breakneck speed, minus crash helmet, 
never mind the concussion.

Sensibly, Turnbull ignored this posturing and set about constructing a verb

Conroy’s New South Wales colleague Anthony Albanese, who was looking very zen 
about this turn of events, thought he might shovel a bit of reality back in the 
direction of a press pack so revved it was in danger of hyperventilation. This 
Conroy resignation looked incredibly strange. Where was Conroy, why wouldn’t he 
front up and explain himself?Albanese was brutal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/sep/16/albanese-on-conroy-resignation-frankly-its-none-of-your-business-video>
. “That is your problem. No one else’s. Stephen Conroy told the Senate last 
night.”

After the dog bit the man (called Sam) last week, various forces aligned to 
ensure the man then bit the dog. The Coalition was persuaded that if you make a 
big political fuss about one senator and his propensity to ask Chinese business 
people to kick in with contributions, you might need to be seen to be doing 
something more systemic about reform of the donations and disclosure regime. 
Actually doing it is, of course, another matter – and on the doing front, we’ll 
have to wait and see –but the joint standing committee on electoral matters was 
given a reference allowing it to take steps to improve a system desperately in 
need of substantial improvement. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/turnbull-government-launches-sweeping-inquiry-into-donations>
 Who’d have thunk it? Almost grounds for hope.

Then there was the prime minister, making peace with his own complicated 
reality.

Malcolm Turnbull entered his anniversary week absolutely determined to turn 
around perceptions that he’d achieved two-fifths of bugger all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/turnbulls-tipping-points-how-the-liberal-partys-saviour-failed-to-grab-malcolms-moment>
 since taking the leadership from Tony Abbott 12 months ago. This was partly a 
message for external consumption, to pacify the bobble heads who go on Sky News 
programs and ABC24 programs and talk incessantly about “optics”, or who write 
ponderously about seminal turning points; and partly a message for internal 
consumption, given Abbott was Around,being pacified by Alan Jones about the 
Terrible Injustice of one year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/malcolm-turnbull-says-labor-preaching-hatred-in-marriage-equality-debate>
, burnishing some parallel reality where Abbott Could Have Done Better Than 
Malcolm. Never mind all those polls telling us the Coalition was heading for a 
stupendous rout. National affairs is no fun at all if you can’t choose your own 
facts.

Abbott has been saying recently the Turnbull government must be different to 
its opponents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/26/tony-abbott-urges-turnbull-to-pursue-reform-to-counter-populist-politics>
, which is code for saying the Coalition must exist in a state of rigidly 
inflexible purity inside its own ideological bubble, and continue with the 
unproductive tub thumping that killed his own prime ministership. This is a 
dispatch from a strange, disconnected universe where talking incessantly about 
doing something in a righteous manner exciting the shock jocks and the base is 
somehow better than doing it.

Sensibly, Turnbull ignored this posturing and set about constructing a verb. 
The profound need for momentum in anniversary week drove the government tomake 
peace with Labor on $6bn worth of budget savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/labor-under-fire-over-6bn-budget-savings-deal-with-coalition>
 by actually having a negotiation rather than pounding the gavel. The increase 
in the tobacco excise also cleared the parliament, another nice thing to pacify 
the ratings agencies.

Stephen Conroy resigns from the Senate, taking colleagues by surprise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/16/stephen-conroy-resigns-from-the-senate>
Not content with that, Turnbull decided this was the week to walk over and 
lift the club from Abbott’s hand – the superannuation club he’s been using to 
beat Turnbull and Scott Morrison and Kelly O’Dwyer with behind the scenes.A 
peace deal on the vexed super policy was settled and bowled up on the final 
sitting day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/superannuation-backflip-on-500000-cap-wins-over-coalition-conservatives>
.

If the price of that deal was having Christensen out, crowing like a year nine 
prefect in the Mural Hall about being the man of the moment, then that was a 
price worth paying.

Then there was the plebiscite. The realities around the plebiscite are more 
vexed. Turnbull genuflected at the start of the week to the reality of the 
various demands conservatives were making –demands sufficient to kill the whole 
exercise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/cabinet-approves-15m-public-funding-for-same-sex-marriage-plebiscite>
. He appeared to execute this submission willingly enough, but on Friday, 
safely past the pressures of the parliamentary week, a loose construction. The 
prime minister told the radio host Neil Mitchell that he might look to
compromise in order to salvage the plebiscite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/16/malcolm-turnbull-willing-to-negotiate-on-marriage-equality-plebiscite>
.

It’s a flare. Turnbull is clearly saying to Shorten “I will negotiate”. You 
might ask on what? Well, a couple of things. It’s possible the government could 
look to strengthening the protections against government-funded advertising 
being used to say hateful things. It’s possible Shorten could get something 
approximating a joint platform on which to campaign. Perhaps there are other 
things that could be applied to the process to address some of the concerns 
about the plebiscite becoming some sort of sanctioned vilification exercise.

The signal is limited, but it’s also deliberate.

So where does it end?

Well that depends on how far both leaders can extend. Turnbull is completely 
ring-fenced by the plebiscite, his internal reality says it is that process or 
nothing. As for Shorten? It’s a threshold question.

Is the reality now that Labor does not want a plebiscite on any terms? Or is 
it more shaded? Is Shorten hesitating ever so slightly about locking Labor in, 
once and for all, behind killing the whole process, because he is prepared to 
deal?
 