Thrill rating 9/10 
Danger rating 9/10

Fitness rating 7/10

In a nutshell ...

Lie face upwards on a modified skateboard, two inches from the somewhat 
unforgiving tarmac, and pelt yourself down a hill trying desperately to steer 
your way clear of any manhole covers, roadside hedges or other out-of-control 
street luges.

The boards are longer than for a traditional skateboard to incorporate the 
length of your body, and the wheels are thicker for better stability and speed. 
Expert lugers can reach speeds of 80mph and more, and everyone only has their 
feet to brake, so riders must wear a helmet, protective clothing and strong 
footwear.

This extreme sport is working hard to shake off its rebellious, risk-taking 
image, and with the help of Oxford's Street Luge UK, currently Britain's only 
street luge school, it's proving to be an adventure open to anyone - not just 
those young/fearless/crazy Jackass types.

What's the buzz?

"Man has been attracted to speed since the beginning of time, so it's not 
surprising this adventure is popular," says Street Luge UK's Ding Boston, who 
introduced the sport to the UK in 1995. "The idea of speed is enhanced the 
closer you are to the ground, so even if you're travelling at 40 or 50mph, on a 
luge it feels like 80 or 100mph."

Boston also points out that, owing to the lack of brakes, riders often burn 
the rubber off the soles of their shoes when stopping. Looking on the bright 
side, if you do fall off while street luging, at least you haven't got far to 
fall.

Thrill a minute?

Gurston Down in Wiltshire is a great spot for beginners; because of all the 
twists and turns on this half-mile track, you can get plenty of thrills while 
sticking to (relatively) comfortable speeds. First timers can potter down at a 
positively sedate-sounding 25mph, while intermediate riders can work their way 
up to the 50mph mark - and whizz past all those beginners.

Adrenaline peak

Imagine you are Lewis Hamilton (only without the vast earnings potential) and 
indulge in a spot of "drafting" - tucking in behind another luge and using its 
slipstream to pick up speed before nipping out to overtake. Get it wrong, of 
course, and we're looking at one major pile-up and some frosty words from the 
rider you've just taken out.

Where to do it

Ding and his fellow Oxford lugers use a number of venues around the Cotswolds 
- it's important to have a private road with a good incline, challenging 
corners, a sound road surface and a decent run-off area, preferably of grass to 
soften the blow if you fall. Make that when ...

Who can do it

Clearly this is not a walk (nor even a skateboard) in the park. Adults of good 
fitness levels only, please.

What to take

You'll need to lay your hands on welding-style gloves, army boots, motorcycle 
leathers and knee sliders. And a high-quality crash helmet is obligatory, 
obviously.

Typical prices

Street Luge UK taster days cost Â£60 per person and cater for groups of up to 
12. Note that there's no insurance offered, so you take part entirely at your 
own risk. The company's instructors are, however, committed to giving the best 
pointers, safety information and instruction before you start. Weigh up the 
risks with the ever-helpful Ding before booking.

Impress your pals 

Joel King from Bognor Regis set the world landspeed record for a jet-powered 
street luge on a disused runway near Ipswich. "The Gravity King", as he is 
cunningly known, averaged a boggling 112.7mph.

YouTube searchwords 'Will and Andy streetluging'

Good links

streetluge.co.uk <http://www.streetluge.co.uk>

streetluge.com <http://www.streetluge.com>

geocities.com/ukstreetluge/ <http://www.geocities.com/ukstreetluge/>

lugeforce.tripod.com/ <http://www.lugeforce.tripod.com/>
 