
As health officials battle increasing mortality associated with heroin and 
prescription opioids, an even more dangerous group of street drugs has appeared 
on the scene. FromSeattle to Syracuse 
<https://www.statnews.com/2016/04/05/fentanyl-traced-to-china/>, authorities 
are reporting a spike in overdoses of fentanyl, an opioid25 to 50 times stronger
 
<https://www.drugabuse.gov/about-nida/directors-page/messages-director/2006/06/fentanyl-use-in-combination-street-drugs-leading-to-death-in-some-cases>
 than heroin; in Canada,four pounds 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatoon/w18-overdose-saskatchewan-alberta-1.3549043>
 of a drug called W18, which is 100 times stronger than fentanyl, were recently 
seized.

These drugs — which act so quickly that they can be used in anesthesia— are 
now being made in clandestine Chinese and American labs. Fentanyl and similar 
derivatives are then sold either as heroin, in the form of fake Oxycontin 
pills, or scarily, sometimes even in pills made to look like anti-anxiety 
medications such as Xanax.

The problem has caught law enforcement officials and politicians off guard. 
But to anyone who has studied the history of drug policy, it was completely 
predictable.

It’s known as the “iron law of prohibition” or, as activist Richard Cowan, who 
coined the phrase, put it: “The harder the enforcement, the harder the drugs.” 
It’s been demonstrated throughout the history of drug policy: the more 
authorities target a class of drugs, the more potent and dangerous the versions 
on the street become. Under alcohol prohibition, bootleggers preferred to sell 
whiskey and gin, not beer and wine; during the cocaine years, dealers switched 
from selling powder that was used typically for snorting to selling crack, 
which can only be smoked, a much more addictive way of using the drug.

From dealers’ business perspective, then, switching to fentanyl makes total 
sense: the smaller the amount needed to get high, the tinier each package is 
and the lower the risk of getting busted. But from a public health perspective, 
it’s a disaster.

At least prescription drug misusers who get pharmaceuticals from doctors 
receive drugs of a known dose and purity, far from the case with street heroin 
or pills. When users substitute street fentanyl, it can cause an overdose so 
quickly that there is little time to intervene and save a life. (Pharmaceutical 
forms of fentanyl exist, but the kind found on the street tends to be illegally 
produced). While heroin overdoses tend to take several hours before they are 
deadly, fentanyl can kill so fast that people often die with a needle still in 
their arm.

Further, it’s only luck that so far, flawed manufacturing hasn’t introduced a 
batch laced with MPTP into the streets. A known neurotoxin which can be made 
accidentally when trying to synthesize certain types of fentanyl, MPTP causes 
rapid-onset Parkinson’s disease, destroying the brain’s dopamine neurons. It 
often “freezes” victims in place, leaving them conscious but unable to move or 
speak. In the 1980s, at leastsix California heroin users 
<http://www.amazon.com/Case-Frozen-Addicts-William-Langston/dp/0679424652/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1460386701&sr=1-1&keywords=case+of+the+frozen+addicts>
 suffered this horrific fate, and hundreds of others may have been exposed, 
which increased their risk for late-life Parkinson’s.

This explosion of dangerous, unregulated drugs won’t cease unless the policies 
that encourage them do; cracking down on doctors who prescribe opioids without 
boosting treatment for addicts will only grow street-drug demand. The only 
intervention that has been repeatedly proven to cut the mortality from opioid 
addictionby 50% <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/add.13193/full> or 
more 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/20/opinion/every-drug-court-should-allow-methadone-treatment.html>
 is indefinite maintenance with another opioid, typically buprenorphine or 
methadone.

If we’d immediately expanded maintenance treatment when the medical crackdown 
began, the street market that provides heroin and fentanyl almost certainly 
wouldn’t have grown as quickly. And while Barack Obamarecently proposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/29/prescription-drug-abuse-addiction-treatment-painkiller>
 regulations that will allow doctors to prescribe buprenorphine to more 
patients, he has actually made doing so subject to increased red tape and has 
not touched the sclerotic bureaucracy that restricts methadone to highly 
isolated clinics. This must change.

Secondly – and here, more progress is being made – increased access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/05/i-dont-want-heroin-to-kill-my-son-so-i-taught-my-8-year-old-to-give-the-antidote>
 to the overdose antidote, naloxone, is needed. Many states are now making this 
nontoxic drug available over the counter, and the Obama administration is 
funding programs to get it into the hands of more first responders, friends and 
family members of drug users. But to stop fentanyl deaths, naloxone needs to be 
cheap and everywhere: there should be a national campaign to put a few vials in 
every first aid kit in the country, to help whether a toddler gets into 
grandma’s pills or a teenager begins a potentially deadly experiment.

Finally, there are two ways to help cut the death toll among the highest risk 
users, those who either refuse or cannot access maintenance treatments and who 
are often homeless and mentally ill. The first and most well-researched is to 
provide what are known as “supervised injecting facilities” (Sifs), places 
where users can go to take their drugs under the watchful eyes of medical 
professionals.

Research <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21497898> on the Insite Sif in 
Vancouver, Canada, for example, showed that after it opened in 2003, the 
overdose death rate in the immediate area fell by 35%, compared to only 9% in 
areas nearby without such a facility. And areview 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25456324> of the data on Sifs in Europe, 
Canada and Australia found they do not increase injection rates, but they do 
cut HIV, reduce overdose deaths and get people into treatment.

A second approach would be to offer drug testing services – not the kind that 
test users’ urine, but the kind that shows what’s in the substance itself. This 
way, if “heroin” or “Oxy” actually contains fentanyl, at least users would know 
the risk they face – and there is a chance to talk them out of taking it. This 
has not yet been well-researched for opioids, but it is widely used to test 
“club” drugs, with groups likeDanceSafe <https://dancesafe.org/drug-checking/> 
offering test kits online and at raves and festivals to help people avoid 
dangerous chemicals sold as MDMA (ecstasy).

There are ways out of the opioid crisis, but it cannot be curbed simply by 
tightening access to legal supplies. Now that demand is moving to the black 
market, somecities 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/03/us/crime-spike-in-st-louis-traced-to-cheap-heroin-and-mexican-cartels.html>
 are already beginning to see violence and turf wars similar to those that 
accompanied the early marketing of crack during the 1980s war on drugs, which 
was not previously part of today’s opioid problem.

A market will always arise where there’s a demand; the real answer is to 
prevent and treat addiction, not drive people from dangerous legal drugs to 
even riskier illegal substances without any way to ensure their safety.
 