
We were told about Orgosolo by an Italian on the ferry to Sardinia from 
Barcelona. Intrigued by his description, we negotiated our tandem over 
1,000-metre-high mountains, winding by olive trees and ancient dry-stone walls. 
Breaking the brow of our final hill, we were confronted by the high cliff which 
walls Orgosolo in on two sides, and there below was the town itself, perched on 
a steep hillside. As we descended into it we passed the first of what we’d come 
for –the famous murals 
<http://www.italia.it/en/travel-ideas/art-and-history/the-murals-of-orgosolo.html>
.

The arrival of decent roads and the affordability of the ubiquitous little 
Fiats must have opened up life here significantly, but the mountains remain 
enough of an obstacle that the area is still among Europe’s most remote and 
least populated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fstreet-art-sardinia-myth-magic-murals-orgosolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbab2092b7d4a544d6799f4015982258b942e843a%2F0_11_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Street%20art%20Sardinia%3A%20the%20myth%20and%20magic%20of%20Orgosolo's%20murals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fstreet-art-sardinia-myth-magic-murals-orgosolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Street%20art%20Sardinia%3A%20the%20myth%20and%20magic%20of%20Orgosolo%27s%20murals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Fstreet-art-sardinia-myth-magic-murals-orgosolo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbab2092b7d4a544d6799f4015982258b942e843a%2F0_11_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Outlaws and bandits benefited from this isolation. For many hundreds of years 
it was a place to hide the kidnapped and elude the authorities. Its reputation 
as a place of villainy inspired Vittorio De Seta to make his 1961 filmBanditi a 
Orgosolo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r5oNSwCmMhA> (Bandits of Orgosolo), 
with local shepherds cast in lead roles.

The town’s anti-authoritarian predisposition no doubt came to the fore when, 
in 1969, it successfully resisted the Italian military’s plan to create a base 
on common land used by local shepherds. This episode, known as the Pratobello 
revolution, was commemorated in the first of the murals. These were mostly 
created by Francesco Del Casino, a local art teacher and communist, who, in the 
70s and 80s, worked with disadvantaged youths to begin a trend which would soon 
replace banditry as Orgosolo’s primary distinction. Huge, cubist graphics 
recount global social injustices – from Vietnam to Gaza – or call for Sardinian 
independence. Others simply depict scenes from everyday rural life.
 Photograph: Ullstein Bild/Getty Images 
A few tourists do make it here to see the murals, although locals assure us 
that Orgosolo’s renowned hospitality has always attracted visitors. Don’t 
expect much in the way of tourist information, although there is a smattering 
of souvenir shops, from which you can buy an English-language guide to the 
murals. There are also plenty of old shepherds sitting around who would be 
happy to chat, but you may have to grapple with the town’s unique dialect.

We were happy to discover that the aforementioned hospitality isn’t dead, and 
we were treated to a series of unbelievable homemade meals by Carmina, a woman 
in her 80s. Carmina, like many of the elderly women, wears a veil and dresses 
all in black, a tradition that lives on here, starkly contrasting with the 
colourful murals that adorn her town.
 