
Andrew Wakefield, the doctor struck off the medical register 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/mmr-doctor-andrew-wakefield-struck-off>
 for his discredited research that claimed to find a link between autism and 
the MMR vaccine, can add another honour to his list this Christmas: the 
inaugural Golden Duck award for lifetime achievement in quackery, set up by the 
science writer Simon Singh.

Runners-up for the award were Prince Charles and David Tredinnick, the Tory MP 
for Bosworth and member of the Commons health select committee. The Good 
Thinking Society, a campaign group led by Singh, set up theannual Golden Duck 
award <http://goodthinkingsociety.org/projects/golden-duck/420-2/> to recognise 
those "who have supported or practised pseudoscience in the most ludicrous, 
dangerous, irrational or irresponsible manner".

In 1998, Wakefield was the lead author of a paper in the Lancet medical journal
 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2897%2911096-0/abstract>
 that suggested a link between the measles virus and inflammatory bowel 
disease. The paper also suggested the virus played a role in the development of 
autism. Wakefield later said that his research led him to believe that, instead 
of the MMR triple vaccine, children should be given a series of single 
vaccines. His statements led to alarm around the world, a drop in the rate of 
MMR vaccination and, in the UK, a rise in cases of measles cases.

In 2010, the Lancet formally retracted Wakefield's paper and he was struck off 
the medical register 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/mmr-doctor-andrew-wakefield-struck-off>
 after being found guilty of serious professional misconduct. Subsequent 
studies have found no credible link between MMR and either autism or Crohn's 
disease.

Adam Finn, professor of paediatrics at Bristol University, said that 
Wakefield's legacy was "many, many thousands of unimmunised children born over 
the last 15 years whose parents decidedMMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> was too risky at the time and 
subsequently have forgotten all about it. Measles rates are up and they will 
only decline when this accumulation of susceptibles has either had the vaccine 
or the disease."

Singh said Wakefield's impact on vaccination in the past decade had been 
important and worrying. "Reminding people of these issues is very important," 
he said.

The Golden Duck award was voted on by attendees of the many Skeptics in the 
Pub groups, which convene talks and events around rationalism. Tredinnick made 
the shortlist for hisparliamentary motions supporting homeopathy and other 
unproven medical ideas 
<http://www.quackometer.net/blog/2009/10/mp-david-tredinnick-calls-for-more.html>
. Prince Charles was on the list for his long-termsupport for groups that lobby 
for alternative, unproven therapies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/jul/25/prince-charles-snake-oil-salesman>
.

Singh said the idea for the Golden Duck award was inspired by similar prizes 
in Australia and the Netherlands. "We thought if we're going to kickstart it 
over here, then rather than make it a prize for 2012, let's think about all the 
ones we've missed, let's make it a lifetime award for quackery."

He added that it was part of a growing attempt by sceptic groups to organise 
and challenge bad uses of science and evidence in public. "We see a decline in 
homeopathy in the NHS and we see a decline in the number of homeopathic 
hospitals. We see sceptics using regulatory authorities or the Advertising 
Standards Authority to clamp down on misleading claims.

"I think gradually people that care about evidence and science are getting 
their message across. All the time what we care about is the consumer or 
patient.

"It's not just an intellectual battle or a battle of ideas, it's about 
protecting people from misleading information."

Next year's Golden Duck award will be for behaviour in 2013 and likely to 
focus on politics. "We want to see politicians who, if they're not necessarily 
scientists, are willing to listen to scientists and are willing to take on 
board the evidence that surrounds them, rather than ignore it completely," said 
Singh.

He said the Good Thinking Society would keep an eye, in particular, on the 
health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, who has previously signed early-day motions on 
homeopathy. "Next year will be really interesting. With politicians knowing 
they will be monitored in this way, is it going to affect their behaviour?"
 