
Shortly before Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> delivered her big speech 
at the SNP conference, she swapped her Saltire-blue dress of earlier in the day 
for a scarlet one. It was a sign of the land grab into red territory that was 
to come.

“I don’t mind admitting I had high hopes when Jeremy Corbyn was elected,” 
Sturgeon told delegates at the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre. “I 
don’t agree with him on everything. And I didn’t expect to convert him to the 
cause of independence – not immediately anyway – but I did hope he would change 
Labour. But so far Jeremy Corbyn isn’t changing Labour, he’s allowing Labour to 
change him.”

Sturgeon set out her stall to rule Scotland for ever. Well, certainly a long 
time. And while the conference hall was, perhaps surprisingly, not full, those 
who were there were ecstatic. “It has been our privilege to leadScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> for the past nine years. To seek to 
lead our country for the next five – and into a new decade – is an even better 
privilege,” she told the delighted party faithful.

A second referendum was firmly put on the backburner. “We believe in 
independence – in our hearts and in our heads. But our ambition for this 
country is not about flags and anthems. It’s about five million people.”

And the Conservatives – with a reference to David Cameron’s supposed party 
trick with a pig’s head – were mocked as a sexually deviant irrelevance. “The 
prime minister’s attitude to Scotland betrays the worst characteristics of his 
government – arrogant, patrician and out of touch. Pig-headed, some might say!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsnp-conference-dont-mention-independence-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cca84ac8dac35e7f04a41851b9c9d85f8a9d196%2F0_0_3866_2318%2F3866.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sturgeon%20bids%20to%20reassure%20the%20waverers%3A%20%E2%80%98Trust%20me%20to%20always%20do%20the%20best%20for%20you%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsnp-conference-dont-mention-independence-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sturgeon%20bids%20to%20reassure%20the%20waverers%3A%20%E2%80%98Trust%20me%20to%20always%20do%20the%20best%20for%20you%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsnp-conference-dont-mention-independence-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cca84ac8dac35e7f04a41851b9c9d85f8a9d196%2F0_0_3866_2318%2F3866.jpg>
 Sturgeon, waves to her supporters after addressing delegates on the final day 
of the SNP conference in Aberdeen. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Sturgeon’s final speech, like the party conference as a whole, was about 
offering the remaining Labour voters in Scotland, appalled by the shambles down 
south, a safe haven when they came to vote in next May’s Holyrood election. Not 
they, a scary, aggressive nationalist party, but a managerial, united, 
undogmatic one that happens to believe in independence, but is supremely 
relaxed about when there might next be a vote on it.

Crucially, it is not the party of the divisive Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> (who was heard last week 
describing those involved in the pro-union Better Together campaign as 
“lowlife”), but the sensible, mild-mannered Sturgeon. “Trust us – trust me – to 
always do the best for you, for your family and for your community,” she said.

In a few short years Sturgeon has gone from being mocked as a “wee Jimmy 
Krankie” lookalike to being perceived as something close to a mother of the 
nation. A Scottish Angela Merkel, with total control over her party.

On day one of this conference, Sturgeon decreed that talk of a second 
referendum was to be banished to the sidelines, and lo, it came to pass.

During Saturday morning’s session there was time to talk about trade union 
rights. There was scope for points on childcare, the (treacherous) BBC and food 
poverty. A delegate from the Angus South constituency association was even 
given time on the main stage to present a resolution on the need for more 
toilets for the disabled. Oh, and the leader of Plaid Cymru,Leanne Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/leanne-wood>, did a turn. But talk of 
another referendum? Not a sausage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsnp-conference-dont-mention-independence-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd732c14dba313fa9c59fd4ccff763ad9b1016fb5%2F0_470_1605_1179%2F1605.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sturgeon%20bids%20to%20reassure%20the%20waverers%3A%20%E2%80%98Trust%20me%20to%20always%20do%20the%20best%20for%20you%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsnp-conference-dont-mention-independence-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sturgeon%20bids%20to%20reassure%20the%20waverers%3A%20%E2%80%98Trust%20me%20to%20always%20do%20the%20best%20for%20you%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F17%2Fsnp-conference-dont-mention-independence-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd732c14dba313fa9c59fd4ccff763ad9b1016fb5%2F0_470_1605_1179%2F1605.jpg>
 Nicola Sturgeon takes a selfie at the conference in Aberdeen. Photograph: 
David Cheskin/PA 
And what of Salmond – the walking, talking, bullying, symbol of this party’s 
urgent appetite for another vote? He was limited in the week to a three-minute 
afternoon spot to talk about Syria. On Friday evening, Salmond could be found 
at a five-star hotel on the outskirts of Aberdeen being interviewed by the new 
SNP MP for Edinburgh East, Tommy Sheppard, at a charity auction/promo for his 
book,The Dream Shall Never Die 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/308160/>. He was 
rather less bashful than Sturgeon about a second referendum. “It is as near 
inevitable as anything ever can be in politics,” he said.

“This is the first conference in quite a while that you have not been 
absolutely at the centre of it, on the platform – how’s it been taking more of 
a back seat?” asked Sheppard, all wide-eyed and innocent.

Salmond smiled. Although not with his eyes. “Well, there was an incident 
today. It came on the lunchtime news that the SNP leadership had been defeated 
on the issue of land reform. I thought, ‘good, excellent’. That was new.” Cue 
nervous laughter in the audience.

Salmond, who is standing for a place on the SNP’s ruling national council, 
then performed the slow laugh of a pantomime villain. Sturgeon has shown that 
she is strong. Well, she might just need to be.
 