
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> has 
accused Michael Gove of telling “a fib and a half” after he claimed Scotland 
would be able to set its own immigration quotas if the UK leaves the EU.


The pair clashed after Gove said a Scottish visa system could be devised by 
the Scottish parliament after a Brexit vote, allowing Holyrood to tailor an 
immigration policy to meet its economic needs.

Brexit would replace Cameron with Tory hard right, says Tom Watson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/vote-to-leave-eu-would-embolden-thatcherites-warns-labour>
In a short visit to Scotland to rally support for the Vote Leave campaign, 
Gove said the points-based system would be very similar to the proposals put 
forward by the Scottish National party in the2014 independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence>. Alex Salmond, the 
then first minister, and Nicola Sturgeon, his successor, were highly critical 
of UK immigration policy for reflecting the needs of south-east England or the 
anti-immigrant sentiment of English voters.

Sturgeon implied Gove was guilty of cynicism. Referring to his active 
involvement in the anti-independence campaign in 2014, she tweeted:
Nicola Sturgeon (@NicolaSturgeon) 
Politicians who opposed Indy now pretending that #brexit 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/brexit?src=hash> is great idea because it will 
give us powers of Indy probably shouldn't be trusted!
 <https://twitter.com/NicolaSturgeon/status/742311540444041216> June 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NicolaSturgeon/status/742311540444041216> Nicola Sturgeon 
(@NicolaSturgeon) 
Well there's a fib and a half... #voteremain 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/voteremain?src=hash> https://t.co/4puIBp6Mn6 
<https://t.co/4puIBp6Mn6>
 <https://twitter.com/NicolaSturgeon/status/742259202446528512> June 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NicolaSturgeon/status/742259202446528512> 
Gove told BBC Radio Scotland that although the Home Office in London would 
still control UK borders after leaving the EU, under his campaign’s proposals 
both the UK and Edinburgh governments would in future negotiate a distinct 
Scottish policy. Appearing to appeal directly to a growing number of leave 
voters, including to a third of Scottish National party and pro-independence 
supporters, Gove said “it would be forScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to decide” what migrant tests it 
wanted to introduce.

He said the UK-wide result in next week’s referendum was “on a knife-edge” and 
said the outcome among Scottish voters “will be significantly higher” than the 
25% to 30% leave vote shown by recent polls.

Gove endorsed a letter to Sturgeon from Tom Harris, the former Labour MP now 
leading the Scottish Vote Leave campaign, saying Scotland could negotiate a 
special decentralised deal within the UK, in the same way the Isle of Man has 
one with the European economic area which allows it to prioritise its own 
workers.

Gove pointed at the situation of the Brain family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/30/australian-family-in-scotland-win-reprieve-from-deportation>
 who face being deported from Scotland back to Australia because the UK 
government changed the post-study work visa rules which originally brought the 
Brains to the Highlands. That system did give Scotland some flexibility but was 
scrapped in 2012.


Provoking a scathing attack from Salmond, whose party has championed the 
Brains’ case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/27/highlands-town-rallies-round-gregg-kathryn-lachlan-brain-home-office-visa-dingwall>
, Gove implied the family was being penalised because the EU system forced the 
UK to give preferential treatment to EU migrants. “At the moment, if you are an 
Austrian you can come here and there is no control over the number of people 
who can come from any EU country but if you are an Australian there is a 
limit,” he said. “Ultimately, the numbers who would come [to Scotland] in the 
future would be decided by the Westminster parliament and the Holyrood 
parliament working together.”

Salmond accused Gove of talking nonsense. “The Brain family are not suffering 
from any impositions of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>
. They are suffering at the hands of Gove’s Tory government,” the former SNP 
leader said.

“The truth is of course is that the Brexiteers will say anything at this stage 
in the campaign. They run about England telling people they are going to slash 
immigration and now Gove comes to Scotland to tell us we will be able to 
attract more people. The lord chancellor is talking nonsense on ermine-clad 
stilts – what is standing in the way of Scotland having the immigration powers 
we need isn’t the EU, it’s the UK government.”
 