
I’m always looking for the Churchillian leaders of business to work with. 
Those who trust their ideals, passion and instinct rather than research and 
data. The precious few who will happily stand up and be counted rather than sit 
down and count the annual bonus. The truth is these folk are few and far 
between. For everyRichard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson> there are a hundred 
anonymous directors managing by collective decisions and quarterly results.

Dov Charney, until recently the patriarch of American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/17/american-apparel-ceo-dov-charney-fired-fall-icon-sleaze>
, worked by instinct and created impact, although I think it’s fair to say he 
was not a leader in the Churchill mould. Intelligent, charismatic butallegedly 
questionable in matters of the flesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/jun/19/dov-charney-american-apparel>
. A man whose positive character traits built a disruptive category-breaking 
global company but whose negative attributes imposed a ceiling on his ambition 
and ultimately put all he built at risk.

American Apparel’s banned ads are a shocking example of marketing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/12/american-apparel-banned-advert-shock>
Paula Schneider has now been tasked with taking what is already North 
America’s largest apparel manufacturer 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/clareoconnor/2015/01/22/new-ceo-paula-schneider-how-ill-fix-american-apparel/2/>
, albeit with flagging sales, and drive it forward in the post-Charney era. She 
has announced that she will be taking the brand into thearea of social issues 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/fashion/article/23581/1/american-apparel-is-quitting-with-the-overtly-sexual-ads>
, a radical shift from its somewhat self-obsessed and shamelessly provocative 
past.

There is nothing that says you can’t take an existing well-known brand and 
take it in a radically different direction, but it is rare – although Ryanair 
can’t hurt from its realisation that thecustomer isn’t a necessary evil 
<http://www.communicatorcorp.com/blog/ryanair--multi-channel-strategy-to-change-brand-perception>
 and actually should be cherished.

My main advice to Schneider is that if she wants American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> to be centred around 
social issues she will need to pursue this new direction with the same 
personality traits, commitment and energy – the passionate, carefree, edgy 
disruption – that got the brand this far, and make it run through every vein of 
the organisation. People do change their convictions and beliefs in life and we 
all accept that as long as the change is not just skin deep.

The point of living your beliefs is critical. Addressing the wrongs of the 
past while preserving what made you is not as simple as employing advertising 
and social media agencies to create disposable content aroundflavour of the 
year millennials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/feb/12/millennials-advertising-technology-marketing-audiences>
. What American Apparel needs is a true partner to understand, preserve and 
protect the behaviour that made the brand special, while shaving away the less 
desirable elements of Charney’s reign. It needs someone strong enough to 
challenge corporate sensibilities and provoke employees to grow their brand by 
being true to themselves in all they do; be that product, service, culture and 
communications.

Featuring YouTuber Brendan Jordan 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/fashion/news/american-apparel-makes-15yearold-teen-diva-brendan-jordan-the-face-of-its-new-campaign-9916174.html>
 (an ambassador for the LGBT community) in a campaign is not an end in itself. 
I want to see the company integrate its aspirations into supporting the rights 
and opportunities of that, and other, communities. Benetton is a great example 
of how a company went from effective advertising around prejudice in the early 
90s to now setting up theUNHATE Foundation <http://unhate.benetton.com/>, 
therefore putting its principles at the core of the organisation rather than 
just as an expressive opinion. You can’t just tell stories and shock people 
anymore, we’re all a much more cynical bunch who want to see companies back up 
their shouts with actions.

It will be hugely disappointing if American Apparel becomes a brand that 
simply uses “disruption with conscience” (or whatever its proposition becomes 
moving forward) as a print-out on a wall and an image on a website.

Earlier I mentioned Ryanair as a brand currently embarking on a fundamental 
rebrand. I also look to Burberry under Christopher Bailey and how the brand was 
(de)checked. By removing the accessible product and brand imagery popularised 
by the lower end of the consumer market, it re-established itself as a premium 
luxury brand. The irony being its behaviour as a brand had not changed from 
premium to mass market, but it had provided the ability for the consumer to 
take it there. By removing that option Burberry reclaimed its deserved 
perception.

Häagen-Dazs for years represented quality, but was one of the first brands in 
the food and beverage industry to connect with sensuality. The association was, 
however, only on the surface and as a result it lost its way and now lagsfifth 
in the league of UK ice-cream brands 
<http://www.statista.com/statistics/304692/most-popular-ice-cream-frozen-desserts-brands-in-the-united-kingdom-uk/>
 behind leader Ben & Jerry’s.

Jaguar has made a significant transformation over the last decade, moving away 
from the aging, driving-glove-wearing audience of the past into representing 
modern Britishness and beautiful fast cars that appeal to an affluent younger 
market. The car manufacturer reinforced this in its product development in 
recent years, leaving behind the mahogany veneer rolling living rooms of the 
XJ6 and S-Type to the powerful and beautiful F and XF. It’s done all of this 
whilestaying true to the core values 
<http://www.psfk.com/video/keeping-true-old-fashioned-brand-values-will-help-spur-creativity>
 the company was built on.

Smart brands evolve and grow, they don’t change. Take Virgin, Red Bull, 
Caterpillar and MTV as examples. The bad ones do nothing and go under, look at 
Woolworths. As an aside, cigarette brands are in the last-chance saloon in that 
regard.

I’m confident Schneider will create a successful business whatever American 
Apparel does, but if the brand stays true to its personality, loses the 
seediness and behaves as a brand and organisation as one, it will do it better.

Jason Hartley is the chief strategy officer at The Partners 
<http://www.the-partners.com/>

More like this:

• Marmite Easter eggs – the final frontier of brand extensions? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/feb/09/marmite-easter-egg-brand-marketing-extensions>
• The Lynx effect: ad land begins to reflect the lives of gay men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/jan/22/lynx-tiffany-lgbt-gay-lives-advertising>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled “Brought to you by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 