
A shortage of basic goods and skyrocketing food prices are fuelling discontent 
inEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, where a currency crisis has 
hit imports.

Sugar has all but vanished from supermarkets and imports of items such as 
powdered infant formula and even some contraceptives are down.

Egyptian authorities, who have blamed traders and suppliers for hoarding and 
smuggling goods, said they have so farseized 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-24/egypt-raids-sugar-sellers-as-shortage-doubles-prices-in-weeks>
 9,000 tonnes of sugar in raids on factories and warehouses, including 
facilities belonging to Pepsico and Edita, one of the country’s largest 
manufacturers of confectionaries. The sugar is intended for resale to the 
public at subsidised prices.

A man in Cairo was recently arrested  
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/64/245914/Egypt/Politics-/Man-arrested-in-Cairo-for-carrying-too-much-sugar.aspx>
and bailed for carrying 10kg of sugar, as this “exceeded possession of amounts 
reasonable for personal use”, according to Egypt’s largest newspaper, al-Ahram.

Egypt imports about a million tonnes of sugar annually – about a third of its 
total consumption – but an acute shortage of dollars has cut imports by private 
traders, leaving the market short.

The dollar shortage, and the suspension of oil aid from Saudi Arabia earlier 
this month, have also led to a widening gap between the official and parallel 
market trading rate of Egypt’s currency.

The crisis comes as the government of President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi> makes unpopular cuts to 
a subsidies programme while it waits for the first tranche of a $12bn (£10bn) 
loan from the International Monetary Fund.

The IMF recently reminded 
<https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2016/10/08/AM16-TR100816-Transcript-of-the-IMFC-Press-Briefing>
 Egypt that it must follow through on previously promised reforms in order to 
receive the first instalment of the loan, which the regime hopes will stimulate 
the economy.

Food shortages are not immediately apparent in upscale supermarkets such as 
Gourmet in Zamalek, an affluent district in central Cairo, but the rise in 
prices of imported goods are plain to see.

“These prices are going crazy,” one customer said last week as she rifled 
through packets of mussels in search of calamari.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fegypt-sugar-shortage-soaring-food-prices-discontent-abdel-fatah-al-sisi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0f9e48dc4c542ad471fea2630bde0ca4d33ab61%2F0_266_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sugar%20shortage%20and%20soaring%20food%20prices%20fuel%20discontent%20in%20Egypt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fegypt-sugar-shortage-soaring-food-prices-discontent-abdel-fatah-al-sisi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sugar%20shortage%20and%20soaring%20food%20prices%20fuel%20discontent%20in%20Egypt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fegypt-sugar-shortage-soaring-food-prices-discontent-abdel-fatah-al-sisi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0f9e48dc4c542ad471fea2630bde0ca4d33ab61%2F0_266_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Tomatoes for sale for 10 Egyptian pounds (93p) a kilogramme in Tawfiqia market 
in Cairo - the average monthly salary is 868 Egyptian pounds. Photograph: 
Nariman El-Mofty/AP 
Mohamed Ehab, a shift manager at the store, said: “Everything is hard to 
import right now. We used to get the Spanish coconut oil, but now we can’t. We 
haven’t had any salmon for 20 days.”

The complaints might seem frivolous in a country where the average monthly 
salary was 868.50 Egyptian pounds (£80) in 2015. But it is nevertheless 
evidence that the country’s economic woes are beginning to affect those in the 
upper echelons of Egyptian society, and not just the many already living in 
poverty.

Given the extent to which political dissent is stifled in Egypt, its citizens 
have so far been careful to direct their anger exclusively at the economy 
rather than the regime.

“We’re in Zamalek so this is class A,” said Ehab, referring to the richest 
sections of Egyptian society, the traditional support base of Sisi, who swept 
to power in a military coup in 2013.


For some of Egypt’s wealthiest people, it will take more than the rising price 
of salmon to ignite anger with the government. But for the vast majority, who 
live on relatively little, rising prices, inflation and the subsidy cuts have 
had a noticeable impact on their standard of living.


Earlier this month a video of an unnamed tuk-tuk driver ranting 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContentP/1/245741/Egypt/A-tuktuk-drivers-tirade-on-Egypts-economic-woes-go.aspx>
 about the state of Egypt’s economy went viral. “A poor citizen can’t even find 
one kilogramme of rice on the street,” he said, arguing that the country’s 
rulers would face divine judgment for what they were doing to the poor. Two 
days later, ataxi driver in the coastal city of Alexandria set himself on fire 
<http://www.france24.com/en/20161016-rising-prices-food-shortages-spark-desperate-actions-egypt>
 in protest over rising prices.

Price increases and the import crisis have also begun to affect the supply of 
medicines into tEgypt. “Customers get angry if the medicine they want isn’t 
there,” said pharmacist Ahmed Elshafei. Branded contraceptive pills and 
painkillers have become tough or impossible to find in recent months without 
turning to the parallel market, he said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fegypt-sugar-shortage-soaring-food-prices-discontent-abdel-fatah-al-sisi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb443d2ec19c8905116f901af56938ab5eda1619e%2F0_123_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sugar%20shortage%20and%20soaring%20food%20prices%20fuel%20discontent%20in%20Egypt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fegypt-sugar-shortage-soaring-food-prices-discontent-abdel-fatah-al-sisi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sugar%20shortage%20and%20soaring%20food%20prices%20fuel%20discontent%20in%20Egypt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fegypt-sugar-shortage-soaring-food-prices-discontent-abdel-fatah-al-sisi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb443d2ec19c8905116f901af56938ab5eda1619e%2F0_123_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A man carries sugar bought from a government truck in Cairo, where it has all 
but vanished from supermarkets. Photograph: Amr Abdallah Dalsh/Reuters 
“There are people who will buy just one strip of something instead of a whole 
box, or buy local drugs and ask for the cheapest one. If prices keep increasing 
this way, people may not be able to afford that one strip,” he said.

Abdel Alim, a baker in the central Garden City district, said he had raised 
prices across the board because of increases in the price of flour and sugar. 
Asked whether the rising prices could spark discontent, he said: “It’s not my 
problem – it’s the problem of whoever is raising the prices.”

There are persistent rumours of protests over the dire economic situation 
being planned for 11 November, stoked in part by Egyptian media, which accuses 
the banned Muslim Brotherhood group of organising the demonstrations to spread 
discontent. Many of those affected by the shortages remember that one of the 
rallying cries of the country’s revolution in 2011 was “bread and freedom”.

“The government will have to enact subsidy reform and currency devaluation at 
the same time – and at a time when the economic situation is pretty dire,” said 
HA Hellyer of the Royal United Services Institute in London. “Throwing all 
these things together may be quite risky – they might have no choice, but I 
worry about a social reaction: not protests or demonstrations per se, but riots 
or things like that, which are far more sporadic and unplanned.”
 