
Toddler treats, Chamonix, France

Chamonix is a great place to take very young children: because it’s a proper, 
good-sized town it has lots of facilities and activities aimed at residents as 
well as tourists. For example, theRichard Bozon 
<http://www.chamonix.com/piscine-du-centre-sportif-richard-bozon,spa-relaxation,48-3113-sitraLOI321531,en.html>
 sports centre near the Olympic centre has a heated indoor pool, with dedicated 
hour-long sessions for different age groups on Saturday mornings. The town’s 
library has a vast kids’ area, there are creches and babysitting services (see
chamonix.net/english/services/baby-care 
<http://www.chamonix.net/english/services/baby-care>) and on Thursday mornings 
there’s a baby playgroup at the church near the railway station.


Lac de Passy, half an hour’s drive away, is warm enough for swimming in the 
summer – even for babies – and Combloux, 40 minutes away, has an ecological 
lake pool with wooden decks. Older children will enjoy the deer, marmots and 
llamas atMerlet animal park <http://www.parcdemerlet.com/fr/accueil.htm>, the 
Paradis des Praz 
<http://www.chamonix.net/english/leisure/horse-riding/paradis-des-praz>
adventure play centre, riding the town’s 1,300m luge, and taking the 
Montenvers-Mer de Glace train up to the ice cave.

That’s without mentioning all the hiking and outdoor activities on offer in 
Europe’s mountaineering capital, and summer-long events marking the 150th 
anniversary of the first ascents of Mont Blanc (1865.chamonix.fr 
<http://1865.chamonix.fr/en/>). 
• Inghams (01483 345 736, inghams.co.uk 
<https://www.inghams.co.uk/lakes-mountains-holidays/resorts/france/chamonix/chalet-hotel-sapini%C3%A8re?accommodationNode=12419&programCode=GBINB&tourOpCode=INGH&catalogue=010&obArrGateway=FRCH&propertyCode=&boardBasis=&unitCode=&transportType=&departureDate=29%2F07%2F2015&duration=7&obDepGateway=LGW&Adults=2&Children=2&ChildAge1=1&ChildAge2=3>
) has a week at the central Hotel Sapinière for £570pp for a young family of 
four departing 29 July (other dates and prices available), including flights, 
six dinners, and five days’ packed lunch and afternoon tea

Hiking and outdoor relaxation, Wilder Kaiser, Austria
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434713620905%2F6a16ac10-28ff-41f8-a1a8-cebbaf61828b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Summer%20holidays%20in%20the%20Alps%3A%20eight%20great%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Summer%20holidays%20in%20the%20Alps%3A%20eight%20great%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434713620905%2F6a16ac10-28ff-41f8-a1a8-cebbaf61828b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Wilder Kaiser’s towering sheer cliffs resemble the Dolomites 
Holidays organised by the Austrian tourist board offer very good value and 
often include discounted or free transport or activities. One tempting 
programme is a week’s hiking in the Wilder Kaiser region, whose towering sheer 
cliffs resemble those in Italy’s Dolomites. The area is dotted with pretty ski 
villages such as Ellmau, Söll, Scheffau, and – you’ll have fun with this one – 
Going.

Local projects have made an effort to keep visitors entertained with features 
ranging from abarefoot trail 
<http://www.hexenwasser.at/en/stations/barefoot-path.html> at the Hexenwasser 
adventure park to anextensive e-bike system 
<http://www.wilderkaiser.info/en/summer/summer-active/electric-bikes.html>, 
which claims to be the biggest in the world, with 275 electric bikes, 75 rental 
and charging stations and paths through 45 villages. But the hiking routes 
alone are lovely, through forests and alpine meadows. A KaiserJet pass for the 
local hikers’ bus is included, along with a Wilder Kaiser guest card, giving 
free access to 15 guided hikes and 12 family events each week.
• From £299pp for a week, with accommodation in “cosy farms”: book on +43 
50509,wilderkaiser.info 
<http://www.wilderkaiser.info/en/available-accommodation.html>

Slow cycling and scenery, Slovenia
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434714325885%2F1f0a1ae2-951b-40d5-998a-0d77444f22ba-2060x1378.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Summer%20holidays%20in%20the%20Alps%3A%20eight%20great%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Summer%20holidays%20in%20the%20Alps%3A%20eight%20great%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434714325885%2F1f0a1ae2-951b-40d5-998a-0d77444f22ba-2060x1378.jpeg>
 Cycling through a vineyard in the Maribor region of Slovenia. Photograph: REX 
Shutterstock 
Cycling holidays can be both hardcore and hard to afford. But self-guided 
tours with new companyFlexitreks 
<http://flexitreks.com/cycling-holidays/lake-bled-cycling-holiday/> are a bit 
kinder to legs and wallet. The riding is fairly gentle and avoids steep climbs 
and traffic-clogged areas, and week-long tours start at under £500pp. The 
Slovenia trip is a circular route from Lake Bled, including B&B accommodation 
and some transfers; flights and bike hire are extra. The 147-mile route 
includes a day cycling between the Karawanke mountains and the Julian Alps to 
the resort of Kranjska Gora, and takes in stunning Vintgar gorge and the Bohinj 
valley, with stops for lunch or lake swimming.
• One week from £465pp, 01273 410550, flexitreks.com 
<http://flexitreks.com/cycling-holidays/lake-bled-cycling-holiday/> 

New hikers’ refuge, Maurienne valley, France
 Refuge Lo Tsmao 
There are lots of bargain refuges and mountain huts in the Alps, but a new one 
opening this summer, at 2,060m near Val Cenis, is a good base for exploring the 
Maurienne valley and Vanoise national park, or a starting point for a 
multi-stop hike. When it opens on 11 July, self-sustainingRefuge Lo Tsmao 
<http://www.refuge-lotsamou.com/accueil.html> will have two double rooms, two 
four-bed rooms and dorms sleeping six, eight and ten, plus a restaurant serving 
Savoyard dishes such as raclette,crozet pasta, crepes and omelettes. Its summer 
season ends on 6 September, but it will reopen for one week in October. The 
tourist office in nearby Bramans village sells aPass Exploration 
<http://www.haute-maurienne-vanoise.com/pass-exploration/fonctionnement-du-pass>
 (€2 a day) that lets hikers use the three ski lifts in Val Cenis, and allows 
free entry to the resort’s swimming pool complex, bus travel to the villages of 
Bessans and Bonneval-sur-Arc, plus activities. Paragliding, husky sledging 
(with wheels) and kids’ clubs can be arranged, too.
• From €13 a night, or €32 half-board, refuge-lotsamou.com/accueil.html 
<http://refuge-lotsamou.com/accueil.html>

Design hotels and family activities, Bavaria, Germany
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434713337369%2F75287fea-8bdb-4f8d-bac5-d7e8b562b3c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Summer%20holidays%20in%20the%20Alps%3A%20eight%20great%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Summer%20holidays%20in%20the%20Alps%3A%20eight%20great%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434713337369%2F75287fea-8bdb-4f8d-bac5-d7e8b562b3c2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Gut Steinbach has good hiking on the doorstep and is handy for sightseeing 
in Salzburg, Munich and Kitzbuhel 
The Bavarian tourist board has launched a collection of “Sightsleeping Hotels 
<http://www.bavaria.by/about-sightsleeping>”, which it says have particular 
visual appeal, such as castles, palaces or buildings with impressive interior 
design or artwork. In Upper Bavaria, theAm Eichholz Galerie und Art Hotel 
<http://www.bavaria.by/sightsleeping-hotels-design-bavaria/a-am-eichholz-galerie-und-art-hotel>
 (doubles from €120) in Murnau is owned by a landscape architect and an artist: 
it has original artworks on the walls, and there’s another gallery across the 
road.

The Gut Steinbach 
<http://www.bavaria.by/sightsleeping-hotels-design-bavaria/a-hotel-gut-steinebach>
 (doubles in July from €148) in Reit im Winkl is handy for sightseeing in 
Salzburg, Munich and Kitzbuhel, but has good hiking on the doorstep, plus
pram-friendly walking trails 
<http://www.reitimwinkl.de/en/summervacations/walking-the-baby> of 3-9km, 
outdoor pools and lakes for swimming, and afamily night-hiking experience 
<http://www.reitimwinkl.de/en/summervacations/night-hiking-for-the-whole-family>
 throughout July and August that involves carrying burning torches through the 
Klausenberg gorge to a campfire barbecue. The hotel has a spa, a gym with 
mountain views, and traditional decor with pine-clad walls and log fires, but 
individual touches such as edelweiss-patterned upholstery. It could be a good 
stop on the popular 450kmGerman Alpine Road 
<http://www.reitimwinkl.de/en/summervacations/take-the-scenic-route>, from 
Lindau on Lake Constance to Berchtesgaden.
• bavaria.by/sightsleeping-hotels-design-bavaria 
<http://www.bavaria.by/sightsleeping-hotels-design-bavaria> lists 46 hotels, 
including 11 in upper Bavaria

Summer skiing and mountain biking, Tignes, France
 Mountain biking in Tignes 
The glacier in Tignes makes it an obvious destination for summer skiing or 
snowboarding. It’s particularly popular for those who want to practise jumps 
and freestyle in the slush, then chill with a beer in a resort that can also 
provide a full-on night out. New this summer is a mountain biking park (free to 
use from 27 June to 30 August), with mountain and cross-country tracks graded 
from green to double black, an airbag for showing off bike jumps, and links to 
Val d’Isère.
• Peak Retreats (0844 576 0170, peakretreats.co.uk 
<http://www.peakretreats.co.uk/summer/home-summer.htm>) has a week in an 
apartment for two inLe Telemark 
<http://www.peakretreats.co.uk/summer/tignes2/mgm-apartments/le-telemark.htm>, 
which has an indoor pool, saunas and Jacuzzis, from £787pp in summer (27 
June-22 August), including ferry crossing. Discounts for second week

Serious cycling in Alta Badia, Italy
 Cycling in the Dolomites 
This is extravagant, so anyone who’d balk at spending four figures on a bike 
should look away. Hotel La Perla in Corvara, the main resort of the famously 
foodie Dolomites region of Alta Badia, has a chef who gears meals to cyclists’ 
needs (high energy, low fat). It is also home to the Dogma Pinarello Passionate 
Lounge, which tells the history of the brand and has a Dogma 65.1 to road test 
– this is the bike Chris Froome rode to win the 2013 Tour de France. A
four-night break 
<http://leadingbike.hotel-laperla.it/en/offers/offers-mangia-beve-bici-the-dolomites-experience/10-61.html>
 costs from €640pp, including breakfast and €40 a day to spend in the hotel’s 
five restaurants, one of which is Michelin-starred. For an extra €250 a day, 
the “cyclist treatment” package includes hire of a Pinarello Dogma F8 bike 
worth £9,000, bike guide, support car, mechanic to tune and wash the bike, a 
daily post-ride massage, energy gels and bars, a Garmin 810 satnav with 
pre-loaded routes, and a daily wash-and-fold service for riding kit.
• See altabadia.org  
<http://www.altabadia.org/en/summer-holidays/cycling/road-bike-tours-in-the-dolomites.html>
for cycle routes and dozens of cheaper hotels, including apartments sleeping 
four for around €240 a week in July. Nearest airports are Innsbruck and Venice 
Treviso, or the nearest train station is Bolzano, just over an hour away

Tour de Monte Rosa, Switzerland and Italy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434713162713%2F0be9045e-4bbb-4afa-afcf-e1028b78a743-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Summer%20holidays%20in%20the%20Alps%3A%20eight%20great%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Summer%20holidays%20in%20the%20Alps%3A%20eight%20great%20ideas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Fsummer-holidays-the-alps-bargains%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434713162713%2F0be9045e-4bbb-4afa-afcf-e1028b78a743-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The hi-tech, eco-friendly Monte Rosa Hutte above Zermatt. Photograph: Martin 
Ruetschi/Keystone/Corbis 
The Tour de Monte Rosa, on the border between Switzerland and Italy, is one of 
the most epic Alpine hiking tours, less famous than the Tour du Mont Blanc, so 
much less busy, but with staggering scenery. It crosses cols of over 3,000m 
most days, beside peaks of over 4,000m, and can include climbing the Kleine 
Matterhorn. Indulgent Alpine meals can be justified on such a mammoth trek, and 
local specialities vary from valley to valley. Hikers can do it the classic way 
(using theCicerone guidebook 
<http://www.cicerone.co.uk/product/detail.cfm/book/730/title/tour-of-monte-rosa#.VYAOQ2TF_5o>
), staying in refuges and huts, or do what I did a few years agoand add a few 
comfortable nights in little hotels in valleys along the way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/apr/27/monte-rosa-walking-alps-hotels>
. (See itinerary online at
theguardian.com/travel/2012/apr/27/monte-rosa-walking-alps-hotels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/apr/27/monte-rosa-walking-alps-hotels>
.) A highlight was Tre Alberi Liberi (doubles from €95 in summer,
trealberiliberi.it <http://www.trealberiliberi.it>) in gorgeous Alagna.


One of the newest huts on the circuit is hi-tech, eco-friendly Monte Rosa Hutte
 <http://www.zermatt.ch/en/Media/Attractions/Monte-Rosa-hut-Swiss-Alpine-Club> 
(dorm beds from £14) above Zermatt, which opened in 2009 and has a seriously 
modern aluminium facade. Hiking to it involves traversing the Gorner glacier – 
best done with a guide.

A good money-saving tip is to get a Swiss rail pass (sbb.ch 
<http://www.sbb.ch/en/leisure-holidays/holidays--short-breaks-in-switzerland/swisstravelsystem/swiss-travel-pass.html>
) which covers travel on any standard train or bus in the country and entry to 
480 museums, plus 50% off mountain railways. This costs £144 for three 
consecutive days, and under-16s travel free with a parent.
• Information and refuges at section-monte-rosa.ch 
<http://www.section-monte-rosa.ch/fr/> and monterosa.com 
<http://www.monterosa.com/>
 