
Marseille 


In recent years, Marseille has ditched its gun-slinging and girlie-bar image 
in favour of Euro-sophistication. The city is to be European Capital of Culture 
in 2013, so clearly needs all those design hotels, lounge bars and galleries 
that have sprung up to puzzle the hoodlums. Pick of this summer's exhibitions 
might be the Auguste Chabaud show at thePalais des Arts  
<http://www.regards-de-provence.org/>(Place Caril, 20 May-12 September). After 
portraying debauchery in Paris, Chabaud returned to Provence for a quieter 
life, tackling rural themes with fauvist intensity. He grew as obsessed with 
the Alpilles hills as Cézanne had been with Mont Sainte-Victoire.

But I'll be just as glad for a flip back to they city's pre-sophistication 
days at theworld pétanque championships  
<http://www.lamarseillaise.fr/mondial-p-tanque-2009.html>(4-8 July). This is 
the Wimbledon of boules, with pastis instead of strawberries. You can enter on 
the above site, to take your chances with the 13,000 other players. Entrance 
costs just €15 per three-person team.After being knocked out, retire toLe 
Crystal bar on the Vieux Port. Revelling in 50s chic (check out the yellow 
formica bar), it's the hippest spot around.

Casa Honore <http://www.casahonore.com> (+33 4 9611 0162, doubles from €150) 
is a stylish B&B in a back street near the Vieux Port, with funky but minimal 
white rooms and a breakfast area with patio doors onto a balcony overlooking 
the pool, in a courtyard flanked by palms and bougainvillea.
Anthony Peregrine, travel writer and Provence expert for simonseeks.com 
<http://www.simonseeks.com>

Nice


In summer, jazz breaks out of boozy basements and heads for the sun. Festivals 
swing across the south of France, a pandemic of blues, funk and bebop. You can 
barely walk without tripping over a trombonist. The finest gathering is atNice 
Jazz Festival <http://www.nicejazzfestival.fr/> (17-24 July) in the Cimiez 
arena and gardens. If names such as Ornette Coleman and Robert Cray, Al 
Jarreau, Herbie Hancock and Buddy Guy get your mojo working, this is your 
place. There are three stages, hosting multiple concerts each night, and fringe 
events bring lesser luminaries to bars across town. Two things surprise me this 
year – first that Dr John (18 July) is apparently still alive and, second that, 
in Nice at least, Kris Kristofferson (23 July) ranks as a jazzman. Tickets for 
individual concerts from €29; an eight-day pass costs €185.

Newest and grooviest of the private beaches is Hi Beach 
<http://www.hi-beach.net/> at the eastern end of Promenade des Anglais 
(entrance from €18 a day). It has activity and relaxation zones, massage, sushi 
and more. TheHi Hotel <http://hi-hotel.net/> (+33 4 9707 2626 doubles from 
€250) a few blocks back on Avenue des Fleurs is a futuristic pad with colourful 
rooms, gadgets and DJs.AP

Avignon


Avignon, the ancient city of alternative popes in Provence, hosts Terra-Mare 
<http://www.avignon-barcelo.com/>, a major exhibition of the work of Mallorcan 
artist Miquel Barceló, in three venues this summer (27 June-7 November). Recent 
paintings and works on paper will be shown in theCollection Lambert 
<http://collectionlambert.com/> galleries , housed in a gracious 18th-century 
townhouse; ceramics and terracotta installations will be on display in the 
Grande Chapelle of the massive 14th-centuryPalais des Papes 
<http://www.palais-des-papes.com/> (; and sculptures in the Musée du Petit 
Palais <http://www.petit-palais.org/> , which will also present Mallorcan 
Gothic works (being shown outside Spain for the first time since the Middle 
Ages) made around the time the kings of Mallorca visited the pope in Avignon in 
the 14th century.

The exhibition, which marks the Collection Lambert's 10th anniversary, honours 
a versatile artist who had made a worldwide reputation for himself and was 
fetching astronomical prices for his paintings by the time he was 30. Now in 
his 50s, Barceló lives and works in Paris, Mali and Mallorca.

Book well in advance if you plan to go in July, when the walled city with the 
famous brokenpont is abuzz with the annual Festival d'Avignon 
<http://festival-avignon.com/> theatre shindig. The central Hotel de Blauvac 
<http://hotel-blauvac.com/> (+33 4 9086 3411, doubles from €72), near the 
Palais des Papes has simple, jolly rooms and a courtyard. Have lunch or dinner 
on the terrace of theLe Moutardier du Pape <http://restaurant-moutardier.fr>, 
with a splendid view of the palace.
Heidi Ellison, editor of paris-update.com

Arles 


Van Gogh fans are seduced by this old and intimate Provençal city, where the 
stars sparkle over the Rhone and the Café de Nuit. It is also a good place to 
walk around, with Roman ruins and lovely squares to idle in. Aside from its 
sun-suffused charms, the city is hosting one of the world's leading photography 
events,Les Recontre d'Arles <http://www.rencontres-arles.com>, this year from 3 
July-19 September.

For a day trip out, pick up some Provençal picnic staples in one of the 
markets and then travel by bike or bus, or take a slow drive down to the 
glorious lagoon-scape of theCamargue, around 20km away.

For an atmospheric stay in the heart of the city, try the Grand Hotel Nord 
Pinus <http://nord-pinus.com> (+33 04 9093 4444, doubles from €170), on ancient 
Place du Forum and beloved by local-boy fashion designer Christian Lacroix and 
decades of visiting bullfighters. The foyer displays gilded costumes like 
relics alongside black- and-white photos of retro matador pin-ups.
Christine Finn, travel writer

Rouen


Rouen cathedral appears as painterly fragments in works by Claude Monet. He 
took rooms opposite it so as to be able observe it in all lights and all 
weathers. This summer sees some of the paintings together in Une Ville pour 
L'Impressionnisme: Monet, Gauguin et Pissarro à Rouen from 4 June-26 September 
at the city'sMusée des Beaux Arts <http://www.rouen-musees.com/>. The show's a 
first for Normandy as the "home of Impressionism", a range of themed events and 
exhibitions across the region (see our top 10 pick of the shows at
theguardian.com/travel <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/travel>). The shows will 
look at the impact on the artists of the cool northern light along the Côte 
d'Alabatre.

Rouen is also a good city for foodies, famous for its heart-shaped Neufchatel 
cheese, and there are parks, gardens and bike trails along the Seine and into 
the lush country. Two other arty locales, the harbour ofHonfleur, and Monet's 
gardens atGiverny, are within easy reach. Stay at the Hôtel de la Cathédrale 
<http://hotel-de-la-cathedrale.fr/> (+33 2 3571 5795, doubles from €69), a 
pretty half-timbered building in the old town with a palm-filled courtyard. CF
 