
Terence Davies has always made films melancholically embedded in the past, yet 
has never quite fitted the heritage cinema mould: even when adapting Wharton 
and Rattigan, his period pieces had an elegiac poetry all their own. Newly 
prolific of late –A Quiet Passion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/quiet-passion-review-emily-dickinson-terence-davies-berlin-film-2016>
, his dismayingly stodgy Emily Dickinson biopic, recently played Berlin – he 
seems to have stiffened.Sunset Song (Metrodome, 15), a grandly pictorial 
adaptation of Lewis Grassic Gibbon’s Scots farmland saga, is awash with enough 
magic-hour cornfield vistas to make his similarly stately namesake, Malick, 
golden-green with envy. For a director associated principally with delicate, 
darkened interiority, this is a fully composed foray into epic form.

Peppery and unbending as ever, Lily Tomlin could animate any old dreck

Yet for all its rolling widescreen skies, there’s precious little air in this 
tale of a stout-hearted farm lass (a hard-labouring Agyness Deyn), working the 
land through the ravages of paternal abuse, marital disintegration and the 
first world war. Every tragedy lands with stolid dramatic gravity, the 
characters defined less by their human urges and foibles than by the imposing 
misery of their circumstances.

There’s more life to be found in Grandma (Sony, 15), which is to say that Lily 
Tomlin <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lily-tomlin> is in it. Peppery and 
unbending as ever, Tomlin could animate any old dreck – and in the early stages 
of Paul Weitz’s swiftly sketched character comedy, which introduce acidic 
lesbian poet Elle (Tomlin) as a strident grouch-by-numbers, it seems she may 
have to. But as the lean, day-spanning story takes shape, with Elle coming to 
the aid of a teenage granddaughter (Julia Garner) in need of an abortion, it 
emerges as a lower-key study of shifting generational rebellion – giving human 
grounding to Tomlin’s wiliness, even as it invaluably spikes proceedings.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI0hJ7NHDglU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI0hJ7NHDglU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI0hJ7NHDglU&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Grandma, starring Lily Tomlin. 
“Human grounding” is not a required concern of Guy Maddin’s beautifully batty 
fantasiaThe Forbidden Room (Soda, 12), though perhaps a big screen is. A 
collage of fever-dream dioramas and skits involving wolfmen, vampires, 
submarines and a sentient, tapioca-craving volcano, it’s altogether better seen 
than described – though while Maddin’s crazy-quilt vision proved intoxicatingly 
immersive in the dark of the cinema, living-room viewing makes it seem less a 
portal to another dimension than a dazzlingly realised (in bubbling, two-strip 
Technicolor, no less) curiosity. Still, I’m glad it’s with us.

The title’s the most arresting thing about Kill Your Friends (Studiocanal, 
18), an adaptation of John Niven’s Britpop-era music-biz satire that, even 
accounting for its 90s setting, has a decidedly dated conception of “edginess”. 
The loftyF Scott Fitzgerald allusion 
<http://theodysseyonline.com/florida/show-me-hero-i-ll-write-tragedy/112290> in 
the title ofShow Me a Hero (Warner, 15), on the other hand, is mostly justified 
by Paul Haggis and David Simon’s absorbing, conscientious six-part miniseries, 
starring the reliably riveting Oscar Isaac as Nick Wasicsko, the young Yonkers 
mayor who fought for desegregated housing in his city. It’s meaty social 
tragedy with a hint of Sidney Lumet in its HBO house style.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fsunset-song-grandma-forbidden-room-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1845d3559d792a9defa00fb7f3cfd16b67073065%2F0_0_2217_1330%2F2217.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sunset%20Song%3B%20Grandma%3B%20The%20Forbidden%20Room%3B%20Kill%20Your%20Friends%3B%20Show%20Me%20a%20Hero%3B%20Of%20Good%20Report%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fsunset-song-grandma-forbidden-room-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sunset%20Song%3B%20Grandma%3B%20The%20Forbidden%20Room%3B%20Kill%20Your%20Friends%3B%20Show%20Me%20a%20Hero%3B%20Of%20Good%20Report%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fsunset-song-grandma-forbidden-room-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1845d3559d792a9defa00fb7f3cfd16b67073065%2F0_0_2217_1330%2F2217.jpg>
 ‘Riveting’: Oscar Isaac with Carla Quevedo in the HBO miniseries Show Me a 
Hero. Photograph: HBO 
On recently revisiting the BFI Player, I stumbled upon a welcome section I 
hadn’t seen before. The self-explanatoryUnavailable on DVD 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/bfi-player-plus/unavailable-dvd-plus/> delivers on 
its promise of obscurity: I have yet to see most of the included titles, but 
was pleased to notice a flavourful South African provocation in the murk. 
Initially banned in its homeland in 2013, Jahmil XT Qubeka’sOf Good Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/14/of-good-report-london-film-festival-review>
 tells of a torrid township student-teacher relationship that goes wildly, and 
most violently, awry. Uneven but bristling with sexual and social aggravation, 
it’s a lively landmark in the country’s still nascent tradition of black cinema.
 