
US bank SunTrust has pulled a U-turn on a policy requiring laid-off IT workers 
to provide the company with assistance for no compensation for two years after 
they have been let go, the company told the Guardian on Friday.

The “continuing cooperation” clause, first reported on by ComputerWorld 
magazine 
<http://www.computerworld.com/article/2994787/it-careers/bank-s-severance-deal-requires-it-workers-to-be-on-call-for-two-years.html>
, would have required laid-off workers to provide the company with information 
or assistance for up to two years after they were let go. ComputerWorld 
described the clause as requiring the workers to be “on call for two years” – a 
characterization that SunTrust called misleading.

When asked about the clause and the employees being offered no compensation 
for such continued cooperation, Mike McCoy, the company spokesperson, said: “We 
understand that a clause in our severance agreement was misconstrued versus its 
use in actual practice and therefore, we have removed it.”

The clause originally read: “For a period of two (2) years following the end 
of my employment with SunTrust, I agree to provide assistance and to make 
myself reasonably available to SunTrust regarding matters in which I have been 
involved in the course of my employment with SunTrust and/or about which I have 
knowledge as a result of my employment with SunTrust.”

It went on to say that the “assistance” – which could include phone and 
in-person meetings, testimonies, interviews, trial or affidavits – would “not 
unreasonably” interfere with the former employees’ new jobs. While SunTrust 
would cover expenses incurred by the former employees, it would not compensate 
them for their time.

“I understand that I will not be entitled to any additional consideration or 
compensation of any kind from SunTrust in exchange for such assistance.”

SunTrust – which has close to 1,500 branches across the southern states – 
insisted that it rarely enforces the clause in question.

“It is a rare occasion when we need to call a former employee. The ‘continuing 
cooperation’ clause in our severance agreements is designed to assist the 
company under scenarios that arise infrequently when we need access to 
knowledge possessed by a former employee, primarily related to regulatory or 
legal matters,” McCoy told the Guardian, less than an hour before announcing 
that the clause would be removed from the severance package. “SunTrust has 
never used this provision to require a former employee to be ‘on call’ to help 
conduct day-to-day business in any way.”

Cooperation clauses are traditionally required for executives leaving 
“high-level positions”, Jonathan Segal, an attorney with the firm Duane Morris 
in Philadelphia and legislative director of the Society for Human Resource 
Management in Pennsylvania,told the Atlanta Journal-Constitution 
<http://business.blog.ajc.com/2015/10/20/1733/>.

“There are times that a lower-level employee has institutional knowledge that 
is needed later. But it is the exception, not the rule,” he said.

In 2009, when William Reed JR retired from his post 
<https://www.memphisdailynews.com/news/2009/jun/29/suntrust-execs-consulting-role-follows-other-leadership-changes//print>
 as the vice-chairman of the Atlanta-based bank, he too was required to agree 
to similar clause as part of his non-compete agreement. While he would receive 
no compensation for any continuing assistance offered over the following two 
years, he did receive$100,000 for signing the non-compete agreement 
<http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/750556/000129993309002639/exhibit2.htm>.

Asked to confirm that it was laying off 100 IT employees, who were required to 
train the contractors that would replace them in the coming weeks, SunTrust 
neither confirmed nor denied the claim.

“In terms of the question about lay-offs: like all companies, we are 
constantly reviewing and adjusting our operations to ensure we’re meeting 
client needs effectively and efficiently, however we will decline to comment on 
any specific activities,” McCoy said. 

According to ComputerWorld 
<http://www.computerworld.com/article/2996049/it-careers/qanda-about-suntrust-s-cooperation-clause.html>
, layoffs are scheduled to begin on 1 November.
 