
At GDC2009, Jane McGonigal introduced five challenges to game developers (read 
about them here, in our GDC2009 coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2009/mar/25/game-developers-conference-gdc-2009-jane-mcgonigal-arg>
). One of the more esoteric ideas was to change the world through game 
mechanics. True to form, the game designer behind the serious ARGWorld Without 
Oil <http://worldwithoutoil.org/> and the group at the Institute for the Future 
<http://www.iftf.org/>, have released the results from their most recent title, 
Superstruct <http://www.superstructgame.org/Home1>, in which players were 
challenged to come up with scenarios to save the world from its end.

Although the threats that were posed were fictional (e.g., chemical warfare, 
hunger), the output and analysis was thoughtful and relevant to our current 
crises. Based on more than 1,000 stories submitted for the game by almost 8,000 
players worldwide, the team identified three scenarios that could evolve in 
similar situations. Fromcnet 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-13772_3-10225547-52.html?part=rss&tag=feed&subj=GeekGestalt>
:

First, "The Long crisis," which "plots a path of slow response, resistance to 
change, and attempts to maintain current power relationships."

Second, "Emergence," which "follows a course of rapid adaptation from the 
bottom up, without much unifying direction."

And finally, "The great transition," which "envisions a world remade by 
technology, a challenge to the planetary dominance of humans as a species."

Superstruct <http://www.superstructgame.org> is a crowdsourcing vehicle that 
uses game mechanics across multiple platforms to engage the players and get 
them to contribute. As McGonigal argued in her keynote, this is the most 
powerful asset game developers have in their toolboxes. Here is an example of 
how to implement it.

Of course, it's a rather good-deedy example, one that might - in its current 
format - inform non-profits how to use new media for their own goals. It 
successfully extends the marketing-laden Alternate Reality Gaming genre by 
allowing players to contribute in a meaningful way. Sure, traditional game 
makers may not want to approach such lofty ideals, but Superstruct and other 
games like it indicate that the know-how for engagement that's in developers' 
heads is being applied in some strange places. Who knows where this kind of 
thing might end up.
 