
I went sliding on a mountain in the holidays. In mud. My family and I set out 
for a gentle Christmas walk in Wales that became an unplanned mudbath after we 
climbed a rocky riverbed in search of fossils and ended up stranded and soaking 
on a steep mountainside. We were trying to pull ourselves up by tree trunks but 
kept sliding down again and again as the sun started to set. It was hilarious 
and slightly terrifying.

A new attraction in the Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic> offers a similar experience 
– but one that is planned and safely designed and won’t leave you covered in 
mud. The Dolní Morava Skywalk on the Králický Sněžník mountain includes a giant 
slide that’s clearly inspired by the artist Carsten Höller. Not only can you 
see spectacular vistas of the surrounding peaks while making your way nervously 
along a glass-bottomed skywalk, but you can slide in the sky.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsuper-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548a767f1998d2b06b64487870ebb38cd2e07b98%2F0_0_3736_5603%2F3736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Super%20slides%20are%20the%20slippery%20slope%20into%20art's%20babyish%20new%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsuper-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Super%20slides%20are%20the%20slippery%20slope%20into%20art%27s%20babyish%20new%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsuper-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548a767f1998d2b06b64487870ebb38cd2e07b98%2F0_0_3736_5603%2F3736.jpg>
 The Dolní Moravia Skywalk slide on the Králický Sněžník mountain in the Czech 
Republic. Photograph: Jakub Skokan, Martin Tůma/BoysPlayNice 
It’s a big year for art slides, it seems. Höller himself is wrapping a giant 
slide around the spiralling Orbit tower in east London. He was invited to do so 
by its co-creator Anish Kapoor. Doubtless it is hoped that an exciting art 
slide will help increase visitor numbers at the attraction, where it has been 
claimedlow ticket sales led to losses of £520,000 in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/olympic-parks-orbit-tower-costing-taxpayer-10000-a-week>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsuper-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F833870dee6eec6f053a3d81c294d9ace1d69ba23%2F0_987_3744_3977%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Super%20slides%20are%20the%20slippery%20slope%20into%20art's%20babyish%20new%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsuper-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Super%20slides%20are%20the%20slippery%20slope%20into%20art%27s%20babyish%20new%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsuper-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F833870dee6eec6f053a3d81c294d9ace1d69ba23%2F0_987_3744_3977%2F3744.jpg>
 A shot of the skywalk from below. Photograph: Jakub Skokan, Martin 
Tůma/BoysPlayNice 
If in doubt, install an art slide. From the Czech mountains to Stratford, 
slides are now defined as both fun and cultural. Art is turning into play, and 
play now seen as a noble cultural goal for adults as well as children.

But the rise and rise of the art slide (last summer also saw Höller’s 
creations turn the South Bank into a funfair) shows how some of our deepest 
cultural values are changing. High art has always been an introspective affair, 
from looking silently at paintings in a museum to sitting quietly to listen to 
a symphony. It is about contemplation and absorption. Two people can read the 
same book and talk about it afterwards, but the act of reading will still be a 
solitary experience.

Today, we seem to fear such solitude. Art slides are typical of the age of 
oversharing. It’s not enough to look quietly at art. We need to slide on it, 
climb over it or talk to it, then share selfies of the experience with as many 
online friends as possible. The privacy or shared tranquility of artistic 
contemplation is being trashed by an age that can’t stand being alone. Even for 
a second.

A mountain is not a museum, yet the skywalk and giant slide in the Czech wilds 
typify this huge and disturbing cultural change.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsuper-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41afd2c34c893f922a41e65081915ef6d3045ee9%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Super%20slides%20are%20the%20slippery%20slope%20into%20art's%20babyish%20new%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsuper-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Super%20slides%20are%20the%20slippery%20slope%20into%20art%27s%20babyish%20new%20era&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsuper-slides-art-babyish-new-era-orbit-holler-dolni-morava-skywalk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41afd2c34c893f922a41e65081915ef6d3045ee9%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 Looking out down the Morava river. Photograph: Jakub Skokan, Martin 
Tůma/BoysPlayNice 
When we got in a spot of bother on that mountain we had a laugh, but we were 
also genuinely outside the civilised world. It was an adventure that taught us 
to respect nature’s power. By contrast, the Czech skywalk seems to insulate 
people from a natural experience. It claims to be environment-friendly, but 
pictures make it look like a massive unnatural pollution of the skyline.

Going into nature for real, or sitting in the Rothko room 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/rothko-black-on-maroon-t01031> at Tate 
Modern, are the kinds of cultural adventures that take us to new planes and new 
places. They can be shared, but mustn’t be overshared. When all our most 
intense experiences are reduced to art slides and skywalk selfies, I’d rather 
be lost in the woods.
 