
Superheroes have never really worked for me outside what I consider their 
"natural" environment – comic books. Even in this post-Avengers movie age, I 
still find brightly-costumed heroes interacting with real life on the big 
screen somewhat jarring, something with which I have no trouble in the confines 
of a comic panel.

And superheroes, born out of a very visual medium, have never really gelled 
for me in prose fiction, especially established characters who occasionally 
make the jump to the pictureless narrative. When I was young I had a Superman 
novel written byElliot S! Maggin <http://elliot.maggin.com/>. It was a 
well-crafted tale but I could never escape the niggling thought that I'd rather 
be reading about Superman in a comic.

And what an age of comics it was in those heady late 70s and early 80s 
(somewhat disappointingly termedthe Bronze Age 
<http://www.comicvine.com/bronze-age/4015-55978/> in official comics history). 
Chris Claremont's X-Men 
<http://sequart.org/movies/4/comics-in-focus-chris-claremonts-x-men/>, classic 
Spider-Man storylines such as theGwen Stacy 
<http://amazingspiderman.wikia.com/wiki/Gwen_Stacy> plot forming the basis of 
the current movie, Green Lantern and Green Arrowtackling drugs and civil unrest 
<http://dc.wikia.com/wiki/Green_Lantern_Vol_2_85> … they were great days.

I still buy comic books, though not anywhere near in the numbers that I did in 
the Bronze Age, or even 20 years ago. Perhaps, in my 40s, a 22-page monthly 
instalment of characters I've had a lifetime of familiarity with just doesn't 
cut it any more. And when the big companies such as Marvel and DC do breathe 
fresh life into their characters, they don't seem to be aimed at me – anyone 
for the newGhost Rider 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/comics/news/a557841/one-directions-zayn-malik-inspired-all-new-ghost-rider-design.html>
, reportedly inspired in his look by One Direction's Zayn Malik?

Maybe I have to face up to the fact that I'm just not the demographic for 
comics now, which is no bad thing. Back in the 80s, when Alan Moore was writing 
Watchmen and Frank Miller was doing Dark Knight, we were all at pains to point 
out that "comics aren't for kids any more". It became a kind of mantra. Now, 
when I look at some of the recent big hits – Keiron Gillen and Jamie McKelvie's 
smart and sassyYoung Avengers 
<http://www.comicbookresources.com/?page=article&id=49745>, for example – I 
think that maybe comics are for kids after all. Which, I suspect, is just how 
it should be.

However, I do seem to be rekindling my sense of wonder at superheroes … but in 
prose fiction rather than comics. In the past year I've read three novels that 
not only exorcise my inherent dislike of superhero prose, but give me cause to 
wonder if the future of well-written adult superhero stories is perhapsin the 
novel form <http://superheronovels.com/>.

My first witness for the prosecution is The Violent Century by Lavie Tidhar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/25/violent-century-lavie-tidhar-review>
, published last year and out in paperback now. This is an astonishing 
alternate-history novel about a world with superheroes – while the Americans 
fulfil their cultural destiny by wearing garish outfits and adopting outlandish 
names, the British heroes owe more to Le Carré's glum, shadowy spies and work 
in the background of history.

Next to take the stand is Vicious by Victoria (writing as VE) Schwab 
<http://thebooksmugglers.com/2013/09/book-review-giveaway-vicious-by-v-e-schwab.html>
, which takes all the usual superhero formulas – a pair of brilliant friends 
experimenting with the possibility of superpowers at university, sidekicks, 
superpowered battles – and neatly inverts them in a rather brilliant novel that 
questions the notions of heroism and good vs evil and paints a picture of just 
how "real" people with all their foibles might deal with being gifted 
extraordinary abilities.

Finally, I offer you Nick Harkaway's Tigerman 
<http://www.randomhouse.co.uk/editions/9780434022878>, which is published this 
month ((on May 22)) by William Heinmann. Tigerman is Harkaway's third novel and 
despite the title isn't a really superhero novel at all. However, it does 
feature a superhero called Tigerman, born from not a lightning bolt and a stew 
of chemicals, but rather a half-formed paternal love and a desire for revenge. 
Tigerman is a proper grown-up novel in which it feels entirely appropriate for 
a man knocking on 40 to put on a mask and a costume. Now there's a demographic 
I feel squarely at home in.

Superhero novels aren't a new thing – there's a website devoted to them 
<http://superheronovels.com/> and the numbers being published are huge, which 
is perhaps not surprising given the money superhero movies rake in at the box 
office. But the examples above seem to signal a shift towards quality, depth 
and literary values, which begs the question, for me at any rate, could novels 
really steal comic books' thunder?

The wheels were set turning years ago with Michael Chabon's The Amazing 
Adventures of Kavalier and Clay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/oct/15/fiction.reviews1>, and Jonathan 
Lethem <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jan/11/fiction.features>'s 
Fortress of Solitude. Lethem's book scrawls the discovery of a Green 
Lantern-esque magic ring over the backdrop of racial divisions in Brooklyn, 
while Chabon's novel retells 20th-century history through the lens of a pair of 
cousins (one recently escaped from Nazi-occupied Prague) who are analogies of 
Superman's real-life creatorsJerry Siegel and Joe Shuster 
<http://comicsalliance.com/alan-moore-essay-jerry-siegel-joe-shuster-occupy-comics-creators-rights-superman/>
.

But, as Stuart Kelly cleverly notes in his Violent Century review, they were 
perhaps "meta-novels", where fictional comic worlds blend with literary 
"reality". Vicious, The Violent Century and Tigerman feel like a new era, where 
the concept of the superhero is so ingrained in our collective consciousness 
that we can strip it back to its basics and start all over again: superheroes 
for superheroes' sake.

After all, comic superheroes had their roots in the pulp-fiction adventures of 
The Shadow and Doc Savage 
<http://www.vintagelibrary.com/pulpfiction/characters/Doc-Savage-75th-Year.php>
, so perhaps things have just come full circle and prose is their natural 
environment after all.
 