
In Berlin on 7 October we are holding a concert, To Russia With Love, in 
support of the innocent victims of violence and human rights violations in 
Russia, and to show solidarity with all those who hold dear Russia's future. On 
7 October 2006, the renowned journalist and human rights activist,Anna 
Politkovskaya <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>, was 
murdered in Moscow. Over the past decade the death toll and list of dubiously 
convicted people in Russia have grown exponentially. They include not only 
journalists and human rights activists, but business people, lawyers and 
musicians. The names of Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev, Sergei 
Magnitsky (the lawyer who died in prison), Pussy Riot members Nadezhda 
Tolokonnikova and Maria Alekhina are known worldwide. These names have become 
symbols of resistance to arbitrary power and unjust jurisprudence.

The trials are underway of the so-called Bolotnaya prisoners â€“ the young 
people who dared take to the streets to demand their constitutional rights. An 
unprecedented harsh sentence has recently been imposed on the rural 
schoolteacher, Ilya Farber, who fell victim to corrupt officials. And there's 
the latest arrest of 30 Greenpeace activists accused of piracy for their 
attempt to attract world attention to ecological distractions caused by Gazprom 
in the Arctic.

We are musicians. We are a peaceful people. It is naive to believe that our 
joint action can dramatically change something and justice will prevail. 
Dostoevsky's famous words that "beauty will save the world" evidently also 
sound naive. But we do choose idealism and do believe in miracles. Our goal is 
not only to create wonderful sounds, but also to bring effective help to all 
those who are in real need. We are asking musicians and artists to send words 
of encouragement or messages of support which will be published in the 
programme notes of the concert. Contact us atwww.to-russia-with-love.org 
<http://www.to-russia-with-love.org/Artists_for_the_Human_Rights_in_Russia._Oct_7,_Berlin/EN.html>
.
Gidon Kremer
Berlin
 