


Almost half of all UK-listed companies targeted in takeover bids in the past 
two years have been bought by overseas buyers,fuelling the debate over foreign 
ownership of British firms. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/10/vince-cable-test-takeovers-public-interest>

According to research by the City law firm Wedlake Bell, 44% of mergers and 
acquisitions deals targeting UK-listed companies since the beginning of 2008 
have been backed by overseas bidders.

In the first quarter of this year the proportion of foreign bidders rose to 
53% – almost double the 27% recorded in the first quarter of 2008 as foreign 
companies took advantage of the favourable bid conditions in the UK.

The research comes as foreign ownership of British companies moves up the 
political agenda in the wake of the takeover of Cadbury by Kraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/apr/12/labour-cadbury-law-protectionism-cbi>
 this year and the planned takeover of the transport company Arriva by Deutsche 
Bahn.

Other high-profile deals in recent years, such as Tata's takeover of Corus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/corus> – once British Steel – and the 
sale of the nuclear power producer British Energy to EDF of France, have led to 
crucial parts of the UK's industrial base passing into foreign ownership.

Vince Cable <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable>, the business 
secretary, has pledged to rewrite the rules for takeovers to give the 
government the right to veto deals that are not in the national interest. He 
campaigned for changes when he was Liberal Democrat treasury spokesman and was 
fiercely critical of the Cadbury deal.

Tim Bird, partner and head of the corporate team at Wedlake Bell, said: "More 
and more foreign companies see the UK as a good place to invest. And the 
quickest way is to acquire companies.

"The return to growth of the UK economy is boosting the confidence of overseas 
investors, who clearly view the long-term prospects of the UK economy to be 
very good."

The Wedlake Bell research suggests that the interest shown by overseas bidders 
in UK-listed companies can also be attributed to the stability in Britain of 
the corporate governance systems crucial to the success of takeovers.

Bird said: "The legal system in place to facilitate corporate takeover 
activity is well established and extremely competitive. Backing that up is a 
regulatory system that is transparent, robust and recognises the interests of 
both bidder and target.

"Even where the target company's assets are actually all overseas, the fact 
that they are listed on the London Stock Exchange does give a strong element of 
reassurance to the bidder.

"The current relative weakness of sterling also means UK-listed companies 
appear to represent much better value to overseas investors."

The US remains the largest source of bids for British companies, with emerging 
market bidders such as China and India catching up fast. US companies were 
responsible for 30% of all overseas bids for UK companies over the past two 
years.

The research also reveals that in the 12 months to March this year, 11% of 
overseas bids were from Chinese bidders, although there had been no bids at all 
from China in the previous year. Over the last two years 5% of bids for 
UK-listed firms were from India.

The Financial Reporting Council is expected at the end of this month to 
propose new regulations designed to improve corporate governance of UK 
companies following last year's Walker review.
 