
Swallows and Amazons. By Arthur Ransome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/arthur-ransome>. London: Jonathan Cape. 
Pp.350. 7s. 6d. net.

Children’s books are probably the most difficult of all to write; they are 
certainly the most difficult to review. For children alone can properly judge 
their worth, and children, very wisely, never review. An adult has to refer 
back to his own childhood and ask himself: Would I have enjoyed such a book 
then? The answer, in the case of “Swallow and Amazons,” is very definitely, 
Yes. Moreover, the book is entirely charming quite apart from its qualities as 
child literature. This is rare; for, generally speaking, nothing makes drearier 
reading than the conscious juvenility of adults. There is something elephantine 
and clumsy about it, like Gladstone capering on all fours or a bishop playing 
Santa Claus.

Mr. Ransome has the same magical power that Lewis Carroll had of being the 
child in terms of himself. He never talks down; never finds it necessary to be 
patronising or sentimental. And sentimentality is the most terrible pitfall 
that besets those who venture into the world of play. For just as Mr. 
Galsworthy delights Europe through the medium of Tauchnitz by showing it 
English ladies and gentlemen that exactly correspond with Europe’s idea of 
English ladies and gentlemen, so your writer of children’s books delights 
Montessori teachers and other moulders of the very young by showing them 
precisely their idea of children - an idea that bears about the same relation 
to real children as window-boxes do to gardens. For instance, Christopher 
Robin. Captain John and Mate Susan, and Able-seaman Titty, and Ship’s Boy Roger 
are not at all like Christopher Robin. they are children. And the story of 
their adventures on a little island in the middle of an English lake is 
thrilling just because it is not fabulous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswallows-and-amazons-review-1930-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5340fb78ae826188bc485d5c550a97147185ccdb%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swallows%20and%20Amazons%20book%20review%2C%201930%20-%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswallows-and-amazons-review-1930-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swallows%20and%20Amazons%20book%20review%2C%201930%20-%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswallows-and-amazons-review-1930-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5340fb78ae826188bc485d5c550a97147185ccdb%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Swallows And Amazons film stil, 2016. Photograph: PR 
 Unlike “Swiss Family Robinson,” where the miraculous satisfaction of the 
family’s slightest need strikes the most sanguine child as vaguely ridiculous 
and not at all convincing, the explorers in “Swallows and Amazons” are supplied 
with milk by a farmer only thinly disguised as one of the less hostile natives, 
and buy their lemonade over the counter - a fact which does not at all prevent 
it from becoming vitriolic grog. That is to say, the book is the very stuff of 
play. It is make-believe such as all children have indulged in: even children 
who have not been so fortunate as to have a lake and a boat and an island but 
only a backyard amongst the semis of Suburbia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswallows-and-amazons-review-1930-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d72797fad85335ce36db2f474f8ec58a5a4aa94%2F0_4_699_419%2F699.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swallows%20and%20Amazons%20book%20review%2C%201930%20-%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswallows-and-amazons-review-1930-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swallows%20and%20Amazons%20book%20review%2C%201930%20-%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswallows-and-amazons-review-1930-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d72797fad85335ce36db2f474f8ec58a5a4aa94%2F0_4_699_419%2F699.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 21 July 1930.  