
It's being billed as a "white-knuckle-ride action adventure 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/cannes-film-festival/8517359/Cannes-2011-BBC-to-adapt-Swallows-and-Amazons.html>
" that could capture the imagination of the Harry Potter generation. TheBBC is 
to adapt <http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118037057?refCatId=13> Arthur 
Ransome's beloved children's taleSwallows and Amazons 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1387668/Arthur-Ransomes-Swallows-And-Amazons-adapted-timely-BBC-series.html>
 with the aim of launching a series of films.

Set in the Lake District, Ransome's 1930 tale centres on two sailing-mad 
groups of children who encounter each other one summer during the school 
holidays. They make camp on an island and enjoy fishing, exploring, swimming 
and the fruits of "piracy" including grog (ginger beer and lemonade).

Head of BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Films, Christine Langan, 
said Ransome's book presented a world far from today's health and safety 
obsessed society.

"This story is from the pre-health and safety generation," she said. "Modern 
parenting is fraught and complicated – worrying about what sort of society we 
live in.

"There is a danger we are physically infantilising our children. There is a 
sense of freedom in the book and a sense of innocence that people perhaps miss. 
The film is very timely."

Langan confirmed that both the Swallows (the four Walker children) and the 
Amazons (two Blackett children) would be shown as they were in the book, so 
they will not wear lifejackets. It was not immediately clear whether other 
aspects of the stories will remain, however. The Walkers are John (the eldest 
and captain of the Swallows), Susan (mate), Roger (ship's boy) and Titty (able 
seaman). The latter name caused problems for producers of previous adaptations 
and was changed to Kitty for the BBC's 1963 version. The Blacketts are Nancy 
(captain) and Peggy (mate).

With the final Harry Potter film due to be released this summer, there is a 
sizable gap for child-orientated fare in cinema schedules. Langan said she 
hoped Ransome's books – the author wrote 12 books in theSwallows and Amazons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/swallows-and-amazons> series (including one 
unfinished at his death) – might help fill it.

"I hope that Swallows and Amazons could draw upon that same audience," she 
said. "It is a very British film but it is universal in that it is about all 
[the dreams] of all children."

The most recent, and perhaps best known film of Swallows and Amazons was EMI's 
1974 version starring Virginia McKenna as the Walkers' mother, with Ronald 
Fraser as Uncle Jim (aka Captain Flint).Claude Whatham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jan/10/television.culture> was the 
director.
 