
Contemporary dance audiences have generally been happy to book their tickets 
at much shorter notice than the opera house crowd, so it’s a register of how 
competitive the dance scene has become that both Sadler’s Wells andDance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance> Umbrella have already announced their 
autumn seasons.

Matthew Bourne takes risk on ballet version of The Red Shoes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/05/matthew-bourne-risk-ballet-version-the-red-shoes-film>
This year’s Umbrella bears all the marks of director Emma Gladstone’s jauntily 
experimental spirit. I’m particularly intrigued by Unknown Pleasures – a 
co-commission with CNNBallet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> de 
Lorraine and Sadler’s Wells – in which the identities of the five 
choreographers featured in the programme (four women and one man ranging from 
their 30s to their 70s) will remain anonymous. It’s an idea as political as it 
is playful – addressing the roles that reputation, gender, age and pecking 
order all play in our evaluations of work, whether we’re conscious of them or 
not.

In its selection of named choreographers, Umbrella is pitching a nice balance 
between the familiar and the new.Jérôme Bel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/22/step-guide-dance-jerome-bel>, 
who does magical things with non-professional performers, presents Gala, a 
London-specific commission that takes place at three different locations 
(including the Tanks at Tate Modern) and features a cast of ordinary Londoners, 
from a divertingly eclectic range of jobs and backgrounds.Aditi Mangaldas 
<http://www.aditimangaldasdance.com>, one of India’s new wave of Kathak 
choreographers, returns to London with her work Inter_rupted, an experimental 
weave of classical and contemporary dance forms. Dimitris Papaioannou, best 
known for his work choreographing and directing the opening ceremony of the 
Athens Olympics, presents the UK premiere of Primal Matter – a duet between a 
naked and a clothed performer that explores the history of the body in religion 
and art.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsadlers-wells-dance-umbrella-autumn-winter-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff47e08e94fba1d6749ac9ec3685f7b35d6aa759b%2F0_0_4418_2580%2F4418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swan%20Lake%20to%20school%20disco%3A%20this%20winter's%20dance%20shows%20are%20set%20to%20dazzle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsadlers-wells-dance-umbrella-autumn-winter-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swan%20Lake%20to%20school%20disco%3A%20this%20winter%27s%20dance%20shows%20are%20set%20to%20dazzle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsadlers-wells-dance-umbrella-autumn-winter-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff47e08e94fba1d6749ac9ec3685f7b35d6aa759b%2F0_0_4418_2580%2F4418.jpg>
 A scene from The Show Must Go On by Jérôme Bel, who brings new work to 
locations across London. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Real life intrudes into dance in Laura Dannequin’s The Secret Slowness of 
Movement, in which the audience are invited to have an immersive experience 
with grass (the garden variety); and in Wallflower, a piece by the 
Manchester-based group Quarantine that explores our collective dance memory 
through evocations of school discos and wedding dances. I’m looking forward to 
i ride in colour and soft focus, no longer anywhere, a work byJamila 
Johnson-Small <http://%20http//www.acontemporarystruggle.com/#!about/c1qdj> – 
whose sharp blogs make for one of the most interesting commentaries in the 
independent dance scene.

The Wells, meanwhile, brings out some big hitters, starting with the Alvin 
Ailey <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alvinailey> company on the first leg 
of its UK tour. They have a new director in Robert Battle, and while the 
repertory retains the stamp of its founder (Ailey’s signature work Revelations 
is danced, as always, at the end of each of the three programmes) there are 
some interesting additions from Aszure Barton, Christopher Wheeldon and Battle 
himself. The company’s dancers are reliably excellent, sleek and expressive, 
and an incidental pleasure to their UK tour will be their inclusion in the cast 
of the Royal Ballet’s performances of Wayne McGregor’s Chroma in November, the 
first time that dancers from the two companies have ever danced together in the 
same work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsadlers-wells-dance-umbrella-autumn-winter-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0049e36786bb4ce85f365b29b9871727ad0f0c4e%2F0_0_1562_1951%2F1562.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swan%20Lake%20to%20school%20disco%3A%20this%20winter's%20dance%20shows%20are%20set%20to%20dazzle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsadlers-wells-dance-umbrella-autumn-winter-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swan%20Lake%20to%20school%20disco%3A%20this%20winter%27s%20dance%20shows%20are%20set%20to%20dazzle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsadlers-wells-dance-umbrella-autumn-winter-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0049e36786bb4ce85f365b29b9871727ad0f0c4e%2F0_0_1562_1951%2F1562.jpg>
 A scene from a 2002 production of Alvin Ailey’s Revelations, which returns 
along with new work to Sadler’s Wells. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
Another headline of the Wells programme should be Michael Keegan-Dolan 
<http://fabulousbeast.net/about>’s Swan Lake. Keegan-Dolan has one of the most 
boggling and fertile dance imaginations on the planet, and in this re-imagining 
of the ballet classic he filters the story through the myth – and the modern 
urban reality – of his native Ireland, adding a score of Irish and Nordic folk 
music, played live with fiddle, cello, banjo, whistle, voice and percussion.

Also making a raid on ballet tradition is Akram Khan, in his re-imagined 
Giselle <http://www.ballet.org.uk/whats-on/akram-khan-giselle/> for English 
National Ballet. Khan’s choreographic imagination is often at its most potent 
when dealing with spiritual and supernatural themes and he’s a natural fit with 
the moonlit ghosts of the Romantic classic. Matthew Bourne pits himself against 
a very different ballet classic with his new production ofThe Red Shoes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/05/matthew-bourne-risk-ballet-version-the-red-shoes-film>
. Inspired more by thePowell and Pressburger film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/08/my-favourite-film-red-shoes>
 than the Hans Christian Andersen tale, it faces up to the magisterial ghosts 
of Robert Helpmann, Leonid Massine and Moira Shearer.

Many Wells regulars are back this season. Rambert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rambertdancecompany> celebrates its 90th 
anniversary and its status as Britain’s oldest dance company, with Mark 
Baldwin’s massively ambitious setting of Haydn’s Creation, which features 50 
dancers and 70 singers and musicians. The company also perform a programme of 
new works from Alexander Whitley, Malgorzata Dzierzon and Patricia Okenwa.

Whitley’s choreography also features in Candoco’s 25th anniversary double 
bill, alongside an adaptation of the ineffably witty and wonderful Trisha Brown 
classic,Set and ReSet 
<http://www.candoco.co.uk/productions/repertory/current/set-and-reset-reset/>. 
Birmingham Royal Ballet give the London premieres of their twoShakespeare 400 
<http://www.shakespeare400.org/> commissions, David Bintley’s The Tempest and 
Jessica Lang’s Wink, while theJasmin Vardimon Company 
<http://jasminvardimon.com/> perform Vardimon’s new family-friendly adaptation 
of Pinocchio.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsadlers-wells-dance-umbrella-autumn-winter-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ce9d2faa3efc3d641218a8ccaa9bbc1a50e2fb0%2F0_0_3439_2610%2F3439.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Swan%20Lake%20to%20school%20disco%3A%20this%20winter's%20dance%20shows%20are%20set%20to%20dazzle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsadlers-wells-dance-umbrella-autumn-winter-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Swan%20Lake%20to%20school%20disco%3A%20this%20winter%27s%20dance%20shows%20are%20set%20to%20dazzle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fsadlers-wells-dance-umbrella-autumn-winter-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ce9d2faa3efc3d641218a8ccaa9bbc1a50e2fb0%2F0_0_3439_2610%2F3439.jpg>
 Hetain Patel in American Boy – now becoming American Man. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
It’s a good spread of UK companies, but the Wells is always a reliable conduit 
for new international dance, and I’m glad of the introduction to Israeli 
choreographersSharon Eyal and Gai Behar <http://www.lev-dance.com/en/home> in 
their work OCD Love; also to Chinese choreographerYang Liping 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yang_Liping> who, as part of the theatre’s mini 
season of Asian work, experiments with a modern adaptation of the classic 
Chinese tale Farewell My Concubine.

What’s also pleasing about this season is the strengthening role of the Lilian 
Baylis Studio for works that need an intimate space. One of the show’s I’m most 
looking forward to is American Man, Hetain Patel’s follow up to the gabbily 
genius soloAmerican Boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/22/hetain-patel-american-boy-review>
, in which he imagines a dystopian world where Barack Obama is the CEO of Apple 
and Oprah Winfrey is in control of government policy.
 