
Sydney crashed the party of Matthew Pavlich’s 350-game milestone with a 
90-point thrashing of Fremantle in Sunday’s wet and windyAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> clash at Domain Stadium. Swans 
midfielder Josh Kennedy tallied 45 disposals and three goals in the 21.11 (137) 
to 7.5 (47) victory, with the result keeping Sydney in the hunt to finish 
second.

The Swans take on Port Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide>, 
St Kilda, North Melbourne, and Richmond in the final four rounds, giving them 
an excellent chance to edge out the likes of GWS and Geelong for second spot. 
Fremantle remain mired in 16th place with just three wins to show from 18 games.

Defender Zac Dawson is facing several weeks on the sidelines after dishing out 
a heavy hip-and-shoulder to the face of Sydney’s Jake Lloyd, who lay prone of 
the ground for more than a minute before recovering to walk to the bench.


Giants thump Tigers, Roos salute in Harvey's record-breaking 427th game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/giants-humiliate-richmond-as-hawks-edge-past-gritty-carlton>
Pavlich was cheered by the 32,401 crowd every time he touched the ball, with 
the 34-year-old finishing with 15 disposals and two late goals in a 
hard-working effort. After the game, David Mundy and Chris Mayne chaired 
Pavlich off through a guard of honour formed by Fremantle and Sydney players.


But the 34-year-old’s milestone will forever be remembered as a dark day for 
the club, with the Dockers going from minor premiers to easybeats within the 
space of a year. Sydney’s win was their biggest ever against Fremantle, 
eclipsing the 77-point margin they posted in round 13, 2002 at the SCG.

Scoring chances were few and far between for Fremantle in the first half, but 
Pavlich was in the thick of the action for most of them. He sharked the ball 
off the back of a pack and handballed to Matt Taberner for Fremantle’s only 
goal of the first quarter.

And Pavlich produced a bizarre highlight early in the second quarter when he 
balanced the ball on the back of his head while in congestion before feeding it 
out for a Mundy goal.


Sydney led by 29 points after a wet and windy first half but that was just the 
entree. The third quarter became a feast for the Swans as the rain finally made 
way for sunshine, with Tom Mitchell booting three of Sydney’s eight goals for 
the term as the game turned into a romp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fmelbourne-hold-off-gold-coast-in-thrilling-finale-to-error-strewn-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fa789684d313752f7759a4f75fc5c770c0e736c%2F0_0_4000_2571%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20Swans%20victory%20turns%20Fremantle's%20day%20to%20remember%20into%20one%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fmelbourne-hold-off-gold-coast-in-thrilling-finale-to-error-strewn-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20Swans%20victory%20turns%20Fremantle%27s%20day%20to%20remember%20into%20one%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fmelbourne-hold-off-gold-coast-in-thrilling-finale-to-error-strewn-match%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fa789684d313752f7759a4f75fc5c770c0e736c%2F0_0_4000_2571%2F4000.jpg>
 Eddie Betts starred with five goals in the Crows’ victory over Essendon at 
Adelaide Oval. Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images 
Adelaide secured a valuable percentage boost with a thumping 82-point AFL win 
overEssendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon>, but the victory 
looks to have come at a cost, with valuable ruckman Sam Jacobs suffering an 
ankle injury early in the second quarter of the 22.11 (143) to 9.7 (61) win at 
Adelaide Oval.

Jacobs didn’t return to the field after landing awkwardly on his left ankle, 
and later emerged from the sidelines on crutches. It was a rare sore point for 
the Crows, who were hardly troubled by an outmatched and overawed Essendon. The 
Bombers showed the right signs early on, winning the most clearances and 
inside-50s in the first quarter but the difference in skill levels between the 
two sides was telling.

Plenty of Essendon’s forward entries ended up in the hands of Rory Laird (36 
touches) and Kyle Cheney (seven marks, 13 touches), whose quality rebounding 
drove Adelaide forward time and again. The Crows stepped on the gas in the 
second quarter to open up a 45-point lead at half-time. From there, it was 
party time for the 44,264 home crowd.

The Crows kicked seven majors to Essendon’s one in the third quarter as 
maestro Eddie Betts (five goals) and apprentice Charlie Cameron (four) added to 
their tallies. Even key defender Kyle Hartigan got in the act, booting a goal 
for the first time in his four seasons of AFL after winning a 50-metre penalty.

The Crows’ midfield were challenged by coach Don Pyke during the week to lift 
their performance after a lacklustre performance against Geelong. Led by the 
brilliant Rory Sloane (33 touches, nine inside-50s) and Brad Crouch (31 
touches), they didn’t disappoint.

For the Bombers, few stood up under pressure. Young midfielder Zach Merrett 
continued his outstanding season with 31 disposals, while skipper Brendon 
Goddard toiled hard. Spearhead Joe Daniher worked tirelessly up the ground and 
was rewarded with four goals and 11 marks.

The win puts the Crows into fifth place on the AFL ladder, equal on points 
with Greater Western Sydney, Sydney and Geelong.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fmelbourne-hold-off-gold-coast-in-thrilling-finale-to-error-strewn-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002f135296bf2b15d0e512481ac0b7eaa41b7f9c%2F0_45_2801_1682%2F2801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20Swans%20victory%20turns%20Fremantle's%20day%20to%20remember%20into%20one%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fmelbourne-hold-off-gold-coast-in-thrilling-finale-to-error-strewn-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20Swans%20victory%20turns%20Fremantle%27s%20day%20to%20remember%20into%20one%20to%20forget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fmelbourne-hold-off-gold-coast-in-thrilling-finale-to-error-strewn-match%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F002f135296bf2b15d0e512481ac0b7eaa41b7f9c%2F0_45_2801_1682%2F2801.jpg>
 Jack Watts (left) celebrates a goal with Nathan Jones. Watts was involved in a 
thrilling finish to the match at the MCG. Photograph: Julian Smith/AAP 
Jack Watts helped Melbourne snatch a two-point win over Gold Coast in an AFL 
game that hit no great heights until a thrilling finish. Both sides were guilty 
of cringe-worthy turnovers, simple set-shot misses and fumbles at key moments, 
during a game played in perfect conditions at a sun-soaked MCG. Nonetheless it 
culminated in an after-the-siren finish as the Demons prevailed 9.12 (66) to 
9.10 (64).

Watts marked in the forward pocket and booted his third goal with a tick over 
two minutes remaining, giving the hosts a two-point lead. He then stepped up at 
the other end of the ground, marking in the goal square to seemingly deny Gold 
Coast victory, but he passed to team-mate Bernie Vince, who picked out Suns 
spearhead Tom Lynch before the siren sounded. Lynch, kicking from beyond the 
50m arc and tucked up on the boundary line, was unable to make the distance.

It was Melbourne’s eighth win for the season. A further victory in the final 
four rounds will make it the club’s best year since 2006, when they most 
recently reached the finals.

Max Gawn continued his career-best season, tallying an impressive 60 hitouts. 
Watts, Dom Tyson, Billy Stretch and Aaron Vandenberg were also among the hosts’ 
best in the scrappy clash. Lynch booted two goals and loomed the man most 
likely to drag his side over the line, having kicked the game’s opening goal 
after clutching one of his seven marks.

The Demons’ defence were overwhelmed for much of the opening term, while the 
hosts were also devoid of rebounding run early. But the Suns couldn’t convert 
their dominance, kicking only 3.3 in the first quarter.

Melbourne’s first goal didn’t come until the 24th minute of the match, 
courtesy of Watts. The Demons busted the low-scoring affair open in the second 
term with three goals in three and a half minutes, including two to Vandenberg.

They boasted a two-goal buffer at half-time but wayward kicking helped keep 
the Suns in the contest. The third quarter was unremarkable with the exception 
of a bruising collision between James Harmes and Kade Kolodjashnij. The Suns 
hit the front in the final term after booting three consecutive goals, 
including a showstopper from Jarrad Grant, but couldn’t stop Watts.
 