
A 16-year-old western Sydney boy has pleaded not guilty to trying to source a 
gun for use in an Anzac Day terrorist attack.

The Auburn teenager, who cannot be named, was arrested on Sunday afternoon 
after police reportedly intercepted encrypted messages they allegeshow the boy 
was trying to obtain a firearm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/25/sydney-boy-16-allegedly-tried-to-get-gun-for-use-in-anzac-day-terrorist-attack>
.

His solicitor, Zemarai Khatiz, told the Parramatta children’s court on Tuesday 
an application for bail would be made on Friday, drawing on a psychological 
assessment of the impact of incarceration on the teenager.

He said the report of the psychologist, who had 38 years’ experience, would be 
“a very relevant and powerful factor in the bail application”.

Malcolm Turnbull: multiculturalism and tolerance will combat terrorism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/malcolm-turnbull-multiculturalism-and-tolerance-will-combat-terrorism>
Commonwealth prosecutor Chris Choi said a number of electronic devices would 
need to be examined ahead of a brief against the boy being delivered on 7 June. 
The prosecution asked for 10 weeks to prepare the brief but were granted six.

The boy was reportedly participating in a government-funded deradicalisation 
program after coming to counter-terrorism authorities’ attention last May, when 
he made contact online withNeil Prakash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/31/neil-prakash-australias-most-senior-operative-in-islamic-state-believed-dead>
, a senior Syria-based Islamic State recruiter.

Prakash had allegedly tried to lure the youth into an Anzac Day attack to 
coincide with another in Melbourne that police also foiled.

The boy’s father told the Australian newspaper 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/police-tried-to-deradicalise-teen-accused-of-anzac-day-plot/news-story/6e79b79756d3cb35cf7d40e1309f8ffb>
 in December that the program had been making progress. “He’s 16, so he’s still 
got a long way to go in the sense that he’s still got a lot of growing up to 
do,” he said.

He “almost fainted” when told by intelligence agents of his son’s contact with 
Isis figures. “It was a shock. It was like: this can’t happen,” he said.

His family is believed to be devout and mainstream in their views, and that 
part of the deradicalisation program involved attending a mosque with English 
sermons, a gym membership and regular welfare checks by police.

These efforts appeared to have failed in the last week when police allege the 
youth tried to engineer an attack to coincide with Anzac Day.

Clarke Jones, the co-director of an Australian National University centre that 
advises police and government on intervention programs, said the boy’s arrest 
should not reflect on the success of the programs.

“Nobody expects these programs to succeed 100% of the time,” he said. 

Jones said he “had all the respect in the world” for those involved in the New 
South Wales police program. But their efforts needed to target the social 
setting around young people at risk, including Muslim community perceptions of 
policing, “or we’re not going to get anywhere”.
 