
7.31am BST 

And with Emma Donoghue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/19/emma-donoghue-i-want-to-entertain-and-mess-with-peoples-minds>
's closing address to the festival about to start, I'm going to put this 
liveblog to bed. Thanks very much for keeping us company this festival, and 
especially to everyone whose tweets, comments or pictures we've used. It's been 
a fantastic festival. Do let us know what your highlight has been in the 
comment box below.

Brigid Delaney (@BrigidWD) 
Returning to Melbourne destroyed of body, inspired of mind. Thanks for a great 
@SydWritersFest <https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest> @jemmabirrell 
<https://twitter.com/jemmabirrell> #swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/BrigidWD/statuses/470450811995058176> May 25, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/BrigidWD/statuses/470450811995058176> 
7.23am BST 

Irvine Welsh <https://www.theguardian.com/books/irvinewelsh> meets his public! 
Nice T-shirt.

Ms Darlinghurst (@msdarlinghurst) 
Just met this legend!! Thanks for the pic @WelshIrvine 
<https://twitter.com/WelshIrvine> ! #IrvineWelsh 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23IrvineWelsh&src=hash> @SydWritersFest 
<https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest> #trainspotting 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23trainspotting&src=hash> #authorcrush 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23authorcrush&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/QYP088pyA7 <http://t.co/QYP088pyA7>
 <https://twitter.com/msdarlinghurst/statuses/470435476961099776> May 25, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/msdarlinghurst/statuses/470435476961099776> 
7.13am BST 

And, thanks to the Sydney writers' festival official blog 
<http://www.swf.org.au/?option=com_wordpress&Itemid=346&lang=en&view=bloglink>, 
I see that more sessions have been uploaded onto Soundcloud. Here's AM Homes:


And here's Alexis Wright.


You can see all the sessions that have been uploaded and recorded on the 
Sydney writers' festival Soundcloud page 
<https://soundcloud.com/sydney-writers-festival>. 


7.05am BST 

Here are the Stranger in a Strange Land panelists – Jane has that as her pick 
of the festival.

HarperCollins Aus (@HarperCollinsAU) 
Strangers no more. @AmyTan <https://twitter.com/AmyTan> Ben Law Gary Schentgart
#SWF <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SWF&src=hash> 2014. Backstage. 
pic.twitter.com/OS7OPkiI2t <http://t.co/OS7OPkiI2t>
 <https://twitter.com/HarperCollinsAU/statuses/470367886079700992> May 25, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/HarperCollinsAU/statuses/470367886079700992> 
6.18am BST 

Also, there has been some breach of poetry-slamming etiquette.

Courtney Robinson (@courtney_ro) 
Hey poetry slammers, that wasn't guerrilla or contrarian, it was fucking rude. 
#sydneywritersfestival 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23sydneywritersfestival&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/courtney_ro/statuses/470424591949508609> May 25, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/courtney_ro/statuses/470424591949508609> 
6.17am BST 

Ahh ...

Dr Huw Lewis-Jones (@polarworld) 
Final drop of Sunday sunshine @SydWritersFest 
<https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest> before heading to the airport. Happy. 
#BarefootHistorian <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23BarefootHistorian&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/QCjcMxXck2 <http://t.co/QCjcMxXck2>
 <https://twitter.com/polarworld/statuses/470416572461228032> May 25, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/polarworld/statuses/470416572461228032> 
6.15am BST 

Hmm, there seem to be plenty left to me ...

Shahida Sweeney (@bizmonitorgroup) 
Bob Carr's tome selling like 'hot cakes' @Sydney <https://twitter.com/sydney> 
Writers' Festival!!pic.twitter.com/dxEPtNYnNC <http://t.co/dxEPtNYnNC>
 <https://twitter.com/bizmonitorgroup/statuses/470427980670304257> May 25, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/bizmonitorgroup/statuses/470427980670304257> 
6.09am BST 

Speaking of Shteyngart, Bethanie went to his solo stage interview on Saturday. 
This is what it was like:

It’s always hard to interview a satirist. They’re funny but in a way that can 
be evasive when you’re enquiring about the subject of their work, a memoir. I 
had the experience the night before of interviewing Shteyngart and had asked 
him the same question that opens theFrom Russia With Love 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,3966/task,view_detail/>
 session. Given how autobiographical his earlier works are, why a memoir now? 
“Why now? You’re asking why not never? The short answer is I needed to build a 
pool. So I thought, ker-ching!”

Later, though, he talks about his choice to work in the satiric form: “Comedy 
is the ballistic missile where you package the sadness.” The sadness in his 
memoirLittle Failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/21/gary-shteyngart-little-failure-memoir-review>
, is of his parent’s lives and the way in which their presence in Russia 
prevented them from being the artists they wanted to be. He writes about 
Russia, he says, because “Greatly unequal societies create great literature. 
Societal conflict is the great conflict.” He relates a trip to Russia in which 
he visits a restaurant called 1913. “I asked the waitress, ‘Why 1913?’ ‘That 
was the only good year in Russian history.’”

6.06am BST 

We've just posted Jane's account of this morning's great session Stranger in a 
Strange Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/25/amy-tan-gary-shteyngart-and-benjamin-law-on-being-the-children-of-immigrants?view=desktop>
, in which Amy Tan, Gary Shteyngart (him again) and Benjamin Law discussed 
being the children of immigrants. She writes:

Strangers in a Strange Land is that perfect blend of a writers' festival 
panel: funny, perceptive, occasionally shocking, and allowing the audience a 
new insight into the writers and the ways their lives can be connected through 
their work. Tan says that as a child, she felt as though she had landed in the 
wrong family - she felt American. Shteyngart, emigrating with his parents from 
Leningrad to New York when he was seven, found solace in writing: "it was the 
one thing where I didn't have an accent."

Law, on the other hand, feels he had a reverse experience to typical. Growing 
up in Queensland as one of five children, with Sesame Street on television and 
Law starting school the same year the World Expo came to Brisbane, "I started 
out in a place of confidence," he says. "Multiculturalism was in. [...] We were 
considered sort of awesome."

5.26am BST 

The weather is gorgeous out on the wharf although there is the feeling that 
things are winding down – the crowds are starting to thin out, for one thing. 
However, there's been one notable appearance:

Oliver Phommavanh (@oliverwinfree) 
Chilling out with Grug @SydWritersFest <https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest> 
Family Fun Day!#swf2014 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/y7oKuw9i5v <http://t.co/y7oKuw9i5v>
 <https://twitter.com/oliverwinfree/statuses/470406176325115905> May 25, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/oliverwinfree/statuses/470406176325115905> 
3.07am BST 

We've posted Bethanie's report of last night's session with AM Homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/25/am-homes-i-write-emotional-science-fiction>
. The winner of the 2013 women's prize for fiction spoke candidly about the 
trauma caused by discovering that she was adopted, and about how that trauma 
influenced her work:

“For years, my grip on life seemed so tenuous. I wouldn’t buy tickets to 
concerts because I didn’t think I’d be around that long. I wouldn’t buy a big 
pack of toilet paper, because the four pack seemed like enough. Now I feel like 
it’s OK for me to exist. And it sounds traumatic, but it really was traumatic.”

She breaks the mood by quipping “I’m available for adoption again. I have a 
child and pets, I’m the whole package.

“When I wanted to have a child of my own my mother got offended: ‘What, is 
adoption not good enough?’” She laughs. “It’s a fairly common desire!”

Here's a video interview Homes did last year with Jeanette Winterson.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F07%2Fam-homes-jeanette-winterson-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F6%2F7%2F1370603964522%2FAM-Homes-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AM%20Homes%2C%20winner%20of%20the%20women's%20prize%20for%20fiction%2C%20talks%20to%20Jeanette%20Winterson%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F07%2Fam-homes-jeanette-winterson-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AM%20Homes%2C%20winner%20of%20the%20women%27s%20prize%20for%20fiction%2C%20talks%20to%20Jeanette%20Winterson%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F07%2Fam-homes-jeanette-winterson-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F6%2F7%2F1370603964522%2FAM-Homes-016.jpg>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F07%2Fam-homes-jeanette-winterson-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F6%2F7%2F1370603964522%2FAM-Homes-016.jpg>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AM%20Homes%2C%20winner%20of%20the%20women's%20prize%20for%20fiction%2C%20talks%20to%20Jeanette%20Winterson%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F07%2Fam-homes-jeanette-winterson-video-interview>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AM%20Homes%2C%20winner%20of%20the%20women%27s%20prize%20for%20fiction%2C%20talks%20to%20Jeanette%20Winterson%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjun%2F07%2Fam-homes-jeanette-winterson-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F6%2F7%2F1370603964522%2FAM-Homes-016.jpg>
close 
2.42am BST 

Bethanie caught up with Gary Shteyngart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gary-shteyngart> and asked him some 
questions:


What are you reading?

Lots of books about finance because they’re in my next novel. I’ve got to 
learn how to do aprice-earnings ratio 
<http://www.investopedia.com/terms/p/price-earningsratio.asp>. 

Can you recommend a book (apart from yours) to the readers of Guardian 
Australia?

You know what they should read if they still care about America is The 
Unwinding by George Packer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/17/george-packer-unwinding-america-review>
. It’s a book that spans decades of American history, but looks at it not just 
from the view of coastal elites, but from the point of view of the declining 
centre of the country.

What's the last thing you read that changed your opinion about something?

My opinions are so pre-formed they just can’t be changed. 

Digital or physical? And why?

Oh physical of course. Imagine, you’ve just stated going out with someone, you 
walk into her apartment, and she doesn’t have a bookshelf because it’s digital. 
But imagine if she had a physical bookshelf and most of the titles are byGlenn 
Beck <https://www.theguardian.com/media/glenn-beck>, let’s say, and you know it 
will never work.
 Recommended: The Unwinding by political commentator George Packer. 
Photograph: Murdo MacLeod 
2.33am BST 

Yesterday afternoon Jane attended the Writing Bodies session with crime writer 
Tara Moss, philosopher Damon Young and the extremely busy Irvine Welsh. It took 
in exercise, the way women's bodies are fictionalised and how we get to know 
people through their physicality.She's written about it here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/25/tara-moss-irvine-welsh-and-damon-young-on-writing-about-bodies?view=desktop>
 An excerpt:

Looking at Welsh's novel, Young calls Lucy "the very picture of the 
professional jock", and thinks it is interesting to consider the role of the 
personal trainer: in entering this relationship, he says "a lot of us have lost 
sovereignty over our bodies." Welsh relays the inspiration for the book: 
watching two women exercise together, and one breaking down in tears. "You're 
paying someone to do this to you," he says incredulously.

1.39am BST 

We've just posted an absorbing interview with Alexis Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/25/alexis-wright-it-was-like-writing-a-story-to-the-ancestors?view=desktop>
, one of Australia's most celebrated writers, whose novel The Swan Book was 
shortlisted for the Miles Franklin earlier this month (she won the prize for 
her previous novel Carpentaria in 2007). She describes writing as a calling, 
and tells Maryam Azam that she wants to offer an authentic Indigenous voice to 
Australian literature. Which isn't to say that she doesn't take influences frpm 
around the world:


Though might lead one to assume that Carpentaria and The Swan Book must be 
distinctly Indigenous Australian in theme and style, Wright is candid about the 
sources of inspiration for her novels, citing the literature of South America, 
India, the Middle East and Ireland.

“I didn’t find the voices in published literature in Australia that could show 
me the way,” she says. She sound inspiration in writers such asJames Joyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesjoyce>, Seamus Heaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/seamusheaney> and Carlos Fuentes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/carlos-fuentes>. She looked to writers who 
had a long association with their own countries and “had some of the troubles 
we had”. Wright says with some feeling that “Heaney felt like a mentor I wish I 
had while I was trying to write.”
 Alexis Wright: 'writing is like trying to build a multistorey building'. 
Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
1.12am BST 

 The novelist and critic Chris Flynn 
<http://wheelercentre.com/dailies/post/c3c44f291a13/> was at the Australian 
book industry awards on Friday night where,as we reported yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/24/tony-abbott-handed-arts-cuts-petition-at-book-industry-awards>
, Tony Abbott gave a speech and was handed a petition against the arts cuts 
announced in his government's federal budget. Chris has kindly written his take 
on the event, which is very revealing:


Prime minister Tony Abbott gave a speech midway through Friday night’s 
Australian book industry awards in Sydney, during which he talked about being 
an author politician and gave assurances as to the future of theprime 
minister’s literary awards <http://arts.gov.au/topics/pms-literary-awards>.

Attorney general and minister for the arts George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/14/australian-artists-respond-brandis-intervention-biennale-transfield>
 was also in attendance. A strained silence filled the room as Abbott moved 
quickly to address the topic of the recent budget.

“Now I know that we’ve just been through a budget process, and it’s been a 
difficult process, it's been a difficult process. But amidst all of the 
difficult decisions that have been made, I want to assure you that you have a 
mighty champion in Senator George Brandis. He has very substantially protected, 
very substantially protected arts funding generally and literary funding in 
particular from the stringencies of these times, and in so doing has made 
himself deeply unpopular with all his colleagues. But he has demonstrated what 
a true champion of the arts, what a true finder for ideas this man is, this man 
is. And I am pleased to say that as far as I am aware, the prime minister’s 
literary prizes continue to be the richest prizes in this country.”

The crowd, made up of publishers, booksellers and authors, remained mute 
throughout. The prime minister ended his speech by thanking MCCasey Bennetto 
<http://www.smartartists.com.au/artists/bennetto.php> for “lending a real 
pizazz to what might possibly be a bookish and donnish kind of an evening,” 
before making a swift departure. As his retinue walked past the tables, a stony 
silence endured, with many simply turning their backs to avoid eye contact. As 
he crossed the threshold of the fire exit, Bennetto raised his microphone and 
said, “It’s OK – he’s gone now.” The cheer that erupted was the loudest of the 
evening.

At 10pm that night, the judges for this year’s prime minister’s literary 
awards were posted on the award’s website. The chair of the fiction and poetry 
panels isLouise Adler 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/publisher-be-damned-20130329-2gyzt.html>, CEO 
of Melbourne University Publishing, who released Tony Abbott’s bookBattlelines 
<http://newsweekly.com.au/article.php?id=3731> in 2009, and the chair of the 
non-fiction and history panel isGerard Henderson 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/columnists/gerard-henderson>, 
columnist for The Weekend Australian. The chair of the children’s and young 
adult fiction panel isMike Shuttleworth 
<http://wheelercentre.com/events/presenter/mike-shuttleworth/>, programme 
manager at the Melbourne writers' festival. The panels will shortly make 
recommendations to the prime minister for the shortlists and winners, although 
the final decision on winners lies with Abbott.

Updated at 6.21am BST

12.50am BST 

Still lots of love for the festival on social media. This was the People of 
Letters session, where (according to the programme), well-known Australians 
were paired off and invited to write "a letter to my other half".

claudie (@hufflypuffles) 
on that note, I'm starting my strop about sydney's best time of year being 
almost over.#swf14 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf14&src=hash>, you quick, 
interesting, wonderful mistress.
 <https://twitter.com/hufflypuffles/statuses/470210123109916672> May 24, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/hufflypuffles/statuses/470210123109916672> 
12.29am BST 

It's a slightly overcast Sunday morning and Bethanie, Jane and I (Alex) are 
back in the bunker at Sydney Theatre for the final day of Sydney writers' 
festival. For a kick-off, I've just launchedmy report of yesterday's sold-out 
session by Christos Tsiolkas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/25/christos-tsiolkas-do-the-first-draft-orgasm-and-start-editing?view=desktop>
, a very illuminating hour in which the author of The Slap and Barracuda talked 
about his upbringing in a working class Greek immigrant family in Melbourne, 
how his novels are about how to be good, and – most startlingly – how he goes 
about writing sex scenes:

Marr asked him about the sex in his writing, and whether writing about sex is 
more enjoyable than the act itself. Tsiolkas laughed, and said that while it 
would never beat his best sexual experinces, "sometimes writing sex is better 
than some of the sex I've had." In a moment that seemed impressively candid to 
me (though some will regard it as too much information), Tsiolkas said that the 
best way of writing sex scenes is to "do the first draft, orgasm, and then 
start editing. You can be objective post-orgasm."
 Hands free: Christos Tsiolkas. Photograph: Colin McPherson/Corbis 
8.55am BST 

And with that we're going to sign off for today as we're about to get chucked 
out of the bunker. See you tomorrow for the final leg.


8.54am BST 

An observation on audience questions from Jane, who's been to the Writing 
Bodies session:

I've found audiences at this festival a bit hesitant with asking questions - 
rather than the verbose "I'll take that as a comment" question, panel hosts 
have been struggling to see arms raised. Still, I have a new favourite 
question, directed at Irvine Welsh this afternoon: "Is watching your films a 
reasonable substitute for the books? Because I've not read your books."

 Welsh was very diplomatic with his answer, suggesting that while films can do 
things books cannot - such as becoming a social experience - he still 
recommends the books, saying simply "I think your own interpretation is always 
more interesting than the film."
 James McAvoy in Filth, from a book by Irvine Welsh. Photograph: Lionsgate 
8.47am BST 

I've been having a look at the official Sydney writers' festival blog  
<http://www.swf.org.au/?option=com_wordpress&Itemid=346&lang=en&view=bloglink>
and have to say that it's great. The writers in residence, Fiona McFarlane and 
Chris Flynn, have been attending and writing up plenty of sessions (here's 
McFarlane on the Judging Women discussion 
<http://www.swf.org.au/?option=com_wordpress&Itemid=346&lang=en&p=713>), and 
there's also some excellent multimedia content, which, thanks to the power of 
embedding, I'm also going to share with you now. Here's Andrew Solomon's 
opening address.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqEZMcmn4dos&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqEZMcmn4dos>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqEZMcmn4dos&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqEZMcmn4dos&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqEZMcmn4dos>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqEZMcmn4dos&media=>
close  Andrew Solomon's opening address to Sydney writers' festival. 
And here's a session I was sorry I missed but can now listen to in handy 
podcast form – Tara Moss, Emma Donogue, Nakkiah Lui and Kate Ceberano on the 
Madonna-Whore and other fictions.

 The Madonna-Whore and other fictions 
8.04am BST 

Jane has written about the event she attended this morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/24/culture-what-is-it-whats-it-worth-and-whos-shut-out>
, which despite its title Culture Wars, turned out to be a discussion of what 
the arts are and how to value them rather than a ding-dong about the struggle 
between right and left in matters like education. The definition of culture was 
pretty broad, as this excerpt indicates:

Jim Hearn 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/books/the-hooked-cook-heroin-and-heroines-20120824-24qsd.html>
, a chef turned cultural researcher, takes on the notion that culture is 
everything. The study of the way workers interact with in banks, he says, has 
the same validity as studyingSydney's Vivid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2014/may/23/vivid-sydney-festival-in-pictures>
 orAdelaide's festival of arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/adelaide-festival-2014>. "We are all 
subject of culture," he says, "whether we like it or not. We can leave society 
and go to a desert island [...] but we can never leave culture." Even on that 
desert island, the way we would think, and the language that we would think in, 
would be completely informed by the culture we came from.

7.35am BST 

A few more tweets. Lots are about the weather (although it's clouded up a bit 
now). Such as ...

Annabel Crabb (@annabelcrabb) 
Absurdly perfect day here at Sydney Writers Festival. Assuming organisers 
sacrificed a goat at some point for this weather#swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/annabelcrabb/statuses/470005267455676416> May 24, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/annabelcrabb/statuses/470005267455676416> toby schmitz 
(@fallofasparrow) 
printed tunics canvas bags franzen in hand? linen pants Sydney Writers 
Festival, 2014@timminchin <https://twitter.com/timminchin>
 <https://twitter.com/fallofasparrow/statuses/470077253657710592> May 24, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/fallofasparrow/statuses/470077253657710592> Michael 
Richardson (@richardson_m_a) 
Something I wrote is inside this and it's for sale at #swf 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf&src=hash>. @kyd_journal 
<https://twitter.com/kyd_journal> pic.twitter.com/LI1OeYTIYe 
<http://t.co/LI1OeYTIYe>
 <https://twitter.com/richardson_m_a/statuses/470025412408401920> May 24, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/richardson_m_a/statuses/470025412408401920> 
Sorry I missed this anatomy of a song event:

2SER 107.3 (@2ser) 
.@sarahblasko <https://twitter.com/sarahblasko> singing to us now #SWF 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SWF&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/E8Xl4rZ9mn 
<http://t.co/E8Xl4rZ9mn>
 <https://twitter.com/2ser/statuses/470025127120232448> May 24, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/2ser/statuses/470025127120232448> 
6.04am BST 

Bethanie has interviewed Ceridwen Dovey, whose book Only the Animals sees 
human conflict through the eyes of creatures including a mussell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/16/only-the-animals-by-ceridwen-dovey-book-review>
.


What are you reading?

I'm reading Seven Days in the Art World  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/oct/05/art>by Sarah Thornton - a 
sociological but very accessible and beautifully written portrait of the high 
stakes global art scene during its boom before the recession.


Can you recommend a book (apart from yours) to the readers of the Guardian?

I'm sure most Guardian readers would already have devoured this incredible 
book, but in case they haven't - I can't recommendThe Flamethrowers by Rachel 
Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/23/flamethrowers-rachel-kushner-review>
highly enough. It's a brilliant novel that has taken the US by storm and is 
also about the politics of the art world - set between New York and parts of 
Italy in the 1970s.
What's the last thing you read that changed your opinion about something?


Chris Flynn's The Glass Kingdom 
<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/21936921-the-glass-kingdom>. I've not been 
a fan of Breaking Bad and generally find narratives about ruthless drug lords - 
no matter how ordinary or innocent their beginnings - uninteresting. But this 
book changed my mind, for what Flynn does in The Glass Kingdom is create a 
portrait of the real damage crystal meth does to rural Australian towns. 
There's nothing sentimental or preachy about it, however - and the fantastical 
elements in the book give it true allegorical power.

Digital or physical? And why?


I think there's enough space in our hearts and minds for both. I tend to see 
them as complementary; both fulfill important but different functions. My neck 
pain has certainly eased since I started to take my Kindle instead of a 
physical book with me on the train. But I take physical books on the plane (to 
avoid being told to turn off all electronic devices, including my Kindle - 
usually at the book's most gripping point - for takeoff and landing), and 
regretted not having a physical copy ofMichelle de Kretser's Questions of Travel
 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-05-19/michelle-de-kretser-wins-nsw-premiers-literary-award/5462540>
the last time I saw her because I couldn't ask her to sign my Kindle!

 Ceridwen Dovey: not a Breaking Bad fan. 
5.53am BST 

 Jane's been taking a look at what people are reading at the festival. She 
writes:


In case the hundreds of books from dozens of authors in the festival, and all 
of the reading suggestions coming out of panelists weren't enough, I've been 
taking a sticky beak at what people are reading in-between events. There are 
new books (Jo Nesbø's The Son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/15/the-son-jo-nesbo-review>, Alexis 
Wright'sThe Swan Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/15/miles-franklin-shortlist-bet-on-alexis-wright-or-tim-winton>
) and old books (Ivan Turgenev's On the Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/dec/30/on-the-eve-turgenev-rereading>, 
Muriel Spark'sThe Prime of Miss Jean Brodie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/13/prime-of-miss-jean-brodie>) and 
more than a few library books. The Sydney Morning Herald, the Saturday Paper, 
one lonely mX, and dozens of programme guides are not only reading materials, 
but are all doing a quite nice trade doubling as makeshift hats in the sunny 
Sydney weather.

It's a decidedly analogue festival - I've only spotted a handful of e-readers 
and people appearing to read on their phones, and notes are being taken by a 
notebook and pen more often then on an iPad. The most popular book appears to 
be Eleanor Catton'sThe Luminaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/11/luminaries-eleanor-catton-review>
 - but perhaps she's cheating by having written such a chunky novel people must 
take longer to read it, and thus increasing the amount of time they spend 
carrying it around.
 Ivan Turgenev: putting in a posthumous appearance in Sydney. Photograph: 
Bettmann/Corbis 
5.41am BST 

Bethanie 'flaming fingers' Blanchard has just posted another piece. It's a 
funny but very telling report from the Judging Women session yesterday, in 
which Eleanor Catton and Claire Wright found that despite being from different 
countries and working in contrasting genres, they had both had the same kinds 
of experiences of sexism. Not least (in what is surely the phrase of the day) 
"the dick table".


While travelling to book signings around the country for the release of The 
Forgotten Rebels of Eureka, Wright spent much of her time in bookshops around 
Australia, particularly airport bookstores. “The books placed with most 
prominence were always books written by men about male topics: sports people, 
politicians, war.”

Wright took photos of these prominent displays, referring to them as “dick 
tables” and began taking her book from the W section of non-fiction and placing 
it alongside others on the display. “There were two other books on Eureka by 
male authors at the time:Peter Fitzsimons’ Eureka 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/arts/review/not-quite-everymans-rebellion/story-fn9n8gph-1226536090995>
 andThe Sons of the Southern Cross by Grantlee Kieza 
<http://www.harpercollins.com.au/books/Sons-Southern-Cross-Grantlee-Kieza/?isbn=9781743097168>
 and it seemed appropriate to put it with them.”

Following the Stella win, however, she notes that her bookshelf activism is no 
longer necessary, as the work now occupies a new table, “Prizewinners, 
alongside Eleanor’s The Luminaries.”

5.22am BST 

Last night Tony Abbott was handed a petition signed by dozens of writers 
objecting to the arts cuts in the federal budget, previously published in 
Guardian Australia. He was giving a speech at the Australian book industry 
awards.


Bethanie has interviewed Maxine Beneba Clarke, the poet and writer who handed 
the petition to Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/24/tony-abbott-handed-arts-cuts-petition-at-book-industry-awards?view=desktop>
. She said:

Tony Abbott was seated in the middle of the room, and about halfway through 
the event they announced the main course and I just approached his table very 
humbly, and said, ‘Look I know that it’s really forward of me to approach you 
like this, but I’ve been wanting to meet you for quite a long time, and I just 
wanted to take this opportunity to actually come up and speak to you.'

“He looked quite taken aback, and I had a petition in a sealed envelope with a 
copy of my book because I was worried that if I told him it was a petition he 
wouldn’t accept. He asked me who I was, and I told him my name and I said I’ve 
just published my first book I’ve brought a copy here particularly for you, I’d 
really love it if you would accept the book.

“He hesitated and then he took the envelope, and I said, ‘In the envelope 
there’s also a letter signed by a number of prominent Australian writers and 
thinkers regarding the cuts to the arts industry. I feel like I’ve been really 
respectful and I haven’t caused a scene, and I haven’t been rude to you, and I 
really hope you actually take this envelope when you walk out of here and you 
engage with Australian artists about this petition. And he said thank you and I 
walked away, very surprised I hadn’t been tackled by security.”
 Tony Abbott addresses the Australian book industry awards dinner in Sydney. 
Photograph: Daniel Munoz/AAP 
4.04am BST 

Some people hopefully feeling inspired ...

Angela Meyer (@LiteraryMinded) 
My #swf2014 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash> flash fiction 
workshop group writing away...pic.twitter.com/l92maNmUJW 
<http://t.co/l92maNmUJW>
 <https://twitter.com/LiteraryMinded/statuses/470017319180046336> May 24, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/LiteraryMinded/statuses/470017319180046336> 
4.01am BST 

Bethanie attended a talk on criticism last night at which the Pascall prize  
<http://www.pascallprize.org.au/>was announced. Here's her report:


Last night, James Ley 
<http://meanjin.com.au/blog/post/good-books-can-die-from-neglect-interview-with-james-ley/>
 was awarded the 2014 Pascall Prize for critical writing. It was the second 
time he’d been notified that he’d won the award, in a now notorious mix up that 
saw the wrong James receiving the call in 2012 – it wasJames Bradley 
<http://cityoftongues.com/about/> who was to receive it that year. 

The founding editor for the Sydney Review of Books 
<http://sydneyreviewofbooks.com/> now joins the long list of esteemed critics 
to receive the honour, includingKerryn Goldsworthy 
<http://wheelercentre.com/dailies/post/ec8e439f2552/> and Geordie Williamson 
<https://twitter.com/gamwilliamson>. The event was an awarding of the prize, 
but also a debate about the potential and form of criticism. Of the critical 
possibilities of the Review being an online-only publication, Ley said: “Having 
space is the main thing. You give good critics room and say 'go for it',” as 
opposed to print publications, in which “you often have to shrink your ideas 
down to the size of the commission.”

Both Ley and Goldsworthy saw online as a space for longer form, more nuanced 
engagement with texts, and Ley bemoaned criticism’s status “as a whipping boy” 
whenever a new publication is launched.

Some of the most interesting insights came from Steven O’Donnell from ABC TV’s 
Good Game <http://www.abc.net.au/tv/goodgame/about/bajo.htm>, working in the 
still emerging critical culture around gaming: “It’s a mess,” he said. “If you 
compare it to film, we’re in the black and white era. Every year you have a new 
genre of a game. Every year they reinvent themselves.

“Criticism along the way has changed a lot. I remember as a kid looking at 
magazines and it was broken down into percentages: graphics were 73%, sound 
design 65%, and no matter how many times you break it down, in the end they’re 
complex forms of art that occasionally also have an X factor of an emotional 
connection. You’re reviewing the work but you’re also reviewing the things you 
did in the game yourself.”

He outlined the anarchic forms of game reviews – everything from the wildly 
popular YouTube videos, known as Let’s Play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/02/lets-play-youtube-pewdiepie-one-direction>
, in which gamers film their first play and describe it in real time, to 20,000 
word reviews from games so unique they turn people “into storytellers of their 
experience inside the game.

“It is a mess but it’s wonderfully exciting.”

2.14am BST 

We've just posted Jane's review of last night's panel of Irvine Welsh, Sandi 
Toksvig and Gary Shteyngart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/24/irvine-welsh-sandi-toksvig-and-gary-shteyngart-on-debauchery?view=desktop>
discussing "humour and debauchery with a few manners in between". Rather a 
random title, borne out by the discussion, which contained a few laughs but not 
much illumination. Jane writes:


Occasionally, themes in the careers of these three very different writers 
converge. Struggling slightly to speak to the theme of the event, Crabb asks: 
what is the etiquette about writing about real people?

"Well, there is a legal department at Radom House," Shteyngart says with both 
relief and frustration.

After telling us every psychopath in Edinburgh thought Trainspotting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/trainspotting> was about him, Welsh puts 
this on the reader. "I tend not to consciously put real people into novels," he 
says. "And the most grotesque things that happen in life you don't want to put 
in your book."

"I'm ashamed to say," says Toksvig, "I've done hideous pen portraits of people 
I don't like in my novels. And they'll say 'oh, that person was hideous,' and 
I'm nodding and I'm thinking, 'it's you, you fool!'"

I'm going to watch David Marr interviewing Christos Tsiolkas now. I was 
surprised to find myself absolutely loving﻿Tsiolkas's Barracuda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/03/barracuda-christos-tsiolkas-review>
 when I read it recently – it seemed to say so much about class, shame, family, 
competition ... even reading.

 Gary Shteyngart: wombat fan. Photograph: AGF s.r.l./Rex Features 
Updated at 2.14am BST

1.23am BST 

Good morning. Fuelled by flat whites, Jane, Bethanie and me (Alex) are back in 
the bunker for another day at the Sydney writers' festival. We've got loads of 
great stuff coming up today including an interview withAlexis Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/15/miles-franklin-shortlist-bet-on-alexis-wright-or-tim-winton>
,Adam Brereton <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adam-brereton> on Malcolm 
Fraser and Bob Carr, and a review of last night's session on "humour and 
debauchery".

I saw a very moving panel last night called What is normal, anyway? Andrew 
Solomon <http://andrewsolomon.com/>, Jo Case <http://jocasewrites.com/>, Robert 
Hoge <http://roberthoge.com/> and AM Homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/07/am-homes-interview-womens-prize-fiction>
 discussed identity in the context of family (being – or having – a child who 
turns out to be different from its parents). It was the end of a long day but I 
welled up several times, particularly when Hoge discussed the first couple of 
weeks of his life. He was born with a tumour in the middle of his face that 
distorted his features and badly disabled legs; his mother refused even to go 
and see him for the first week of his life. His parents didn't want to take him 
home, but finally decided to after asking their four older children (aged 
between ten and four), who had been to the hospital to see and hold their baby 
brother, whether they should. The kids all said yes.

Solomon told several stories from his experiences interviewing the parents of 
"difficult" children for his bookFar From the Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/23/review-far-from-the-tree>. He 
had interviewed several women who had been raped and tortured during the 
Rwandan genocide. At the end of his interviews he always asks his subjects if 
they have any questions for him, to level the playing field. One asked him for 
his advice on how to love her daughter, who was conceived when she was raped. 
The woman said that she tried, but "every time I look at her, it reminds me of 
this terrible event". Floored by her words, Solomon said that it was only a 
couple of days afterwards that he realised how much love the question had 
contained.

Some tweets:

Dianne Masri (@media_pixels) 
Getting ready for writers' reflections in Glorious Sydney at #SWF14 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SWF14&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/CwBwnVWYJ7 
<http://t.co/CwBwnVWYJ7>
 <https://twitter.com/media_pixels/statuses/469986857686536192> May 23, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/media_pixels/statuses/469986857686536192> Bec Melrose 
(@becfrolics) 
Looking forward to Australia and the World with Malcolm Fraser and Bob Carr. 
What we need is better pyjamas.#SWF14 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SWF14&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/becfrolics/statuses/469988246861000704> May 23, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/becfrolics/statuses/469988246861000704> 
And this is great for Alice Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-walker> fans – a link to a transcript 
of her talk on Wednesday night.

Jane Hutcheon (@JHutcheon) 
Want to recall some of Alice Walker's words? Here's the transcript via 
@tveedercom <https://twitter.com/tveedercom> http://t.co/ZH7kVEvcLM 
<http://t.co/ZH7kVEvcLM> #oneplusone 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23oneplusone&src=hash> #swf14 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf14&src=hash> #abcnews24 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23abcnews24&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/JHutcheon/statuses/469796745141309440> May 23, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/JHutcheon/statuses/469796745141309440> 
8.54am BST 

I'm going to wrap up for the day now, but will be going to see Andrew Solomon 
discuss "what's normal anyway?" and hopefully a session on manners and 
debauchery with Gary Shteyngart, Irvine Welsh and Sandi Toksvig (what a combo). 
This was the scene last night. Thanks for reading – see you tomorrow.

 Sydney writers' festival at sunset. Photograph: Prudence Upton 
8.50am BST 

I, er, got the wrong door to the David Marr session (which I was late for in 
any case) and ended up in The Rally Cry: Stories That Inspire Change. Given 
that it was about digital journalism, it was something of a busman's holiday 
for me. My colleagueMadhvi Pankhania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/madhvi-pankhania> was even on the panel, 
along withPatrick Abboud <https://twitter.com/PatrickAbboud>, a video 
journalist from SBS2's The Feed, andHal Crawford 
<http://news.ninemsn.com.au/meet-the-team/online/hal-crawford>, editor in chief 
of Nine MSN.

A lot of hot media topics were chewed over: is the homepage dead  
<http://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2013/01/21/is-the-home-page-dead/>in the 
age of social media sharing? Should articles be either incredibly long or 
incredibly short? Why is data journalism <https://www.theguardian.com/data> 
important, and why is it such a growth area? Is Australia becoming saturated 
with news websites (possibly, seemed to be the consensus – Crawford believes 
that only the biggest sites will survive).

Abboud told an interesting story about getting a good scoop – Skype interview 
with a female graffiti artist from Afghanistan (after clicking through various 
images on Google of work she'd created) – and being told by SBS that it was 
unusable because the quality was so low. The solution was to use it as part of 
an animated piece of work that brought some of the artist's work to life – the 
kind of creative solution made possible by the digital world, and which 
journalism will need more of in the future. The story is below.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F76520611&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F76520611> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F76520611&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F76520611&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F76520611>  
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F76520611&media=>
close  Patrick Aboud's Tagging the Taliban. 
He also recommended the Narratively <http://narrative.ly/> website as 
demonstrating a new way of telling stories: "like going to an art exhibition, 
where you look at a lot of things you don't understand at first glance."

8.36am BST 

Jane went to see Thomas Keneally interviewed on stage earlier this afternoon – 
her report is here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/23/thomas-keneally-joan-of-arc-was-a-stroppy-sheila>
. He described Joan of Arc as "a stroppy sheila" and expressed regret that 
Julia Gillard didn't live up to her promise to be "the second coming of a 
female Christ".


Women are a frequent topic of the conversation: Gillard and Joan of Arc, but 
also the women he has been writing about since the mid 90s, up to his most 
recent novel,The Daughters of Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/09/daughters-of-mars-thomas-keneally-review>
. Writing these female characters, he says, is "one of the great challenges of 
having grown up in misogynistic institutions."

Women, he says, "are remarkable. They can have the most graphic hysterics if 
their daughter's room is untidy, but give then a real problem and they just 
deal with it." And as a writer, he has a theory: "under the cement of 
Australian manhood, everything we need for a woman is in our subconscious, or 
in our souls. Somewhere."
 'Fiction has always tried to tell the truth by telling lies' … Thomas 
Keneally Photograph: Richard Saker 
7.47am BST 

Meanwhile, there is a parody account of the questions some people ask at 
writers' festivals. Check out Writers' Fest Questions at@WFQuestions 
<https://twitter.com/WFQuestions>. Here's a sample:

WritersFestQuestions (@WFQuestions) 
.@SydWritersFest <https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest> Please explain why 
@EleanorCatton <https://twitter.com/EleanorCatton> asked me to remove my 
handmade steampunk-inspired hat during her talk?
 <https://twitter.com/WFQuestions/statuses/469432082834661377> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/WFQuestions/statuses/469432082834661377> 
Also, here's a very nice picture from the Michael Leunig session this morning.

Syd Writers Festival (@SydWritersFest) 
Leunig, "As an adult you can have a mature innocence. I try to see things like 
a child. What is this?"#swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/XJQHZylpqz 
<http://t.co/XJQHZylpqz>
 <https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest/statuses/469707487734550528> May 23, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest/statuses/469707487734550528> 
7.43am BST 

Jane bumped into the playwright Nakkiah Lui  <https://twitter.com/nakkiahlui>
for a Q&A.


What are you reading?

I just finished Tara Moss’ The Fictional Woman 
<http://www.harpercollins.com.au/books/Fictional-Woman-Tara-Moss/?isbn=9781460700587>
, and I’m re-readingFrom Massacres to Mining 
<http://www.amazon.com/Massacres-Mining-Colonisation-Aboriginal-Australia/dp/0955917719>
, which is looking at the history of mining and land ownership and massacres 
within Australia, for my next work. I highly recommend it. AndBlood on the 
Wattle <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1401798.Blood_on_the_Wattle>, which 
is also amazing.

Can you recommend a book to the readers of the Guardian?

The Story of Zahra 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/hanan-al-shaykh/the-story-of-zahra/>
 by Hanan al-Shaykh, orNative Son by Richard Wright 
<http://www.amazon.com/Native-Son-Richard-Wright/dp/0061148504>. Those two 
books changed my perspective on the “other”, how oppression works, and 
empowerment. The themes that exist within the two books in the context of 
looking at the history of Australia are really interesting. Also they’re really 
great classic books that aren’t really included within the classic literature 
curriculum in Australia.

What is the last thing you read that changed your opinion about something?

I was reading the lyrics on Rap Genius, for a song called 48 
<http://rapgenius.com/Tyler-the-creator-48-lyrics>, and maybe I’ve completely 
misinterpreted the lyrics, but it’s this story of being a hustler and trying to 
survive, and this cycle of oppression but aspiration. Him being “I killed 
people in my community trying to get ahead”, and that he’s sorry. And the whole 
song is about him saying “I’m sorry.” It’s really amazing. He’s really great,
Tyler the Creator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/may/19/tyler-the-creator-goblin-review>
. Aside from all the homophobic, misogynic stuff which, you know is a different 
way of looking at it I guess.

Books: digital or physical?

I prefer physical, maybe it’s attachment to a legacy. But then I’ve reached 
people equally through physical and digital. I work in a practice that is 
physical. Theatre is a thing that exists in the physical. It’s about being 
live, it only exists in the moment, which is why I guess the idea of having a 
book or something physical you can touch appeals to me, because theatre is so 
transient; but digital there is a whole untapped audience there.
 A fan of Tyler the Creator: Nakkiah Lui Photograph: Patrick Borland 
Updated at 7.48am BST

5.31am BST 

I'm about to leave the bunker for the first time today to see a session called 
Turning a Blind Eye, about ethics and the law. My colleagues have been to see 
Thomas Keneally and a session called Judging Women, so stay tuned for reports 
of those.

Alice Walker has been out and about – to Redfern.

Nella Soeterboek (@nellinc) 
After an inspirational morning at Mudgin-Gal. #alicewalker 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23alicewalker&src=hash> #redfern 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23redfern&src=hash> #swf14 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf14&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/YWeFzjcg5m 
<http://t.co/YWeFzjcg5m>
 <https://twitter.com/nellinc/statuses/469691867982880770> May 23, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/nellinc/statuses/469691867982880770> 
3.40am BST 

Bethanie Blanchard has just posted an illuminating write-up of the sessions 
she attended yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/23/bob-carr-political-writing-and-the-sovereignty-of-the-mind>
 – Bob Carr discussinghis notorious memoirs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/10/bob-carrs-diary-what-weve-learned>
 and a panel of writers on engaging with politics. She writes:

What struck me in Carr’s session was how relaxed and trained he is – as 
opposed to the agitated and passionate speeches of the authors in the earlier 
session: Christos Tsiolkas speaking forcefully and almost exasperated at his 
own lack of answers, Alexis Wright gentle and meandering but sharp in her 
criticism. Carr was effortlessly able to conduct the audience to laughter or 
concern. As he noted candidly in the session, “entertainment is part of the 
political function. Let’s be honest – you want to be entertained. If 
politicians are entertaining they’ve got more leeway to make big policy 
decisions because everyone’s diverted by the show.”﻿


2.50am BST 

We've just posted a great review of Sandi Toksvig's show last night by Jane 
Howard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/23/my-valentine-sandi-toksvig-review-a-love-letter-to-the-world>
. Who knew that Sydneysiders would have heard of British 80s kids Saturday 
morning showNo 73 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mA1GqmkeFQo>? 

Jane writes:

The show is at its most touching when a homage to her friends and their 
adventures, and particularly the bond they often shared over the English 
language – and the puns that can be made with a language which is much more 
complex than Danish.

She is delighted every time the audience enthusiastically replies yes when she 
asks if we’ve seen this British television show, or heard that British radio 
programme. If any of these questions are answered with uncertainty, she tells 
us we must go hunt it out – these the things Toksvig has loved, and this show 
is about sharing her love for them with us.
 Sandi Toksvig: bonded with friends over puns. Photograph: Prudence Upton 
Updated at 2.55am BST

1.43am BST 

Jane was also brave enough to attend the late night, ahem, erotic fan fiction 
session. She writes:


My night ended with erotic fan fiction at the festival club, and it wasn't the 
sort of adventure I thought I'd be having at this festival. The audience, 
younger and all together rowdier than their daytime counterparts, laughed and 
cheered through the five stories – that is, when we weren't grimacing and 
covering our faces. There were Scottish terriers, political figures, beloved 
characters from children's films (now surely ruined forever), and a 
particularly epic cosmic copulation withCarl Sagan <http://www.carlsagan.com/>. 


Annabel Crabb <http://www.abc.net.au/news/annabel-crabb/167108> read her fan 
fiction only on the collective agreement from the audience that it was not to 
be spoken about – and especially not tweeted about – so I'll say nothing except 
that we all left a little bit more psychologically scared than we were when we 
entered, and reading her political commentary will perhaps never be the same.

1.36am BST 

A few more great tweets, compiled by Jane Howard:

from Hel (@fionahelen) 
The best thing about #swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash> is that when you're reading 
to kill time all your fellow bookworms know better than to interrupt you.
 <https://twitter.com/fionahelen/statuses/469627107400634368> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/fionahelen/statuses/469627107400634368> Jennifer Burge 
(@JenniferBurge) 
Listening to Alice Walker speak last night was a game changer. #amwriting 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23amwriting&src=hash> #swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/JenniferBurge/statuses/469609655639896065> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/JenniferBurge/statuses/469609655639896065> Emily Orpin 
(@ejorpin) 
Today - Christos Tsiolka (beautiful, thoughtful, all too brief) and Sandy 
Toksvig (smart, funny, joyous)#swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/ejorpin/statuses/469446573282189314> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ejorpin/statuses/469446573282189314> Marina Saggers 
(@marinasaggers) 
Just experienced 15mins of being completely enthralled by Jesus & 
Christianity. How bout that. Thanks@rezaaslan <https://twitter.com/rezaaslan> - 
fascinating.#swf2014 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/marinasaggers/statuses/469440450273615872> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/marinasaggers/statuses/469440450273615872> Andrew Cohen 
(@androsmcgregor) 
Lots of booklovers up early getting amongst it! #swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/NA9s24OrUh 
<http://t.co/NA9s24OrUh>
 <https://twitter.com/androsmcgregor/statuses/469619108552536064> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/androsmcgregor/statuses/469619108552536064> 
1.29am BST 

The panel on American policy in the middle east at the Chaser's freewheeling 
talk show Empty Vessel <http://www.chaser.com.au/events/emptyvessel/> sounds as 
though it got rather heated:

Zoe/Zora Sanders (@Zoezora) 
This panel at #SWF <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SWF&src=hash> is going 
off! Panelists are coming to blows! Amazing. This might be the best writers 
fest panel I've ever seen?
 <https://twitter.com/Zoezora/statuses/469448555128561665> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Zoezora/statuses/469448555128561665> 
Updated at 1.56am BST

1.25am BST 

My colleague Jessica Reed  <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jessicareed>
went to the All the Best storytelling session last night. She writes:


The US motherlode of story-telling events, the Moth <http://themoth.org/>, has 
in recent years inspired the birth of various spawns – go to any big city, and 
you can spend a night with strangersreading your most embarrassing teenage 
diary entries <http://salonofshame.com/>, listen to a cast of women reading out 
letters <http://womenofletters.com.au/>, or try your luck at true stories 
comedy nights.

Yesterday's All the Best live event 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,4114/task,view_detail/>
 at the Sydney Writers' Festival followed in this path, presenting four 
speakers and one electrofolk singer sharing personal stories. The setting was 
great: a huge, barn-like space with tables facing the stage, with food and 
drink available throughout the night – Shiraz and stories, what's not to like?

Radio producer Belinda Lopez <http://belindalopez.net/> kicked off by sharing 
her misadventures travelling in foreign countries and the perils of 
objectifying foreign populations (ending up with Lopez being the poster girl 
for whitening cream – don't ask). Web developerDan Nolan 
<https://twitter.com/dannolan> read a love letter to superhero animals, 
inspired by the"hero cat" video  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/may/15/cat-saves-boy-from-dog-attack-video>
which went viral last week. MusicianCaitlin Park <http://caitlinpark.net/> 
played a quirky song about love and loss. AuthorMaxine Beneba-Clarke 
<http://slamup.blogspot.com.au/> delivered a powerful spoken-word text about 
Australia's endemic racism, andMeanjin <http://meanjin.com.au/> editor Zora 
Sanders <http://wheelercentre.com/dailies/post/3fd0869f7a0b/>drew quite a few 
earnest laughs reading a story about her mother moving to a commune.
I can't say the night was quite as tight and carefully crafted as the ones 
which are routinely offered at the Moth, but there's nevertheless something 
quite spirit lifting in seeing fellow human beings being brave enough to stand 
up and face a crowd to read tales of loss, laughter or shame. I tip my hat to 
them.


12.41am BST 

Meanwhile it seems that exciting, possibly drunken things have been happening 
overnight.

Giles Hardie (@gileshardie) 
The bar has broken down at a Writers Festival event. We may be about to see 
the most over-privileged riot ever!#swf 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf&src=hash> #FeralsRevolting 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23FeralsRevolting&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/gileshardie/statuses/469397552014434304> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/gileshardie/statuses/469397552014434304> 
Poetic license? Well, it is a writers' festival.

Michael Dawson (@michaeljdawson) 
Writers festival has turned Walsh Bay into Big Day Out for 70yo women with 
silver bobs. Saw my Mum passed out in the HarperCollins tent#SWF 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SWF&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/michaeljdawson/statuses/469313978586234881> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/michaeljdawson/statuses/469313978586234881> 
More from this event shortly ...

Dan Ilic (@danilic) 
Haven't finished writing my erotic story for tonight...¯\_(ツ)_/¯ vodka #SWF 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SWF&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/danilic/statuses/469335980399689728> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/danilic/statuses/469335980399689728> 
12.35am BST 

It's Friday morning and we're back in the bunker. We've started the day with a 
brilliant piece by Andrew Solomon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/23/the-stolen-generations-an-unending-disaster-for-australia>
, who gave the opening address at Sydney Writers' festival on Tuesday. The 
author ofFar From the Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/23/review-far-from-the-tree>, a 
monumental andprizewinning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/29/wellcome-book-prize-andrew-solomon-far-from-the-tree>
 book about parents who bring up "difficult" children, has written about 
Australia's stolen generation, the removal of Indigenous children from their 
parents, and the repercussions of those policies. He writes:

Our ideas of what constitutes responsible parenting are strongly culturally 
determined, and members of other cultures have the prerogative to define such 
matters for themselves. An Australian childhood is different from a Congolese 
one; a 20th-century childhood is different from an 18th-century one; a gay 
childhood is different from a straight one; a fundamentalist childhood is 
different from an atheistic one.

 It may be that many Indigenous childhoods look all wrong to those who regard 
them from the fortress of their own system. Yet it may well be that such 
childhoods make sense to the families enacting them – and that the removals, 
which now seem so “rational” will seem anything but to the generation that 
follows ours.
 'This is a rapturous day for me' … Andrew Solomon on winning the Wellcome 
prize. Photograph: Sophia Evans 
9.10am BST 

As I said earlier, I went to see Colin McDowell this morning. As promised (or 
should that be threatened?), I've now written it up –the piece is here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/22/colin-mcdowell-a-passion-for-fashion?view=desktop>
. In a very entertaining hour he bigged up Victoria Beckham, excoriated 
middle-aged men who wear trainers (like me), and talked about the 
democratisation of fashion (halted by the return of haute couture). He also 
revealed the price of a bespoke Chanel suit – about £45-50,000 – but pointed 
out that if you're young and great looking, that beats any fancy outfit. So not 
much comfort there - unless you are indeed young and great looking.

I'm going to wrap up for the day now, but tomorrow we've got lots more great 
stuff including a piece byAndrew Solomon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrew-solomon>, author of Far From the 
Tree, a report from theSandi Toksvig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sandi-toksvig> show which is taking place 
tonight, and a review of thefestival club storytelling session 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,4114/task,view_detail/>
.

Here's a final tweet.

LinWong (@Lin_Wong_) 
A great day today at the Sydney Writers' Festival #swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/w22tdJ5wpv 
<http://t.co/w22tdJ5wpv>
 <https://twitter.com/Lin_Wong_/statuses/469383087571218433> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Lin_Wong_/statuses/469383087571218433> 
7.59am BST 

Here's what people are talking about on Twitter. As you can see, the weather 
really is very nice.

Sydney Festival (@sydney_festival) 
Stunner of a day at @sydwritersfest <https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest>. 
#swf2014 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/omcdImpyga <http://t.co/omcdImpyga>
 <https://twitter.com/sydney_festival/statuses/469331995210698752> May 22, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/sydney_festival/statuses/469331995210698752> 
Some rather alarming news:

WritersFestQuestions (@WFQuestions) 
. @SydWritersFest <https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest> An old man just fell 
off the pier I think it was David Malouf?#swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/WFQuestions/statuses/469367237045133313> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/WFQuestions/statuses/469367237045133313> 
Where the bloody hell are you, etc.


7.38am BST 

Bethanie Blanchard has been to see Bob Carr. She writes:


Bob Carr’s Diary of a Foreign Minister session was packed, and I file in with 
hundreds of others, our shuffling bringing to mind the sorts of airline 
arrangements Carr complains of in the work.

Chair Marian Wilkinson begins by asking Carr which of the reviews he felt were 
most accurate –News Limited who called him a “first class tosser” 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/bob-carr-says-he-wears-titles-such-as-tosser-and-firstclass-snob-as-a-badge-of-honour/story-fni0cx4q-1226879884077>
, Julie Bishopwho stated in response 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/bob-carrs-diaries-threaten-australias-relationships-says-julie-bishop-20140409-zqsrr.html>
 “while it is tempting to ridicule the arrogant foolishness of this egotistical 
self-promoter, his book carries a real risk of damaging Australia’s standing 
among currently serving world leaders,” orPeter Hartcher who compared him to a 
delusional Don Quixote 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/bob-carr-former-minister-for-nothing-20140411-zqtne.html>
. Carr answered with an anecdote about Abraham Lincoln, who responded in 
letters to his critics simply with: “you may be right.”


6.24am BST 

A note from Jane about a session called The Naked Bookshelf which she attended 
this morning:

Of course at a writers' festival you’re going to see many amazing writers – 
but I didn’t expect one of the first things I’d see would be an amazing book. 
In the morning session The Naked Bookshelf, where writers discussed their book 
collections, however, Kate Forsyth held up a signed, first edition Enid Blyton. 
I may have been sitting ten metres away, but it felt pretty special to be 
sharing the room. It is just one book of 7500 in Forsyth’s collection, 
including another first edition she showed off – an Abby Girl book, which her 
mother bought for 20 cents and is worth around $6500. There were only a handful 
of books sitting on the table in front of us, but collectively the audience was 
amazed. What it would be to go discover what else lies on her bookshelves. ﻿


6.23am BST 

I've just posted a really nice Jane Howard report from David Malouf's session 
this morning, part ofhis ongoing 80th birthday celebrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/12/david-malouf-and-friends-artistic-collaboration-a-brisbane-state-of-mind>
. It was as much about his life of a reader as of a writer; the books that 
turned him on to literature aged 12, and a quick crash course in Australian 
literature:

From Australian literature, he has been influenced by Frederick Manning’s The 
Middle Parts of Fortune, Kenneth Seaforth Mackenzie’s The Young Desire It, and 
Patrick White’s The Aunt’s Story. Of these writers, says Malouf, although 
they’re not always writing about Australia or Australian characters, “their 
‘Australianness’ is absolutely taken for granted, and absolutely present.”

﻿This is the work he regards as the greatest in history.
 David Malouf on the Iliad 
5.40am BST 

Sorry for the somewhat pregnant pause – I've just come from two back-to-back 
events with writers that couldn't be more different. Most recently,Irvine Welsh 
did a webchat with Guardian Australia readers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/19/irvine-welsh-put-your-questions-to-the-author>
Here he is doing it in a deserted conference room in the hotel where all the 
writers are staying.

Alex Needham (@alexneedham74) 
Irvine Welsh: live Q&A - the proof http://t.co/LDJgrBEHOp 
<http://t.co/LDJgrBEHOp> pic.twitter.com/HHnwz6Sshk <http://t.co/HHnwz6Sshk>
 <https://twitter.com/alexneedham74/statuses/469316874669277184> May 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/alexneedham74/statuses/469316874669277184> 
I have to say it was the most low-maintenance interview I've ever done – Welsh 
simply typed his answers to all the questions while thoughtfully munching on 
salad and chips. An early highlight camewhen JadeHawk asked him 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35845644>: "What do you 
think of our Prime Minister, Treasurer and the recently released Australian 
budget?"

Welsh replied: "Your PM seems a bit of an arsehole and his economic policies 
seem to be the usual crap involving strengthening smug elites while shitting 
over everybody else." (He was fully abreast ofthe winking thing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/may/21/tony-abbott-winking-video>
.)

He also gave an insight into the creation of psychopathic characters like 
Begbie,replying to turbo5, who asked 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35974966>: "What really 
intrigued me and set me on edge was the chilling way you seem to get inside a 
psycopathic mind such as Begbie. Now, I'm assuming you're not like Francois, so 
how do you manage to get inside his mind to create that incredibly realistic 
effect?"

Welsh said: "I think you try to find something that evokes the character to 
you; it could be something they say, or a set of actions or attitudes 
expressed. These help you find your inner Begbie. I think we probably all have 
one."

Before that I watched Colin McDowell  <http://www.colinmcdowell.com/>be very 
entertaining about fashion: more of that later.


2.21am BST 

We've just posted a great account by Van Badham of last night's Alice Walker 
event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/22/alice-walker-me-and-jane-eyre-were-tight?view=desktop>
, in which the Pultizer-winner explains how reading so much as a child awakened 
her political consciousness:


It's reading that she credits with the ability to develop political empathy. 
"If our children could just read everything and feel themselves into everything 
they're reading, things would be very different when they grew up," she says, 
recalling a particular fondness forCharlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/09/100-best-novels-jane-eyre>. "I 
recognised myself in Jane Eyre. It amazes me how many white people can't read 
themselves in black characters. I didn't feel any separation between me and 
Jane. We were tight."

 Alice Walker on stage at Sydney writers' festival. Photograph: Prudence Upton 
By way of a total contrast I'm just going to a talk by the Sunday Times's 
fashion critic Colin McDowell's talk Shopping for Miracles ... and then for a 
live chat with Irvine Welsh.Post your questions here! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/19/irvine-welsh-put-your-questions-to-the-author>


1.32am BST 

Here's a flavour of the scene outside. Nice, eh? 

HarperCollins Aus (@HarperCollinsAU) 
It's a beautiful day on the harbour down at the @SydWritersFest 
<https://twitter.com/SydWritersFest> ! Hope to see you there! #swf2014 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23swf2014&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/DsfPfREqis 
<http://t.co/DsfPfREqis>
 <https://twitter.com/HarperCollinsAU/statuses/469261789830475776> May 21, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/HarperCollinsAU/statuses/469261789830475776> 
Meanwhile, this is what I'm looking at as soon as I step out of the Guardian 
bunker, backstage at Sydney theatre.

 Outside the Guardian bunker at Sydney writers' festival Photograph: Alex 
Needham/The Guardian 
At least there's a nice picture of Kylie to keep me company inside the bunker.

 Kylie in the Guardian bunker. Photograph: Alex Needham/The Guardian 
1.12am BST 

Welcome to our Sydney writers' festival liveblog

The Sydney writers' festival is arguably the most important literary festival 
in Australia. Authors and thinkers from all over the world – including Alice 
Walker, Eleanor Catton, Andrew Solomon, Irvine Welsh – are joining illustrious 
locals like Christos Tsiolkas, Thomas Keneally and our own David Marr in a 
festival of reading, thinking and generally celebrating the power of the 
written word. It all takes place in a glorious location on Sydney Harbour, and 
today the sun is beaming. What's not to like?


Today we've got a lot of great stuff coming up including a live webchat with 
Irvine Welsh at 1pm AEST (post your questions here) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/19/irvine-welsh-put-your-questions-to-the-author>
, a report from last night's headline event with Alice Walker, news from David 
Malouf's sessioncelebrating his 80th birthday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/12/david-malouf-and-friends-artistic-collaboration-a-brisbane-state-of-mind>
, coverage of Bob Carr's event where he will talk abouthis notorious memoirs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/quiz/2014/apr/10/bob-carr-patrick-bateman-quiz>
, and a roundup of what people are saying and doing on social media.


In the meantime, catch up on our coverage of the festival so far. There's an 
in-depth interview with Andrew Solomon, who gave the opening address on Tuesday 
night, here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/01/andrew-solomon-far-from-tree-wellcome-prize>
. On 1 May, Breaking Bad writer Vince Gilligan gave a talk to his legions of 
Australian fans –read a report from that event here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/05/vince-gilligan-meets-the-worlds-worst-breaking-bad-pirates?view=desktop>
. We publisheda controversial piece about the giving and taking of offence by 
Australia's human rights commissioner Tim Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/20/twitter-trolls-have-right-offend-but-dont-have-to-listen>
 with an interesting comment thread on Tuesday. We've interviewed two of the 
headline authors –Emma Donogue, who is giving the closing address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/19/emma-donoghue-i-want-to-entertain-and-mess-with-peoples-minds>
, and Sydney'sFiona McFarlane, one of the festival's two writers in residence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/21/fiona-mcfarlane-i-wanted-to-explore-dementia-from-the-inside>
. Finally,we have a top 10 picks of what to see here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/19/sydney-writers-festival-10-things-to-see?view=desktop>
.

Do tweet us your thoughts @alexneedham74 <https://twitter.com/alexneedham74>, 
@noplain <https://twitter.com/noplain>, @beth_blanchard 
<https://twitter.com/beth_blanchard> and post your views below. Or hell, meet 
us in person – we'll be around.

 