
Sydney’s being overrun by big-name international authors, local favourites and 
over 400 other bookish types this week, as the Sydney Writers Festival kicks 
off with a huge selection of talks, performances, and odd shenanigans that defy 
description. Head tothe official program <http://www.swf.org.au/> to scope out 
all the action, but here are just a few must-see picks.

1. Bankstown Poetry Slam

It’s the largest poetry slam in Australia, and it’s amazingly open to 
all-comers (the sign-up sheet gets passed around at 6:30pm sharp on the night!) 
– who knows, that quiet hooded kid in the corner could be our next literary 
sensation? There’ll be local talent galore and special guests, and if the 
rapid-fire spitting doesn’t move you, at least you’ll be just down the street 
from the greatest pho in Sydney.

Tuesday 20 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,4170/task,view_detail/>

2. The Life and Times of Alice Walker

Unless you’re Bono (poor you), it’s not often you get to spend a casual 
evening in the presence of Pulitzer Prize-winning greatness. Here’s your chance:
Alice Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview23>
, author of The Color Purple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/21/color-purple-menier-chocolate-factory>
, is joined onstage by one of our most accomplished Indigenous musiciansArchie 
Roach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/23/archie-roach-still-a-powerful-voice-for-indigenous-justice>
 and interviewerCaroline Baum <http://www.carolinebaum.com.au/> to discuss 
race, activism, her latest collection of poetry, and lay judgement on Oprah’s 
acting chops (well, hopefully).

Wednesday 21 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,3882/task,view_detail/>
 Precocious prizewinner: Eleanor Catton. Photograph: Robert Catto 
3. Eleanor Catton: The Luminaries

Earlier this year, 28-year-old Canadian-born/New Zealand-raised Catton became 
the youngest ever winner of the prestigious Man Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/15/booker-prize-eleanor-catton-luminaries>
 for her ambitious second novel, The Luminaries. It’s since become perhaps the 
most passed-around novel of the year, but if an 832-page historical epic set 
amongst the 19th century New Zealand coal mines sounds like a hard slog, you 
can stay in the loop by listening to her talk about it instead.

Thursday 22 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,3884/task,view_detail/>

4. An Unconventional Faith

Religious discussion – it’s the ultimate party-starter! Oh wait, that’s rum. 
Nevertheless, reflect on old men with beards (or, uh, their existential 
absence) with Jewish/atheistAntony Loewenstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/antonyloewenstein>, Scientist/humanist Jim 
Al Khalili, and Christian/Muslim scholar Reza Aslan, the Colbert Show and Daily 
Show regular whose promo push for his latest book Zealot resulted inan 
hilarious Fox News viral video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jt1cOnNrY5s> 
that saw him shoot to the top of the New York Times Bestseller list.

Thursday 22 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,3853/task,view_detail/>

5. Jacques Roubaud: writer, mathematician and Oulipean

Lovers of obscure literary movements will wanna catch the philosophical 
musings ofRoubaud <http://www.egs.edu/faculty/jacques-roubaud/biography/>, the 
82-year-old French poet, novelist, essayist and mathematician who was part of 
the famedOulipo <http://www.nous.org.uk/oulipo.html> - alongside the likes of 
Georges Perec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/19/1000-novels-comedy-georges-perec>
 andItalo Calvino <https://www.theguardian.com/books/italocalvino> - in the 
mid-60s. Roubaud had his first piece published as a 12-year-old while world war 
two was still raging, and will be discussing his unique, constraint-based 
approach to writing.

Thursday 22 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,3971/task,view_detail/>
 Debating feminism: Emma Donoghue. Photograph: Ulf Andersen/Getty Images Europe
6. The Madonna-Whore And Other Fictions

Emma Donoghue <https://www.theguardian.com/books/emma-donoghue>, the Irish 
author of 2010’s bestselling coming-of-age thriller Room, joins local 
personalitiesTara Moss <http://taramoss.com/>, Kate Ceberano 
<http://www.kateceberano.com/>, Nakkiah Lui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nakkiah-lui>, and columnist Tracey Spicer 
<http://spicercommunications.biz/> to take a necessary shaking fist to the 
labels placed upon women, and its detrimental effect on society in general.

Friday 23 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,3917/task,view_detail/>

7. Humour and Debauchery With a Few Manners in Between

Local columnist and presenter Annabel Crabb <https://twitter.com/annabelcrabb> 
chats with three of the festival’s most prominent guests about their recent 
works: Russian-American sadsackGary Shteyngart  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gary-shteyngart>discusses his new memoir 
Little Failure; UK comedian and television regularSandi Toksvig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sandi-toksvig> reflects on modern manners 
with Peas & Queues; and Trainspotting legend Irvine Welsh  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/irvinewelsh>will get doubly dirty, 
discussing The Sex Lives of Siamese Twins. One to take your mum to.

Friday 23 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,3887/task,view_detail/>

8. 5 x 15

A stellar lineup, a unique set-up, and the potential for a memorable 
trainwreck or improvised genius: 5x15 is one for you adventurous types. Five 
speakers – Room author Emma Donoghue; Nigerian poet and playwrightInua Ellams 
<https://twitter.com/InuaEllams>; British fashion writer Colin McDowell 
<http://www.colinmcdowell.com/>; local theatre writer/director Wesley Enoch 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/theatre/theatres-party-pooper-wesley-enochs-nasty-side-20140109-30ii6.html>
; and Rake himselfRichard Roxburgh <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0746896/> – take 
to the stage without notes for 15 minutes a piece, to blab eloquently on a 
topic of their choosing.

Saturday 24 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,3889/task,view_detail/>
 Irvine Welsh: horrible memories. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Observer 
9. Irvine Welsh: The Sex Lives Of Siamese Twins

Most of us remember where we were when we first read Trainspotting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/trainspotting> – probably a cluttered room 
in a stinky share-house or some dingy backpackers in Berlin, with 
philosophising weirdoes nearby looking to bum all your cigs. Relive those 
horrible, horrible memories with a night with cult hero Irvine Welsh, who’ll be 
talking comedy, unsavoury types, and his epically titled new novel, The Sex 
Lives Of Siamese Twins.

Sunday 25 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,4010/task,view_detail/>

10. Strangers in a Strange Land

Expect awkward, poignant and humorous personal tales that’ll no doubt hit 
close to home when Gary Shteyngart (Super Sad True Love Story),Amy Tan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2013/dec/13/amy-tan-joy-luck-club-podcast>
 (The Joy Luck Club) and local man about townBenjamin Law 
<http://benjamin-law.com/> (The Family Law) gather to talk about their 
first-generation immigrant upbringings. If no one drops a line about how much 
immigrant dads love tracksuit pants and/or WD40, I’ll have to raise my hand.

Sunday 25 May – further details 
<http://www.swf.org.au/component/option,com_events/Itemid,124/agid,4008/task,view_detail/>
 