
Pakistan have finally offered some resistance in the SCG dead rubber, reaching 
126-2 at stumps on day two after negotiating a wicket-less session with some 
help from Australia’s vice-captain. Australia remain in control of the contest, 
boasting a 412-run lead following centuries from David Warner, Matt Renshaw and 
Peter Handscomb.

But their bid for a 3-0 series win stalled when Warner, one of the best 
fielders in the world, fluffed his lines. Warner missed chances to run out 
Azhar Ali on 12 and Younis Khan on 32 at the non-striker’s end, while he 
dropped a sharp one-handed catch at leg slip in the day’s penultimate over.

Azhar was 58 not out at stumps on Wednesday, while Younis was on 64. Running 
between the wickets was not the highlight of their unbeaten 120-run 
partnership. Azhar was mid-pitch when Younis sent him back in the 11th over. 
Warner had enough time to lob the ball back to bowler Mitchell Starc and 
complete the dismissal but instead tried to throw down the stumps.

Australia v Pakistan: third Test, day two – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/04/australia-v-pakistan-third-test-day-two-live>
Azhar returned the favour in the 27th over, when Warner went within a whisker 
of snapping the stubborn stand from mid-off. The veteran then failed to back up 
when opening partner Renshaw also tried to throw down the stumps. Skipper Steve 
Smith couldn’t see the funny side as the tourists scampered through for two 
overthrows.

Earlier Smith declared at 538-8, wanting seven overs at Pakistan prior to the 
tea break. It proved a wise decision, with Josh Hazlewood snaring two wickets 
in his second over. 

Hazlewood needed seven balls at Sharjeel Khan and four at Babar Azam to 
account for the batsmen. Hazlewood and Starc found bowling to Azhar, who showed 
what he is capable of with an unbeaten knock of 205 in the Boxing Day Test, and 
Younis far tougher. Spinners Nathan Lyon and Steve O’Keefe were largely 
ineffectual in the final session, when Smith opted against using them in 
tandem. However, Lyon created a late chance when Azhar was on 51.

Earlier, Renshaw’s maiden Test ton ended when he was on 184 in the sixth over 
of the day. Sid Barnes is the only Australian opener to have produced a higher 
score at the SCG than what the 20-year-old managed in his fourth Test. 
Handscomb was out hit-wicket for 110 after benefiting from a missed stumping on 
nine.

Captain Misbah-ul-Haq, who publicly contemplated retiring after losing the 
series in Melbourne, was one of many Pakistanis to gift cheap runs with 
misfields. Sarfraz Ahmed missed two stumpings, while the visitors put down 
catches offered by Usman Khawaja and Hilton Cartwright, who made 37 on Test 
debut.



 