
On first meeting, in her sleek navy tracksuit and immaculate trainers, Sylvie 
Guillem <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sylvie-guillem>, the superstar 
ballerina, looks like the pro gymnast she used to be as a girl. A star is 
always a star, but her relationship to the firmament in which she shines is 
mutable. Balletomanes who have marvelled at the way Guillem’s astounding 
physical presence can dominate a stage would be surprised to find that, in 
person, she is slight, almost vulnerable. Until you shake her hand. Guillem’s 
steely clasp, combined with a risque smile and the shy but penetrating look 
that quizzes you from behind a mane of wild red hair, hints at the dance diva 
of her reputation.

Today, perhaps because she has just announced her retirement (she will be 50 
this week), the woman once known as “Mademoiselle Non” is in an affirmative 
mood: chatty, reflective, candid and fun, striking aséduisant note of 
collaboration throughout the rigmarole of a press interview.

There is, however, no point in asking Sylvie Guillem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sylvie-guillem> about her childhood dream of 
becoming a ballerina, because she didn’t have one. When the young Sylvie was 
growing up in the working-class suburbs of Paris where her father was a car 
mechanic, her teenage future had only Olympic dimensions. There was, she says, 
“no music at home. I was a blank duck.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEYx0xw7yhzk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEYx0xw7yhzk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEYx0xw7yhzk&media=>
Her mother was a gymnastics teacher. Aged 11, Guillem was a junior member of 
the French national team, training for Olympic glory. Dance, she says, “was on 
another planet. I had never a thought of training to be a ballerina. I was a 
normal child. I never dreamed of the tutu. In fact, I landed at theParis Opera 
Ballet school 
<https://www.operadeparis.fr/en/les-artistes/l-ecole-de-danse/presentation> by… 
by hazard.” Guillem’s English is good, with a strong French accent, but 
occasionally she supplements the conversation with her mother tongue.

Guillem’s gym coach had friends at the Paris Opera Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> school, and he arranged for his 
pupil to swap the parallel bars for the barre. Both sides hoped an exchange 
programme between young dancers and gymnasts would achieve a mutually enhanced 
performance on stage and in the arena. Guillem, who was shy and rebellious, 
hardly saw it like this. “I did one year, and I really didn’t like it.”

When I was doing gymnastics, I was playing. It was fun. The ballet was not fun 
at all
Sylvie Guillem 
In the gym, she was free and happy; ballet school was too much like boot camp. 
“When I was doing gymnastics, I was playing. It was fun. The ballet was not fun 
at all. Yes, I agree you must have discipline, but you don’t need to be a 
witch. You can’t teach a child like that. Three times a week, I went back to 
train as a gymnast. Then I was happy.”

However, by the end of her first year, her teachers had spotted her potential 
– and she had discovered her vocation. “They asked me if I wanted to be in the 
end-of-term show,” she says. “I thought: I’m not finding this ballet school 
exciting. Let’s try the show.” Here her expression takes on a passionate 
intensity. “One foot on stage. Curtain up. That was it… The relation I had with 
the audience, it was fantastic. It is always so strange. You dance, and there 
is an answer – that is always true. You put me in a room with people and I hide 
in the corner; put me on stage and I’m different. It’s difficult to explain.”

Is that still true?

“Yes.” Another shy smile. “Still.”

Guillem is so composed and easy-going today that it’s hard to imagine her at 
odds with the demands of performance. But the more she talks, the more you see 
a woman, and an artist, who has never had it too easy. She has always been a 
loner, with a fierce sense of her integrity, and an awkward relationship with 
the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fsylvie-guillem-interview-dance-nureyev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424190534524%2F7eb85970-f3ed-424a-9f50-38112ff17a2a-2060x1365.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sylvie%20Guillem%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20dance%2C%20and%20there%20is%20always%20an%20answer%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fsylvie-guillem-interview-dance-nureyev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sylvie%20Guillem%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20dance%2C%20and%20there%20is%20always%20an%20answer%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fsylvie-guillem-interview-dance-nureyev%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F17%2F1424190534524%2F7eb85970-f3ed-424a-9f50-38112ff17a2a-2060x1365.jpeg>
 Sylvie Guillem photographed in Venice in 2012. Photograph: Mirco Toniolo/Rex 
“Wilful”, “demanding” and “egocentric” are the words that surface recurrently 
in the reports of her career as “the most exciting dancer in the world”. Her 
strong sense of herself may also come from her father’s Catalan origins. “My 
grandmother,” she exclaims at one moment. “Nowshe was something; she was 
terrible. I am a bit nicer than she, but I didn’t have the hard life she had.”

As a child, Guillem was awkward, shy, and deeply attached to her parents. 
Ballet school meant weekly boarding. Every Sunday evening, returning to the 
discipline of the ballet class, she would cry her eyes out. “It was a 
nightmare,” she recalls.
It was her mother who inspired a crucial career turning-point for Guillem. 
“She said: ‘Listen, this can’t go on. If you are really sad, we stop, and we 
don’t speak of the ballet again. If you want to do it, you have to change.’ So 
that day I said to myself, ‘That’s it. I am not crying any more.’ After that, I 
decided to separate, and all my life I have drifted away from my home, and done 
all these different things, like living in England, dancing with Rudolf…”

Looking back now, across 39 years of dancing, in roles such as Giselle and 
Odette/Odile, Guillem can point to some extraordinary high points. She can even 
look back on her younger self with nostalgia. “There’s a period in your life 
when you have no brain,” she says. “You think you are immortal, and everything 
is energy. As you get older, you want to slow down, and use your brain to 
analyse your performance.”

But in ballet, unlike theatre, the music always sets the tempo. There can be 
no slowing down. As she says, “All I can do is stop.” And yet a dancer’s 
biological clock is always ticking. At the Paris Opera Ballet, retirement is 
mandatory at 42. By 2006, having moved toSadler’s Wells in London 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/> to pursue contemporary ballet, Guillem was into 
injury time. She has continued to defy the odds for a further decade, and at 
several points in this conversation she expresses a keen awareness of time.

In retrospect, the moment when the ageing Rudolf Nureyev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nureyev> joined the Paris Opera Ballet as 
dance-director, in 1983, is crucial. His best years were behind him, and his 
health was failing, but he and Guillem, who became his protegee, forged a 
powerful artistic alliance. She remains one of the few dancers still at work 
today who has actually performed with “Rudi” on stage.

Nureyev taught me that you must stick to what you believe. That was a good 
lesson – to learn that you have to fight
Sylvie Guillem 
Guillem becomes animated with memories of her days (aged just 19) as Nureyev’s 
precocious “Etoile”, the youngest-ever dancer to occupy this coveted role at 
the Paris Opera Ballet.

“When Rudolf arrived, he had this huge reputation. He was no longer dancing so 
well, but I could see the difference between the dancer and the man. He had 
vision. He was passionate, intelligent and generous. He helped all the young 
people in the Paris Opera Ballet.”

In Nureyev, Guillem found a kindred soul. “He taught me that you must stick to 
what you believe, even if it’s hard. That was a good lesson – to learn that you 
have to fight.” She smiles, modestly. “I won’t compare myself to Rudolf,” she 
adds. “We clashed because I respected him. He was really quite shy, and I am 
too. I had trouble to communicate, and so did he. With us, it always goes to 
the wall: we had no diplomatic language. That was the problem. Things that make 
me angry and sad, I cannot hide. It’s not because I want to be a rebel, it’s my 
instinct. When something touches me deeply, I really have to react. So we had 
clashes. But I loved him, yes. He had shiny eyes. He was very clever, and he 
knew what he was doing.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTGh5KAQcHUw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTGh5KAQcHUw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTGh5KAQcHUw&media=>
Guillem, under Nureyev, now performed all the leading roles in the classical 
repertoire, but she has never been at ease with classical formality. 
“Technique?” she queries, dismissively. “I don’t care. Classical technique… for 
me, it’s not interesting.” Increasingly, she preferred to explore modern dance. 
In 1987 she performed the lead role in William Forsythe’s contemporary balletIn 
the Middle, Somewhat Elevated <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WLWDtbHNzxw>. 
For Guillem, there is only dance. To her, “modern” and “classical” are largely 
labels.

By 1989, Guillem had had enough of a restrictive ballet regime. “I said to 
myself, so long as I am happy I will go on. If something is wrong, I stop. I 
can always leave.”

She was in the middle of contract negotiations in Paris when the Royal Ballet 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/?gclid=CIL62eWB6cMCFdMatAodsn0Ayw> made a dramatic 
counter-bid. “I wanted a contract where I could choose the productions and my 
[dance] partner. I wanted my own say. Perhaps I was a little bit Latin in my 
approach to things.”

Her move rocked Paris culture, and her defection was debated in the National 
Assembly. The arts minister went before the TV cameras to declare “a national 
catastrophe”. Guillem was unmoved. For her, following in the footsteps of 
Nureyev, the Royal Ballet was “a new start”. Her new contract gave her the 
right to choose her repertoire. This freedom, and her willingness to refuse 
certain roles, won her, from artistic directorAnthony Dowell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_9aL0nSglvQ>, the soubriquet “Mademoiselle 
Non”. Once, this relationship had tensions; now, she has only praise for 
Dowell, whom she describes as “one of the finest dancers ever”.

At the Royal Ballet, Guillem became a ballet superstar, and a game-changer. 
She used her celebrity power to promote the choreography ofAkram Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/akramkhan>, Mats Ek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/28/juliet-romeo-mats-ek-royal-swedish-balllet-vivid-spin-shakespeare>
, andRussell Maliphant <http://www.russellmaliphant.com/>, and still talks of 
“doing what I do with pride and passion”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwDjc6jy7YSQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwDjc6jy7YSQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwDjc6jy7YSQ&media=>
There have been some diva moments. In 2001, Guillem astounded French Vogue 
when, responding to a modelling commission, she submitted a set of portraits 
(taken by her photographer husband, Gilles Tapie) in which she appeared without 
makeup, stark naked. Perhaps the only safe prediction about Guillem is that she 
will be always unpredictable – contrarian, her enemies would say. In the course 
of this interview, she occasionally seemed almost Anglo-Saxon in her 
determination to speak her mind. She has lived in London for nine years, mostly 
in Notting Hill, and has made many English friends.

“I love England,” she exclaims. “It is so civilised.” She favours London, as a 
great city with many parks in which she can ride her bike, and be free. When 
she retires she will live in Switzerland (where she has a house), and Italy, 
whose culture she adores. And how will she cope with retirement? Guillem makes 
a wry face. “Who knows? I just want to let it come to me. I need time to look 
and see. I am very interested in nature.” Guillem has already added her voice 
to the campaigns of the environmental lobbySea Shepherd 
<http://www.seashepherd.org.uk/>. She pauses again to contemplate her future. 
“I think it’s exciting, but it’s going to be hard. I’m going to miss the 
pleasure of the stage a lot.”

Her last dance – and when she says there will be no comebacks, you believe her 
– will be a performance of Mats Ek’s poignant valedictory solo,Bye 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SIGVCUxlBYw>, in Japan on 30 December as part 
of her final programme. “When I think of it,” she concludes, “I am already 
crying.”

Sylvie Guillem’s final dance programme, Life in Progress, will be touring to 
Sadler’s Wells, London from 26-31 May 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2015/sylvie-guillem/>
 