
Andrew Symonds <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> has been 
ruled out of Australia's upcoming tour of South Africa after Cricket Australia 
advised the National Selection Panel that the all-rounder needed further 
rehabilitation and counselling. The Cricket Australia board decided that 
Symonds would not be available for selection until he satisfied formal 
rehabilitation criteria.

Symonds was sanctioned for 'detrimental public comment' last week and fined 
A$4000 (Â£1,800) after abusing New Zealand wicketkeeper Brendon McCullum on a 
radio program.Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia has 
decided the all-rounder is not yet of the right state of mind to represent 
Australia.

"Our assessment is that he is making good progress but that his commitment 
needs testing against new, tougher criteria we will finalise after consultation 
with his counsellors, the ACA [Australian Cricketers' Association] and 
Queensland Cricket," Cricket Australia CEO James Sutherland said.

"We have a responsibility to Andrew and his welfare but we also have a 
responsibility to Australian cricket to ensure his commitment is as it needs to 
be before he can be considered for national selection."

Sutherland revealed Cricket Australia had received feedback from the state, 
national players and Australian team management that Symonds was making good 
progress with the rehabilitation program he is undertaking. Symonds was 
informed of the decision today, one which Sutherland described as "tough but 
appropriate" and in Symonds' best interests.

But the door, it appears, remains open for tours beyond South Africa. "It's a 
tough stance but it's an appropriate stance in the circumstances," said 
Sutherland. "It can be looked at as a sanction but I would prefer to look at 
this as a decision in the best interests of Andrew Symonds as well.

"This period back in Australia will provide him with an opportunity to have 
some more intense counselling and to work through some of his issues."
 