
When looking at the future, social entrepreneurs often talk about a "systems 
change" – a vision for a healthier, happier, more productive world. But what is 
the difference that will make the difference? When looking into the crystal 
ball of the future, how can business tip the system in their favour?

Here are three tips to help your business succeed in the long-term:

1. Shift the focus

Shift your focus from figures to creating a long-term strategic vision that 
encompasses both your bottom line and your long-term impact. How can you shift 
the focus in your market?

Let's use education as an example. Many traditional models of improving 
education focus on getting more students to pass exams. Exams are great and an 
important part of education, but not the only part. Instead of creating a 
programme that helps students pass exams,Mary Gordon 
<http://uk.ashoka.org/fellow/mary-gordon> created Roots of Empathy 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Roots+of+Empathy&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&aq=t&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&client=firefox-a>
. It's a social enterprise that brings babies into primary-school classrooms. 
The result is that, through the work of a trained facilitator, the students 
learn to empathise with the baby, and with each other. Studies have proven that 
this programme dramatically reduces bullying.

An evolving ecosystem of change is unsustainable unless it equips the next 
generation with the skills and tools they will need to enable change in their 
communities, and to keep up with a fast-moving world. Young people must be able 
to master cognitive empathy as a basic and key skill to become an active 
participant.

2. Change behaviours

Successful systems of the future will challenge and change existing 
behaviours. Think about the ways to win the hearts and minds of your customers, 
if you want them to change.

Take the example of developing organic produce. You can build the farms, 
educate the farmers and produce a quality product. But are customers going to 
buy it? Do they know why they should? Is it better for your target market to 
buy organic from abroad, or buy local non-organic produce? Should they be doing 
urban farming with the support of an organisation such asGrow It Yourself 
<http://www.giyinternational.org/>? These are difficult questions, so if you 
want your business model to win in the future help your customers answer them.

Educate your target market about the importance of your product or service. 
Raise awareness of the problem you are trying to solve. The key is that your 
market knows why it wants to change and that you have the solution.

3. Think about the system

Find and solve new problems. Where do you sit in the ecosystem of your market? 
Who are the other players? What are they thinking and talking about? Are you 
ready to work with them?

Take the example of supermarkets. Supermarkets throw out tonnes of food 
everyday that has only just passed its sell-by date. A number of great projects 
have been set up to counter this waste, such asFoodcycle 
<http://foodcycle.org.uk/> and Rubies in the Rubble 
<http://www.rubiesintherubble.com/>. But analysing the food chain from farm to 
consumer shows that this is not where most waste is happening. Around 20% of 
the food produced doesn't reach the supermarket, because it's not what 
consumers are looking for. Think bent cucumbers and unusually shaped carrots. 
Of what does get to the supermarket, on average only 3% of that stock actually 
goes to waste. But the biggest percentage is wasted in the consumer's home. 
Roughly 30% of the food that consumers buy goes to waste.

Systems of the future won't be making supermarkets 3% more efficient, they 
will be changing consumer behaviour.

Major challenges lay ahead but by shifting the focus, working on changing 
behaviours and thinking systemically you could tip the system in your favour.

Richard Brownsdon runs Inspiring Adventures 
<http://www.InspiringAdventures.co.uk>, sharing stories that connect you with 
travel, social enterprise and adventure. He is a writer, blogger and freelance 
social enterprise marketing and events specialist.

Last month saw the Ashoka Change Week 
<http://storify.com/changemakers/changeweek> host the Ashoka Support Network 
Global Summit <http://asnglobalsummit.org/>, which brought together business 
leaders and social enterprises from around the world to sharing ideas of how to 
dramatically alter the way we run and interact with business.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To join the Guardian Social 
Enterprise Network <http://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/>, click here. 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>
 