
Back in 2005, studying in Montpellier, in south-eastern France, Tahar Rahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tahar-rahim> found himself the subject of a 
documentary namedTahar the Student. In one scene, we see him in his bedroom, 
with a poster on the wall for Al Pacino inScarface; four years on, the young 
French actor would be widely compared to Pacino in that very film.

Rahim had only appeared in one feature, a bit part in a horror movie, before 
his explosive breakthrough in Jacques Audiard's 2009 thrillerA Prophet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/129970/prophet>. He played Malik, a 
gauche young petty criminal who rises through the ranks of prison society to 
become a ruthless gangster, and the performance – quiet but assured, and 
compellingly feral – won Rahim two of France's prestigious César awards, for 
best actor and brightest male hope. But it was anyone's guess then whether he 
had an illustrious future ahead of him or whether he would join the 
over-populated ranks of cinema's inspired one-offs.

Five years on, it's clear that Tahar Rahim is here for the long haul, and a 
lot of students around the world now decorate their walls with posters ofA 
Prophet. Rahim has appeared in another 10 features (he's currently shooting the 
11th), and, while they're not all in the league of A Prophet, they largely 
feature him in roles chosen with seriousness and executed with tough grace.

The latest is The Past <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154520>, an 
intense Parisian drama by Asghar Farhadi, the Iranian director ofA Separation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142608/separation>, with Rahim as the 
third corner of an emotional triangle that also contains Bérénice Bejo, fromThe 
Artist. Rahim's character – Samir, a drycleaner with tragic family troubles – 
is a sullen, taciturn figure, the actor's restraint throughout bringing a 
stable centre to a film that's otherwise prone to hair-tearing histrionics. 
Samir resembles him the least of all his characters, Rahim tells me: "He 
doesn't move much – I can't stay still for a moment."

Sure enough, when I meet him in a café near Paris's Place de la République, 
Rahim is quite the live wire. Lightly bearded, he bounds in, grinning, in a 
boho-chic ensemble of leather jacket, designer shades and flat cap, which he 
takes off to reveal an artfully jagged short haircut. He's hyper-alert, looks 
you straight in the eye while talking, and his conversation in French speeds up 
heatedly, punctuated by expansive hand signals, when he gets onto a subject 
close to his heart, such as his favourite Korean directors or the American 
cinema of the 70s – "A cultural renaissance! Boom! A total explosion!"

Films such as The Past, he says, are "the kind I most like watching – the kind 
that make you think about the human condition. I like films to be pure cinema, 
but I also like them to provide a snapshot of a family, a society or a 
character – something that can nourish you as a human being as well as an 
actor."

Farhadi's directing style, Rahim tells me, is all about absolute precision and 
extremely detailed rehearsal, down to the last gesture. Rahim was worried that 
this approach would inhibit him, but he found it strangely liberating. "It 
almost becomes like bunraku – Japanese puppet theatre – on a human scale. It's 
worked out to the millimetre. It taught me to work differently, with 
constraints, and I loved it."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIVPUkGQAVwo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIVPUkGQAVwo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIVPUkGQAVwo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Now 32, Rahim grew up in Belfort in north-eastern France, the youngest of 10 
siblings (the oldest more than 20 years his senior); they were raised by their 
Algerian mother, whom inTahar the Student he calls "la femme de ma vie". He 
won't talk about his father, though, or discuss his family background. "When 
you do this job, you give everything to the public – your emotions, your 
private self, your body, your face. There are places I keep for myself," he 
says, putting a hand on his heart, "and family is one of them."

As a boy, his cinephilia was encouraged by two of his brothers and by a man 
known as Mentor who ran a private video club on the 13th floor of the family's 
tower block, renting out a bootleg collection of 500 titles. Rahim knew in his 
early teens that he wanted to act, but decided to study film first in 
Montpellier. "I knew I'd have to go to Paris eventually and I didn't want to be 
the provincial kid who just turns up and says 'I want to act'." He didn't only 
study acting, he says, but "film history, lighting, production, the whole 
business. It all helped."

Signing up for work as an extra brought Rahim into contact with a director who 
decided to make him the subject of a documentary – or rather, "a documentary 
fiction, a hybrid".Tahar the Student cheats with some of the facts, he admits, 
putting a conspiratorial finger to his nose, but it's basically true to his 
life then. He hasn't seen it since it was made. "I'd rather watch it later 
because, for me, it's not just a film, it's a piece of memory." Rahim's first 
acting break was in the 2007 TV seriesLa Commune, scripted by Abdel Raouf 
Dafri, one of the writers of A Prophet. It was about crime and cultural 
conflict on a housing estate; Rahim's character was "a small-time hood with 
dreams of power, who's a bit disturbed. If there had been a second series, I 
think he'd have become absolute evil."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3_XmxCHpyX4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3_XmxCHpyX4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3_XmxCHpyX4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
A Prophet came out two years later, and was immediately acclaimed not only as 
a superb thriller but as a cultural turning point. Its gangster anti-hero and 
realistic underworld background broke with the derogatory, cartoonish or 
earnestly affirmative representations of Arab characters that had long 
prevailed in French cinema. As the newspaperLibération put it, "having a 50% 
Arab cast in a genre movie … is a powerful gesture, more powerful than any 
anti-racist tract or screenplay".

The film, Rahim agrees, "pinpointed a real problem in French cinema, to do 
with the representation of minorities. It really changed things. But I don't 
like the term 'minorities', it stigmatises." He makes a point of avoiding 
stereotypical roles: "I've always refused to play terrorists. If it helps 
change things, OK – but not if it maintains the status quo of what appears in 
the media."

After A Prophet, he played two out-and-out Arab heroes – a black-marketeer 
turned French resistance fighter in thewartime drama Free Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/27/free-men-french-review>, and in 
Black Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/26/black-gold-review-antonio-banderas>
, set in a fictional Gulf state that suddenly strikes oil, the studious son of 
a sheikh who becomes a glamorous desert warrior. A touch of romantic cliché 
there, surely? "I imagined it would go a little deeper," Rahim concedes.

He is wary of expectations that he should be a role model for France's 
Maghrebi communities. "I don't get into all that. I'm not here to carry a flag 
and say I represent this or that. Other people do it really well. I'm an actor, 
full stop. Not an Arab actor. Not an actor of Algerian origin. Just an actor."

I ask whether he felt uncomfortable when reviews of A Prophet hailed him as a 
new Pacino. He grins and rubs his fingers together briskly, a gesture I don't 
quite follow. What does it mean? "It means fear! Pressure! It terrified me." 
The key thing, he says, is to keep some distance. "Acting isn't an obsession 
for me – and it mustn't be an obsession, it should be just a job."

It's certainly a full-time job: 10 completed features since 2009. Some have 
inclined more to the mainstream, like the forthcomingThe Informant, a rather 
functional true-crimer about drug smuggling in Gibraltar; orthe comedy he's 
currently shooting <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3532850/?ref_=nm_flmg_act_1>, 
about a burglar whom a small boy mistakes for Santa Claus. Strangest of all was 
the Celts-and-centurions swashbucklerThe Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140958/eagle>, for British director 
Kevin Macdonald. Rahim played the Seal Prince – shaven-headed, covered from 
head to foot in loam, and speaking ancient Gaelic.

Then there are a series of more intense art films – such as Love and Bruises 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1650831/>, a tale of Parisian amour fou. That 
wasn't an easy experience – partly because the Chinese director Lou Ye had to 
communicate through an interpreter (and then not very much: "Zero direction," 
Rahim shrugs), partly because of the intimacy involved. "If it's sexual, that 
worries me. Emotional I don't mind, sexual I can't handle. I nearly didn't do 
it because of the nude scenes. It was agony."

Differently agonising was Our Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/12/our-children-review-perdre-raison>
 (2012), a superb but harrowing drama about a couple (he's Moroccan, she's 
Belgian) undergoing extreme meltdown brought on partly by cultural difference. 
Rahim rolls his eyes. "Phew! It was tough. But I keep a distance from my 
characters. I'm not one of those actors who becomes another person to make a 
film, and I'm not sure they exist anyway. I work in the moment – when I'm there 
I believe in it, and when I go home, I'm me."

It's only five years since A Prophet transformed Rahim's life – for one thing, 
he is now married toLeïla Bekhti 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Le%C3%AFla_Bekhti>, another rising French star, 
who acted with him in that film. But his marriage is another subject he 
declines to discuss. "Don't take it personally!" he says in English, grinning 
and putting his hand on my wrist to signify no hard feelings.

Despite his guardedness, Rahim perhaps reveals more than he intends when he 
talks about the effects of success. "People look at you differently. Sometimes 
they take out their frustrations. It comes out in little details – you get 
shouted at a lot more for no reason, and you have to give people time to cool 
down. Because it can come as a shock to someone you've grown up with – boom! 
you explode, suddenly you don't belong just to them but to everyone, and they 
think they're losing you. It can be hard to deal with."

You can see how the people around Rahim might find his new life so startling, 
and why he might find it all hard to balance. For his forthcoming film,The Cut, 
by acclaimed German director Fatih Akin, he went on an exhausting shoot that 
took in six countries including Canada, Cuba, Jordan and Germany; not the least 
of the challenges was dealing with the extreme changes in climate. But that's 
what excites him, he says, the cosmopolitanism of it all. "Working with an 
Iranian, a Belgian, a Chinese, a Frenchman, a German Turk – that's what I like 
in cinema, travelling. New, fresh cinema – that's what I want to do."

What about time to …, I start to ask, but Rahim cuts me off. "To breathe? I 
don't really think about that. I'm not ready to stop and look back yet."
 