
I am shaken to see the Guardian publish a three-page article headlined “The 
case against human rights” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/dec/04/-sp-case-against-human-rights>(4 
December) by Eric Posner, a US professor of law. What a huge mistake, at a time 
when the Tory leaders are doing their utmost to scrap the Human Rights Act and 
pull out of the European human rights convention. And when legal aid has been 
decimated. It is useless to argue the freedom of the press. The Times, I am 
sure, would have happily published Professor Posner.

Nelson Mandela <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nelsonmandela> stated that 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights inspired him. He was a lawyer. Soviet 
dissidents felt strengthened in their struggles. Slobodan Milosevic was brought 
to The Hague for crimes against humanity. Some African leaders are in jail 
after indictment and sentence under international human rights law. General 
Pinochet discovered in the UK that he was not immune under human rights law, 
and Chilean courts subsequently indicted him. I can suppose that editors of the 
Guardian conceived of a debate in their pages. We live in times which require a 
fearless stand for human rights law and due process – in our own country and 
everywhere else.
Vanessa Redgrave
London 

• Your report (9 December) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/08/cia-rendition-report-al-qaida-senate-allies-nerves>
 that the US Senate is publishing a summary of the investigation into the CIA 
programme of rendition is welcome news. At last the US will publicly admit its 
role in human rights abuse, abduction and torture in the wake of 9/11. Even 
more welcome would be the immediate release and return of British resident 
Shaker Aamer, unlawfully imprisoned and tortured in Guantánamo for over 12 
years. (10 December)UN Human Rights Day 
<http://www.un.org/en/events/humanrightsday/>, would be a good day for this. 
How can our government continue to be complicit in his suffering?
Joy Hurcombe
Worthing, West Sussex
 