
Earlier this year, Abdul Waheed, a Pakistani human rights activist and social 
entrepreneur,was shot dead by the Taliban 
<http://www.humanrights.asia/news/ahrc-news/AHRC-STM-092-2013>. Waheed was 
known for his work in transforming Pakistan's education system; through his 
organisationBright Education Society (BES) 
<http://brighteducationalsociety.webs.com/>, he worked towards ensuring that 
Pakistan's urban poor had access to modern education.

The government's response to Waheed's death was lukewarm. In countries like 
Bangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>, Myanmar and India, 
there are echoes of Waheed's story for those working in the social sector; 
extrajudicial killings, distrust in institutions and a constant fight against 
the political system. Without strong support from government, one thing is 
clear - an increasing number of social entrepreneurs are struggling to identify 
the best possible way to engage with the government.

The deep disconnect

"The biggest challenge that I have faced is that the government does not 
understand the nature of work I do," said Dr. Latha Anantha, "The government 
always looks at issues in a simplistic way and fails to see the bigger picture."

Dr. Anantha's organisation, the River Research Centre 
<http://india.ashoka.org/fellow/latha-anantha>, plans and manages the use of 
water resources and intervenes at the policy level for the long-term sustenance 
of river basins. Over the past year, the centre has seen to driving key policy 
changes that protects and manages the waters of the Chalakudy river basin.

In India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, social entrepreneurs like 
Dr. Anantha are faced not only with the herculean task of working with the 
government, but trying to earn the trust of local communities. Though the 
government has been slowly opening doors to the sector and embracing new ideas 
for development, a corrupt and complex political system often poses challenges 
that entrepreneurs are not ready for.

Bastu Rege <http://www.santulan.org/index.asp>, founder of Santulan, an 
organisation that works for the rights of informal stone quarry workers in 
India, faces a unique challenge. "In our case, the people we are working for 
have been excluded from the Indian system. Although it is the prime 
responsibility of the government to provide basic facilities for citizens, 
these communities are not recognized under any government scheme, record or 
census," he said. "Since they don't fit into any political agenda, it is hard 
for us to approach policy makers, government officials or political leaders and 
make them understand that this is an important issue".

Collaborative solutions

For decades, the social sector and the government in India have worked on a 
parallel, often looking at development exclusively. This struggle has now 
reached a crucial point of discussion this year, with more social entrepreneurs 
raising discussions within the academia and the public sphere on how they could 
make the government an ally. For entrepreneur-activists like Bastu Rege, whose 
work largely involves directly working with the government to bring about a 
change in national policy to benefit stone quarry workers, there is no option 
but to push for change.

"The government rarely cares for what we have to say but we have to keep 
persisting," he suggested, "Eventually, there will be at least one or two 
officials in the administration who will see truth in the argument." His words 
reflect the attitude of several others who are looking for ways to reach out 
into the murky world of Indian politics to seek help.The International Labour 
Organisation (ILO) <http://www.ilo.org/global/lang--en/index.htm> estimates 
that aroundone million children are informally employed by the stone quarry 
sector in India <http://www.indianet.nl/pdf/MiningAndItsEffectsOnChildren.pdf>. 
Yet, there has been little progress.

In a few India states, the government is slowly opening doors. Jeevika 
<http://www.jeevika.org.uk/>, a program that is supported by the World Bank 
<http://www.worldbank.org/> and the Government of Bihar <http://gov.bih.nic.in/>
 is a good example. The community-based platformallows 
<http://acumen.org/blog/building-an-ecosystem-for-social-entrepreneurship-in-rural-india/>
 promising social innovators access to financial capital. Yet, there are 
several challenges that lie ahead for entrepreneurs to leverage this 
opportunity. As one of the most backward states in terms of economic progress, 
the government has, for long, ignored areas that seem too complex. For instance,
large parts of Bihar remain un-electrified 
<http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2012-03-14/india/31164916_1_rural-households-rural-areas-lpg>
 even over 65 years of independence. It is enterprises such asDesi Power 
<http://www.desipower.com/>, Husk Power Systems 
<http://www.huskpowersystems.com/> and Saran Renewable Energy 
<http://www.saranrenew.in/> that are now coming forward to help bridge this gap 
and address the failures of the government.

Building partnerships

The answer lies in not looking at the government merely as an institution but 
to engage with it as an agent. In countries like Pakistan, India, Bangladesh 
and Brazil, there is also a deep rift in trust between the social sector and 
the government. "Understanding how the government works in India is a 
challenge. And this makes it more difficult for young social entrepreneurs,' 
Dr. Anantha said.

"They seem quite disconnected from social reality. There's a danger in being 
young and apolitical as young people have to learn to care for the government 
and understand their role within it."

Her views reflect the larger truth that there is a new generation of young 
social entrepreneurs who are in a state of flux when it comes to taking on 
social challenges that will involve sensitive issues such as human rights 
violations, corruption, women and sexual rights.

For social entrepreneurs, the best way forward is to work on building this 
trust early on instead of avoiding key decisions that will help create a strong 
support system for their work. Co-owning change and making sure that engaging 
with government bodies, be it local or national, is a dialectical process.

"It is important to keep in mind that what you are working towards is for the 
larger community. You are not doing it for yourself. Therefore, we need to try 
the best possible ways to mobilise people towards pushing for change," Bastu 
Rege said.

"If you are persistent enough, someone will listen." Today, his organisation 
has succeeded in working with theGovernment of Maharashtra 
<https://www.maharashtra.gov.in/Site/Home/Index.aspx> to set up a committee to 
study if education programs can be regularised or grants can be allocated to 
migrants in Maharashtra. These small successes stand testimony to the fact that 
one reaps rewards when one identifies that the cause is bigger than the problem.

Meera Vijayann handles online communications forÂ Ashoka India. 
<http://india.ashoka.org/> 

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To join the Guardian 
Social Enterprise Network <http://socialenterprise.theguardian.com/>, click 
here. 
<http://socialenterprise.theguardian.com/en/accounts/join?INTCMP=NECNETTXT6695I2>
 