
UTV Media's TalkSport has reported a 13% year-on-year fall in operating 
profits in the first half of 2011, in part due to the cost ofhiring former Sky 
Sports presenters Andy Gray and Richard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/08/richard-keys-andy-gray-talksport?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

However, UTV's pre-tax profits climbed 15% to £11m after a strong advertising 
performance.

UTV <https://www.theguardian.com/media/utv>, which also owns the ITV licence 
for Northern Ireland, said it managed to maintain total group revenues at 
£59.1m despite a tough year-on-year comparison following the advertising 
bonanza of last year's football World Cup.

The company's GB Radio division, which includes TalkSport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/talksport>, maintained flat revenues at 
£25.2m. However, operating profits for GB Radio fell 13% to £5.8m due to an 
£800,000 increase in operating costs to £19.4m.

UTV said the increase in costs in the first half included "increased 
investment in programming and presenters at TalkSport".

In February, TalkSport announced a "sensational coup" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/08/richard-keys-andy-gray-talksport?INTCMP=SRCH>
 in landing long-running Sky Sports presenters Keys and Gray to front a 
flagship daytime show just two weeks after they left Sky over a sexism row.

Increased investment also included TalkSport securing the rights to double the 
number of live Premier League games it broadcasts and developing its online 
activities.

"Revenue improvement will inevitably lag improvement in both broadcast and 
online audiences," the company said.

TalkSport is expected to have a strong third quarter with revenues forecast to 
be up 14% year on year in the three months to the end of September. The total 
GB Radio division is expected be up 9% – which will counter a 1% fall in TV ad 
revenue for the same period.

UTV said its results to the end of June showed a "strong outperformance in a 
subdued advertising markets".

TV advertising revenue rose 4% year on year in the first six months of 2011, 
to £17.2m, "comfortably outperforming" the ITV network, which reported flat ad 
revenue for the same period.

UTV said it was a "particularly creditable" performance given the absence of 
the World Cup and the "drag" of the Irish ad market, which was down 4% year on 
year.

The company, considered a prime candidate to buy Absolute Radio which is 
currentlybeing sold off by parent TIML Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/may/18/talksport-owner-utv-expansion?INTCMP=SRCH>
, said it has reduced net debt by £14.2m over the last year to £63.1m.

UTV said its net debt to earnings ratio will be around a market-pleasing 
two-times by the end of the year.

"These are another robust set of results despite the challenging 
macro-economic conditions," said John McCann, group chief executive of UTV 
Media. "A 15% uplift in pre-tax profits, an 18% reduction in net debt and a 
significant increase in dividend all point to good progress being made in 
positioning the company for the upturn."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 