
Avis Europe found itself shoved into the stock market's headlights yesterday, 
rising 4.5p to 77.75p on talk that Europe's largest car rental firm may be 
about to receive a bid.

The rumoured bidder is D'Ieteren, the Belgian car distributor that is Avis 
Europe's biggest shareholder. It has almost 60% of the business and there has 
often been talk that it would like to pick up the rest of the company. Neither 
side would comment on the rumour but it was enough to makeAvis Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aviseurope> one of the biggest risers 
among the second-line stocks.

Back in the main market, the FTSE 100 closed up 25.9 points at 5,749.7 points 
yesterday as Wall Street's opening strength and gains among financial stocks 
offset weakness in the mining sector as commodity prices fell.

Lloyds TSB added 12p to 515.5p after a dinner with analysts on Wednesday night 
at which the bank's executives were apparently upbeat.Man Group lurched 81p 
higher to £24.20 - the day's biggest blue-chip gainer - after better than 
expected annual results. Mining stocks, meanwhile, made up most of the major 
losers.Xstrata lost 73p to £20.57; Kazakhmys dropped 38p to £10.98 and Rio 
Tinto closed at £28.71, down 92p.

PartyGaming eased 4p to 126p on talk that the former directors Vikrant 
Bhargava and Anurag Dikshit - who hold 30.4% and 8.6% respectively - are 
looking to sell 500m shares, or 12.5% of the business. ButCorus jumped 7.25p to 
398p on reports in the Russian press that Roman Abramovich, the billionaire 
owner of Chelsea FC, was in talks to buy a stake in the company.

British American Tobacco shares added 16p to £13.54 as the cigarette company 
announced plans to close a Dutch plant to cut costs, whileCable & Wireless 
gained 1.75p to 105p on continued bid speculation. Shares inBSkyB were also a 
bright spot, up 8p at 539.5p, as Merrill Lynch reiterated its buy stance with a 
610p share price target. The bank, which took over in April as joint house 
broker to the broadcaster from its longstanding partner Goldman Sachs, has 
looked at what it terms the "last piece of the football jigsaw" - the right to 
broadcast Premier League games in Ireland and the near-live rights that Sky and 
BT snapped up last week for £84.3m

The broker reckons the price of the near-live rights - which covers the 242 
matches that will not be shown live by Sky and Setanta - and the Irish deal 
amounts to a saving for BSkyB of about £31m a year compared with its model.

"The bears are pointing out that competition will increase, thereby 
diminishing the company's return," Merrill said in a note. "That might turn out 
to be the case in TV but that is giving the company little benefit of its entry 
into broadband and telephony."

BSkyB is working towards launching a "free" broadband offer for higher-value 
customers as part of its diversification since last year's acquisition of the 
internet service provider Easynet.

Among second liners, the FTSE 250 added 12.2 points to 9,310.4 while the 
Small-capindex fell 5.8 points to 3,417.9.

Shares in iSoft got a welcome respite, adding 5.75p to 93.5p. The healthcare 
software company, which many traders still think is working on a refinancing, 
announced the sale of its operations in Switzerland to Nexus, a local provider 
of healthcare IT, for just under £1m, including repaying inter-company loans.

Shares in Independent Media Distribution added 1p to 56p after the digital 
distributor of TV and radio advertising said TV revenue had more than doubled 
year on year in the last two months as a result of its deal with ITV.

On Aim, shares in AdEPT Telecom gained 6p to 186.5p as the aggressively 
acquisitive communications group snapped up another rival. Since it was founded 
in 2003, AdEPT, of Tunbridge Wells, has made 13 acquisitions - three since it 
floated, at 140p, in February. Yesterday the firm, which is essentially a 
telecoms reseller and makes a profit before financial charges, snapped up 
10,000 business customers from Fizz Telecom, a voice telephony reseller 
established in 2004, for a maximum of £3.2m, depending on performance. The 
customers are all small businesses that spend, on average, £32 a month and Fizz 
had a profit margin of 4.8%.

Avanti Screenmedia, which provides flat-screen TV channels in pubs and shops, 
added 25.5p to 218.5p, following rumours this week that an institutional 
investor was looking to dump a million shares. With no sell orders forthcoming 
in the morning session, traders and private client brokers took the opportunity 
to buy into the stock.

Aim also played host to a new name yesterday with the software company 
Proactis Holdings joining the market. Shares in the York-based company were 
placed at 43p and ended the first day at 46.5p. The company, valued at £13m, 
raised £4m of new cash in the placing by Teather & Greenwood, which it will use 
to beef up its sales force and balance sheet, and perhaps fund acquisitions.

Proactis develops, sells and maintains software used to monitor and control 
all internal and external expenditure other than payroll. The software is used 
by HMV, Wickes, the Law Society and the NSPCC. In the year to last July, it 
made a small profit on £1.8m turnover.

TTP bought out

So farewell then, TTP Communications, developer of wireless chipsets. The 
company, based in Royston, Hertfordshire, never quite made it to the elevated 
levels of its Cambridge-based contemporaryArm Holdings after its flotation in 
October 2000, and yesterday it accepted a £103m offer fromMotorola. The company 
has624 staff, the vast majority in the UK, and their future is uncertain. TTP 
has built itself an extensive portfolio of intellectual property but delays in 
crucial contracts have plunged it into a cash squeeze. For the year to the end 
of March it lost £27m. The offer from Motorola is worth 45p a share, below the 
245p float price and well off the 330p it reached a few weeks after. But it is 
better than the 13p TTP hit last week. Yesterday it added 30.5p to 43.75p.
 