
BBC Radio 5 Live, TalkSport and Absolute Radio have held onto the same Premier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> rights as they 
currently broadcast in the latest three-year radio deal announced on Tuesday.

5 Live will continue to have the first pick of matches at 3pm on Saturday 
afternoons, with Saturday lunchtime, Sunday afternoon and Monday night 
fixtures, making up four of the seven rights packages on offer.

TalkSport <https://www.theguardian.com/media/talksport>, which has made 
substantial inroads into the BBC's portfolio of live sport in recent years, 
will broadcast Saturday evening kick-offs and Sunday lunchtime fixtures, two of 
the seven packages.

Absolute Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> has picked 
up the seventh, the second choice of kick-offs at 3pm on Saturday afternoons.

There had been speculation that TalkSport could win more live Premier League 
football with the BBC's sports budgets under pressure and that Absolute, the 
centre of an on-off sale saga over the last year, might move away from live 
football.

But Tuesday's announcement by the Premier League maintains the status quo over 
the next three seasons, running from the new season beginning in August this 
year until the end of the 2015/16 campaign.

In the last deal, announced in 2010, the BBC lost a third of its live Premier 
League games to TalkSport and Absolute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/18/bbc-football-radio-commentary>.

Each package comprises between 31 and 33 live Barclays Premier League games.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 