
Tanzanian villagers are suing two African gold mining companies after six 
people were killed by police and others injured.

On Monday, Leigh Day <http://www.leighday.co.uk/>, the London law firm, served 
a claim on behalf of 12 villagers againstAfrican Barrick Gold 
<http://africanbarrickgold.com/> (ABG), one of Africa's largest mining 
companies, andNorth Mara Gold Mine <http://www.tanzaniagold.com/North_Mara.html>
 (NMGM), to highlight the allegedly serious human rights situation at the mine.

The claim alleges that the companies are liable for the deaths and injuries of 
villagers, including the killing of at least six men by police.

According to Leigh Day, villagers often try to gather rocks in the vicinity of 
the mine in the hope of finding small amounts of gold. "Police, which are an 
integral part of the mine's security, allegedly shoot at the villagers using 
tear gas and live ammunition," said Richard Meeran, a partner at the law firm.
 Magige Ghati Kesabo, whose son was allegedly shot and killed by police on 16 
May 2011. Photograph: Leigh Day 
The claims relate to several incidents, including one in which five men were 
shot dead in May 2011. The villagers allege the mine and NMGM, which are 
operated byAfrican Barrick Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/african-barrick-gold>, "failed to curb 
the use of excessive force at the mine, including deadly force used by police 
on a regular basis over a protracted period of time".

Meeran said: "Unfortunately, these are not isolated incidents. We are aware of 
dozens of other instances in which local people have been seriously injured or 
killed by police at ABG's mine."

ABG, owned by Toronto-based Barrick Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gold>, the world's largest gold-mining 
company, said it was saddened by any injury or loss of life at its operations 
"but we will not compensate illegitimate claims or lawsuits".

It added: "The majority of the claims in this case originate from an incident 
[which] involved violent intruders who invaded the mine in the course of 
committing criminal acts. After receiving repeated warnings of the risks 
associated with such activities, some of these intruders were injured by 
members of the Tanzanian police acting in self-defence or in defence of the 
safety of mine employees.

"A small number of additional claims have been brought by intruders who 
illegally entered the mine on other occasions. In the event any legal 
proceedings are pursued, ABG will vigorously defend itself against all the 
claims. While some local people conduct legitimate artisanal mining in areas 
near North Mara, of greater concern is highly organised trespass on to the mine 
site, often involving hundreds or even thousands of illegal, armed and violent 
intruders systematically stealing gold-bearing rocks and other property from 
the mine."

Lawyers at Leigh Day said many local villagers, who face extreme poverty 
despite living on gold-rich ground, have in effect been "silenced" by the mine.

The mine, which employs more than 2,000 people, has had a troubled history 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African_Barrick_Gold>, with allegations of 
pollution and calls for it to be closed. In 2008, 200 local people broke into 
the site and destroyed approximately $15m of Barrick property.

Two years ago, Barrick announced that ABG had launched a full investigation 
into what it called "credible" allegations of sexual assault at the mine but 
the results of the investigation were not released.

Meanwhile, Vedanta <http://www.vedantaresources.com/> faces further protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/aug/28/protesters-challenge-vedanta-human-rights>
 this week in London, Odisha and Delhi in the runup to the FTSE 100 company's 
annual meeting. Its plan tomine a mountain sacred to the Dongria Kondh tribe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kondha> in Odisha has triggered mass protests and 
the Church of England, among others, withdrawing investments.

The supreme court of India ruled in April that the decision on the Niyamgiri 
mine should be takenby village meetings 
<http://londonminingnetwork.org/2013/07/niyamgiri-is-won-at-seventh-palli-sabha-vedanta-will-have-to-stay-away/>
.Seven of the 12 meetings 
<http://www.livemint.com/Companies/TbDs0gtW2GI364AyW8YThN/Majority-of-village-councils-reject-Vedantas-bauxite-mining.html>
 have been held, and each has registered a unanimous "no" to the project, which 
makes it look likely that the mine may be cancelled, losing Vedanta a $7bn 
investment. The final meeting will be on 19 August.
 