
I'm delighted with our excellent results in Mexico City - Olly Jarvis once 
again proved his ability around the Mexican circuit with flawless drives in the 
sprint and feature races on March 16, leading to two second-place finishes and 
the fastest lap in the feature race - making GB the highest-scoring nation of 
the weekend. This, plus a bit of bad luck for our main competitors, haslifted 
us to fourth <http://www.forix.com/a1gp/cp.php> in the championship and put us 
right back in the mix.

The weekend was extremely competitive, with only half a second between the top 
10 teams in practice. I'm not sure if it's because teams are getting more and 
more competitive as we near the end of the season or if it was the amended 
circuit, but there was certainly no margin for error in Mexico.

I was pleased to see Ireland get their first ever win 
<http://www.a1gp.com/News/NewsArticle.aspx?newsId=40757>. They're a hardworking 
outfit and it was great to see them succeed - particularly as it meant they 
prevented our main competitors clocking up the points! It was particularly apt 
given that it was St Patrick's weekend - not that the Irish crew ever need an 
excuse to celebrate as they definitely have the reputation as the biggest party 
team in the paddock! I'm sure they were on their usual form from the chequered 
flag until their flight home on Monday!

Despite fantastic support from an extremely vocal home crowd, who really got 
behind the Mexican team chanting and doing Mexican waves, the local squad had a 
dismal weekend. It was the same for South Africa in Durban last time out. I'm 
not too superstitious, but I hope it's not the curse of the home nation - I'm 
looking for a repeat of last year's performance atBrands Hatch 
<http://www.a1gp.com/Circuit/CircuitInfo.aspx?circuitId=18>. As well as the 
massive cheering for the Mexican driver, there were also a lot of boos for the 
US during the drivers parade and the feature race podium where the US came 
third - it's possibly a bit mean on the US driver Jonathan Summerton, but at 
least the Mexicans were getting behind the whole national pride ethos of A1GP!

Mexico has definitely been a good track for the Brits and it was nice to 
return to the scene of our maiden victory, but it is quite a tough event behind 
the scenes. Mexico City is one of the largest and most polluted places in the 
world - it's a nightmare dealing with the traffic getting to and from the track 
and, once there, it's often difficult dealing with the bureaucracy and policing 
system, making it a challenge to get jobs done. Once again, there were a few 
illnesses in the paddock as people struggled to work in the humid conditions or 
ate food they shouldn't. But that is just something we have to deal with at the 
majority ofA1GP <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> races - I'd far rather 
work in warm climates than in a cold, wet, windy paddock in the UK! And 
although I think one of the benefits of travelling with a job is tasting the 
local cuisine, sometimes it's worth just holding back and going for the 
western-style food as we cannot afford to risk any illnesses within our small 
squad.

Since Mexico is not one of our target markets commercially, it's a relatively 
quiet event for us in terms of guest attendance and promotional activities, but 
this didn't mean we had time to relax, because with Brands Hatch just round the 
corner, we are extremely busy with the build-up to the season finale. We've 
also started to prepare for next season, testing out new British talent with 
the likes ofDuncan Tappy 
<http://www.duncantappy.com/news.php?action=view_article&article_id=76> joining 
the team as our rookie driver.

Jarvis is a fantastic asset to the British A1GP entry in many ways, and 
although he now signs off this season to concentrate on hisDTM commitments 
<http://www.maximummotorsport.co.uk/2008/02/23/new-dtm-drivers-oliver-jarvis-katherine-legge-and-ralf-schumacher/>
, he will still be very much a part of the team in an official capacity 
off-track until the end of the season, and I'm sure British fans will see him 
back in the cockpit in the new Ferrari car next season. But, right now, we've 
got to concentrate on getting strong points hauls in Shanghai and Brands Hatch 
in a bid to reclaim our bronze championship standing, which we have held for 
the previous two seasons, or even aim for the silver medal.
 