
Professional cycling was waiting on Friday to see the finer details of the UCI 
licence commission’s decision to award aWorldTour racing licence to the Astana  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/23/astana-uci-vicenzo-nibali-world-tour-licence>
team of the Tour de France winner, Vincenzo Nibali, after a process involving a 
wealth of twists and turns. Of particular interest were the conditions under 
which the licence was granted – said in a press release to be strict and to 
include “special measures” – but there was no indication of when they might be 
revealed.

“We request the licence commission to make the reasoning public, for the sake 
of transparency towards the fans, the media and fellow cycling teams,” said a 
statement from the cycling teams’ umbrella body, the AIGCP. But the UCI was 
unable to say when the “reasoned decision” would be disclosed because its hands 
were effectively tied: the process lies with the licence commission which is 
kept distant from the governing body.

Apparently referring to the UCI’s request at the end of February that Astana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/astana> should have its licence revoked over 
a number of doping cases and the initial outcome of an internal audit by the 
University of Lausanne, the AIGCP continued: “We feel that there are 
discrepancies between the public statements of the UCI on several occasions on 
this case and the outcome of the process. It is harmful to our sport for the 
international federation to prejudge a case against anyone if that case hasn’t 
been brought forward to the right instances and that hasn’t come to a 
conclusion.”

The UCI under its new president, Brian Cookson, had entered uncharted waters 
when it asked the Institute of Sport and Science at the University of Lausanne 
(ISSUL) to audit Astana’s ethics when the licence was granted provisionally in 
December. While the processes for sanctioning riders over doping infractions 
are clearcut there is no set method for taking steps against teams suspected of 
condoning doping. This is why throughout the saga there has been a feeling that 
policy has been created on the hoof.

The UCI and Cookson had talked tough, with Cookson telling the Guardian after 
the initial decision that the Kazakh squad was “very much on probation” and 
that they had nothing to be happy about. At the end of February, following the 
Lausanne audit, the governing body took the unprecedented step of referring 
Astana back to the licence commission – a four-man body presided over by Pierre 
Zappelli, a former Swiss High Court judge – stating an initial audit contained 
“compelling grounds to refer the matter to the licence commission and request 
the Astana Pro Team licence be revoked”.

Since then, however, the process has stalled, with the most likely explanation 
being that the investigative methods used by ISSUL may not withstand possible 
legal scrutiny funded by Astana’s ample cash reserves if the team were to have 
its licence revoked. The ISSUL criteria appear to be more about the environment 
within a team; a research document online quoted by the website cyclingnews.com 
says it is “based on an analysis of team practices, and the ways in which 
riders produce their achievements [with] an alternative perspective which 
emphasises doping as a product of socioeconomic condition”.

In the background, clearly, is the UCI’s need to be seen to function 
differently from the pre-Cookson days when – as highlighted in theCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> Independent Reform Commission 
report – its president, Hein Verbruggen, had a relationship with Lance 
Armstrong that was too close.

This leaves Cookson keeping several balls in the air: being tough on doping 
and creating a legally watertight process which is totally independent from the 
UCI. As juggling acts go it is a tough one which may prove impossible to 
perform to anyone’s satisfaction.
 