
Hi guys, what can you tell me about Clam Collective?

We are Felix Conran, Kai Lawrence, Wilson Astley and Felix Manley – four 
product designers working together under the guise ofClam Collective 
<http://www.clamcollective.com/>.

 We didn’t form with an aim or mission; those things developed later, 
organically. Starting our first year of product design atCentral Saint Martins 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/csm/> and being thrown together with all these other 
new, exciting brains was such an amazing experience. We found that our 
enthusiasm and creativity overflowed into discussing a means of satisfying our 
design ambitions. It just seemed natural to get a studio together and start 
sharing a space, plans and ideas.

How do digital platforms and technology impact the way you work?

The dynamic of having a constant battle between digital and analogue is what 
makes Clam Collective. We’re equally fascinated by new tech as we are by some 
ancient metal working tool that bends only one type of metal to a 45-degree 
angle. We see the benefit in the “everythingism” of new tech, but at the same 
time there is such beauty and value in grounding this within the context of 
what has gone before.Lightly 
<http://www.clamcollective.com/products/lightly?variant=821775325>, our first 
product, definitely sprang from this mutual appreciation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Ftech-talk-product-designers-clam-collective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F2%2F1422881968248%2Fbdba9b92-4576-4dcf-aa77-7525b10ab185-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20product%20designers%2C%20Clam%20Collective%20%7C%20Tech%20talk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Ftech-talk-product-designers-clam-collective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20product%20designers%2C%20Clam%20Collective%20%7C%20Tech%20talk&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Ftech-talk-product-designers-clam-collective%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F2%2F1422881968248%2Fbdba9b92-4576-4dcf-aa77-7525b10ab185-1020x612.jpeg>
 Clam Collective’s Lightly desk lamp. 
How has technology benefitted design in general?

Tech is so integrated now, we sometimes find ourselves forgetting about 
drawing on paper. When you draw on a computer it can become instantly and 
easily perceivable. All of our computers are synced so the second someone 
creates a file, we can all access and change details and work on things 
together. With the help of our laser and printers, things can quickly become 
tangible. It’s one of the most amazing things when you can go from an idea to a 
real object in the time it would take you to sketch it by hand. The advantage 
of all this is time; when something is in 3D you can instantly realise things 
to change.

But we’re also acutely aware that you don’t need printers and high-tech to 
learn these things about your design. Sketch modelling is still an integral 
part of our process, which can be done in any material: grab that foam, card, 
bottle and that pile of rubbish, and turn it into an ugly monstrosity – but a 
helpful one.

You have two 3D printers in the studio – what’s the appeal?

When the media picked up on the 3D printing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3d-printing> boom, there was an 
enthusiasm for it based on the public’s perception of what it can achieve. 
There were many sensationalist stories about how it would change our lives and 
we would all be 3D-printing our dinners before the year was out. Take the 
3D-printed gun: suddenly everyone was worried that we’d form manufactured 
militias.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDconsfGsXyA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDconsfGsXyA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDconsfGsXyA&media=>
We use ours in a largely traditional sense. A lot of people don’t realise that 
3D printing has existed for years and years for prototyping. They are rapid 
prototypers for us too. We use them to get an understanding of the form of a 
design, but that alone. It’s still very much an iterative process working with 
these printers. You can play around with a file as much as you like, but almost 
every time it comes off the print bed you’ll find you’ve made some schoolboy 
ergonomic mistake. You’ll end up going back to the CAD file to tweak it and 
send to print again. Weep and repeat.

What tech on the horizon are you excited about?


There’s some interesting work being done with micro-3D printers 
<https://printm3d.com/themicro/>, which are traditionally smaller, more 
affordable and accessible. Where the tech will become really interesting is if 
it turns into something quick and cheap enough to use as a viable manufacturing 
process.

Will 2015 be the year drones become art?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/dec/19/2015-drones-art-creative-examples>
Neuromorphic “brain-like” 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuromorphic_engineering> chips sound really 
interesting. Everyone seems obsessed with drones as well. We’re still waiting 
for someone to do something both ethical and worthwhile with them – maybe that 
will happen this year.

What career tips would you give to any young, aspiring designers out there?

We haven’t got any yet; all of our massive glaring mistakes are yet to happen.

In all seriousness, there needs to be more movement and rebellion within young 
designers. It’s all got a little bit sterile. We think it’s partially to do 
with the environment that we as a society are brought up in. The role of the 
art school has changed massively. They used to be left-wing melting pots where 
everyone was politically engaged and people had points to make. That aspect 
seems to have disappeared.

Maybe it’s a general disillusion with the political climate. Perhaps it’s the 
fact that we all have to pay so much to be here and some of that seething 
political discontent has been filtered out. It just feels strange to be in an 
art school, under a Tory-led coalition, and no one seems bothered. It’s not 
what we’d imagined it would be. So be more angry… do something meaningful.


This interview was co-commissioned with Arts Industry magazine

Clam Collective <http://www.clamcollective.com/> are Felix Conran, Kai 
Lawrence, Wilson Astley and Felix Manley


More Tech talks

• Jen Chapman, head of comms, FACT Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/dec/05/tech-talk-jen-chapman-fact-liverpool>
• Edwin Coomasaru, director, International New Media Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/23/edwin-coomasaru-international-new-media-gallery>
• Bertie Watkins, director, CoLab Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jul/29/tech-talk-bertie-watkins-colab-theatre>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 