
Ted Cruz is riding high right now. Over the weekend, he gave a rousing 
anti-establishment speech 
<http://www.mediaite.com/tv/ted-cruz-has-a-message-for-gop-graybeards-who-opposed-govt-shutdown/>
 at the activist-oriented Republican Leadership Conference in New Orleans, and
won the event's straw poll 
<http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2014/05/31/cruz-convinced-gop-to-retake-congress-this-fall/>
. He also appeared on ABC's This Week to give acathartic Hillary Clinton 
smack-down 
<http://www.breitbart.com/Breitbart-TV/2014/06/01/Cruz-Slams-Clinton-Shes-All-Politics-All-the-Time>
: "The sad thing with Secretary Clinton, is it seems to be all politics, all 
the time." Most significantly, the Texas GOP primaries gave the Tea Party and 
Cruz animportant series of victories 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2014/05/28/one-of-the-biggest-winners-in-the-texas-runoffs-ted-cruz/>
 at a time when the insurgent movement's electoral future seems otherwise 
uncertain – even and especially in this week’s Super Tuesday primariesin 
Mississippi 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/29/us/politics/to-tea-party-mississippi-senate-race-is-last-chance-to-oust-incumbent-thad-cochran.html>
 andelsewhere 
<http://www.nationaljournal.com/politics/the-trickle-down-effect-of-tea-party-primary-wins-20140601>
.

The person who should be the happiest about Ted Cruz's visibility and apparent 
success? Rand Paul.

The more Cruz links himself to the Tea Party and basks in national attention, 
the more reasonable and mature Paul looks – and the less he has to tone down 
his own extreme positions. Cruz and Paul are the only two possible 2016 
candidates with the infrastructure and fundraising abilities that could 
plausibly challenge what used to be Chris Christie's advantage, which is looking
weaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/02/christie-donor-property-venture-new-jersey>
 by the day.

Don't be distracted by straw polls. Crowd size says more about notoriety and 
entertainment value than political support (n.b. Palin, S; Bachmann, M). The 
key indicator for the Cruz-Paul matchup, at this ultra-early stage, is found in
state head-to-head polls against Clinton 
<http://realclearpolitics.com/epolls/latest_polls/president/#>: in the most 
recent polls from Iowa and North Carolina, Paul is the GOP nominee who comes 
the closest to besting Clinton – beating not just Cruz but Christie and Jeb 
Bush, too. In New Hampshire and Colorado, he's the only Republican that can 
beat her.

Cruz's heightened national profile has come with steady negative favorability 
ratings – in fact, he'snever had a net positive favorability rating nationwide. 
Even more perilously, the feedback loop of Tea Party adoration always pushes 
Cruz's rhetoric into ever-more-fanciful flights of extremism. In March, he 
accused pro-choice advocates of beingSatanists 
<http://thinkprogress.org/health/2014/03/13/3400851/sba-fundraiser-abortion/>; 
last month, he cribbed Jack Nicholson's firey "A Few Good Men"retort 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2014/may/14/ted-cruz-goes-jack-nicholson-dems-cant-handle-trut/>
 in the context of a Benghazi debate, saying Democrats "can't handle the 
truth." It's a great line – it's also the point in the movie at which it 
becomes clear that Nicholson's character has confused patriotism with a blank 
check to commit atrocities.

Cruz's considerable ego flourishes in the spotlight, while Paul has a cagier – 
and more wonkily sedate – approach to grandstanding. Search the internet for
wacky Rand Paul quotes 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/dc/s-t-my-rand-says-a-compendium-of-paul-s-wacky-quotes>
. He puts his most right-wing proposals in deceptively simple language: framing 
the elimination of Social Security, for instance, as "I think the average 
American is smart enough to make their own investments." His other gaffes are 
in support of libertarian ideas that sound weird only in the context of being a 
Republican in 2014: "I think torture is always wrong," for instance, or saying 
he would have voted against invading Iraq.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fted-cruz-tea-party-rand-paul-libertarian-gop-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F2%2F1401748882413%2F491e68fa-7f5f-4f21-b95f-9b633d9f4f15-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz's%20Tea%20Party%20allegiance%20only%20makes%20the%20case%20for%20Rand%20Paul%20stronger%20%7C%20Ana%20Marie%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fted-cruz-tea-party-rand-paul-libertarian-gop-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ted%20Cruz%27s%20Tea%20Party%20allegiance%20only%20makes%20the%20case%20for%20Rand%20Paul%20stronger%20%7C%20Ana%20Marie%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2014%2Fjun%2F03%2Fted-cruz-tea-party-rand-paul-libertarian-gop-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F2%2F1401748882413%2F491e68fa-7f5f-4f21-b95f-9b633d9f4f15-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Paul's libertarianism is unapologetic; where he's strayed from GOP orthodoxy, 
it's largely in the direction that the American public is going – and not just 
his call for NSA oversight. Photograph: Mike Theiler / Reuters 
It’s not that Paul doesn’t like the spotlight, or that gaffe-proofing yourself 
is the only strategy 889 days before Election Day. But two showy Senate 
filibusters last year neatly illustrate the divide: Paul's was, in fact, a 
filibuster; Cruz's speech was just that – a long speech, with his fundamental 
aimlessness betrayed by wildly off-topic soliloquies on everything fromWhite 
Castle to Ashton Kutcher 
<http://prospect.org/article/ten-quotes-reveal-just-how-bizarre-ted-cruzs-super-extra-long-senate-speech-0>
.

The Cruz bubble is built on a charismatic, if sometimes eccentric, appeal to 
the most conservative of the conservative base; Rand's popularity – and he came 
in third in that RLC straw poll – has its roots in a few strong policy 
positions and the ability to not come off like an asshat in public. He's also 
created a new kind of base: outside both ideological orthodoxy and the 
entrenched establishment.

The irony of Paul benefitting from being the lesser of two crazies is that, in 
some ways, Paul is actually the more radical of the two, the candidate most 
likely to pull the GOP from its moorings. Cruz rails against the party 
"graybeards", but he is actually a kind of stealth establishment candidate: his 
radical rhetoric and lack of discipline mayupset the party "graybeards", but 
his positions are logical extensions of the traditional GOP platform.

Paul, on the other hand, is staking out new ground. His positions don't 
completely align with establishment GOP – nor do they fit the agenda (such as 
it is) of the Tea Party. He is a Venn diagram of one.

Paul's libertarianism is unapologetic; where he's strayed from GOP orthodoxy, 
it's largely in the direction that the American public is going – and not just 
his call for National Security Administration oversight (supported 
<http://rt.com/usa/americans-nsa-surveillance-poll-755/> by 59% of Americans). 
On marriage equality (also supported by 59% of Americans), Paul told his party 
that they need to "agree to disagree 
<http://chicago.gopride.com/news/article.cfm/articleid/54377424>". In contrast, 
Cruz hasintroduced a bill 
<http://thinkprogress.org/lgbt/2014/02/14/3293191/cruz-lee-marriage/> that 
would invalidate the federal benefits of same-sex marriages if the couple moves 
to a marriage-restricted state – and he asked listeners to "pray" that marriage 
equality rulings be reversed.

But it's not just about bending with the popular will. Paul has staked out 
positions outside the GOP orthodoxy that are also on the periphery of the 
average voter's radar. He at leastadmits 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2014/05/14/rand_paul_s_voter_id_walkback.html>
 that the Republican mania for voter ID laws is counter-productive: 
"Republicans need to be aware that there is a group of voters that I’m trying 
to court and that we should be trying to court who do see it as something 
directed towards them." Both Paul and Cruz advocate drug sentencing reform, but 
Paul backs up that gesture with the belief that felons' voting rights should be 
reinstated.

Look, Rand Paul is no moderate 
<http://mediamatters.org/blog/2014/03/26/socially-liberal-rand-paul-is-a-media-creation/198621>
. He's pro-life and another Benghazi alarmist. He wants to privatize Social 
Security. He's aligned with the National Rifle Association on gun rights. But 
he's not really much of a Republican – and that's a good thing, if the GOP 
wants to survive.

Paul happens to be headed to Texas this week himself; he'll speak at the Texas 
State Republican convention. People forget that Paul's Texas roots are just as 
deep than Cruz's: his father's 37-year House career means that Paul was born 
and raised there. This is no small thing in a state that takes its identity 
very seriously. (That Texas has accepted and elevated a Cruz, a native 
Canadian, is perhaps the strongest proof of Cruz's political genius).

But 2016 prognosticators shouldn't pay much attention to how Paul is received 
– they should keep an eye on the waves hedoesn't make. He could surf those calm 
waters far.

 