
Emerson Etem got his first career short-handed goal late in the second period 
after Corey Perry scored twice to level the game, helping theAnaheim Ducks 
extend the best start in the club's history with a 6-3 victory over theDallas 
Stars on Sunday.

The defending Pacific Division champions have won seven straight, including 
all five at home, following a 6-1 loss at Colorado on opening night. Anaheim 
captain Ryan Getzlaf had a goal and three assists, and Teemu Selanne extended 
his goal streak to three games. Ryan Garbutt, Brenden Dillon and Shawn Horcoff 
scored during the final 10 minutes of the first period for Dallas. Jack 
Campbell made 41 saves in hisNHL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl> debut.

Anaheim goalie Frederik Andersen also made his NHL debut, replacing Jonas 
Hiller at the start of the second with a 3-1 deficit. Andersen stopped all 24 
shots he faced, two days after he was promoted from Norfolk of the AHL because 
of Viktor Fasth's lower-body injury.

In other games Sunday, the Columbus Blue Jackets beat the Vancouver Canucks 
3-1 and theNashville Predators had a 3-1 win over the Winnipeg Jets.

At Columbus, RJ Umberger scored his first goal of the season with 8:46 left 
and Columbus ended a four-game losing streak with a victory over Vancouver. 
Curtis McElhinney, making his first appearance for the Blue Jackets in place of 
Vezina Trophy winner Sergei Bobrovsky, had 37 saves.

At Winnipeg, Carter Hutton made 37 saves for his first NHL win to lead 
Nashville past the home team. Eric Nystrom, Patric Hornqvist and Matt Cullen 
scored for Nashville. The 27-year-old Hutton was given his second career start 
when Predators coach Barry Trotz chose to rest Pekka Rinne after the team's 
victory Saturday night in Montreal. The Predators had only seven shots in the 
second period, but made three of them count as they took control of the game. 
The win extended Nashville's point streak to five games.
 