
In retail, Amazon and Tesco have blazed trails 
<http://smartdatacollective.com/bernardmarr/182796/amazon-using-big-data-analytics-read-your-mind>
, mining insight from millions of consumers at scale to better buy stock and 
recommend appropriate products to consumers. In finance,American Express is 
crunching 
<http://searchcio.techtarget.com/opinion/Ten-big-data-case-studies-in-a-nutshell>
 account holders' transaction history en masse to identify loyalty and pre-empt 
churn. And, in sport, player and match data is now so abundant that clubs like
Chelsea are examining attributes of players 
<http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21583711-worlds-richest-football-league-embracing-big-data-ball-watching>
 from leagues around the world to spot new talent.

With a few exceptions, however, the TV industry is still not taking full 
advantage of the data opportunity to plan its future better.

Of the 146 pilots shot in the US in 2013 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/kevin-spacey-speech-why-netflix-model-can-save-television-video-full-transcript-1401970>
, costing close to $400m, only 56 made it to air. That's a hit rate of just one 
in three; and only a minority of those eventually graduated to a first full 
season. Advertising is also confined to brands with big budgets.

So, is it possible to predict a successful programme from a TV 
ratings-disaster in the making? The UK ratings panel Barb (Broadcasters' 
Audience Research Board) measures TV viewership using a sample of just 5,100 
homes. And, over the years, it has done a sterling job of quantifying TV 
viewing, establishing the trading currency in the media. However, in an 
increasingly fragmented, multi-channel environment, when you consider that 
there are around 25m homes in the UK, Barb analysis is only meaningful for the 
big channels who can operate on the large rounded figures as they command the 
lion's share, but this makes it a significant challenge for the hundreds of 
emerging channels who target niche audiences.

In the analogue age, broadcasters commissioned content for a broad mass of 
people who watched just a few shows on just five channels. In lieu of further 
media choice, broadcasters had to focus their efforts just on the single 
dimension: primetime slots. And, while the 7:30pm slot is great, from an 
advertising perspective it means that much spend is wasted. The vast majority 
of buyers would prefer to reach tightly-defined, target consumer groups.

Today, TV can do better: audiences are shifting habits, advertisers reared on 
extreme online targeting and control demand it, and commissioners groaning at 
yet more failed pilots need it.

Fortunately, the game-changer, even for linear TV, is digital audience data. 
Encouragingly, online viewership of TV content on broadcaster services is 
booming.BBC iPlayer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2014/iplayer-performance-pack-march-2014>
 andChannel 4's 4OD 
<http://www.vodprofessional.com/news/2q2014/4od-shows-growth-as-channel-4-announces-second-successive-annual-loss/>
 consumption is up 18% and 6% from last year. In the US, 22% of adults watch 
original digital video every month, while viewing on connected TVshas doubled 
in the past year 
<http://streamdaily.tv/2014/05/08/viewing-on-mobile-smart-tvs-nearly-double-from-2013-study/?utm_source=stream-newsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=viewing-on-mobile-smart-tvs-nearly-double-from-2013-study>
 and more than 70% are being used to enjoy web content. As such, audience 
panels are now just one data source. All these new platforms represent new 
inputs that give planners and buyers deep, rich and immediate understanding of 
content and advertising performance, where none was previously available. The 
benefit of better data to TV is not just better targeted programmatic 
campaigns, but also real insight into campaign effectiveness at the individual 
level.

Recent technology advances are allowing organisations to process massive 
amounts of data and conduct complex analysis at relatively low cost. This 
allows machine learning algorithms, for example, to predict audience behaviour 
more accurately by statistically modelling historic viewing and engagement 
patterns.

Some are beginning to reboot TV in the way that makes good on these promises. 
For example, by examining its subscribers' appreciation for previous content 
plus the popularity of political drama across its network, Netflix was able to
commission House Of Cards without the expense and delay of a pilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/mar/07/netflix-data-house-cards>
. Meanwhile,CNN uses data 
<http://mashable.com/2014/05/09/cnn-obsessed-malaysia-mh370-zucker/?utm_campaign=Feed%3A+Mashable+%28Mashable%29&utm_cid=Mash-Prod-RSS-Feedburner-All-Partial&utm_medium=feed&utm_source=feedburner>
 from three different analytics platforms plus TV ratings to tailor its 
editorial programming to viewer demand.

Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/advertising>, too, is 
getting smarter. From this summer, BSkyB will start sharing with advertisers 
the viewing habits of 500,000 subscribers. By telling advertisers what viewers 
are watching, the AdSmart set-top box technology lets both national and local 
advertisers serve much more relevant advertising to particular categories of 
viewers. The prize is clear: a better service for time-poor viewers whose very 
behaviour is telling you what they want, and a better service for advertisers 
who want demonstrable bang for their buck.

But, while there are a handful of examples of innovation, not enough in the 
industry are adopting these approaches. Too many in the TV industry are 
dragging their heels when it comes to data, and they risk getting left behind 
when audiences and advertising budgets make a bigger shift towards digital. The 
companies that use data to give viewers and advertisers a better experience 
will win the emerging TV game, whilst those that don't will find it difficult 
to compete. Big data has been the driver of great new opportunities across 
industries. It is time the TV business got aboard the bandwagon.

Aki Tsuchiya is the founder and managing director of Streamhub 
<http://www.streamhub.co.uk/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 