
1. Alberto Salazar gave Galen Rupp testosterone when he was 16

What was alleged Steve Magness, an assistant coach at the Nike Oregon Project, 
told Panorama and ProPublica that he was in Salazar’s office when the reports 
showing athletes’ blood levels were put on his desk. “Under one of Galen’s it 
had ‘currently on testosterone and prednisone medication’ and when I saw that I 
kind of jumped backwards,” Magness said. “Testosterone is obviously banned and 
everyone knew that. It was all the way back in high school – and that was 
incredibly shocking. I actually took a picture of it.”

Alberto Salazar’s defence under strain as witnesses dispute coach’s version of 
events
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-defence-doctor-magness-emails>
Salazar’s response In his open letter, Salazar claimed Rupp was taking a 
natural and legal testosterone supplement – possibly Testaboost, Alpha Male or 
ZMA – that was incorrectly recorded. “My clear recollection is that when 
[Magness] showed it to me, I stated that the entry was ‘crazy’ as Galen had 
never taken testosterone. I then stated that Galen, as a 16-year-old kid, must 
have misspoken about the supplements he was taking. I told Magness to take it 
back to the lab and have them straighten things out. I didn’t think much of it 
afterwards since I knew it was a mistake and because Magness never mentioned it 
again.” Both Salazar and Rupp strenuously deny the athlete took testosterone.

Where this leaves us Photographic evidence exists of the reports, so it comes 
down to whether it was incorrectly recorded. Meanwhile Magness has responded, 
saying: “I came to my superior, Salazar, and asked for answers. It would have 
been a simple clarification to make at the time for him to contact Dr Loren 
Myhre [the Nike lab’s then head physiologist, who died in 2012], someone who he 
had worked with for at least a decade, to clear up the confusion. If I saw an 
official medical chart naming one of my athletes being on testosterone, I think 
it’s any normal person’s reaction to get to the bottom of it.”

2. Rupp used prednisone, a powerful asthma drug banned in competition, aged 16

What was alleged The Panorama presenter Mark Daly spoke to Stuart Eagon, a 
former running colleague of Rupp, who told him of an incident in 2003 involving 
prednisone, which can block pain and enhance oxygen consumption and is 
prohibited by the World Anti-Doping Agency in competition. “We were going on 
our morning run and Alberto said to Galen: ‘Have you taken your prednisone yet 
this morning?’” said Eagon. Daly added: “I have heard from various sources that 
Rupp has used prednisone regularly, but he has asthma and allergies, which 
could account for its use.”

Salazar’s response An emphatic denial. “The claims that Galen has been on 
prednisone continuously since he was 15 are absolutely false. The BBC and 
ProPublica ‘reporters’ were informed that these allegations were completely 
false, and they should not have printed them. Printing false statements to harm 
Galen is irresponsible journalism that damaged an innocent athlete’s reputation 
– Galen has never taken prednisone for a competitive advantage.” Rupp has 
always denied taking any banned substances.

Where this leaves us Salazar appears to have strong evidence that Rupp was not 
taking prednisone regularly. However as David Epstein, the ProPublica reporter 
who worked closely with Panorama, points out, that was not the claim. “The BBC 
published a document showing that Rupp had apparently taken prednisone during 
one time period when he was 16. The story did not report allegations of 
continuous use nor cite the age 15.”

3. Testosterone (AndroGel) was found at a Nike Oregon Project training camp

What was alleged Panorama spoke to John Stiner, a massage therapist who worked 
for Salazar in 2008, who said that Salazar told him he was using AndroGel – a 
banned steroid – for his heart. “He said to me: ‘I don’t want you to get the 
wrong idea.’ And I said: ‘OK.’ I was really unsure what he meant and he goes: 
‘There’s a tube of AndroGel in the bedroom and it’s under some clothing.’ He 
said: ‘It’s for my heart, it’s all fucked up.’” The BBC said that using 
testosterone gel could actually make a heart problem worse.

Salazar’s response He accepts that he uses testosterone but says he never told 
Stiner it was for his heart and has never given it to his athletes. “My 
excessive training as an athlete did extensive damage to my body,” he said. 
“One of the lingering negative effects from which I still suffer today is 
hypogonadism with significant symptoms, including multiple low testosterone 
serum levels. There is no question that I have a valid justification for my 
possession of AndroGel as defined by the Wada code. I have never given AndroGel 
to any of my athletes.”

Where this leaves us With broad agreement that Salazar was on testosterone. 
However Stiner insists he was right to say Salazar said it was for his heart. 
“I told 100% the truth,” he told ProPublica. “I’ll take 20 lie detector tests. 
Of course he said I’m lying.” The BBC says Salazar did not respond to questions 
sent regarding the reason he would be prescribed testosterone that were sent in 
early May.

4. Salazar brought assorted vials and needles to a training camp

What was alleged Following the original Panorama and ProPublica revelations, 
Stiner also told the Daily Mail that he found vials in the fridge labelled 
“allergy one” and “allergy two” and a bag of unused hypodermic needles in the 
bathroom of one of the apartments the Nike Oregon Project rented while in Utah 
in 2008. Meanwhile the Mail also reported that Magness had also made 
allegations to the US Anti-Doping Agency (Usada), claiming he found an unmarked 
vial in France that belonged to Rupp.

Salazar’s response That these vials were simply allergy medicine for Rupp. 
“Galen has been receiving allergy immunotherapy vaccine injections since 
approximately 2004. His allergy specialists at the Allergy Clinic in Portland 
have specially mixed two vaccines for him. Vaccine A: Allergens & Molds 
contains the following extracts: Cat, Dog, Dust Mites and two types of Molds. 
Vaccine B: Pollens contains: Mixed Grasses, Ragweeds, and 3 different Weeds 
common in the Pacific Northwest. Galen must receive weekly injections to help 
control his allergies and his asthma. All documents related to these medicines 
and Galen’s treatment for his allergies were provided to Usada in 2013. There 
is no issue here.”

Where this leaves us Salazar’s response is convincing – although it is 
slightly odd Magness was sent emails from Salazar and Rupp requesting the 
return of “Galen’s allergy serum” from France given such medicine appeared to 
be used so frequently.

5. Salazar tried to get a therapeutic use exemption (TUE) certificate for Rupp 
at the 2011 world championships

What was alleged Kara Goucher, the 10,000m bronze medallist at the 2007 world 
championships, told Panorama and ProPublica that Salazar had coached Rupp to 
try to get a TUE for an intravenous drip before the 2011 World Championships. 
Under Wada rules, such drips are prohibited and anyone caught manipulating the 
TUE process to get one would be liable for a ban.

Salazar’s response That the allegation is false – and he has documentation 
that backs him up. “As the US team doctor has confirmed, at no time did I 
request the US team doctor to give Galen an IV or saline drip while he was in 
Daegu in 2011,” he said. “Galen did not receive any vitamin shots in Daegu. The 
US team doctors did not have any needles and UKAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> doctors could not treat a US 
athlete.”

Where this leaves us Again at a stalemate. ProPublica says other people back 
up Goucher’s claim but Salazar is adamant it wasn’t the case.

Alberto Salazar rebuttal: starting pistol for a race heading for the courts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-statement-nike-steve-magness-mo-farah-bbc-panorama-claims>
6. Rupp said he was tired after the 2011 World Championships in South Korea 
yet ran a personal best soon afterwards

What was alleged The BBC quoted Goucher, who appeared to suggest Rupp’s 
improvement between races was suspicious. “I had a conversation with Galen in 
2011 and he told me how tired he was and how he was so excited to have the 
season be over,” she said. “You don’t get to the end of a long year burnt out 
and take two weeks off and come out and run the best race of your life, that’s 
not how it works.”

Salazar’s response As Salazar points out, when Rupp ran in Daegu it was 80F 
(26.6C) and the heat wouldn’t have suited him because he weighed more than 
other athletes, while in Brussels – where Rupp broke the US record – it was 
only 59F (15C). He added: “It should be noted that even while making these 
false allegations against me, neither Kara nor Adam ever claim that I violated 
the Wada code or IAAF anti-doping rules.”

Where this leaves us Another impasse. Salazar claims Rupp’s improvement in 
2011 was no surprise because he had steadily got better throughout his career. 
Others who have worked at the Nike Oregon Project have told the Guardian that 
they did not expect Rupp to improve as much as he did in 2011 and 2012.

7. Salazar wanted to give Goucher a prescription thyroid drug because she had 
put on weight after giving birth

What was alleged Goucher claimed to Panorama that Salazar had tried to get her 
to take the prescription thyroid drug Cytomel, saying: “Alberto was always 
unhappy about my weight after I had Colt, like it was almost as if I didn’t 
have a child, I’d just like gained 30 pounds. He said: ‘You need to just take 
some Cytomel.’ Maybe four or five days goes by and Alberto brought me this 
prescription drug that I didn’t have a prescription for. It has Alberto’s 
writing on it clear as day.”

Salazar’s response Salazar has published a trail of email correspondence 
between the pair which appears to suggest that he did not want Goucher to lose 
weight more quickly. “I was thrilled with Kara’s weight, body composition and 
fitness in 2011,” he added. However, he did admit: “There was one time when I 
gave Kara Cytomel. It was in August 2011 in Daegu, South Korea. I did so after 
being expressly directed to do so by Kara’s endocrinologist, Dr Brown.”

Where this leaves us Salazar’s evidence appears to back up his claims 
regarding weight loss. However ProPublica has since spoken to Dr Brown, who 
says that while he could not discuss individual patients: “I would never, ever 
give somebody Cytomel for weight loss, ever.” As to the bottle, Brown said: “I 
don’t write on frickin’ bottles, and if it was mine, you wouldn’t be able to 
read it.”

8. Salazar was happy for his athletes to take banned testosterone medication

What was alleged Panorama spoke to another unnamed runner, who worked with 
Salazar for several years, who said that in 2007 he was feeling run down and 
went to see Dr Loren Myhre, who “suggested that I go and see an endocrinologist 
that Alberto and most of the athletes work with, to get testosterone and 
thyroid. He said: ‘This is what Alberto does. You’ll feel better and you’ll be 
able to train better,’ and so then I said: ‘Well, isn’t that cheating?’ And he 
goes: ‘Well no, Alberto does it.’ I did mention something about being, like: 
‘Wouldn’t it test positive?’ He said: ‘No, no, no. We’ll get you into the 
normal range.’”

Salazar’s response A fierce and emphatic denial. Salazar called these 
allegations “a remarkable display of irresponsible journalism” adding: “I do 
not know of a single instance where Dr Myhre ever recommended that an athlete 
that I was coaching take testosterone whether with a prescription or 
otherwise.” He added: “To claim ‘That is what Alberto does’ is completely 
false. It is not what I did then; it’s not what I do now and it’s not what I 
have ever done.”

Where this leaves us Another impasse. Dr Myhre passed away in 2012, which 
makes it particularly hard to prove or refute the allegations.

9. Rupp received unspecified pills in a paperback thriller

What was alleged Magness and Rupp were in Düsseldorf when Rupp told him he 
wasn’t feeling well. Magness called Salazar, who he says told him to expect a 
package. Two days later, a box arrived at his hotel room. Inside it he found a 
paperback thriller. Confused, he flipped it open. A section of the pages had 
been hollowed out to form a compartment into which two pills were taped. “At 
that point,” Magness says, “my mind was like: ‘This is stuff you see in movies, 
this is extremely strange.’” He handed the pills to Rupp, who he says promptly 
swallowed them and laughed off the clandestine packaging as typical Salazar 
antics.

Salazar’s response Neither Salazar nor Rupp responded to Epstein’s original 
questions about the hollowed-out book containing pills. But in his statement 
Salazar says: “Allegations around prednisone in Düsseldorf are false, and Steve 
Magness is fully aware of what occurred because he was involved.” Salazar also 
quotes another time, in Birmingham, where he used unusual packaging via mail. 
“Noting my peculiar packaging, Galen wrote: ‘You went all Shawshank Redemption 
on that book and nasal spray. I loved it!!!’

Alberto Salazar case: Expert says athletes are particularly asthma-prone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-case-expert-says-athletes-are-particularly-asthma-prone>
Where this leaves us Depending on your point of view, this either shows that 
Salazar – for all his reputation for being intense and win-at-all costs – is a 
secret practical joker, or needs to explain why he didn’t send medicine to his 
athlete in the normal way.

10. Salazar tested testosterone on his son, Alex, in a laboratory to see the 
levels needed to evade tests

What was alleged Salazar’s son was involved in tests to see how much 
testosterone cream would trigger a positive test. According to Magness, Alex 
told him they were worried that someone could rub some cream on one of their 
athletes after a race. Magness said he believed that explanation to be 
“ludicrous” – and that they were instead trying to figure out how to cheat.

Salazar’s response Salazar does not mention Alex in his response but does say 
he “let his paranoia get the best of him” when he asked Dr Brown to “set up an 
experiment” to see whether it was possible for an athlete to be sabotaged by 
someone rubbing testosterone on them. Salazar says that when Justin Gatlin, the 
100m runner, blamed his positive test for exogenous testosterone on being 
sabotaged by his massage therapist, Chris Whetstine, a claim Whetstine denied. 
Salazar claims he was worried the same thing might happen to Rupp – especially 
when Whetstine rubbed Rupp’s shoulders in 2009.

Where this leaves us ProPublica have since spoken to Brown, who said he did 
not prescribe a controlled substance for Salazar’s son or other research 
subjects as part of an experiment. “No, absolutely not,” Brown said. “I didn’t 
do that, and would not do that.” He said that he was merely advising Salazar on 
how to conduct research on potential sabotage “in a hypothetical situation”. He 
said that Salazar’s exploration of potential testosterone sabotage was 
admirable.
 