
A decade ago a toxic brew of anti-Muslim hatred, alcohol, social media foment, 
threats to the mono-cultural beach scene of the Sutherland Shire and the noxious
shock jock-ery of, among others, Alan Jones 
<http://www.acma.gov.au/webwr/_assets/main/lib101068/2gb%20-%20report%201485.pdf>
, manifested in the Cronulla riots.

There’ve been inquiries and endless community consultations, conversations and 
parsing over the factors that contributed to one of the ugliest incidents, 
post-second world war, of racial violence in Australia.

Yes, we’ve had 10 years in which to heed the lessons of Cronulla – a decade in 
which much has happened globally, and in Australia, to heighten tensions 
between Islamic communities and the amorphous so-called Australian mainstream.

Anzac Day should be quarantined from politicians – a solemn moment to reflect 
on the agony of war | Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/23/anzac-day-should-be-quarantined-from-politicians-a-solemn-moment-to-reflect-on-the-enduring-agony-of-war>
It’s a decade during which the shape of radical jihad has changed repeatedly 
so that now it presents in the form ofIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> and the acts of terror, including in 
Australia, that are conducted in sympathy with – or explicitly in – its name.

And it’s a decade during which leaders of successive Australian governments 
have used military engagement, the rhetoric of national security, fears about 
Muslim asylum seekers and border control to bolster their electoral standing. 
They’ve been either cheered on or condemned as too soft by a reactionary media 
where nuance is non-existent, where you’re either for us and our supposedly 
unique way of life, or against us.

Critically, as the Guardian’s Paul Farrell has pointed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/09/cronulla-summer-simmering-tension-race-riots-10-years>
, the plans of an extreme-right group to commemorate the anniversary of the 
Cronulla riots in the Sutherland have garnered little local interest.

Cronulla has learnt. But has the rest of Australia?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcronulla-riots-10-years-on-sutherland-shire-mayor-reflects-on-the-violence-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F11%2F1449796325160%2FKP_727575_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cronulla%20riots%2010%20years%20on%3A%20Sutherland%20shire%20mayor%20reflects%20on%20the%20violence%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcronulla-riots-10-years-on-sutherland-shire-mayor-reflects-on-the-violence-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cronulla%20riots%2010%20years%20on%3A%20Sutherland%20shire%20mayor%20reflects%20on%20the%20violence%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcronulla-riots-10-years-on-sutherland-shire-mayor-reflects-on-the-violence-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F11%2F1449796325160%2FKP_727575_crop_640x480.jpg>
Cronulla riots 10 years on: Sutherland shire mayor reflects on the violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/dec/11/cronulla-riots-10-years-on-sutherland-shire-mayor-reflects-on-the-violence-video>
Indeed, the sentiments expressed by the anti-Muslim haters at Cronulla a 
decade ago, replete with all of their symbols of exclusion – the Australian 
flag appropriated as the “Cronulla Cape” or otherwise used as a symbol of 
territorial exclusion and claim, the “Australian” rioters’ talk of themselves 
as “Anzacs” fighting an Infidel – have since been appropriated by more 
organised racists such as the toxic Reclaim Australia.

At recent “reclaim” rallies across Australia the flag has become a hideous 
distillation of Anglo-Australian racism. Meanwhile Anzac (whose mythology began 
with the invasion by Australians and New Zealanders of an obscure finger of the 
Ottomans in 1915, their defeat and retreat) continues to be misappropriated by 
the racists now, just as it was at Cronulla.

Australian political leaders have frequently conflated both the flag and Anzac 
with their own national security muscle-flexing and contemporary military 
deployments.

Words and symbols can be potent weapons. Cronulla began with an exchange of 
heated words. Then came some punches

Perhaps it’s no surprise, then, that anti-Muslim racists might occasionally 
appropriate them for their own malevolent, potentially violent, ends.

Anzac and Gallipoli were repeatedly summoned up at Cronulla on 11 December 
2005.

Like this: “You’re standing on the soil that has been fought for by Australian 
Anzac diggers.”

And like this: “This is what our grandfathers fought for, to protect this, so 
we can enjoy it, and we don’t need these Lebanese or wogs to take it away from 
us.”

Never mind that the cannon fodder Anzacs took their orders as invaders from 
their empirical commanders or that they fought under the British flag. Truth 
has never interfered with Anzac’s hoary myths and it was never likely to with 
the mob at Cronulla or at the rallies across Australia run by the likes of 
Reclaim Australia.

At a recent rally at Melton, west of Melbourne, Reclaim demonstrators marched 
beneath a banner emblazoned with poppies, silhouettes of marching troops and 
the always evocative – but frequently misappropriated – words “Lest We Forget”.

At rallies elsewhere, bare-chested demonstrators sported Anzac tattoos and 
protesters held aloft a banner featuring an Anzac monument. Such protesters 
would use Anzac as another metaphor by which to distinguish themselves from the 
target of their venom – peaceful Muslim Australians who, they would claim with 
blasé generality, harbour potential terrorists.

The truth is more complex of course: the responsibility for combating radical 
jihad rests not just with the Australian Muslim communities, but with all 
Australians – opinion makers, religious leaders, community figures, law 
enforcers.

Radical jihad, in it current form, Isis, defies all sorts of convention and 
definition,not least in terms of its recruits and followers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/02/us/politics/56-arrests-in-us-this-year-related-to-isis-study-says.html?_r=0>
. Few things are certain. But one is: rioters, protesters, politicians and 
journalists who attack, rhetorically or otherwise, Muslims in Australia and 
elsewhere play into the hands of Isis recruiters.

We all, even former prime ministers 
<http://mashable.com/2015/12/08/tony-abbott-islam/#NT83aOn.X8qp>, have 
responsibilities in this regard.

Proposing that Australians ought to declare “the clear superiority of our 
culture to one that justifies killing people in the name of God” is hard to 
trump (pun intended) in terms of abrogated responsibility.

Words and symbols can be potent weapons.

Cronulla, after all, began 10 years ago with an exchange of heated words. Then 
came some punches. And a whole lot more words. And more violence that became a 
riot.

Australia has learnt plenty since. But it has heeded too little.

Perhaps there’ll never be another race riot in Cronulla. But what happened 
there a decade ago, many times multiplied, could easily occur elsewhere in 
Australia any time now.
 