
1. A glass a day keeps the reader at bay

You might cherish holiday memories of floating on a lilo with a beer in one 
hand and a book in the other, but sadly it doesn't work once the siesta hour is 
taken away. Devise a system of reading-time units to keep a healthy 
relationship between the bottle and the page. If you're having trouble with 
willpower, letF Scott Fitzgerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/classics/9780007925353/the-beautiful-and-damned>
 orRichard Yates  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/romance/9780099518624/revolutionary-road>
set you straight.

2. Switch the TV off

And don't start Breaking Bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad> series 1 on Netflix, 
either. If you're addicted to serials, how about going back toDickens  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/charles-dickens>(he's the HBO 
writers' writer, after all)?

3. Approach the Man Booker prize longlist with caution

Richard House's 1,000-page thriller The Kills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781447237860/the-kills> 
or Donal Ryan's slim debutThe Spinning Heart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781781620069/the-spinning-heart>
? Colm Toibin's novella about Jesus's mother,The Testament of Mary, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780670922093/the-testament-of-mary>
 or Eleanor Catton's massive New Zealand goldrush novelThe Luminaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781847084316/the-luminaries>
, a good nine times longer? If it's notches on the bedside table you care 
about, weigh your reading choices with care.

4. Buy an e-reader with an illuminated screen

Then there's no excuse not to have books with you at all times - and nowhere 
too dark to read them.

5. Cultivate an interest in poetry

Slip a slim volume into your bag and scatter more in all those other, ahem, 
places you visit regularly during the day. Ten minutes withSeamus Heaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/seamus-heaney> is worth a 
lifetime with a lesser writer.

6. Rise with the larks...

There's always a spare half-hour between bed and breakfast if you choose to 
use it. Perfect for short stories - try last year's International Man Booker 
winnerLydia Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780241145043/the-collected-stories-of-lydia-davis>
, if you want real value-per-minute.

7. â€¦ and love your insomnia

Those wee hours between three and five am are perfect for reading, be it a 
gentleJoanna Trollope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/joanna-trollope> or something 
more suitable to long dark nights of the soul (The Anatomy of Melancholy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9780940322660/the-anatomy-of-melancholy>
, anyone?). And face it: if you're not reading, you'll only be worrying.

8. Get into audiobooks

They're great for multi-tasking: there's nothing so bracing as walking the dog 
with your MP3-player turned to 1.5 times the normal speed. Kate Atkinson'sLife 
After Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780385618670/life-after-life>
, with its repeating stories, especially suits this treatment. But be warned: 
at normal read-aloud rate, audiobooks take far longer than reading yourself.

9. Join a reading group

You'll be so behind the curve that all the lightweights who only joined for 
wine and nibbles will have gone by now, leaving the serious readers to get on 
with it. Particularly good for those books you need to be prodded into 
finishing.

10. Pick up something you can't put down

Cliffhangers are your friends. Whether it's the must-read-one-more-chapter 
plot reversals of Gillian Flynn'sGone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/crime/9780297859383/gone-girl> and 
Sarah Waters'Fingersmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781860498831/fingersmith>
, or just something that suits your mood, if you're engaged enough, you'll tear 
through a title.
 