
What is digital social innovation?
The internet is playing an ever-increasing role in how we work, play and 
relate to each other <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate>. As a 
natural result of this, many of the most exciting new innovations that enable 
people to collaborate to address societal challenges are being developed 
online. At Nesta we call this activity digital social innovation (DSI) and it 
includes a diverse set of services, entrepreneurs and organisations.

However, while DSI has been around since the birth of the web (and, in fact, 
fits the internet's original ethos of social good), there is little collected 
public knowledge on what best practice looks like, how networks of innovators 
might work together in order to understand its potential impact, and what 
policies might best help to encourage a greater use of the internet for social 
good.

We are currently leading a large research project <http://digitalsocial.eu/> 
funded by the European Commission to explore how we can better understand the 
potential in DSI and support more of it to happen.

So, with that in mind, here are 10 innovative people that are driving some of 
the most exciting digital social innovations:

1. Tomas Diez, co-founder, Smart Citizen kit @tomasdiez 
<https://twitter.com/tomasdiez>
Tomas Diez is the co-founder of the Smart Citizen Kit project 
<http://www.smartcitizen.me/> – an initiative that empowers citizens to improve 
urban life through capturing and analysing real-time environmental data. The 
Smart Citizen Kit is based on two components: the "kit" itself and the platform 
used to share data between people operating a kit. It is built on theopen 
hardware product Arduino <http://www.arduino.cc/>, and equipped with sensors 
that can measure air quality, temperature, sound and humidity. Via theplatform 
<http://www.smartcitizen.me/> anyone who owns a kit can share and visualise 
their data.

2. Massimo Banzi, co-founder, Arduino @mbanzi <https://twitter.com/mbanzi>
Massimo Banzi developed the Arduino <http://www.arduino.cc/>, a simple, cheap 
circuit board with a microprocessor in 2005 to enable more people to build 
electronic contraptions. It has been described as "LEGO for electronics" 
because it is easy to use and can be a "building block" on which to make 
services and applications, which has helped social innovators developlow-cost 
tech solutions <https://code.google.com/p/phduino/>. More than 300,000 Arduino 
units have been sold worldwide to date.

3. Chris Lintott, director, Zooniverse @chrislintott 
<https://twitter.com/chrislintott>
Chris Lintott is founder of Zooniverse <https://www.zooniverse.org/>, a 
website that hosts online citizen science projects involving the public in 
crowdsourcing academic research. Often over-burdened academic departments don't 
have the time or the resources to process large datasets and some of the most 
important available information is in forms that computers still can't process. 
Zooniverse asks people (via large online communities) to devote their free time 
to projects such asanalysing formations of galaxies 
<https://www.zooniverse.org/project/hubble> and studying cancer cells 
<http://www.cellslider.net/>. In the latter, Zooniverse got people analysing 
more than 2 million cancer images.

4. Sean Bonner, co-founder, Safecast @seanbonner 
<https://twitter.com/seanbonner>
Safecast <http://blog.safecast.org/> – a project that enables citizens to 
capture and share measurement on radiation levels – was founded by Sean Bonner, 
Joi Ito and Pieter Franken in March 2011 as a response to the accident at the 
Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in Japan. Using open hardware the team 
built Geiger counters that were used to create large open datasets on radiation 
levels. All data is plotted on amap <http://blog.safecast.org/maps/> that 
visualises radiation levels in a given geographical area. To date, Safecast has 
captured more than15 million data points 
<http://techpresident.com/news/wegov/24738/15-million-crowdsourced-data-points>.

5. Robert Bjarnason, co-founder, Your Priorities @CitizensFNDN 
<https://twitter.com/CitizensFNDN>
In 2008 Robert Bjarnason and Gunnar Grimsson developed Your Priorities 
<https://www.yrpri.org/home/world>, a platform that enables groups of people to 
debate and prioritise policy ideas, budget decisions and micro-issues affecting 
their neighbourhood. The best ideas, with the most support, are elevated to the 
top and actioned on. In Reykjavik, Iceland, up to 40% of citizens use the 
platform and the city council has committed itself to discussing and 
implementing the most popular ideas on monthly basis.

6. Bas van Abel, founder, Fairphone @basvanabel 
<https://twitter.com/basvanabel>
Fairphone <http://www.fairphone.com/> was founded by Bas van Abel in 2010. It 
started as a campaign against the conditions endured by people working in parts 
of the global electronics supply chain, including those in the mineral mines of 
the Democratic Republic of Congo and the assembly lines in China. Fairphone is 
a smartphone with a low environmental impact, using minerals from independent 
miners and manufacturers who guarantee basic standards to their employees. To 
ensure transparency Fairphone works with NGOs and its 50,000 Facebook followers 
on monitoring its supply chain. On 13 November 2013 Fairphone sold the first 
batch of 25,000 smartphones.

7. Olivier Schulbaum, co-founder, Goteo@goteofunding 
<https://twitter.com/goteofunding>
In 2011 Olivier Schulbaum, Enric Senabre and Susana Noguero founded Goteo.org 
<http://goteo.org/> – a network for crowdfunding and collaboration in Spain. 
Their idea was to help finance and support independent creative and innovative 
initiatives that contribute to the common good. In similar style to 
Kickstarter, Goteo helps facilitate the crowdfunding of projects. However, 
Goteo will only launch projects that contribute to free knowledge and the open 
source community. As a result, Goteo projects must use free and open licences, 
making them transferable and reusable by other people. As well as finance, 
projects can also source non-financial support from backers.Nodo Móvil 
<http://goteo.org/project/nodo-movil>, a mobile wifi connection unit for social 
movements, sourced developer support, a hacklab space for working, a 3D 
printer, and an offer to collaborate with local authorities on testing.

8. Juliana Rotich, co-founder, Ushahidi @afromusing 
<https://twitter.com/afromusing>
"Ushahidi" <http://www.ushahidi.com/>, which means "testimony" in Swahili, was 
founded by David Kobia, Juliana Rotich, Ory Okolloh and Erik Hersman, to map 
reports of violence in Kenya after the post-election fallout in 2008. Since 
then Ushahidi hasdeveloped software <http://www.ushahidi.com/products> that 
allows people to crowdsource and map crisis information from mobile phones or 
the internet. Applications built on the platform range from monitoring 
elections in India, to monitoring medical supply chains and co-ordinating 
disaster responses. After a devastating earthquake hit Haiti in 2010, the 
Ushahidi platform was used to report more than 40,000 incidents on locations of 
collapsed structures, damaged schools and fires.

9. Ramon Roca, founder, Guifi.net @guifinet <https://twitter.com/guifinet>
Guifi.net <http://guifi.net/en> was founded in 2000 as a response to the lack 
of broadband internet in rural Catalonia, where commercial internet providers 
weren't providing a connection. The idea, developed by Ramon Roca and his 
co-founders, was a"mesh network" <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mesh_networking> 
where each person in the network used a small radio transmitter that functions 
like a wireless router to become a node in the Guifi net. Only one node needs 
to be connected to the internet and from it the connection is shared wirelessly 
with all others in its vicinity, who again share the connection wirelessly with 
those closest to them. With its more than 23,000 nodes, Guifi has been 
described as the largest mesh network in the world. The majority of Guifi 
activity is in Spain, but the network reaches as far as Argentina, China, India 
and the US.

10. Chris Taggart, founder, OpenCorporates @CountCulture 
<https://twitter.com/CountCulture>
OpenCorporates <http://opencorporates.com/> was founded in 2010 by Chris 
Taggart and Rob McKinnon to make information about companies and the corporate 
world more transparent and accessible. OpenCorporates does this by opening up 
data about corporations.The data is turned in to searchablemaps and 
visualisations of complex corporate structures 
<https://opencorporates.com/viz/financial/index.html>, often illustrating the 
layers of control across global organisations (in some cases showing thousands 
of subsidiaries). One analysis of the complex corporate structure of Goldman 
Sachs based on data from the US, New Zealand, the Cayman Islands, Luxembourg 
and the UK, identified 1,475 subsidiaries registered in the US and 739 in the 
Caymans alone. OpenCorporates has grown to become the largest open database of 
companies in the world, with data on 60m companies.

Jon Kingsbury is director, creative economy programmes, at Nesta and Peter 
Baeck is principal researcher atNesta <http://www.nesta.org.uk/>

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 

• This article was amended on 28 February 2014 to correct the founder 
information listed under Ushahidi and on 3 March 2014 to correct the founder 
information listed under Goteo
 