
When it comes to games, Australia is an indie nation. Since the closure of the 
Australian branches of almost every major publisher – with a few remnants 
porting software between platforms or doing HD remakes – the country's video 
game industry has fragmented out into a broad spectrum of talent, with small 
teams of dedicated people trying to make their own games and get noticed.

At PAX Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2013/jul/22/pax-australia-penny-arcade-melbourne>
, I got to see and discuss their work first-hand. Unlike the titles on show at 
the big-name stands, they're surprising. They're different. They take risks 
because no one is telling them not to. What comes out isn't always perfect but, 
more often than not, it's interesting. Here, after some deliberation, are some 
of the strangest and best. Add yours below.

Fractured Soul
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-ZULs6anF7I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-ZULs6anF7I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-ZULs6anF7I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Like many of the indie games on show, Fractured Soul 
<http://www.youtub­e.com/watch?v=-ZULs6anF7I)> is a hard sell based only on a 
description. Running on the Nintendo 3DS (unusual for an indie title), play is 
split equally between both screens of the device as you navigate a world of 
hostile sci-fi robots and jumping puzzles. At the push of a button your 
physical representation in game can switch between the top and bottom screen.

This is vital for some puzzles – switching in mid-air to land on a platform 
that's in one world but not the other – and also comes in handy when the lasers 
start flying as you duck between screens to avoid attacks.

It's a clever use of existing technology, as all too often the lower screen on 
the DS is relegated to the role of inventory or map, and it plays surprisingly 
well; the mental gymnastics needed to manage two screens at once are easy to 
conquer.

Fractured soul has been out for a while; give it a look on the 3DS store if 
you've not done so already.

Particulars
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkG0ryYldOJ0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkG0ryYldOJ0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FkG0ryYldOJ0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
In Particulars <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kG0ryYldOJ0#at=15)>, you play 
a physicist who finds herself transformed into a down quark, which is a change 
from the traditional shaved-head/big muscles/space marine combination that you 
normally find in player characters. Also, while playing it, I nearly cried.

I haven't cried playing a video game before; it's not like it's a habit. But 
there's something about the loneliness of being a down quark all alone in a 
subatomic space that really underlined the joy in finding an anti-down quark to 
combine with.

The writing is sharp, the physics-puzzler slingshot gameplay is both frantic 
and measured in equal amounts, and the science is – I'm assured – sound, as one 
of the programmers is a physicist.

Play an early version of Particulars here <http://www.particularsgame.com/>.

Freedom Fall
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FwmOFow-LzZ0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FwmOFow-LzZ0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FwmOFow-LzZ0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Remember the notes we used to pass each other in primary school? The words 
we'd scrawl on our pencil cases, bags, binders?Freedom Fall 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wmOFow-LzZ0)> takes those and combines them 
with a healthy dose of murderous glee, then has a sociopath princess daub them 
all over the walls of your prison.

Carrying with it a lot of black humour, this short game from Stirfire Studios 
tells the story of a young girl dealing with the death of her mother, her 
father's remarriage and her confusing feelings towards the opposite sex by 
building a giant tower and filling it with lethal traps. It's adorable.

You can buy Freedom Fall <http://www.freedomfall.com/buy/> for not very much 
on pretty much any non-console platform you care to mention. The touch controls 
aren't great on iPad, so get it on PC instead.

Black Annex
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZqlveWIhCFI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZqlveWIhCFI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZqlveWIhCFI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
A homage to Syndicate rather than a remake, Black Annex 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZqlveWIhCFI)> already plays more smoothly than 
both the original and the confused 2012 remake.

Pitching you into a retro-looking world of industrial espionage and mercenary 
killing, it is written in QBASIC, an ancient programming language, for reasons 
that are clear only to Lance E McDonald, the man behind the game. But it works, 
despite the self-imposed restrictions, and even playing a very early build 
shows that he has managed to get a good blend of outright violence and tense 
stealth.

Thanks to the fact that it's a one-man project being developed in a 
14-year-old language, Black Annex isn't out just yet.

Antichamber
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FaGsnm2nOnso%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FaGsnm2nOnso%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FaGsnm2nOnso%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Antichamber <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aGsnm2nOnso)> is a spatial puzzle 
game that's a rough combination of Portal and being trapped in a maze by a 
malicious scientist with a timer ticking down to the hour of your death.

Developed by one man – Alexander Bruce – it's a masterclass in teaching the 
player new ways of thinking through subtle cues and positive reinforcement; the 
sort of game that prisoners would have to beat in exchange for their freedom in 
some neon-tinted dystopia.

It's confusing and upsetting and stressful and clever and wonderful and you 
should probablyplay it <http://store.steampowered.com/app/219890>.

Wander
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGh7CvoHlO7M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGh7CvoHlO7M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGh7CvoHlO7M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Loki Davison, the ex-nomad designer of explore-'em-up Wander 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gh7CvoHlO7M>, explains the sort of thing that 
would happen in his game.

"You're walking through some forests, and you don't know what to do. You see a 
griffon, and you shout out to the griffon, 'Hey, what am I supposed to do in 
this game?'

"And the griffon responds, 'No worries, follow me, I've got something to show 
you,' because she's another player. And she flies off and shows you a nice 
waterfall that she found, and you look at it together. That's it."

It's certaintly a different experience from Call of Duty, say, but that what 
makes Wander noteworthy. It's a massively multiplayer game – like World of 
Warcraft, except that it has no combat whatsoever – and a game of exploration 
with no defined end. Plus, it comes with full Oculus Rift support; I can 
confirm that I spent the entirety of my experience wearing the virtual-reality 
goggles wide-eyed and slack-jawed.

You can download an early version of Wander from the official website 
<https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1nwit0F2jnewfvdyrT0FQISAcxZMXfN5bLrwJwMT6kd4/viewform>
, if you fancy.

Muse
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fq5pf4NPSpgk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fq5pf4NPSpgk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fq5pf4NPSpgk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Muse 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?annotation_id=annotation_3891288725&feature=iv&src_vid=Uq9mdDMtajE&v=q5pf4NPSpgk>
 is an attempt at something that's been tried a few times before with little 
success – a freeform music generating game. In fact, it's an open-ended 
experience more than a game, really – you float around an aquatic digital 
landscape, picking up samples in the form of creatures that swim around the 
environment, which all play together to form an ambient techno track.

There's no way to win, per se, so I'm not sure when you'd stop playing; but 
that isn't the sort of thing you should be worried about when you sit down for 
a session of Muse. It is the video-game equivalent of a chillout room at a 
club. It will be out mid-2013. So, you know, any day now.

Framed
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsQetrrlg1jk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsQetrrlg1jk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsQetrrlg1jk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Part graphic novel and part puzzle, Framed 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sQetrrlg1jk> tells a gorgeously-animated film 
noir story through a series of comic-book themed levels.

As the comic stands, our hero doesn't succeed in his goals – he falls to his 
death when leaping between buildings, or gets caught and arrested by the police 
officers that surround his apartment. Rearrange the panels in the right order, 
though, and he gets away.

It's an elegant concept for a touchscreen puzzle game backed up with fantastic 
art and sound. Out later this year.

Ninja Pizza Girl
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FUoS3QnFzfeg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FUoS3QnFzfeg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FUoS3QnFzfeg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This is a mum-and-dad game design <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UoS3QnFzfeg)>
, coming from a tiny studio made up of Nicole Stark, her husband, Jason, and 
their 16-year-old daughter, Raven.

You're an underpaid teenage ninja, tasked to deliver pizzas across blasted 
near-future cityscapes awhere rampant infrastructure problems have resulted in 
parkour being the only reliable form of hot food delivery. The game plays well 
and the whole thing drips with an earnest charm.

"The enemies don't hurt you," says Nicole, "They just make fun of you. They 
push you over and call you a dork.

"If your self-esteem meter gets low enough, you give up and go home. I don't 
know about you, but people being mean still bothers me, it still gets me down."

Fair. Ninja Pizza Girl will be released at some point next year.

InFlux
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fh2k-v94k-ac%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fh2k-v94k-ac%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fh2k-v94k-ac%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
InFlux <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h2k-v94k-ac> is Impromptu Games' first 
big title, and it's a good one; it's set in a series of puzzle test chambers on 
an overgrown, wild island that you must navigate. And you are a sphere, of 
course. You are a sphere with limited control over gravity.

The puzzles themselves are, by and large, dizzying 3D versions of those wooden 
boxes with carved mazes through which you must guide a ball bearing, which is 
no bad thing. The outmoded wooden hardware for those things was starting to 
wear thin.

You can buy InFlux here <http://joewintergreen.com/influx/influxr/influx.html>.

Boson X
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fc-UKKHrKeCE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fc-UKKHrKeCE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fc-UKKHrKeCE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Boson X <http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=c-UKKHrKeCE> 
has you running down an endless corridor of shifting platforms in a world where 
gravity is meaningless and concepts such as "floors" and "ceilings" are 
interchangeable.

I downloaded the preview build and immediately spent a full hour playing it, 
hammering the retry key after every death. To progress you'll need to gain 
energy by running over glowing blue platforms – judging whether or not to make 
the leap leaves you trying to plot optimal routes in a unnatural space with 
frightening speed.

It's released on 30 August and it's entirely free 
<http://www.boson-x.com/index.html> on PC, Linux and Mac. If however, you want 
it on iOs, you'll have to pay.
 