
1. How many actual users did it have?

The site’s homepage touts “over 39,170,000 anonymous members”, while the 
figure of 37 million is regularly quoted in news stories aboutAshley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison>. Yet the leaked 
database shows slightly under 33 m individual user accounts. Where are the 
other 6 million?

What’s more, a user account isn’t quite the same as a member. The data 
suggests that a large number of the accounts are registered with duplicate 
emails, which could indicate one person registering multiple accounts.

2. Did it make fake accounts?

In 2013, an Ashley Madison employee in Toronto tried to sue the company, 
claiming that she’d developed a repetitive strain injury in her wrist at work. 
The action which caused the damage,she alleged 
<http://www.citynews.ca/2013/11/10/woman-hurt-typing-fake-profiles-for-dating-site-20m-suit-alleges/>
, was creating 1,000 fake female profiles over the course of a week to pad out 
the Brazilian version of the site.

Ashley Madison denied that allegation, saying that 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/ashley-madison-strikes-back-against-plaintiff-2013-11?IR=T>
 “our service is 100% authentic, as described in our terms and conditions, and 
we resent any implication otherwise and are certain we will be both vindicated 
and victorious in court”. The existence of multiple accounts linked to single 
email addresses raised new questions.

3. Was it aware of prostitution on the site?

Several Ashley Madison users have reported that some of the site’s users who 
arereal people are also not actually married people seeking a discreet affair. 
Security researcher Robert Graham writes that “according to several users, 
prostitutes are really the only females they’d consistently meet on Ashley 
Madison”.

In February this year, an anonymous user on Vice related his experience on the 
site 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/im-a-married-man-who-uses-ashley-madison-224>, 
euphemistically referring to “sugar babies”: “If you find a profile of an 
attractive woman under 25 and she doesn’t turn out to be a scammer, then she 
probably is out to get paid,” he wrote.

4. It promised security to its customers. What did it do to ensure this?

The Ashley Madison website still boasts about the discretion it offers 
customers. From its offer of 39 million “anonymous members” (who are no longer 
anonymous) to the promise of a “100% discreet service” and the purple-ribboned 
“Trusted Security Award”, a big part of the company’s brand is the promise of 
an affair that no one else will know about.

But the data dump shows very little actual progress towards that goal. User 
passwords were stored in a secure manner, “hashed” in a way that prevents them 
from being easily reused by attackers; and the site connected over SSL, which 
prevented a man-in-the-middle attack on a particular user. But vast amounts of 
sensitive data were apparently stored in plain text in a couple of databases on 
the site’s backend, letting anyone who downloads the leaked data read users’ 
profile information, turn-ons, and relationship goals.

Before the hack happened, some staff members were aware of the security risks 
at the firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madison-staff-raised-security-concerns-before-hack>
, according to the hacked database. Internal documents leaked as part of the 
attack show concerns over “a lack of security awareness across the 
organisation” being raised by one vice president in response to an internal 
questionnaire.

In the same questionnaire, the company’s chief executive, Noel Biderman wrote 
what he would hate to see go wrong in the company: “Data exfiltration, 
confidentiality of the data. An insider data breach would be very harmful. Have 
we done good enough a job vetting everyone, are we on top of it.”

5. Its CEO said the leak was an inside job. What made him think that? Has he 
changed his mind?

Noel Biderman also said shortly after that the firm believes the hack was an 
inside job, from someone who already had access to its systems. “I’ve got their 
profile right in front of me, all their work credentials,”he told the security 
journalist Brian Krebs 
<http://krebsonsecurity.com/2015/07/online-cheating-site-ashleymadison-hacked/>
. “It was definitely a person here that was not an employee but certainly had 
touched our technical services.”

But Biderman hasn’t revealed any further information since then. If he knew 
who it was, why haven’t they been caught? And if he didn’t, why was he so clear 
it was definitely an insider?

6. Why did the “full delete” not fully delete a customer’s profile? Why did it 
keep location information for a fully deleted account?

Ashley Madison offers a £15/$20 “full delete” service for users. The site 
stands out amongother dating sites for this, in that the paid delete will even 
remove conversations a user has had with other site members.

But the database shows that “full” is rather overstating matters. Users who 
paid to delete their account have their email address, postal address, 
username, first and last names wiped from the record, along with their profile 
information; but a raft of personal data stayed on Ashley Madison’s servers, 
including sexual preferences, height, weight, date of birth, and even the 
user’s latitude and longitude, derived from the address data they entered 
earlier.

Worse, the credit card information used to pay for the full delete is also 
stored (the full card number is not kept, however), and the transaction is 
linked through a user ID to the deleted account. In other words, it’s possible 
to fully de-anonymise a user, even after they paid real money for the deletion.

“I paid for the complete deletion yet I appear on the dump,” one user told the 
Guardian. “If Ashley Madison charged for a service they didn’t provide, I would 
like to know.”

In a statement in July, Ashley Madison said: “Contrary to current media 
reports, and based on accusations posted online by a cyber criminal, the ‘paid 
delete’ option offered by AshleyMadison.com does in fact remove all information 
related to a member’s profile and communications activity. The process involves 
a hard delete of a requesting user’s profile, including the removal of posted 
pictures and all messages sent to other system users’ email boxes.”

7. Given it took card payments for a full delete, why didn’t it make clear 
that that payment information has to be retained?

Ashley Madison offered anonymous payment options, including the ability to pay 
with a Starbucks gift card 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/read/what-the-ashleymadison-hack-can-teach-everyone-about-opsec>
. But for the users who paid with a credit card, it was never going to be 
possible to fully remove their details from the site, because credit card 
payments are retained for fraud protection – and, obviously, linked to a 
specific real identity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Ften-questions-ashley-madison-needs-to-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9102da179893c58b7159ac75d350a5f3c8e7964%2F0_82_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20questions%20Ashley%20Madison%20needs%20to%20answer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Ften-questions-ashley-madison-needs-to-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20questions%20Ashley%20Madison%20needs%20to%20answer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Ften-questions-ashley-madison-needs-to-answer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9102da179893c58b7159ac75d350a5f3c8e7964%2F0_82_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 CEO Noel Biderman:“Have we done good enough a job vetting everyone, are we on 
top of it?” Not so much. Photograph: Jane Mingay/Rex Shutterstock 
8. Why didn’t it disclose the hack to customers as soon as it happened? Why 
did they have to find out from the press?

Disclosure is important in security breaches: often, the most damage will be 
done in the time before users find out and change passwords and card details. 
The Ashley Madison hack is, of course, a special case, because the information 
is damaging in and of itself, regardless of whether it’s reused later on; but 
the same principle applies.

Which is why it’s concerning that the hack has been largely communicated to 
the public through security reporters, rather than contact between Ashley 
Madison and its members. Since the hack was first reported, there have only 
been five public statements from the firm, and no advice for actual users 
concerned about the dissemination of their personal data.

9. Why did it make a specific, narrow denial about storing card numbers?

One of those five statements read, in its entirety:

“No current or past members’ full credit card numbers were stolen from Avid 
Life Media. Any statements to the contrary are false. Avid Life Media has never 
stored members’ full credit card numbers.”

While the statement is undoubtedly true, it glosses over the fact that payment 
information was stolen, including the last four digits of payment cards. Was 
this an attempt to distract from the issues at hand?

10. Why is it still implying the leak is not real?

At this stage, the evidence overwhelmingly points to the complete database 
being genuine. Not only is consumer data exposed, but also Ashley Madison’s 
internal communications – including, in a second dump twice the size of the 
first,the complete email database of founder Biderman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/20/hackers-new-ashley-madison-data>
.

Yet the site’s most recent statement on the matter merely says “we are 
actively monitoring and investigating this situation to determine the validity 
of any information posted online”. If the company is going to attempt to win 
back user trust, the first thing it has to do is come clean. And until it 
admits the extent of the breach, that’s not going to happen.

The Guardian put these questions to Ashely Madison, but the company has not 
directly replied to any questions so far through its UK spokeswoman.
 