
Since Einstein developed his theory of relativity 
<http://www.allaboutscience.org/theory-of-relativity.htm>, and Rutherford and 
Bohr <http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aso/databank/entries/dp13at.html> revolutionised 
physics, our picture of the world has radically changed. Yet no poet, to my 
knowledge, in any European language, has really explored the implications of 
all this for the way in which we view the world. Tennyson, by contrast, was 
immediately alive to the imaginative implications of the revolution in the 
study of geology at the beginning of the 19th century.

We tend to think it was Charles Darwin and the theory of natural selection 
<http://www.darwins-theory-of-evolution.com/> that began the process of 
unbelief, first among 19th century intellectuals, later among the world at 
large – so that by the end of the century, as GK Chesterton observed, "atheism 
was the religion of the suburbs". But, really, it was Charles Lyell's 
pioneering work in geology, and the popularised versions of it published in 
Robert Chambers's Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation (1844), that 
shook faith.

On the one hand, the readers of Lyell were confronted with concrete scientific 
evidence that this planet was of infinitely greater antiquity than the Bible 
would suggest. So bang went any possibility in believing in the literal truth 
of every word of scripture. At the same time, there came the even more 
troubling revelation of the fossils, that the species, far from being created 
whole and finished, as in Milton's evocation inParadise Lost 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradise_Lost>, in fact came and went. There were 
many obsolete animal forms revealed in the fossils. What did this revelation do 
to the hope that not a sparrow falls to the ground unseen by a loving 
providence?

From scarped cliff and quarried stone
She [Nature] cries, "A thousand types are gone:
I care for nothing, all shall go."

Tennyson imagines Nature looking at "Man, her last work" and being bemused by 
his faith in a god. The reality of things, as he contemplates the life of 
prehistoric monsters, is of unthinking violence, and the struggle for the 
"survival of the fittest" long before the term was coined. The whole history of 
religion, with Man building "fanes of fruitless prayer" seems pathetic and vain.

A clergyman's son, depressive, heavy-drinking, heavy-smoking, Alfred Tennyson 
suffered an appalling emotional blow when he lost his best friendArthur Hallam 
<http://www.suite101.com/content/the-bond-of-arthur-hallam-and-alfred-tennyson-a127584>
 on 15 September, 1833. Many of Hallam's friends, including Gladstone, who had 
been all but in love with him at Eton, had seen him as the white hope of his 
generation. In a series of lyrics, written piecemeal over a number of years, 
Tennyson confronted not merely his personal bereavement, in the loss of his 
friend, but the collective bereavement felt by all thinking people of that 
generation as they said farewell to the religious certainties of the past.

In Memoriam <http://www.online-literature.com/donne/718/> is sometimes thought 
of, by those who have not read it, as a cosy, or sentimental work. It is the 
reverse. Although it is so firmly located in the time and place in which it was 
written, it is absolutely of relevance today. It almost beggars belief that 
there are still "creationists" in English and American schools who wish to 
teach young students that the world is only 6,000 years old. Yet it is surely 
equally staggering that so many clever people suppose that these scientific 
facts somehow dispose of the ancient mysteries – of love, of moral obligation, 
of the all but universal sense of God – which have been part of all civilised 
discourse in every part of the world.

This dialectic is at the centre of Tennyson's great poem. On the one hand, he 
confronts the raw pain of losing the false certitudes still peddled today by 
creationists. On the other, with immense delicacy and intelligence, he listens 
to the intuitive and what some would think of as "female" part of his 
imagination. He recounts dreams, idle thoughts on his walks, glimpses of 
nature, as well as the common experiences of bereavement – the sudden, awful 
remembrance that the beloved is no longer there.

In Memoriam has been my companion for all my grownup life. I have found it a 
good "self-help" book in bereavement. And of all the 19th century books about 
faith and loss of faith – John Henry Newman'sGrammar of Assent 
<http://www.thefreelibrary.com/Religious+belief+in+Newman%27s+Grammar+of+Assent.-a0180569724>
, Ernest Renan'sVie de Jesus 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ernest_Renan#Life_of_Jesus>, Leo Tolstoy's 
Confession <http://flag.blackened.net/daver/anarchism/tolstoy/conf1.html> and 
The Gospel in Brief 
<http://www.biblicalproportions.com/modules/wfsection/article.php?articleid=56>
, I have found it "answered", both the condition of despair and doubt, which 
must invade any sensitive soul contemplating an apparently pitiless universe 
and the raw pain of bereavement; and, yet, which acknowledges the reality of 
religious experience. The intuitive sense that there is something "behind the 
veil, behind the veil" is equally honestly confronted. Though "something 
sealed" the lips of the evangelist when it came to explaining or proving 
Christ's divinity, it is not purely contemptible to believe where "we cannot 
prove".

Tennyson seems to be the patron saint of the wishy washies, which is perhaps 
why I admire him so much, not only as a poet, but as a man. But what the 
robust, sharp lyrics of In Memoriam teach me, every time I return to them, is 
that the false certainties of evangelicalChristianity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> are as arid as the shrill 
negativism of the materialist outlook. Truth comes to us mediated by human 
love. That message Tennyson found from experience, as well as from his frequent 
rereading of Dante. He had nothing but scorn for religious controversialists of 
his day – whether Romanisers or Prots – "To cleave a creed in sects and 
cries/To change the bearing of a word"… But it was not merely wishy-washy 
wishful thinking that made his trust in the experience of love.

The love that rose on stronger wings,
Unpalsied when he met with Death,
Is Comrade of the lesser faith
That sees the course of human things.
 