
Alfred, Lord Tennyson would have been 200 this month 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2009/aug/06/tennyson-museum-bicentenary-poet>
, had he been granted even greater longevity – he lived into his mid-80s as it 
was. He was easily the most admired poet of his time: Prince Albert was 
compelled by his admiration to drop in, unannounced, on the Tennysons in 1853, 
as they were busily moving into their new house on the Isle of Wight. Queen 
Victoria invited him to visit her several times, and persuaded him to accept a 
title, although he had declined such public honours when offered them by 
Disraeli or his schoolboy friend, William Gladstone. His appointment as poet 
laureate in 1850 confirmed his place among his contemporaries. Can anyone think 
of a poet in our own time who is as loved, and asread? 

His was, on the surface, a charmed life. If you dig a little deeper, however, 
you see the usual miseries: losses (personal and financial), rejections, 
doubts, existential fears. When his Poems of 1832 were published, and harshly 
reviewed by some prominent critics, he fell silent for a decade – so torn by 
Furies that at one point he considered committing himself to a sanatorium.

Of course, it's as a poet of uncertainty that he now appeals to us. "In 
Memoriam <http://theotherpages.org/poems/books/tennyson/tennyson01.html>" 
(1849) remains his major achievement, a dark meditation on love and loss, life 
and death, fired by periodic thrusts of courage, and attempts to grapple with a 
universe that makes less and less sense. "So runs my dream, but what am I?" he 
asks, in Canto 54:

An infant crying in the night,
An infant crying for the light
And with no language but a cry.

As Tennyson himself said in this sequence: "Words, like nature, half reveal 
and half conceal the soul within." This formulation certainly applies to his 
own work precisely.

From the height of acceptance in his own time, Tennyson fell into that limbo 
of the Great Unread. Modernism needed a straw man to whip, and he was the 
obvious choice, as Queen Victoria's favorite poet. In his influential essay on 
the metaphysical poets, Eliot wrote: "Keats and Shelley died, and Tennyson and 
Browning ruminated." Rumination was not good. Pound suggested that one should 
avoid "Tennysonianness of speech" in writing poems. Robert Frost asserted that 
Tennyson's track of "effects in assonance" was "the wrong track." FR Leavis 
pounced with typical ferocity, in New Bearings in EnglishPoetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry> (1932), charging Tennyson with a 
cult of the "poetical," seeing his work as representing a dream world. Even WH 
Auden, in one of his less inspired moments, called Tennyson "undoubtedly the 
stupidest" of English poets. Thank goodness that recent critics, such as 
Christopher Ricks and Herbert F Tucker, have stepped forward with sharp and 
persuasive critical readings that reveal the subtlety and depth of Tennyson's 
massive body of work.

I personally wouldn't want to go through the rest of my life without "In 
Memoriam" on my bookshelf; without access to any number of lyrics from "Song 
<http://www.litscape.com/author/Alfred_Lord_Tennyson/Song_A_Spirit_Haunts_The_Years_Last_Hours.html>
" and "Mariana <http://www.englishverse.com/poems/mariana>"; to any number of 
longer poems, including "Ulysses <http://www.metalvortex.com/poems/ulysses-.htm>
" and "Maud <http://www.englishverse.com/poems/maud>" – a dense, rewarding poem 
that reveals a deep emotional intelligence. I also recommend Tennyson's 
narrative poems, such as "The Gardener's Daughter 
<http://www.blackcatpoems.com/t/the_gardeners_daughter.html>" and "Enoch Arden 
<http://www.everypoet.com/archive/poetry/Tennyson/tennyson_contents_enoch_arden.htm>
" – and few poets have written as well in the epistolary form, as in "To Mary 
Boyle 
<http://telelib.com/words/authors/T/TennysonAlfred/verse/demeter/maryboyle.html>
", a poem as perpetually fresh as any in the language, one that reveals this 
poet's odd, distinctive mode of forthrightness and reserve, his easy mastery of 
form.

Happy Birthday, Tennyson – and long may you live on.
 