
There are four great voiceovers in cinema: William Holden in Sunset Boulevard 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r9TIDthcIHU>; Joanne Woodward in The Age of 
Innocence <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K0bENHsyGPg>; Joan Fontaine in Letter 
from an Unknown Woman <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P0m0OhvYU_w>; and, to my 
mind the greatest of them all,Dennis Price in Kind Hearts and Coronets 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5XGOyS89gjw>. It's utterly perfect; there isn't 
a flaw in it. The way Price delivers it is quite extraordinary. The truth is, 
withoutDennis Price <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0696866/> there wouldn't be a 
film. He holds it all together with the most elegant diction. It's quite 
wonderful, even just to listen to.

The starting point of Kind Hearts and Coronets is a 1907 novel called Israel 
Rank, by Roy Horniman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/nov/12/kind-hearts-and-coronets>
. It was originally a somewhat laboured Edwardian satire on antisemitism; 
I tried to read it, and frankly it's impossible to get through.Robert Hamer 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/people/id/476694/>, the director and co-writer 
withJohn Dighton <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0226538/>, took the basic idea but 
quite rightly changed everything else. What they've done is transform it into 
one of the greatest comedies of British and indeed world cinema. I think it 
says something that, though it was released in 1949, this is the only 
black-and-white film I always remember in colour.

Price has a wonderful role: Louis Mazzini, the son of a disinherited ducal 
daughter who, after he is not allowed to bury his mother's body in the family 
seat, decides to exact revenge by killing everyone who stands between him and 
the title. Thus the film becomes an odyssey in well-bred murder. We empathise 
with Louis because natural justice has been denied him, so his murderous quest 
has our wholehearted support, for he is not only a victim, he is a charming one 
with an exquisite sense of irony. We also share his disgust at the well-heeled 
classes whose privileges have never been earned and who believe their right 
to rule is automatic and God-given.

And Price is absolutely brilliant. If you study his gestures in the film, you 
soon realise how beautiful they are. They even transmit themselves to the actor 
playing the prison governor: in the opening scene, when they are speaking 
together in Louis's cell, Price grips the edge of his desk, and the governor 
daintily touches the desk with a single finger. It's gorgeous. You can't direct 
that, it just happens.

Later on, Louis has some lovely scenes with his mother where he makes his 
voice very, very light, like a young man. You believe it. It's a lovely 
placement of the voice. Interestingly, what prompts the murders is his love 
for her, the fact she has been so hurt and so dismissed. It's 
such a wonderfully controlled hatred.

Similarly, there's a tremendous economy about the direction. I love the scene 
with Louis's father singing to his mother the first time they meet. Price (who 
plays the father, too) is wearing the most preposterous moustache and never 
appears to breathe. The whole story is told in a single shot. Look at the way 
his mother drops her eyes when he looks at his father. You know immediately 
she's in love with him. That's cinema.

The film's sense of comedy arises from the subversion of the hierarchy, which 
is restrictive and comforting at the same time. So Louis replaces it with an 
exquisite war of personal attrition that is never random but aimed entirely at 
what he calls "the D'Ascoyne's monstrous pride". It is Louis's poise that is 
wonderful. It is seen as exceptionally important to be on polite terms with the 
people you intend to kill. It is both vulgar and unthinkable that revenge 
should ever interfere with good manners. "Revenge is a dish best tasted cold," 
says Louis.

And Louis is as good as his word. For when guarding one's personal honour one 
has to be meticulous while observing the social fabric with equal 
scrupulousness.

At one time, the whole country shared that belief. Guarding personal and 
public honour through collective moral shame was axiomatic, accepted but 
unspoken. But that was a Britain of long, long ago. Look at the ruling class 
now, and weep.

• Kind Hearts and Coronets is in cinemas now, and rereleased on DVD and BluRay.
 