
Eyebrows would be raised if American crocodiles, found on the southern tip of 
Florida <https://www.nps.gov/ever/learn/nature/crocodile.htm>, decided to 
relocate to New York’s Fifth Avenue or Moroccan camels suddenly joined the 
tourist throng outside Buckingham Palace in London. Yet this is the scale of 
species shift that appears to be under way in Alaska.


In July, researchers in Cape Krusenstern national monument 
<https://www.nps.gov/cakr/index.htm> on the north-west coast of Alaska were 
startled to discover a nest containing Caspian terns on the gravelly beach of a 
lagoon. The birds were an incredible 1,000 miles further north than the species 
had been previously recorded.

“There was plenty of shock, it is a very unusual situation,” said Dr Martin 
Robards, Arctic program director at theWildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Conservation Society, which 
found the nest. “We checked with Caspian tern experts and they were all very 
surprised they were this far north. We get Arctic terns here but these terns 
are much bigger, they really stand out.”

The terns, usually found in Washington state, successfully bred and chicks 
have now flown the nest. While it remains to be seen whether Caspian terns will 
become ensconced long-term within the Arctic circle, the epic relocation is 
emblematic of how warming temperatures are causing a huge upheaval in the basic 
rhythms of Alaska’s environment. Next week, scientistswill gather 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/05/13/white-house-arctic-science-ministerial-september-28-2016>
 at the White House’s first ever Arctic science meeting to deliver the 
confronting news.
Alaska temperatures <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/09/alaska-temp/>
“I’ve been up here 25 years and the amount of change that has occurred in 
Alaska <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> is shocking,” said Robards. 
“We’ve been focusing on things such as the temperature and sea ice here but now 
we are thinking ‘oh my God what is going on with the wildlife?’”

Alaska is warming at twice the rate 
<http://nca2014.globalchange.gov/report/regions/alaska> of the rest of the US, 
with the winter temperature 6F (3.3C) warmer than it was 60 years ago. Snow and 
ice has retreated, spring is coming earlier. The landscape is changing and so 
are its residents.

“To be 1,000 miles further north attests to how much the globe has warmed,” 
said Terry Root, a biologist and senior fellow at Stanford University. “Birds 
follow their physiology, nothing else. If they think they should move, they 
move. Alaska has warmed so much that it is causing havoc to a lot of nature.”

While most species aren’t able to move as far as terns, scientists are 
noticing shifts across Alaska. Moose and beavers have moved north of the Brooks 
Range and onto the Arctic plain, which increasingly offers suitable vegetation 
as the regionwarms up and greens 
<http://www.arctic.noaa.gov/reportcard/tundra_greenness.html>. 

Red foxes have moved in and have started to outcompete Arctic foxes. A similar 
thing may happen if the beefy Caspian terns start to push out their smaller 
cousins. The relationship between grizzly bears and polar bears may be a little 
more amicable – as their range starts to overlap there have been reports of a 
hybrid“pizzly” bears in the Arctic. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/18/pizzly-grolar-bear-grizzly-polar-hybrid-climate-change>

But the situation for polar bears is otherwise grim – they are losing 
life-sustaining sea ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/polar-bears-losing-crucial-sea-ice-study-arctic>
 critical for hunting and breeding across the Arctic. They are being forced 
onto land, where they risk starvation. This desperate scenario is shared with 
walruses, which have already suffered a 50% drop since the 1980s. In recent 
years tens of thousands of the tusked beastshave had to crowd ashore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/27/walruses-alaska-arctic-sea-ice-melt>
, with many perishing in stampedes.

The melting on land is just as stark. Over the past decade, Alaska has lost 
850 gigatonnes of water from its shrinking glaciers, enough to raise the global 
sea level by 2.9mm. We are living through the fastest Arctic glacier decline in 
at least 6,000 years, according to Dr Martin Sharp, professor of Earth and 
atmospheric science at the University of Alberta.

“If the warming trends continue then we expect to see continuous retreat,” 
Sharp said. “We are seeing the complete loss of glaciers, areas that had ice 
caps in the 1950s don’t have them now. That trend will probably increase.”

Alaska is being locked into an unhappy cycle of events. As the declining 
glaciers lose albedo, or reflectivity from sunlight, they absorb more heat and 
therefore melt further.

The vegetation poking through thawing permafrost aids the spread of wildfire 
which in turn releases more carbon dioxide – flames have recently licked areas 
of Alaskan forest previously unburned for thousands of years. The amount of 
area burned each year in the state isexpected to double by 2050 
<http://nca2014.globalchange.gov/report/regions/alaska> even if the world acts 
swiftly on climate change.

Summer Arctic sea ice is forecast to winnow away completely by the 2030s, 
which will be a boon for tourism operators looking to traverse the opening
north-west sea passage 
<https://www.climate.gov/news-features/event-tracker/northwest-passage-clear-ice-again-2016>
. TheCrystal Serenity cruise ship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/13/large-cruise-ship-voyage-arctic-ice-crystal-cruises>
, with passengers that paid up to $100,000 for a cabin, arrived safely in New 
York last week after a 32-day journey through this newly reliable corridor.

But this decline threatens more traditional pursuits. Indigenous communities 
are finding the thinning ice too treacherous for fishing, while the 1,000-mile 
Iditarod dog sled racefaces an uncertain future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/24/iditarod-climate-change-sled-dogs-winter-alaska>
. After record winter warmth, Alaska baked as the season turned to spring – the 
temperature from January to April was an incredible 11.3F (6.2C) warmer than 
the long-term average taken from the 20th century.

Still, Alaska and neighboring Canada may well prove a haven for overheated 
animal species in the future. The state will still be cooler than the lower 48 
states and has plenty of wilderness.

“The Caspian tern is a success story in many ways,” said Root. “Unfortunately, 
many animals won’t be able to move. There’s only so far a salamander can crawl 
or a gopher tortoise can walk. We stand at the beginning of a mass extinction 
event.

“One of the most important wildlife corridors runs between Mexico and the US, 
so Donald Trump’s stupid wall could be a huge problem for nature. At least we 
won’t have a border like that with Canada, I guess.”

 * The photo on this story was changed on 23 September 2016. The photo was 
changed because the original showed a great crested tern, not a Caspian tern; 
the headline was changed to indicate that the terns were not fleeing to the 
north of Alaska, rather expanding their migratory area.  