
In a world where we live so much of our lives disassociated from our political 
system, it takes extreme emotions to jolt us out of our apathy and actually 
engage.

Occasionally emotions like hope, optimism and passion drive a Mandela or a 
Whitlam or an Obama into power and gives them a license to transform their 
societies.

More often the emotions of fear drive political engagement, be it the fear of 
the Red Menace or the Nuclear Big Bang or the impending Carbon Catastrophe that 
rouses us from our stupor.

Fear in politics is not in itself a driver of negative policies. Fear drives 
initiatives to reduce the road toll and eradicate smoking; to end our reliance 
on coal as an energy source.

Fear of foreigners is political Viagra for our limp leaders | Suzanne Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/20/fear-of-foreigners-political-viagra-for-limp-leaders-teenage-refugees-david-davies-calais>
But more often fear becomes a tool to justify policies that turn us inwards, 
cowering from the outside world, seeking comfort in the familiar and putting up 
walls to keep out the Other.

Fear gives rise to the cliche of modern politics: “the scare campaign” – the 
idea that bad things are going to happen and only [insert candidate here] can 
stop them.

Fear has been prime currency for the 15 years since terrorists flew their 
planes into the New York Twin Towers, breaking forever the separation between 
first and third world issues.

Fear was localised with the Bali bombings a year later and the attacks on the 
London Underground in 2005 and continues to percolate with increasingly brazen 
attacks on nightclubs and beachfronts from Paris to Orlando.

The response to these attacks as a “War On Terror” framed by the Bush 
administration and implemented by the Howard government has become a part of 
our national psyche and a further driver of that fear.

We might not get the nuance of an al-Qaida as opposed to an Islamic State, but 
fear of a terrorist attack has become core to our political discourse, framing 
our border policies, restricting our civil liberties and informing our views on 
immigration:
How concerned are you about the risk of a terrorism attack on Australian soil? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1JBp-0rbFOT6BsiCmvQL7qC7hNSEL8LmjZjb2og_nL1M>
On one level the fear is understandable, the excesses of Isis’s viral 
marketing has created chilling content that challenges our powers of 
comprehension.

But that fear is demonstrably misplaced by the raw data.

While terrorism has yet to claim a victim in Australia in 2016, 56 women and 
children have been victims of family violence, more than 1,200 people have died 
on the roads, an estimated 3,000 people have committed suicide and upwards of 
40,000 Australians have died of cancer-related illness.

Fear is the straw man of modern politics. Fear as a political frame makes life 
simpler, it’s not about doing good things in an increasingly complex world, but 
simply stopping bad things happening.

In this context it’s interesting to see what we want our leaders to do to 
quell the fear:
Would you support or oppose the following measures? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1Bc7E9MGoXIb2uPzxypCXgE5K2L6ehNKOc6YD3JqpJbQ>
Note the support for border control measures over military intervention and 
the support for de-radicalisation over data monitoring, but there is majority 
support for all the suggested measures. In the face of fear, we are prepared to 
wave most things through.

While fear is the backdrop to so much of Australia’s political debate, it is 
only an echo of the stresses defining the current US presidential elections 
where reification of guns adds another string to Fear’s armoury.

As Molly Ball argues in the September issue of the Atlantic, fear drives an 
inherently conservative political agenda 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/09/donald-trump-and-the-politics-of-fear/498116/>
.

She cites correlations between a uncertainty and fear, an intolerance of 
ambiguity and political conservatism.

This passes the sniff test – progressive political agendas demand a sense of 
optimism from the people to bloom; when people feel uncertain or scared they 
revert to the safe.

Ball notes that 2002 and 2004 were high points for the American conservative 
movement, despite the limitations of its president who had little to offer but 
the promise of order and control.

A year in Australian politics: after a steady drumbeat of fear, 2015 ends on 
hopeful note
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/18/australia-plumbed-new-depths-in-year-of-fearful-politics-but-ends-on-hopeful-note>
This is a similar theme to the one Trump is attempting to play, with less 
success, in this presidential campaign, where America is weak and foreign 
policy is a “disaster” and he is the only one who can make America great again.

Ball argues that when fear becomes an axis for political debate, all chance of 
rational policy ends, as every incremental social change from immigration to 
welfare becomes a threat to “our way of life”.

Indeed, she observes that in overplaying the fear Trump risks becoming the 
personification of the emotion he attempts to mollify.

And we can report that in Australia at least she is right. Line up all the 
things to be scared of and it is The Donald who runs second to Isis and radical 
Islam:
What of these is the biggest threat to international peace and stability? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1hnfsPOXkCr-MD1WLdn1LsHvIBhCn4BXlcC2JkDGGPgI>
The hope is that a rejection of Trump by the American people will be an 
incremental – and necessary – first step in clearing the way to deal with the 
real threats our world really has to fear.
 