
Tesco has agreed to sell half its stake in Lazada, a south-east Asian online 
retailer, to China’sAlibaba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> for 
about £90m as the UK supermarket group concentrates on its home business.

Tesco said it would sell 8.6% of Lazada 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/tesco-plc--tsco-/rns/tesco-announces-sale-of-partial-stake-in-lazada/201604120700068649U/>
 to Alibaba, the world’s largest retailer, for $129m (£90.6m) in a deal valuing 
the business at $1.5bn. Alibaba will invest $500m in new Lazada shares as well 
as buying out Tesco and other investors in the Singapore-based retailer.

Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> will retain an 8.3% stake 
in Lazada after the transaction completes, including the issue of new shares, 
but Alibaba will have an option to buy out remaining investors within 12 to 18 
months.

The deal values Tesco’s Lazada stake at significantly more than the £113m 
carrying value listed in its accounts last August. Tesco, which reports its 
annual results on Wednesday, classified Lazada as an asset available for sale 
for the financial year that ended in February.

Tesco results: analysts expect strong start to the year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/11/tesco-results-analysts-expect-strong-start-to-the-year>
The former Tesco chief executive Philip Clarke bought 19.6% of Lazada in 
November 2013 as the grocer sought to improve its online capabilities in Asia. 
It has invested $124m in the business. Under new management after a series of 
profit warnings, Tesco has retrenchedto overhaul its UK stores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/08/tesco-recovery-sales-supermarket-retail-sector>
 and has been selling international operationssuch as its business in South 
Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/07/tesco-sells-south-korean-unit-for-4bn-pounds-mbk-partners>
.


Alibaba, which sells almost 1bn consumer products, has overtaken Tesco and 
Walmart of the US to become the world’s biggest retailer. It is expanding beyond
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, where it makes about 90% of 
revenue, and wants to tap into fast-growing south-east Asian consumer markets 
such as Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.

Michael Evans, Alibaba’s president, said: “Globalisation is a critical 
strategy for the growth of Alibaba today and well into the future. With the 
investment in Lazada, Alibaba gains access to a platform with a large and 
growing consumer base outside China, a proven management team and a solid 
foundation for future growth in one of the most promising regions for ecommerce 
globally.”

The deal will take Alibaba into a region where no single operator yet 
dominates. While south-east Asia’s growing affluence is expected to fuel growth 
in online shopping, many countries in the region lack transport and payments 
systems required for online retailing to take off.

Tesco said it would use the money from the sale for general working capital 
purposes.
 