
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has revamped its budget 
range of value products with a new range of own-label “farm” brands as it steps 
up its fight against German discountersAldi  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi>and Lidl. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl>

The seven brands comprise 76 new lines across fresh produce, meat and poultry 
that will either match the price of competitors or beat them. Where there is 
duplication, the products will replace those in its existingEveryday Value 
<http://www.tesco.com/groceries/zones/default.aspx?name=tesco-value> “basics” 
range.

Tesco's fictional farms: a marketing strategy past its sell-by date?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2016/mar/22/tescos-fictional-farms-a-marketing-strategy-past-its-sell-by-date>
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> hopes the colour-coded 
packaging using fictitious British-style farm names will attract shoppers. 
Woodside, Willow and Boswell Farms, for example, represent, respectively, fresh 
pork, chicken and beef, while Redmere Farms cover vegetables and Suntrail Farms 
imported fruit.


Described as “meeting the need for a new level of quality at great prices”, 
the range is a long-term addition to its shelves. Prices for fruit and 
vegetables range from 35p for a lettuce to £1.69 for a punnet of raspberries.


The initiative comes four years after Tesco Value 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/apr/04/tesco-rebrands-value-range> – 
the £1bn range of cheap, own-brand products that defined the company for the 
past 20 years – was relaunched as Everyday Value under the previous chief 
executive, Philip Clarke.


The latest move, under his successor, Dave Lewis, who joined in September 
2014, is part of a strategy to introduce easier to understand low pricing on a 
streamlined product range.

A spokesperson said: “Over the last 18 months we have been simplifying our 
ranges, launched Brand Guarantee and improved customer service. However, we 
know customers want the convenience of getting all their shopping in one place. 
These seven new brands, which are exclusive to Tesco, address our customers’ 
needs for quality fresh food, at very competititve prices in a single shop.”


But the decision to use fictitious farm names at a time when Tesco claims to 
be supporting British farming attracted derision on social media. TheNational 
Farmers’ Union <http://www.nfuonline.com/home/>questioned the use of “phony” or 
“fake” farms given how many real ones there were.

A Tesco spokeswoman said some of the names, such as Nightingale and Rosedene, 
had previously been operating farms and were selected in partnership with its 
suppliers.

“In all cases, the fresh food being sold under our new brands is sourced from 
a selection of farms and growers,” she said. “Some are small, family-run farms 
while others are of a larger scale – and every product has been reared or grown 
to specific standards from known and audited farms and growers.”

There are hopes that 2016 may be a better year for Britain’s big supermarkets, 
which have been hit by a price war triggered by rising competition from Aldi and
Lidl <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> as well as changing shopping 
patterns.

In its January  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/14/tesco-beats-forecasts-with-christmas-sales-rise>
update on Christmas trading, Tesco reported its first like-for-like sales 
growth for four years. Improving monthly industry data has followed, adding to 
hopes Britain’s largest supermarket may finally be recovering.

Last Tuesday, Sainsbury’s revealed its first quarterly sales growth for more 
than two years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/15/sainsburys-sales-rebound-boosts-home-retail-group-prospects>
, and earlier in the monthMorrisons announced its first quarterly rise in 
underlying sales for four years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/morrisons-returns-to-profit-as-sales-start-to-rise>
.


 