
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> has halved the pace of its 
sales decline in the past month as price cuts have helped stem the loss of 
customers elsewhere.

The UK’s biggest supermarket enjoyed its best performance since July, with 
sales down 0.8% in the 12 weeks to 28 February, compared witha 1.6% decline 
revealed a month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/09/uk-grocery-market-gets-a-boost-from-detox-january>
 earlier, according to analysts Kantar Worldpanel.

Tesco considering cutting store staff by 39,000 over three years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/tesco-considering-cutting-store-staff-by-39000-over-three-years>
Separate figures from analysis firm Nielsen suggested Tesco was doing even 
better, with sales falling by just 0.5%, the chain’s best performance since 
November 2013.

Mike Watkins, Nielsen’s UK head of retail and business insight, said: “Tesco 
has been improving the basics, including its pricing. This has encouraged more 
visits and attracted back shoppers who had previously defected.
“Their new customer proposition highlights the benefits of having a large 
variety of store types – physical and online.Supermarkets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/supermarkets> offering more locations, 
good private label and a superior customer experience – not just lower prices – 
tend to be more successful, and these are some of the areas where Tesco are 
focusing.”

The strong sales performance is good news for Dave Lewis, Tesco’s chief 
executive, who is under pressure to show results from his turnaround plan, 
which kicked off in autumn 2014.

The improvement in sales came alongside a general pickup in the grocery market 
in February. Sales for the sector rose 0.5%, the fastest pace of growth since 
October, as chocolate sales rose 13% in February – thanks to Valentine’s Day 
and early preparations for Easter. Sparkling wine sales also continued to soar 
– up 15% last month.

Tesco’s trade increase came at the expense of Asda and Morrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>, where the pace of sales 
declines increased. Asda’s sales fell by 4% in the three months to the end of 
February, the chain’s worst performance recorded by Kantar.

The struggling retailer has lost 0.8 percentage points of market share over 
the past year. It controls 16.2% of UK grocery sales, putting it behind 
Sainsbury’s, which is now the UK’s second biggest supermarket with 16.8% market 
share. Tesco’s market share is 28.4%.

Amazon enters fresh food market with Morrisons deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/29/amazon-enters-fresh-food-market-with-morrisons-deal>
Asda boss Andy Clarke has said he is sticking to a plan of protecting profits 
and cutting prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/18/andy-clarke-asda-determined-not-shelve-five-year-plan>
, despite 15 months of falling sales culminating in the company’sworst 
quarterly trading period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/asda-quarterly-loss-christmas>
. But he is under increasing pressure to turnaround performance before the 
arrival this autumn ofhis potential successor, Roger Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/13/asda-poaches-top-sainsburys-director>
, a former Sainsbury’s director.

Sainsbury’s was the only one of the big four chains to see growth over the 
three-month period. Its sales rose by 0.5%, its eighth consecutive period of 
growth.

Morrisons’ sales declined by 3.2%, compared with a 2.2% fall revealed by 
Kantar last month. The Bradford-based chain’s sales continue to be impacted by 
store closures and price cuts.

The changing face of the grocery market is clearly marked in the latest 
figures as the German discounters Aldi andLidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> continue to grow rapidly. Lidl’s 
sales rose 18.9%; Aldi’s sales rose 15.1%, taking their combined market share 
to 10%.

The Co-operative Group also continued its strong period of growth, with sales 
up 1.9%, as it benefits from the trend towards shopping little and often, as 
well as improvements to its stores, pricing and product range.
 