
My heart leaps whenever I see the poster for Amma Asante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/18/amma-asante-belle-bicultural-ghanaian-british-director-grange-hill>
's new film,Belle, high up on billboards around town. The poised, sincere face 
of its lead actress,Gugu Mbatha-Raw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/may/31/gugu-mbatha-raw-hamlet> (a Brit 
of black South African and white English extraction), towers above an otherwise 
white cast including Tom Wilkinson, Miranda Richardson, and ex-Harry Potter 
villain Tom Felton.

Why? As a mixed-race Brit myself – white and black Caribbean, as I've been 
checking in the relevant boxes for some years now – it's always been 
significant to me to see someone who looks like they could be a close relative 
in the foreground rather than the background. The film's protagonist,Dido 
Elizabeth Belle 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/10863078/Dido-Belle-Britains-first-black-aristocrat.html>
, as you might now know, is based on an actual 18th-century mixed-race woman of 
white British and black African heritage who was raised as an aristocrat.

The issues still seem relevant now: how does a mixed-race person navigate the 
spaces between cultures and the isolation that sometimes ensue? Film and 
television that genuinely engages with the mixed-race British experience is 
rare, so it's always thrilling when it happens in mainstream entertainment. 
Mixed-race visibility is not new, particularly in professional sports, but the 
wonderful sight of Jessica Ennis on the medal podium is not the same as 
experiencing the layered complexity of a multifaceted story.

As the musician and increasingly impressive public intellectual Questlove 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/questlove-remembers-humiliating-racial-profiling-experiences-20130814>
 recently wrote: "In the simplest terms, art humanises. It opens the circuit of 
empathy. And once that process happens, it's that much harder to think of 
people as part of a policy or a statistic."

In 2012, British Future published a glowing report, The Melting Pot 
Generation: How Britain Became More Relaxed on Race 
<http://www.britishfuture.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/The-melting-pot-generation.pdf>
.It noted: "The Jessica Ennis generation can stake a strong claim to have won 
the race against prejudice", alongside figures showing that only 15% of the 
public were opposed to marriages across ethnic lines, down from 50% when my 
parents met in the mid-1980s.

It's clear that things have improved. However, while one can celebrate the 
findings – and happily feel that acceptance of mixed relationships has 
increased – one must also wonder how this all squares with last month's
revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/27/-sp-racism-on-rise-in-britain> 
in the British Social Attitudes survey that found that the proportion of people 
in the UK who say they are racially prejudiced has risen since 2001.

As a film critic by trade, there are some things about myself that I rarely 
include in my contributions to the public conversation. I won a bursary to 
attend a predominantly white private school and it was here that I first 
started to consider seriously issues of race, privilege, the ways that I did or 
didn't fit in, or whether I even had to try to fit in. (I eventually decided I 
didn't, probably around the same time I decidedScritti Politti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/22/green-gartside-scritti-politti-interview>
 were my favourite band and started hawking homemade "best of the 80s" 
cassettes to my teachers.)

At the age of 13, I was thrilled to see the mixed-race experience represented 
in the classroom for the first time when we read John Agard's witty, acrid poem
Half Caste <http://www.intermix.org.uk/poetry/poetry_01_agard.asp>(Wha yu mean/ 
when yu say half-caste/ yu mean when Picasso/ mix red an green/ is a half-caste 
canvas?), a takedown of the now horribly out-of-date, and ever-repellent, term. 
Jamaican patois was familiar to me from my regular trips to the barber with my 
Tooting-born dad. My quietly emotional reaction to Agard's poem was 
automatically filtered from most of my classmates but I was fortunate to have a 
best friend with whom I shared a similar background (his mother's white, his 
father Sudanese) and could privately discuss race, not to mention white 
institutional cluelessness about such matters.

It's tempting to say that as mixed-race people we are able to forge our own 
distinct identities, that mixed-race people don't face the stereotypes that 
other minority groups do. However, this assumption should be treated with 
caution: people such as myself who are "black mixed" versus people who are 
"non-black mixed" can have a different experience.

The sociologist Emma Dabiri 
<http://www.intermix.org.uk/events/emma%20dabiri.asp> convincingly argues that 
"black-mixed people can be racialised as black, whereas non-black-mixed people 
are able to inhabit a more ambiguous exotic space". This, says Dabiri, puts 
paid to the myth that all mixed-race groups can be packaged together – as the 
media often attempt to do – as one separate, monolithic community: a tidy 
narrative of progress.

For example, I was being aggressively racialised as black when I was abused by 
a group of drunken football fans in the bar of the team I support, or whenever 
I've been stopped and searched by police.Mark Duggan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mark-duggan> was racialised as black in death 
by the media.

When England footballer Ashley Cole gets monkey chants from the terraces, his 
(half) whiteness is the last thing on the minds of his abusers. And when 
President Barack Obama was called upon to comment on the acquittal of George 
Zimmerman – whoshot to death the 17-year-old African-American Trayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/28/trayvon-martin-florida-statehouse-stand-your-ground>
 – the American public, conditioned by the "one drop" theory of black 
identification, was not thinking about his half-white heritage.

All of this serves to illustrate that the mixed-race experience is unique 
among minority groups because it is highly individualised, nationally and 
globally; there is very little in the way of a grand, unifying narrative or 
shared history.

That is precisely why compassionate and detailed individual narratives are so 
vital.Comments will be opened later this morning
 