
I first saw Andrei Rublev at the Bloomsbury cinema (later to become the 
Renoir). The film was made in 1966, but wasn't released in the Soviet Union 
until 1971 and finally made it to the UK in 1973, albeit in a cut down version. 
I went thanks to my mother; she was studying Russian at the time so she could 
read her beloved classics in their original language.

This was the first serious art-house film I'd ever seen. The previous year, my 
birthday treat had been to seeDiamonds Are Forever at the Odeon Leicester 
Square followed by hamburgers at Peppermint Park â€“ my idea of heaven. My family 
nickname was the Kid because of my fondness for American movie culture, in case 
it looks like I'm trying to appear prematurely sophisticated.

Part of my enjoyment may have been because seeing this film represented mildly 
illicit behaviour.Andrei Rublev had a AA certificate which meant you had to be 
14 to get in. My mother worried I'd be disturbed by the scenes of torture, but 
the only time I hid my eyes was the appearance of a water snake in a stream.

If I tune into my memory of that first viewing, there are key moments that 
stand out: the casting of the bell, when the film turns from black and white 
into colour, and when Italian is spoken just before the bell is rung for the 
first time. This touched me as the previous year I'd discovered Italy and had 
vowed to go back there.

My understanding of the film now is possibly no greater than it was aged 13 
but I remember being completely sucked into the story, following it as if it 
were an amazing fairy tale. Maybe that's not surprising because Tarkovsky 
himself said: "We worked at drowning our idea in the atmosphere, in the 
characters."

This was not a coup de foudre where I decided to make films from that moment 
on, but it did get seriously under my skin. My appreciation hasn't diminished 
and I have kept it close to my heart ever since.

Joanna Hogg's latest film, Archipelago, is out on DVD on 9 May
 