
If Euroscepticism alone explained everything in European politics, as 
Brexiters and parts of the UK press pretend, then Matteo Renzi’s government 
would have fallen in Italy and Norbert Hofer would be the new president of 
Austria. In reality, one of those things –Mr Renzi’s fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/matteo-renzi-due-to-formally-submit-resignation-as-italy-ponders-what-next>
 – has come to pass; but the other – a Hofer win in Austria – has not. Sunday’s 
votes tell us that Europe faces a shared crisis with distinctive national 
forms. To explain such events it is important to pay much closer attention to 
national politics in Europe than biased observers in Britain ever bother to do.

Alexander Van der Bellen’s win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
 in Austria is a genuine blow to the far right. In May, before the rerun was 
ordered, Mr Van der Bellen defeated Mr Hofer by only a 0.6% margin; on Sunday, 
the former Green leader boosted his majority to a 6.6% margin, more than 
300,000 votes. He did so by running anexplicitly pro-European 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/austria-vote-eu-italy-matteo-renzi-norbert-hofer-union>
 campaign – worth remembering in the wake of the Richmond Park byelection, 
where Sarah Olney did the same. In Austria, women were decisive,by a 62%-38% 
margin <http://derstandard.at/2000048754159/Wer-wem-seine-Stimme-gegeben-hat>. 
So werethe cities 
<http://derstandard.at/2000048751925/Bundespraesidentschaftswahl-Erste-Ergebnisse>
; Vienna voted almost 2:1 for Mr Van der Bellen. Nor was there a generational 
split: over-60s voted for Mr Van der Bellen, as did the under-30s.

Austria’s welcome result should be a note of caution to those who assume that 
voters across Europe will blindly embrace the more nationalistic option in all 
circumstances. Austria’s 2016 elections have been humbling for the old order; 
the centre parties of left and right that have ruled for decades both failed to 
reach the final round. The fact that 47% of Austrians voted for Mr Hofer isa 
warning for the future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/defeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe>
. But Sunday’s outcome is a timely reminder that Austria has a leftwing 
tradition as well as the rightwing one that gets all the publicity.

Italy’s referendum was likewise a defeat for the establishment. Mr Renzi was 
humiliated, and by a larger-than-forecast 18-point margin. He won only in his 
own region ofTuscany and two others 
<http://elezioni.lastampa.it/2016/referendum-costituzionale?refresh_ce>. Most 
of the north and all of the south voted against his proposals to boost central 
government powersto drive through economic reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/2016/dec/05/italy-euro-economy-competitiveness>
. Italy’s strong regional tradition had much to do with this. But so did the 
fact that Italy is still, as it has been since 1945, largely a rightwing 
country. Mr Renzi’s threat to resign if he lost was fatal. It united the 
rightwing parties with those on the left who dislike his reform programme. It 
was an abject defeat for a leader whose response to the migration crisis 
deserved better.

British Eurosceptics have been rubbing their hands for weeks at the prospect 
of an Italian crisis. They hope Mr Renzi’s fall will mean an election that will 
bring anti-European parties to power and will trigger a run on the banks that 
could force Italy out of the eurozone. Neither outcome can be dismissed. But 
the early signs are that much of this is wishful thinking from people who have 
now segued from wanting the UK out of the EU to actively seeking the collapse 
of the EU altogether. Early Italian elections seem unlikely, whilethe markets 
steadied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/05/italy-referendum-matteo-renzi-markets-spooked-shares-bonds-eurozone-live?page=with:block-58454e26e4b015a427f77aad#block-58454e26e4b015a427f77aad>
 on Monday. And Italians remain, in general, markedly enthusiastic about the 
EU. Nevertheless, unlike in the UK Brexit vote, where older voters’ dislike of 
Europe outweighed younger voters’ support for it, in Italy older people stood 
by Mr Renzi, whileyounger voters 
<http://www.rainews.it/dl/rainews/media/I-giovani-e-il-Sud-hanno-bocciato-la-riforma-di-Renzi-la-prima-analisi-dei-risultati-del-referendum-0ebc5b75-8d09-4456-be52-7b52c954d41c.html?&time=&photoStart=1#foto-2>
 turned against him. That is not a good sign for Italy’s future.

The postwar European project is threatened in multiple ways and many 
countries. Without reform it may buckle. But the current tendency among British 
anti-Europeans is to frame every electoral test inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as interchangeable with 
Britain’s Brexit vote and the Trump victory in the United States. This is 
mendacious. Politics in Britain, even, isn’t always about the EU. And one 
reading of Austria’s vote (and of Richmond Park) could be that it was a 
reaction against Mr Trump. Europe’s weekend contests have been widely depicted 
in a typically misleading and solipsistic way on the right. Neither result can 
be adequately explained in that Eurosceptic frame.
 