

Reading this on mobile? Click here to listen. 
<http://soundcloud.com/guardianaudioedition/28may-2013>

In this week's edition:

• When Ingrid Loyau-Kennett's bus was halted at the scene of the Woolwich 
attack, she leapt out to offer aid, but instead ended up engaging one suspect 
in conversation. By Leo Hickman.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2013/may/27/woolwich-witness-ingrid-loyau-kennett>

• A stark rise in inequality has brought about unprecedented rioting in 
Sweden. The omens for Britain are worrying. By Aditya Chakrabortty.Click here 
to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/may/27/swedish-riots-inequality-stockholm>

• A physicist has formulated a mathematical theory that purports to explain 
why the universe works the way it does – and it feels like 'the answer'. By 
Marcus du Sautoy.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2013/may/23/eric-weinstein-answer-physics-problems>

• In 1995, government inspectors spent months on Bodmin moor in Cornwall 
looking for evidence of a 'beast' roaming wild there. They found nothing. Yet 
every year there are 2,000 similarly spurious big-cat sightings in Britain. 
What's going on? By George Monbiot.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/may/21/big-cat-sightings-mass-hysteria>

• Casting directors are among the most powerful figures in showbusiness, able 
to make or break careers. But what exactly do they do? By Laura Barnett.Click 
here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2013/may/21/casting-directors>

• Our audiobook review looks at Antonia Fraser's Perilous Question and Daniel 
Dennett's Intuition Pumps and Other Tools for Thinking.

• The Guardian Audio Edition is supported by Audible.co.uk. 
<http://www.audible.co.uk> To listen to the audiobooks reviewed in this week's 
edition go toaudible.co.uk/guardianaudio 
<http://www.audible.co.uk/guardianaudio>.
 