
Oh, the magic of that opening ceremony: the spectacle, the opulence, the 
fireworks – the sheer, mind-blowing wonder. I'm speaking, of course, of the 
2008 Beijing Olympics opening ceremony, which I somehow missed first time 
around, and which was broadcast twice in its entirety – somewhat churlishly, 
you might think – on Eurosport today. It remains a valuable lesson in what can 
be achieved with some lights, a bit of music, a few guy ropes, and lots and 
lots of conscript labour. But it's also the past. The first day of London 2012 
has finally arrived and I am hungry for some homegrown spectacle.

*******

Spectacle, unfortunately, is a bit thin on the ground today – even thinner 
than it was yesterday, when there was a fair bit of football. BBC3 is taking 
advantage of the special Olympic dispensation allowing it to broadcast 24 hours 
a day to show repeats of The Real Hustle and Snog Marry Avoid. There are, in 
fact, precisely four Olympic events taking place: the team and individual 
Archery ranking rounds, men's and women's. And they're not even on telly.

*******

It is, apparently, a "tradition" that the archers' ranking rounds are held 
behind closed doors, in this case at Lord's cricket ground. It's also an 
"unticketed" event, which quite a few people took to mean not "Please stay 
away!" but "Come on down, it's free!" Literally dozens of disappointed archery 
fans had to be turned away. Perhaps the only thing that could make me care 
about archery is someone telling me I'm not allowed to watch it. What is it 
with these top-secret ranking rounds? Do they use human targets? Do they all 
shoot naked? Let me in!

*******

The archery may not have been televised, but it was being covered – or at 
least, intermittently referred to – on Radio 5 Live. Perhaps there are other 
sports less suited to radio, but there is probably no form of archery harder to 
capture in an audio-only format than the ranking round. A bunch of people shot 
some arrows, which doesn't really sound of anything. Then a bell went. "And the 
competitors are now allowed to check their targets," said a presenter by way of 
explanation. Spine-tingling. No wonder there are several dozen would-be 
spectators trying to storm the gates.

*******

Fortunately 5 Live has found the perfect archery ranking rounds correspondent: 
Test Match Special's Jonathan Agnew. When you can't see what's happening, 
Aggers is brilliant at telling you that, in fact, nothing is happening. He's 
used to spending whole weekends commentating on different varieties of drizzle, 
and he certainly knows his way round Lords. "I can see the pitch for the 
upcoming South Africa match," he said, setting the scene. "It's being sort of 
protected, but not really." Top that, Danny Boyle.

*******

Quote of the day: "The Geiger counter of Olympo-mania is creeping toward the 
red zone now," said Boris Johnson, on being asked by the BBC to describe his 
present mental state.
 