
So far, on this list, with the possible exception of Alice in Wonderland (No 
18 in this series) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/20/100-best-novels-alice-wonderland>
,Heart of Darkness is probably the title that has aroused, and continues to 
arouse, most literary critical debate, not to say polemic. This is partly 
because the story it tells has the visceral simplicity of great myth, and also 
because the book takes its narrator (Charles Marlow), and the reader, on a 
journey into the heart of Africa.

Our encounter with Marlow's life-changing journey begins on the Thames in 
London, the great imperial capital, with his recollection of "the uttermost 
ends of the Earth". With brilliant economy, Conrad transports him to Congo on a 
quest that the writer himself undertook as a young man. There, working for the 
shadowy, but all-powerful "Company", Marlow hears of Mr Kurtz, who is described 
as a first-class Company servant. Once in the dark continent, Marlow is sent 
upriver to make contact with Kurtz, who is said to be very ill, and also to 
safeguard the security of the Inner Station. What he finds, after a gruelling 
journey to the interior, is a fellow European, who may or may not have gone 
mad, and who is worshipped as a god by the natives of the primitive interior. 
Kurtz, however, has paid a terrible price for his mastery. When Marlow finds 
him on his deathbed, he utters the famous and enigmatic last words: "The 
horror! The horror!"

This line is often said to refer to the atrocities Conrad himself witnessed in 
Congo as it suffered under the colonial administration of the Belgians. He 
himself is said to have remarked that his story was based on "experience, 
pushed a little (and only very little) beyond the actual facts of the case". 
The metaphorical force of the story and the indifferent contempt of the African 
who announces "Mistah Kurtz â€“ He dead" (brilliantly expropriated by TS Eliot) 
givesHeart of Darkness the most modern air of all the books that make up the 
movement called Modernism. Welcome to the 20th century, possibly English and 
American fiction's golden age.

A note on the text


Conrad's first and second languages were Polish and French, with his third 
language, English, not acquired until he was 20. English, however, was the 
medium he adopted to explore his youthful experience as a riverboat captain in 
Belgian Congo. Part of the work's strange hallucinatory atmosphere comes from 
the writer's struggle with a language that was not his mother tongue. He 
sometimes said he would have preferred to be a French novelist, and that 
English was a language without "clean edges". He once complained that "all 
English words are instruments for exciting blurred emotions". This, 
paradoxically, is perhaps what gives the book its famously enigmatic, and 
ambiguous, atmosphere.

Conrad finished writing Heart of Darkness on 9 February 1899. It was originally
published as a three-part serialisation inBlackwood's Magazine from February to 
April 1899 <http://www.conradfirst.net/view/image?id=22863> (a commission for 
the 1,000th issue of the magazine), where it was promoted as a nautical tale by 
a writer whose work was at first (mistakenly) associated with the sea.

Heart of Darkness comes down to us in three other primary texts: a manuscript, 
a typescript and the final, revised version published in 1902. Not exactly a 
long story, and certainly not a novella, at barely 38,000 words long, it first 
appeared in volume form as part of a collection of stories that included Youth: 
A Narrative and The End of the Tether. It has become Conrad's most famous, 
controversial and influential work. The English and American writers who fell 
under its spell include TS Eliot (The Waste Land), Graham Greene (A Burnt-out 
Case), George Orwell (Nineteen-Eighty-Four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/aug/06/nineteen-eighty-four-george-orwell-1984>
) andWilliam Golding (The Inheritors) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jan/11/fiction.williamgolding>. It also 
inspired the Francis Ford Coppola 1979 filmApocalypse Now, a work of homage 
that continues to renew the contemporary fascination with the text.

None of Conrad's other books have inspired such veneration, especially in 
America, though some (including me) might want to placeNostromo (1904) higher 
up the pantheon. Critics have endlessly debated it.Chinua Achebe denounced it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/feb/22/classics.chinuaachebe>, in a 
famous 1975 lecture, as the work of "a bloody racist". Among the novels in this 
series, few novels occupy such an unassailable place on the list. It is a 
haunting, hypnotic masterpiece by a great writer who towers over the literature 
of the 20th century.

Three more from Joseph Conrad


Nostromo (1904); The Secret Agent (1907); Under Western Eyes (1911).
 