
The tragic shootings in Baton Rouge on Sunday are yet another reminder that 
the second amendment, which grants Americans a constitutional right to be 
armed, is an extreme danger to police officers. It always was and it always 
will be.

The right to bear arms means that police operate in an environment in which 
members of the public can purchase, store and practice with weaponry similar to 
that of police and military. Some of this weaponry can send pieces of 
armor-piercing lead through whatever bullet protection police officers may be 
wearing. This threat makes many police feel scared for their lives.

The reasoning behind the second amendment is that it guarantees Americans the 
right to fight back – with arms – against a tyrannical government. But who 
defines what is tyrannical?

Baton Rouge officers ambushed by gunman with radical views
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/18/baton-rouge-police-shooting-gunman-gavin-long-victims>
Ammon and Ryan Bundy, who led the occupation of a federally owned wildlife 
refuge in Oregon early this year,view 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/01/ammon-bundy-oregon-protest-sba-loan>
 government restrictions on land use as “tyrannical”. I think that the victims 
of police induced trauma have a clear case for being under a tyrannical 
occupation, too. As police officers are the enforcement wing of the government, 
the subjective notion of what is “tyranny” leaves them particularly vulnerable 
to gun violence by those who think they are just protecting themselves from an 
abusive, threatening government.

Police officers do not want to be the next mother or father who does not make 
it home to their loved ones. And many Americans, especially people of color, do 
not want to be the next Philando Castile or Alton Sterling. On both sides of 
that perspective, the fear of the gun is central.


This fear causes police to continue to be on edge. Being on edge increases 
reliance on aggression and violence. This, in turn, erodes police legitimacy. 
And an erosion of police legitimacy is, or at least can be perceived to be, the 
first step towards tyranny. It’s a vicious and dangerous cycle.


The Washington Post recently wrote about the strong correlation of a state’s 
gun ownership rates to increased police fatalities. The author of the relevant 
study concluded that if you care about police lives, then preventing 
interactions with an armed population is necessary.

Police even kill each other at alarming rates because of their fear of guns. 
In Baltimore, thekilling 
<http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/crime/bs-md-ci-select-lounge-civil-suits-20150706-story.html>
 of William Torbit, an officer of color, by intentional fire traumatized the 
agency. Thekilling 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/03/16/us/maryland-police-officer-killed/> of Jacai 
Colson, also an officer of color, in neighboring Prince George’s County from 
intentional fire is currently traumatizing that agency. In those five years 
since Torbit’s killing, nothing changed. These officer deaths show where Black 
Lives Matter and police safety intersect.

Another deadly day in Baton Rouge. Will we heed the warning? | Barrett Holmes 
Pitner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/17/baton-rouge-deadly-race-guns-republican-convention>
Everyone must have a personal awakening about guns in America. For me, it was 
the realization that widespread gun ownership meant that, as a police officer, 
I was tasked with killingthem before they killed you. 


Brothers and sisters in blue, please have a professional awakening. Tamir Rice 
had to be martyred for me to have mine. The moment I watched that video, I saw 
that the life of a beautiful gift to the world, posing no threat other than a 
12-year-old’s existence, was reduced to something the politicians needed to 
figure out how to get past.

Tamir Rice’s name is seared on my soul. The reason? Because police hold so 
much fear of the gun, they perceive every encounter as being one of life and 
death. Good guys with guns do not stop bad guys with guns. Only ending the mad 
insistence that everyone can be armed can do that.
 