
I've had a lifelong admiration for Alec Guinness and I watched all the Ealing 
comedies adoringly, but inOliver Twist I felt he pushed himself to new 
extremes. He translated his thespian techniques to the screen quite seamlessly, 
parading a supreme understanding of the camera.His performance was so considered
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=77krUcFYGzU>, so subtle. So much more than 
simply acting out a script with dialogue. Watching him, one became colossally 
aware of the fact thatthought translates on the screen. David Lean's direction 
and his great cinematography enhanced this sense, of course.

The most memorable image, for me, is that of Guinness's character, Fagin, 
looking out over the crowds of Victorian London. It emphasised that what's 
important is the image on the screen, above everything else – an important 
lesson for any actor performing in the adaptation of a literary source. I've 
been in a few literary adaptations. Director Tomas Alfredson took John le 
Carré's characters on a winning journey from book to film in the recentTinker 
Tailor Soldier Spy, but films such as Perfume [2006, based on Patrick Süskind's 
novel] posed more of a problem.

It's no mean feat to visualise a written story about the olfactory sense! It 
would have been difficult for David Lean ever to be 100% loyal to Dickens's 
novel, as film is such a wholly different language from literature. But his
Oliver Twist did the book justice, I think, by departing from it. Alec 
Guinness's unforgettable performance was crucial to this. It was the first 
time, on film, I'd seen an actor practise the theatrical tradition of taking 
himself to the part, rather than the other way round – something that remains a 
lasting influence on my work to this day.

John Hurt is on the judging panel of the short film competition Virgin Media 
Shorts. Film fans can vote for their favourite atvirginmediashorts.co.uk 
<http://www.virginmediashorts.co.uk/#page=1&filter=shortlist>
 