
The Michael Bloomberg-funded Everytown for Gun Safety announced 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/bloombergs-gun-group-to-start-2014-midterms-strategy-by-surveying-candidates/2014/07/06/d772a196-02ef-11e4-b8ff-89afd3fad6bd_story.html>
 on Monday a new gambit for creating pressure on candidates to move, finally, 
in the direction of stricter gun laws: the group will offer thema survey 
<http://gunsensevoter.org/10questions/>. Everytown – one of several sane 
competitors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/20/nra-us-gun-lobby-moderate>
 playing the long game against the National Rifle Association’s stranglehold on 
violence in America – will make politicians put their positions on firearm 
restrictions, however convoluted, on the record. As the head of the 
organization, which has$50m in Bloomberg backing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/16/bloomberg-gun-control-grassroots>
 to the NRA’s untold millions, pronounced:“Now we’re going toe-to-toe with the 
gun lobby.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/07/gun-control-nra-tactics-questions-pressure-congress>

This has the feel of a good idea, because it is one – one already employed, 
simply to opposite effect, by the NRA itself. Everytown isn't offering a 
counterweight to the NRA's rating system, it is duplicating it … just without 
the grades. What information could an anti-gun voter would find in the 
Everytown questionnaire that the NRA hasn't ferreted out itself? It will tell 
you who to vote for as surely asa National Right-to-Life rating 
<http://www.capwiz.com/nrlc/scorecard.xc?chamber=H&state=US&session=113&x=11&y=17>
 will direct a voter concerned about preserving the right to choose.

The NRA's ratings are a symptom of its success, not the cause. And the idea 
that voters are just waiting to vote against pro-gun candidates – if they only 
knew who they were – badly misdiagnoses the disconnect between gun-control 
activists and Americans in general. It’s that very disconnect that put 
meaningful gun legislation into legislative free-fall. To address the gap, 
activists such as those at Everytown need to redraw focus away from the 
infrequent horror of mass shootings and get voters to recognize the daily 
tragedies of gun violence. A taller order, but just as necessary: make clear 
that the gun violence is not about violent people with guns – it's about guns, 
period.

The real audience for the NRA's ratings aren't voters but the candidates 
themselves. They are a measure of how much financial support the candidate can 
expect from the NRA itself and its membership. In that regard, Bloomberg's 
millions may function similarly for Everytown ... and its ratings may have the 
same disappointing results.

In the 2012 cycle, the NRA saw a miserable return on its investment in 
electoral spending 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2012/11/08/national-rifle-association-shut-out/>
 – the percent of its money that wound up on the winning side of an election 
was less than 1%. Now, that number is not as heartening to gun-control 
supporters as it sounds. The group spent most of its money, $7m of $11m, 
against Obama, and much of the remaining $4m challenging the Democratic 
incumbents who rode Obama's coattails.

But this is the hard lesson that Everytown and its supporters might learn from 
the NRA's bad bet: There are remarkably few single-issue gun voters. In fact, 
according to Gallup,just 2% of Americans think guns are the most pressing 
national problem <http://www.gallup.com/poll/1675/most-important-problem.aspx>, 
which doesn't even mean that 2% of Americans think there should be more gun 
control. Since 2001,the percentage of respondents who think the main problem 
with our gun laws is that they’re too strict has gone up 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/1645/guns.aspx> from 9% to 16%, and the number who 
think they aren't strict enough has gone down, from 39% to 31%. The past decade 
has seen lurid, saturating coverage of mass shootings that's made us more aware 
of them than ever – even if they're notactually 
<http://nymag.com/scienceofus/2014/06/mass-shootings-arent-on-the-rise.html> 
more common. And people areless sure that we need more gun control.
 via Gallup <http://www.gallup.com/poll/1645/guns.aspx> 
So, if the NRA's endorsement and its funding mean less and less, how do you 
square that with general American support for "stricter gun control" sitting39 
points lower today than it was in 1990 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/1645/guns.aspx>? An even bigger conundrum: How do 
you make sense ofa new Quinnipiac poll 
<http://www.quinnipiac.edu/news-and-events/quinnipiac-university-poll/national/release-detail?ReleaseID=2057>
 that showed overwhelming majorities of Americans, gun owners, Democratsand 
Republicans favoring specific new restrictions on gun sales – background checks 
for all buyers, laws against purchase by the mentally ill – when thesame poll 
showing strong resistance (47%) to "stricter gun laws" in general?

I suspect this disconnect between gun-control advocates and the average, 
not-very-concerned voter has to do with the very tactic that Everytown and its 
ideological brethren believe to be their most effective pitch:We need gun 
control to stop mass shootings. We need gun control to protect our children 
from mad men and criminals.

That argument actually shares the same logic the NRA applies to this country’s 
mass-shooting problem:What we need are fewer "bad guys" with guns. You make 
that argument, and of course you get support for the legislation that would 
seem to address that specific issue – background checks, bans on gun possession 
by the certifiably mentally ill. Even the NRA supports the latter – well, they
say 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/dc/the-nra-s-orwellian-games-on-guns-and-the-mentally-ill>
they do.

There has been a push lately among state legislatures for laws that allow 
police to confiscate the weapons of those deemed a danger to themselves or 
others. Connecticut recently adopted such a statute, andthere are similar 
considerations in California and New Jersey 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/states-look-to-gun-seizure-law-after-mass-killings/2014/07/06/61515f42-0539-11e4-a0dd-f2b22a257353_story.html>
. It’s exactly the kind of measure that finds purchase in the wake of specific 
tragedies but will do little to prevent the kinds of spontaneous crimes and
impulsive suicides <http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/news/magazine/guns-and-suicide/>
 that make up the vast majority of gun deaths. (Most non-felony related gun 
deaths are due to "escalation" in arguments 
<http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2011/crime-in-the-u.s.-2011/tables/expanded-homicide-data-table-11>
; studieshave suggested 
<http://consumer.healthday.com/public-health-information-30/domestic-violence-news-207/firearms-study-684000.html>
 that gun suicides appear to be particularly impulsive.)

That’s the key misunderstanding between gun-control advocates and the wide 
swath of voters they need on their side: Americans are OK with guns. They don't 
like violence. They don't like guns in the hands of mad men and criminals, or 
shoved in their faces in restaurants and shopping centers, but they're OK with 
guns.

Most people probably think of themselves as neutral or commonsensical on the 
issue; they can draw a line between themselves and "gun nuts," they can believe 
they are tastefully moderate on the issue, they can vote for a "pro-gun" 
candidate without associating themselves with fringe-y loons like Wayne 
LaPierre or Cliven Bundy. They might even be able to look at a pro-gun control 
report card and see it as a menu of options, a variety of approaches to the 
same general problem: violence committed by violent people.

But there is no such thing as a neutral position on guns, because there is no 
such thing as a neutral gun. Guns have one purpose: to kill things. They are no 
more neutral than a poison. They can be used for good or ill, but the reason 
they exist is to hurt someone. In the "bad guy with a gun" versus a "good guy 
with a gun" scenario, the problem isn't who's bad and who's good, it's that 
there is a gun involved, period. Introduce a gun into a social equation and you 
immediately increase the odds of someone getting injured or killed – whether by 
his own hand, by accident, or by another member of the household. Studies show 
thisover <http://aje.oxfordjournals.org/content/160/10/929.full> and over 
<http://www.minnpost.com/second-opinion/2012/12/health-risk-having-gun-home> and
over <http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/hicrc/firearms-research/guns-and-death/> 
again.

Guns are not objects, and I doubt we can change the way our country deals with 
them by thinking of guns as merelypotentially dangerous things that need to be 
regulated, no different than unstable chemicals or cold medicines. Guns are 
death waiting to happen, and Everytown's survey is a quaint eulogy for those 
who have already passed.
 