
Black Mirror: San Junipero

Charlie Brooker described the songs that populate Black Mirror’s most humane 
and heartbreaking episode as that rotten egg of descriptions: “guilty 
pleasures”. “All the music I said I hated, I secretly loved all of it,” hesaid 
<http://www.vogue.com/13497476/black-mirror-creator-charlie-brooker-san-junipero/>
. Nostalgia, with its memory-blunting effect does that to us, ripping away the 
layers of cynicism and replacing it with a soft-focus glimmer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj184FPzAzeE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj184FPzAzeE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj184FPzAzeE&media=>
San Junipero was a story about the power of love, how it exists in reality and 
cruel fantasy. The music in the first part of the episode was from 1987 and 
full of processed drums, staccato drum machine patterns, vocal tics. At the 
time it was considered too robotic by some, but the melancholic soul in Belinda 
Carlise’s Heaven is a Place on Earth and T’Pau’s Heart and Soul was underlined 
by Brooker’s narrative that spoke to the sad whisper of fleeting lost love.PE


Westworld
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DelkHuRROPfk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DelkHuRROPfk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DelkHuRROPfk&media=>
For a show that seems to exist outside of time, Westworld certainly leans 
heavily on familiar music, though with a small twist. Recognizable songs such 
as Soundgarden’s Black Hole Sun and some of Radiohead’s most well-recognized 
tracks are reimagined and performed (in the diegetic world of the series) by a 
self-playing piano. The song choices are often on the nose and telegraph 
certain explosive scenes (Radiohead’s Motion Picture Soundtrack, with its lyrics
“It’s not like the movies, they fed up on little white lies” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GoIp3fgyT_I> plays as Maeve realizes she’s a 
host), but Westworld gets away with it because of the gimmick. While the piano 
covers have received most of the press attention, praise should also be heaped 
on toRamin Djawadi for his score 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2016/oct/23/ramin-djawadi-westworld-old-timey-rock-song-piano-covers>
 – a complex blend of traditional western motifs and atonal sci-fi music. 
Djawadi is best known for writing the music for Game of Thrones, and yet again 
he’s created the ideal sonic accompaniment for a world that seems both so far 
away and so relatable.DS


The Girlfriend Experience
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQaY3tDVzD0Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQaY3tDVzD0Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQaY3tDVzD0Q&media=>
The dull, regurgitative trend of TV shows based on films offered up something 
of a doozy this year with a chilly, challenging series based on Steven 
Soderbergh’s lo-fi tale of a high-end escort. One of its many fascinating 
elements was a menacing score from Upstream Color director Shane Carruth, who 
gives the show a sinister background hum, pushing us to queasily wonder just 
when the drama will give way to full-on psychological horror. The moment never 
truly comes, at least not explicitly, but we’re kept uncomfortably dangling on 
the edge nonetheless as we travel deeper into a conflicting world of power and 
sex with a lead character questioning whether or not she’s a sociopath. There’s 
a Fincher-esque cool to the series and rather than giving us a poor man’s 
impression of Trent Reznor, Carruth comes up with something fresh yet dripping 
in dread.BL

Stranger Things
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFpHNlx0pPIU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFpHNlx0pPIU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFpHNlx0pPIU&media=>
With his Molly trilogy, John Hughes cemented the role that a soundtrack played 
in a film. “[Songs have] to come out of the action. It’s got to talk about the 
characters not the story, it has to augment that action,” he toldMTV 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/1617841/john-hughes-explains-music-choices-in-1986-interview/>
. In his films songs were empathetic, thoughtful and complicated. In other 
words, they were another character. Of the few Hughesian things Stranger Things 
intuited, this was one of them. The opening sliver of monolithic synth was two 
parts John Carpenter, one part Glass Candy and a perfect accompaniment to the 
architecturally precise font used in the credits. Some key moments were 
accompanied by glitter ball 80s pop reframed as musical harbingers of gloom 
(Modern English’s I Melt With You playing at the pool party before Barb is 
taken) or poignant pieces of the puzzle (the Clash’s Should I Stay Or Should I 
Go). Others, like New Order’s epic instrumental for Ian Curtis Elegia, were 
songs that played on dual emotional levels mirroring the visible world and the 
other, the Upside Down.PE

Atlanta
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR0_U8ca4040&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR0_U8ca4040>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR0_U8ca4040&media=>
Considering Atlanta is ostensibly a show about a rapper trying to make it in 
arguably the most important city for hip-hop in the world, there’s surprisingly 
little rapping in the show itself. (There are the odd rap cameos, like when 
trap trio, Migos, appear as wood-dwelling drug dealers). But that doesn’t mean 
the soundtrack isn’t dominated by rap music, which is carefully curated to 
bolster the action and provide winks and nods to those who truly know their
Atlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/atlanta> music heritage. The 
process involved a collective of people making suggestions, including Donald 
Glover, and then music supervisor Jen Malone and music consultant Fam Udeorji 
who sometimes had to go to ridiculous lengths to get the songs licensed. The 
payoff was that they helped craft a soundtrack that elevated one of the best 
new shows of 2016. Sometimes the music is used to make hyper-local references 
and check which audience members know their OJ da Juicemans from their OJ 
Simpsons. But sometimes it’s used just for laughs, like when Paper Boi sings 
along to Cheryl Lynn’s gloriously camp Encore.LB

Crazy Ex-Girlfriend
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DepuILDZ3KIo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DepuILDZ3KIo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DepuILDZ3KIo&media=>
Ditching a show and letting another network pick it up is the new letting your 
partner move on to be with someone who will love them more. It worked with 
Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt graduating from NBC to Netflix and also with 
Showtime’s decision not to go forward with Rachel Bloom’s gonzo musical romcom. 
This year has graced us with both the second half of the first season and the 
first half of the second, and while the song and dance numbers might be less 
frequent as the show progresses, they’re still as sharp and enjoyably demented 
as ever. Given the cutesy sheen, it’s often easy to forget how dark Bloom is 
willing to go, but songs likeYou Stupid Bitch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrPrr4wmnJ4> (about intense self-loathing) and 
Greg’s Drinking Song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KqOU6oY5-Ro> (about 
alcoholism) joyfully and smartly remind us what’s underneath the gloss. She’s 
moved past a potentially limited conceit and post-Glee, continues to subvert 
what we expect from TV show-tunes.BL

Halt and Catch Fire
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNX0JWhASLsk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNX0JWhASLsk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNX0JWhASLsk&media=>
Music supervisor Thomas Golubic might have one of the hardest jobs in TV – 
assembling a soundtrack for a series set in the 1980s that doesn’t use the 
tired cues we all associate with the time period. The first season features 
songs from well-known groups like the Human League, Berlin, XTC, the Clash, 
plus more obscure acts like Big Boys and X-Ray Spex. By season three, as the 
characters have matured and musical tastes have changed, you might get a Billy 
Joel track side-by-side with Marxist Christian band the Housemartins. Golubic 
has performed the music supervisor job for numerous AMC shows, including the 
Walking Dead and Breaking Bad, and is also the mind behind the memorable 
soundtracks for HBO’s Six Feet Under. While official soundtrack releases are 
not available for Halt and Catch Fire, AMC and Golubic put out
character-specific playlists for each season 
<http://www.supermusicvision.com/hcf-character-playlists.html>, which quickly 
put you in the mindset of the high-achieving computer mavericks of the late 
20th century.


Insecure
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCZ70coZ7Nhk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCZ70coZ7Nhk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCZ70coZ7Nhk&media=>
There are music consultants and then there are music consultants. Getting 
Solange Knowles to come on board as an adviser on Insecure must go down as one 
of the coups of the year – and gave more kudos to a show that already had 
hat-tips from all the right places. Issa Rae’s HBO series pulled it off, and 
like Master of None – whose music consultant Zach Cowie managed to bring the 
pathos to Aziz Ansari’s dramedy by using indie disco numbers – Solange brought 
extra emotion to the everyday work frustrations and imploding relationships of 
Rae’s drama with contemporary rap, funk and hip-hop. Drake sits alongside Blood 
Orange and D’Angelo, and the laidback LA feel comes via natives of the city, 
including contemporary funk maestro Dam Funk, Long Beach’s own Vince Staples 
and mystic bass noodler Thundercat. Oh, and an arguably even more impressive 
feat was gettingRaphael Saadiq to compose the score 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bBVRqJA4p98>. There are individual Spotify 
playlists for those who want to delve deeper and recreate the whole thing in 
their Fiat Punto or Toyota Camry.LB
 