
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> is and always has been 
interactive, from the city-wide mystery plays of the middle ages, to the modern 
era's improvised comedy nights and experimental promenade performances. And 
though it may seem strange to draw parallels between this ancient artform and 
the world of video games, it's the sense of interplay between audience and 
spectacle that can unite them.

This summer, the young theatre company Goat and Monkey 
<http://www.goatandmonkey.co.uk/> is running a performance and alternate 
reality gaming (ARG) project named,The Seed 
<http://www.goatandmonkey.co.uk/seed/>. Based around the stories of Victorian 
botanists who would travel the world seeking rare seeds, the project starts on 
28 May at a dedicated website, where viewers will read the blog of a fictitious 
researcher at the Millennium Seed Bank who is on a quest to find a 'missing' 
seed. As she investigates its whereabouts, she'll write about the histories of 
Plant Hunters and also asks players to help, both by answering questions and by 
deciphering a range of puzzles.

The ARG story then culminates with a series of performances in great gardens 
around Sussex, including Wakehurst Place, High Beeches Gardens and finally at 
Borde Hill Gardens. For some of these, audience members are given wireless 
headsets and must follow instructions and story fragments, through the 
landscape. The narratives revolve around different tales of Victorian seed 
hunters and explorers, and participants will be able to pick up clues to the 
whereabouts of a hidden prize.

"Each of the four performances is a different story and takes a different 
form," explains Goat and Monkey spokesman, Martin Shippen. "Two of the four are 
short promenade pieces where the audience will wear wireless headphones and 
follow a trail from one scene to the next. The Wakehurst performance takes 
place in a yurt but will involve problem solving and the final performance is a 
promenadepageant piece told in the style of traditional Mummers.

"Within each performance there are clues to help the players solve the mystery 
of the missing seed and find the treasure buried in the real world. Our ARG 
heroine will be in attendance at several performances allowing the players to 
talk to her. The final run of performances at Borde Hill Gardens also has more 
obvious game qualities as it involves audience members hunting for clues/scenes 
unguided by performers in a dark wood!"

This modern notion of interactive theatre, which combines location, narrative 
and interaction with actors has been growing in popularity for the last five 
years. Protoganists such asPunchdrunk <http://www.punchdrunk.org.uk/> and 
dreamthinkspeak <http://www.dreamthinkspeak.com/> usually take over 
non-theatrical venues like abandoned industrial units, shops and factories, 
combining traditional plays with interactive elements. In 2010, Punchdrunk put 
on The Duchess of Malfi at an old pharmaceutical headquarters in the Docklands, 
and last year terrified audiences at Salford Quays with its Dr Who-inspired 
interactive play about a downed alien spacecraft,The Crash of the Elysium 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/jul/03/punchdrunk-doctor-who-review>.

Other artists and studios such as Blast Theory 
<http://www.blasttheory.co.uk/bt/index.php> and Hide&Seek have blurred the 
boundaries even further, turning installations into 'urban games' complete with 
video game-like plots, characters and objectives. Bristol has an annual 
festival namedIGfest <http://igfest.org/>, dedicated to pervasive and social 
games that take place in various areas of the city, often with narrative and 
theatrical elements.

The usual response to the concept of interactive theatre tends to be, well, 
aren't British audiences too reserved to get involved? "All of our performances 
require the audience to 'play along' to various levels of involvement and they 
will be unable to be passive onlookers," says Shippen. "However, we cater for a 
wide demographic and enable individual players and audiences to engage with the 
game elements to different degrees."

The Seed is part of Ahead of The Game Festival, an arts project organised in 
West Sussex to mark the run-up to the Olympics. Ticket details can be found at 
theChichester Theatre Festival box office <http://www.cft.org.uk/>.
 