
I have to confess myself hitherto unfamiliar with the work of Neil Coyle 
<http://www.boslabour.org.uk/> MP, but I see he has now announced himself to 
wider society in the modern fashion: which is to say, he has declared that he’s 
had anonline death threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/03/syria-labour-mps-recriminations-vote-airstrikes-benn-livingstone>
, and has obviouslyreported it to police 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3344070/Labour-s-traitor-list-Corbyn-tries-call-bullies-anti-war-supporters-plotting-kick-66-MPs-backed-bombing-ISIS-Syria.html>
. “U voted for air strikes in Syria,” thishistoric missive read 
<https://twitter.com/coyleneil/status/672399098121740288>. “If I see you round 
ends.” It was followed by three little knives. Strong words – and almost 
coherent. Strong emojis, too.

People can be ghastly on the internet, can’t they? But we do know this by now. 
Yet social media is the last remaining British arena in which social mobility 
flourishes, where imbecilic irrelevances are fast-tracked to positions of 
extraordinary power by whichever MP or university professor or serious 
campaigner has decided to give their bile a platform on the news. It is 
becoming one of our most comfortable pageants, reminiscent of what The Day 
Today once called “the ritual of the bullying ritual 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNetpk5ycIM>”.
Neil Coyle (@coyleneil) 
So @77_icee <https://twitter.com/77_icee> has now deleted their threat. But 
here is the screen grab of it which I've also reportedpic.twitter.com/oTOru8kOOd
 <https://t.co/oTOru8kOOd>
 <https://twitter.com/coyleneil/status/672399098121740288> December 3, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/coyleneil/status/672399098121740288> 
Though he has far too great a sense of perspective to point it out, the shadow 
foreign secretary, Hilary Benn, has also been the focus of what is described by 
others as “bullying”, with various anti-war activists and Alex Salmond taking 
the time to tell him that his late father would have beenashamed of him for his 
stance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/03/hilary-benns-speech-tony-benn-father-birling-grave-alex-salmond-video>
. The question is quite how much attention ought to be given to people who 
genuinely think the way to win an argument is to make some entirely artless and 
vile point about a person’s dead father.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benns-speech-tony-benn-father-birling-grave-alex-salmond-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hilary%20Benn's%20speech%20would%20have%20father%20'birling'%20in%20his%20grave%2C%20says%20Alex%20Salmond%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benns-speech-tony-benn-father-birling-grave-alex-salmond-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hilary%20Benn%27s%20speech%20would%20have%20father%20%27birling%27%20in%20his%20grave%2C%20says%20Alex%20Salmond%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benns-speech-tony-benn-father-birling-grave-alex-salmond-video&media=>
Hilary Benn’s speech would have father ‘birling’ in his grave, says Alex Salmond
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/03/hilary-benns-speech-tony-benn-father-birling-grave-alex-salmond-video>
Presuming to insert themselves into private family dynamics about which they 
know nothing and which are even less of their business, they are people with 
whom no one remotely civilised could stand to spend any time, people so 
self-righteously tin-eared that they imagine this passes for having a point. In 
truth, they do not even need to be argued with, because they disqualify 
themselves from arguments. If any of them care to get in touch after this 
column, I merely direct them to that timeless observation of Aristophanes: to 
be insulted by you is to be garlanded with lilies.

Both Coyle and Benn voted in favour of airstrikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/03/how-every-mp-voted-on-syria-airstrikes>
. Despite disagreeing with them on that, I do not think that voting for 
airstrikes makes anyone fair game for the more savage attentions of fringe 
elements of Stop the War, for instance, who so frequently come across as the 
sort of furiously vindictive types who’d actually be amazing at war. That said, 
there is a slightly unavoidable irony in aman who has just voted to drop actual 
bombs anywhere taking the time to tell everyone about a tweet 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3344070/Labour-s-traitor-list-Corbyn-tries-call-bullies-anti-war-supporters-plotting-kick-66-MPs-backed-bombing-ISIS-Syria.html>
. It does rather make it all about him.

Perhaps Coyle was making a philosophical point, and tacitly contrasting 
Syria’s almost-disintegrated society with one in which we not only have the 
luxury of a police force, but of a police force who will investigate emojis. If 
his aim was to illustrate our self-parodic self-absorption, then he may 
consider it realised.

However vicious that dissent is, more of us are going to have to start rising 
above its idiocies than do at present

If it wasn’t, however, I wonder after the wisdom of his highlighting the event 
in this way. Coyle is a parliamentary newbie elected only in May, so we might 
cordially warn him and all those Labour and Conservative MPs who have shrieked 
about “bullying” that they spent this week in presentational danger of reducing 
a bombing campaign to what Alfred Hitchcock called aMacGuffin 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MacGuffin> – “a plot device that motivates the 
characters and advances the story”, but which is often unimportant in itself.

For all the posturing about airstrikes meaning that we’re still out there on 
the world stage, nothing has underscored the solipsistic irrelevance of 
post-post-imperial Britain more than casting the deployment ofeight RAF Tornados
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/dec/03/syria-airstrikes-britain-launches-bombing-against-isis-targets-rolling-report>
 almost entirely as a psychodrama about the shadow cabinet. Even the wannabe 
statesmanlike prime minister was unable to rise above it with his “terrorist 
sympathisers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/01/cameron-accuses-corbyn-of-being-terrorist-sympathiser>
” comment.

I worry about bullying. Not only about the act, but about the word. Bullying 
is an important word. It denotes extremely nasty behaviour that must urgently 
be stopped, but it is being increasingly stretched to breaking point by the 
various definitions it is expected to bear. Discussing university “safe spaces” 
and the threats to free speech, theacademic psychologist Jonathan Haidt 
<https://www.firstthings.com/blogs/firstthoughts/2015/11/the-revenge-of-the-coddled-an-interview-with-jonathan-haidt>
 recently suggested the problem had its roots in increasingly risk-free, 
coddled childhoods. He noted the coming of age of a generation for whom even 
single instances of unkindness at school were formally classed by 
zero-tolerance educational authorities as “bullying”, suggesting that children 
have been “rendered fragile by their childhoods”.

Meanwhile, you will note that these days virtually all celebrities claim to 
have been bullied at school. Can this really be the case? Certainly, other 
pupils will have been unpleasant to them with varying degrees of frequency, as 
they were to all of us, even to the unpleasant ones – that, I’m afraid, is 
school. But the percentages are entirely out of whack; something is 
being miscast.

Does free speech give us the right to anonymously troll strangers? | Suzanne 
Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/06/free-speech-anonymously-troll-strangers-mccann-dossier>
All this self-dramatisation distracts from areas that require focus far more 
desperately – the online bullying of children, or rape victims, to pick two 
examples. Come to that, in a Westminster week where only Syria has displaced 
allegations ofhorrifying bullying in the Conservative youth wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/conservative-leadership-knew-of-bullying-in-youth-wing-for-years-claims-tory-mp>
 – which involve ayoung man taking his own life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/22/tory-activist-possibly-committed-suicide-party-bullying>
 – we surely do a disservice to the victims most in need of our help if we fail 
to make a distinction between bullying and dissent. However vicious that 
dissent is, more of us are going to have to start rising above its idiocies 
than do at present.

By way of a curiosity, finally, the most death threats I ever had over a 
single column came after I was disobliging about one of Manchester City’s 
erstwhile club suits, a Garry Cook, who amusingly (and quite unfathomably) 
aroused deep passions among a few fans. Cards on the table: I don’t believe in 
a life for a life, and by extension found I couldn’t really support the idea of 
a life for saying thatMilan had made a twat of Cook over Kaká’s failed transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/jan/22/marina-hyde-kaka-manchester-city-garry-cook>
. Unfashionably, though, I declined to make promises to kill me for it a police 
matter. The chap who wrote screeds of death fantasies about me and used to turn 
up at the Guardian until he was sectioned: he was a police matter. But I don’t 
get out of bed for emojis.
 