
Ahh, the sweet, sweet taste of victory. But let's be honest, it doesn't happen 
very often, does it. And if 2005'shistoric Ashes victory 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/cricket/ashes_2005/4239254.stm> is anything to 
go by, we may not have that long to actually enjoy England'sglorious success 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2009/aug/23/england-win-ashes-oval-test-australia>
 before it all goes up the swanny. England'scomplete annihilation by the 
rampant Aussies <http://www.guardian.co.uk/sport/2007/jan/05/ashes2006.cricket2>
 in the 2006 Ashes is a stark reminder that defeat, misery and self-loathing 
can lurk around the corner.

So how can you ensure you really do make the most of today?

Yesterday may have been about punching the air/hugging your granny/spilling 
your pint when Freddie smashed Ponting's off-stump to smithereens (as the 
Australian newspaperput it so poetically 
<http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,25197,25972029-601,00.html>: 
"Flintoff went down on one knee and held his arms aloft as he jabbed another 
nail into Australia's Ashes coffin.") but today is all about the gloating.

As we are quite some distance from Australia, and the defeated Australian side 
will soon be heading home to face the disappointment of their compatriots, the 
only sensible option is to terrorise one's colleagues in a typically 
restrained, English way. Either that, or tell some really bad jokes. (Thanks to 
the Sun for theiradmirable contribution in this area 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/features/2603081/Top-ten-Aussie-Ashes-jokes.html>
. What's the Australian version of LBW? Lost, Beaten, Walloped. It's funny 
because it's true.)

For those of you unfortunate enough not to have Aussie colleagues, a trip to 
your nearest Walkabout pub at lunchtime or for a swift half after work is 
probably your best bet for finding a depressed Aussie at which to poke gentle, 
ironic fun. (For our US readers, you really needn't worry about all this 
nonsense, normal service will resume as soon as possible).

For those lucky enough to have Australian colleagues the options are 
limitless. Perhaps you may want to turn everything on your colleague's desk 
upside down in a friendly attempt to make them feel more at home? Or leave 
champagne corks on their desks, both a fitting cultural reference and reminder 
of last night's celebrations?

Another, more low-key, method is hilariously updating your Facebook status, 
although this really only works if you are friends with plenty of people from 
the land down under
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDNT7uZf7lew%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDNT7uZf7lew%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDNT7uZf7lew%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Our current favourite: "Don Bradman, Dame Edna Everage, Ned Kelly, Alf Stewart,
Rolf Harris <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/rolf-harris>, Bush Tucker Man, 
Walkabout employees, Bouncer from Neighbours can you hear me?? Your boys took 
one hell of a beating!!"

Of course, these meagre suggestions are merely the tip of a glorious, if 
quickly melting, gloating iceberg. We're sure you can come up with far more 
creative top tips for making the most of this brief, but wonderful, victorious 
feeling.
 