
Mexico City: measuring air quality and the spread of disease

There is no better example of a city turning things around – and quickly, said 
Seth Schultz, director of research, measurement and planning atC40 Cities 
<http://www.c40.org/>. “It was not long ago that Mexico City held the dubious 
distinction of [being] the city with the world’s dirtiest air. That is no 
longer the case.”

A monitoring network to measure air quality, alongside new policies, have led 
to a reduction in persistent pollutants. The project is lauded as “one of the 
most successful and long-lasting health protection programmes inMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>,” said Schultz.

Mexico City, which is susceptible to the spread of disease in hot weather, has 
also worked to improve its epidemiological monitoring during summers. Schultz 
said: “This has helped the city to uncover a major cause of gastrointestinal 
sickness: street food that is inadequately preserved during periods of warmer 
temperatures. The city has recently increased its prevention actions during 
heat waves to reduce the spread of these germs, especially among the elderly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclean-cities-world-health-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F2%2F1446473312753%2Fb2f7e21b-73ce-4eac-b0e9-71ed7df54a48-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cities%20that%20are%20cleaning%20up%20their%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclean-cities-world-health-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cities%20that%20are%20cleaning%20up%20their%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclean-cities-world-health-sustainable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F2%2F1446473312753%2Fb2f7e21b-73ce-4eac-b0e9-71ed7df54a48-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cyclists in Copenhagen collectively cycle around the world 31 times each day. 
Photograph: Adrian Dennis/AFP/Getty Images 
Copenhagen, Denmark: calculating the power of the bike

Copenhagen found out that one mile on a bike is worth an economic gain of 
$0.42 while one mile driving is a $0.20 loss
Esben Alslund-Lanthén, Sustainia 
For Charlotte Ersboll, corporate vice president of corporate stakeholder 
engagement atNovo Nordisk <http://www.novonordisk.com/>, Copenhagen stands out 
as a one of the best cities to move around in. “There are more bikes than 
citizens, and cyclists in Copenhagen collectively cycle 31 times around the 
world each day,” she said. “And it’s safe because of the bike lanes.”

Another key factor to the city’s success is that responsibility for public 
health is shared by all city administrations, said Victoria Pinoncely, research 
officer at UK planning bodyRTPI <http://rtpi.org.uk/> and author of a research 
paper onpromoting healthy cities 
<http://rtpi.org.uk/knowledge/research/planning-horizons/promoting-healthy-cities/>
.

Copenhagener Esben Alslund-Lanthén, research analyst at thinktank Sustainia 
<http://www.sustainia.me/>, agreed that decisions about cities should be made 
from a “holistic societal point of view”. This includes measuring health 
outcomes. “For instance, Copenhagen has found out that one mile on a bike is 
worth an economic gain to society of $0.42 [27p], while one mile driving is a 
$0.20 loss. This is the kind of calculation that is needed to build momentum 
towards more sustainable cities,” he said.

Chennai, India: rethinking the transport budget

“With more than 10,000 traffic crashes reported every year, the city has one 
of the highest rates of road deaths inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>,” said Sustainia’s Alslund-Lanthén. 
But in 2012, Chennai implemented a policy that requires 60% of the city’s 
transport budget to be spent on infrastructure for pedestrians and cyclists.

Plymouth, UK: smashing down silos

“We are very much used to talking and thinking in silos, where food is one 
silo, workplaces are one silo, cities another and health is the healthcare 
sector,” said Alslund-Lanthén. He added that if all organisations were to 
integrate health into their practices, there would be greater workplace 
productivity, better performance in schools and more sustainable cities.

Things are starting to get better. Pinoncely, of RTPI <http://rtpi.org.uk/>, 
said many UK local authorities have started working alongside planning and 
public health teams. “For instance in Plymouth, a place-based, integrated 
approach to planning, health and social care is being implemented.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclean-cities-world-health-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F2%2F1446474522729%2Fc2ad811f-40ec-4407-a979-d11a01e4068f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cities%20that%20are%20cleaning%20up%20their%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclean-cities-world-health-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cities%20that%20are%20cleaning%20up%20their%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclean-cities-world-health-sustainable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F2%2F1446474522729%2Fc2ad811f-40ec-4407-a979-d11a01e4068f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Atlanta, Georgia in the US suffers from urban sprawl and traffic pollution, 
but is trying to tackle it through a collaborative approach to redevelopment. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Atlanta, US: partnering up

This city suffers from urban sprawl, traffic pollution and high rates of 
childhood asthma, said Behrooz Behbod, founder ofOxford Public Health 
<http://www.oxfordpublichealth.com/>. But he pointed to the Atlanta BeltLine 
<http://beltline.org/>, a city-wide redevelopment programme that is highly 
successful because has gained “the community’s engagement in all aspects of its 
design and implementation”.


The programme, a collaboration between various bodies in planning, health, 
transport, housing and elsewhere, could provide inspiration for many 
organisations that find it difficult to partner up. “Everyone wants to partner 
in theory,” said Chrissie Juliano, director of theBig Cities Health Coalition 
<http://www.bigcitieshealth.org/>. “Some need incentives to pick up the phone 
and find a colleague in another agency. Some are worried they won’t understand 
‘a different language’ in trying to problem-solve in a multi-sector way. 
Success stories need to be shared more broadly.”

Johanna Ralston, chief executive of the World Heart Federation 
<http://www.world-heart-federation.org/>, agreed that it can be difficult to 
get organisations and individuals in the same room. “Co-creation plays a role – 
getting everyone involved. [It’s] not easy, but bring a few sceptics inside the 
tent,” she said.

How does the normal citizen get motivated? A lot of it has to do with the 
press, and making information available
James Thornton, ClientEarth 
Belfast, Northern Ireland: involving the community

“We need to actively involve communities if we want to create better 
environments,” said Pinoncely, pointing toBelfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast>. The city encourages planners to 
engage with communities during the planning process, provides children with an 
opportunity to express views about how their environment impacts on their 
health, and gets older people to assess the walkability of the city, she said.

James Thornton, environmental lawyer and founding CEO of ClientEarth 
<http://www.clientearth.org/>, agreed that citizen buy-in is a key element to 
creating healthier cities. “And how does the normal citizen get motivated? A 
lot of it has to do with the press, and making information available.”

Philadelphia, US: creating an active environment

The public health department in Philadelphia launched Get Healthy Philly 
<http://www.phila.gov/health/ChronicDisease/gethealthyphilly.html> in 2010, a 
project to promote healthy eating and create an active and smoke-free 
environment. “Its activities have contributed to real decreases in obesity 
among youth of colour,” said Chrissie Juliano, director of the Big Cities 
Health Coalition.

Cities should be designed to incorporate physical activity, and provide access 
to healthy food, positive social contact and contact with nature, according to 
Rachel Toms, lead on the Design Council’sActive by Design 
<http://www.designcouncil.org.uk/projects/active-design> programme. “Every 
person needs these functions for their physical and mental health,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclean-cities-world-health-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F2%2F1446479760244%2F69916c4c-4aa1-4c9e-bd00-276616b85311-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cities%20that%20are%20cleaning%20up%20their%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclean-cities-world-health-sustainable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cities%20that%20are%20cleaning%20up%20their%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fclean-cities-world-health-sustainable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F2%2F1446479760244%2F69916c4c-4aa1-4c9e-bd00-276616b85311-1020x612.jpeg>
 Enrique Peñalosa has just been re-elected as mayor of Bogota, Colombia, after 
a stint in office from 1998 to 2001. Photograph: Guillermo Legaria/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Bogotá, Colombia: leadership at every level


Leadership is crucial to getting health initiatives off the ground – whether 
it’s political leadership or comes from within the community, said Juliano. 
RTPI’s Pinoncely pointed out that Bogotá managed to implement many positive 
changes because of the leadership of Enrique Peñalosa, mayor of the city from 
1998 to 2001. He has just been re-elected for the 2016-19 term.

How can San Francisco have a progressive resilience planning structure when 
there is such a problem with gentrification?
Leo Hollis, author 
Effective leadership needs to be broad enough to affect wide policy, according 
to Leo Hollis, author ofCities Are Good For You: The Genius of the Metropolis 
<http://citiesaregoodforyou.com/about/>. He said: “Peñalosa was a good example 
of that, although he benefited from inheriting the job from Antanas Mockus, who 
should not be forgotten as a social pioneer. Can ground-up, local or 
neighbourhood pressure make a difference?”

San Francisco, US: preparing for climate change

San Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> is linking 
health and climate change impacts together under one programme, which aims to 
educate and empower citizens and improve the resilience of public agencies, 
said Alslund-Lanthén. The city is using data and health indicators to inform 
climate adaptation plans and policies.

However, Hollis argued that its planning framework is incredibly confusing. 
“How can one have a progressive health and resilience planning structure when 
there is such a problem with gentrification?” he said. “Resilience cannot just 
be data-driven, or designed. If the social fabric is under threat, resilience 
is impossible.”

These comments were made during a livechat about how to create healthier cities
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/oct/12/how-to-create-healthier-cities-livechat>
.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 