
The Borderlines <http://www.borderlinesfilmfestival.co.uk/> film festival ran 
for 17 days in February and March. It took place in 26 locations, including 
pubs, churches, assembly rooms and village halls, across Herefordshire, 
Shropshire and the Welsh Marches.

We’ve learned a lot in the festival’s 14 years about running rural arts events 
at this time of year. Here are my top tips:

Make use of networks

This is the advice I return to most. Flicks in the Sticks 
<http://www.artsalive.co.uk/Flicks.aspx> (the touring cinema branch of Arts 
Alive, which takes big-screen films to rural communities) works as a network: 
each village or market town has a promoter who knows their audience, has direct 
contact with them and chooses suitable film titles. The central organisation 
books the film and helps with marketing.

Borderlines operates in the same way, supplying a menu of festival titles from 
which to choose, but the final selection is made locally. Our marketing works 
with similar principles: we supply the materials, and the promoters and 
volunteers (who know about the best places to leave brochures or display 
posters) distribute them.

Keep it local

Allow for idiosyncrasies. We don’t dictate how films are shown in each venue 
in which the festival takes place and we respect that we are working with their 
audience and process. Screenings are social events and village halls often make 
a profit out of selling refreshments. Sometimes they like to have an interval,
which can be disconcerting for the audience. 

One of our board members remembers attending a screening of The Counterfeiters 
at his local village hall. It was just at the point when one of the German 
guards had urinated on a prisoner that the projector was switched off, the 
lights went up and a voice boomed: “Tea!” Films with local connections, 
particularly archive material, are also a boon for attendances.

Rural audiences love world cinema

Do we Brits no longer have an appetite for foreign-language films?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2016/feb/11/brits-appetite-subtitled-foreign-films-world-cinema>
It may take time to overcome people’s prejudices against subtitles, but 
cinema that takes you to far-flung areas of the globe has been proven to be 
immensely appealing. The Ethiopian debut featureLamb 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fS9kpcmO9Jo>, which we showed before its UK 
release (so no reviews or word of mouth promotion) completely sold out.

Within the context of the festival, we often have full or nearly full venues 
for fairly obscure foreign titles, which in a London indie cinema might only 
attract a handful of people. Here, they are perceived as different and special. 
A recentarticle 
<http://lwlies.com/festivals/why-supporting-your-local-film-festival-matters/> 
in Little White Lies movie magazine hit the nail on the head when it said that 
small film festivals are “world cinema’s Médecins Sans Frontières”.

Give viewers a voice

The social factor of film festivals is important, so it’s advisable to provide 
social spaces where people can meet and discuss what they’ve seen. We’ve sought 
to engage with our audiences in other ways too, giving credence and value to 
their opinions.

At our main venue, The Courtyard in Hereford, where we screened about seven 
films a day, we instituted a voting system so that people popped their ticket 
stubs into boxes with one- to five-star ratings. We published the results on a 
noticeboard that was scrutinised intently as the festival progressed. We also 
did analogue tweets: we had a dedicatedTwitter account 
<https://twitter.com/bffanalog> that recorded what audience members commented 
on Post-it notes about the films.

Don’t patronise rural audiences

Lots of people who live in the country have sophisticated tastes. Their joy at 
discovering the richness of cultural choice on offer at least part of the year 
knows few bounds and they will be your strongest advocates. We have little 
trouble getting people to attend the preview screenings the Independent Cinema 
Office (ICO) negotiates for us. Our audiences, whether lifelong locals or 
former urbanites, respond to the challenge of seeing something new and untried.

Get out there

Poor communication is one of the undeniable challenges that rural film 
exhibition faces. It’s not just distances; broadband underperforms and there’s 
barely a mobile phone signal to be had in some parts. That means kissing the 
idea of live tweeting goodbye. But the effort of making contact makes it all 
the more worthwhile, whether it’s a quick exchange over a garden gate or 
sitting down over a cup of tea for a longer chat. What’s hardest about arts in 
rural areas is also what makes it most necessary and rewarding.

Jo Comino is marketing manager for the Borderlines 
<http://www.borderlinesfilmfestival.co.uk/> film festival, which is programmed 
in partnership with the ICO

This is an edited version of an article first published 
<http://www.independentcinemaoffice.org.uk/blog/ruralaudiences> on the 
Independent Cinema Office blog

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 