
What will the name Abu Qatada signify to future students of the British legal 
system? Jordan’s courts convicted Qatada in 2000, while he was in the UK, based 
on information extracted from alleged co-conspirators by means of torture. Last 
year, Jordan agreed that any retrial in person would not rely on torture 
evidence. Without recourse to torture evidence,the prosecution case against him 
collapsed on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/abu-qatada-cleared-terror-charges-jordan-court>
. The effects on our legal system associated with Qatada are longer-lasting.

After 9/11, faced with the urgent need to do something and to be seen doing 
something, the government passed emergency legislation authorising the
indefinite detention of “certified” foreign nationals in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jan/24/terrorism.world> who presented a 
risk to national security. They could not be deported because of the danger 
that they would be tortured in their home countries, but as suspected 
international terrorists they were deemed too dangerous to be left at large. 
Qatada was one of the 14 detainees, all Muslims, held in Belmarsh prison. No 
criminal charges were laid against them and there was no intention to send 
Qatada to Jordan, or anywhere else, to face trial. Thestrategic aim 
<https://www.rusi.org/analysis/commentary/ref:C51DC26B33346C/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=abu-qatada-leaves-the-united-kingdom#.VCNNri5dVpc>
 was to disrupt a network of radical preachers from influencing and supporting 
acts of violence in the UK.

The Special Immigration Appeals Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/special-immigration-appeals-commission> 
(Siac), a court that can hear classified evidence from the government without 
disclosing it to the public or the appellant, heard the detainee’s appeal 
against certification and detention. Readingthe open decision 
<http://www.siac.tribunals.gov.uk/Documents/outcomes/documents/sc152002qatada.pdf>
 this week, the case against Qatada can only be inferred. Siac saw some 
classified material suggesting a connection to al-Qaida. Qatada was said to be 
a spiritual adviser to terrorists and during the 1990s had claimed for himself 
great influence over the Algerian community in London. But the evidence that he 
posed a serious threat remains classified. Heard behind closed doors, the case 
against him was not tested to a high standard – and certainly nowhere near the 
criminal standard of reasonable doubt.

In a landmark case in 2004 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_and_Others_v_Secretary_of_State_for_the_Home_Department>
, the House of Lords ruled indefinite detention to be incompatible with the 
European convention on human rights. The government responded by creating
control orders <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-12108075>. The detainees, 
including Qatada, were released into house arrest (although some were 
transferred to psychiatric hospital). A few months later, the government 
announced that diplomatic “assurances” had been obtained from foreign 
governments guaranteeing that the individuals would not be tortured on return 
to their home countries, and so they could be deported. The courts upheld the 
legality of the regime now known as“deportation with assurances” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/independent-review-of-the-deportation-with-assurances-dwa-policy>
. But when the question turned to the prospect of a criminal trial based on 
evidence obtained by torture, further assurances were deemed necessary to 
prevent this from happening. It is a basic principle that torture evidence is 
unreliable, unfair and inhumane. Full assurances were finally obtained from 
Jordan in July 2013. With the agreement in place, Qatada went voluntarily.

In light of this history, one might think that the acquittal signifies the 
robustness of human rights law in protecting basic norms of justice while 
enabling the disruption of allegedly dangerous networks. Indeed, it is a shame 
that the UK government doesn’t spin it this way, though no surprise, given that 
it unsuccessfully fought against this outcome all the way, contributing 
substantially to the £1.7m legal costs in the process. On Wednesday, the Home 
Office sought to set the media agenda by reassuring the public that Qatadawill 
not return to the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/abu-qatada-not-allowed-back-uk-theresa-may-jordan-acquittal-terror>
, even though there is no suggestion whatsoever that he wants to. Should he 
try, he would face another lengthy appeal to Siac, with no clearer idea of the 
nature of the evidence against him than he had before. Before that, he would 
have to be de-listed from the UN security council’s al-Qaida sanctions list,via 
an opaque process that involves no court whatsoever 
<http://www.un.org/en/sc/ombudsperson/> (not even a secret one). If he somehow 
succeeded, he would return only to further detention and house arrest. Hardly 
worth the candle.

If it is a victory for human rights law then, it is a pyrrhic one. Abu Qatada 
will come to symbolise a brief period in legal history when a parallel system 
of secret justice was established, the enforcement of human rights norms 
portrayed as naive or even dangerous, and the legal mechanisms for full 
surveillance of the population put in place. None of that was necessary to 
achieve the outcome we saw this week, but the impact will be with us for many 
years. The twist in the tale is that Qatada, the bogeyman for so long, now 
appears to Jordan asa preferable kind of Islamist to the horrific Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/abu-qatada-verdict-jordan-logic-islamic-state>
. We should take the time to reflect carefully on this, because it throws into 
stark relief two views of our society. One is a society with robust ideas of 
justice and fairness, and systems for protecting them. The other is a society 
so obsessed with controlling external threats that it risks destroying itself 
in the process. We should ask ourselves which one we prefer to be.
 