
Liam Williams <http://www.timeout.com/london/comedy/one-to-watch-liam-williams>

At last month's Edinburgh fringe, the best newcomer award was won by the 
wig-wearing, false-teeth-wearing eccentric John Kearns. But the cutting edge of 
standup was elsewhere, courtesy of another act on that shortlist. Liam Williams 
is one-third of sketch troupe Sheeps, now breaking out on his own under the 
auspices of indie comedy super-producer the Invisible Dot.With his act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/06/liam-williams-edinburgh-festival-review>
 – and that of the American wunderkind Bo Burnham – the comedy of today's 
disenfranchised twentysomethings announces its arrival. Williams, 25, is 
downbeat, intelligent, unimpressed by anything (least of all himself), and a 
writer of rare lyrical power, whether discussing sex, selfhood or BBC4's 
historical documentaries. Michael McIntyre has nothing to fear; fans of 
provocative comedy should celebrate.Invisible Dot, London, 1-9 November, 
theinvisibledot.com <http://www.theinvisibledot.com/events/197-liam-williams>

Robin and Josie's Shambles <http://robinince.com/>

Absent from this year's Edinburgh fringe after three previous comedy award 
nominations in a row,Josie Long takes to the road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/09/josie-long-edinburgh-review> 
alongsidefellow champion of creative comedy Robin Ince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/10/robin-ince-review> for a night 
of politics, science and "some mucking about and nonsense".Stand comedy club, 
Glasgow, 2 September, then touring,robinince.com <>

Stewart Lee <http://www.stewartlee.co.uk/>

He has had his fun, disguised in a meaty wrestling mask as the, ahem, cult 
Canadian standup Baconface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/05/baconface-edinburgh-festival-2013-review>
 for the duration of the Edinburgh fringe. Now Stewart Lee gets serious(ish), 
with a national tour of his new solo show Much A-Stew About Nothing.Rose 
Theatre, Kingston, 10 September, then touring,stewartlee.co.uk 
<http://www.stewartlee.co.uk/gigs.php>

Alexei Sayle <http://www.alexeisayle.me/>

We thought he was lost to standup. But in January, the godfather of 
alternative comedy returned to his first love after 17 years. Now,Sayle takes 
his show on the road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/24/alexei-sayle-review>. Expect 
1981-era bolshie politics, now with added thoughtfulness – even vulnerability.
Town Hall, High Wycombe, 4 October, then touring,alexeisayle.me 
<http://www.alexeisayle.me/appearances>

Susie Essman <http://www.susieessman.com/>

She was called "the most foul-mouthed woman in sitcom history" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/jul/05/comedy.arts> when she starred as 
Susie Greene in Curb Your Enthusiasm. But the woman behind "you fat fuck!" is 
also a standup of 30 years' experience, who this autumn makes a rare UK 
appearance.Soho Theatre, London, 9-13 October, sohotheatre.com <>
 