
For anyone who’s despaired over the Royal Ballet’s dismal record in 
commissioning women choreographers, the headline event of the company’s 2016-7 
season has to be the arrival of a new ballet by Canadian choreographerCrystal 
Pite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/22/crystal-pite-interview-sadlers-wells>
.

Royal Opera to serve up opera of Buñuel's surreal dinner party in 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/06/thomas-ades-royal-opera-to-serve-up-bunuels-exterminating-angels-surreal-dinner-party-in-2017>
Crystal Pite: the Canadian choreographer bringing a bold new mood to 
contemporary dance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/22/crystal-pite-interview-sadlers-wells>
The last woman invited to make a work for the Royal was Siobhan Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/siobhan-davies>, back in 1999 (and it’s hard 
not to read a certain irony into the work’s title: A Stranger’s Taste). 
Otherwise, apart from a few venerable classics by Bronislava Nijinska and 
Ninette de Valois, nearly all of the company’s two-and-a-half century span of 
repertory has been created by men.

We have to hope that the Pite commission will usher in better times – but 
there is absolutely no sense that she has been a token choice. Pite is easily 
one of finest choreographers of her generation, with a gift for new-minted, 
often breathtaking poetic imagery, and this new work – a setting of music by 
Gorecki that is planned for a cast of up to 40 – should be a gift for both 
dancers and audience.

The Royal’s artistic director Kevin O’Hare has commissioned three other new 
works for the season. Liam Scarlett creates a one-act setting of Rachmaninoff’s 
Symphonic Dances, while taking the company to less familiar terrain isJavier de 
Frutos <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/javier-de-frutos>’s new production of the 
Philip Glass dance-operaLes Enfants Terribles 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Les_Enfants_Terribles>. Based on the 1929 novel 
by Jean Cocteau about a pair of siblings who retreat from the world into a 
deviant fantasy of their own imaginings, the piece was first created in 1996 
with choreography by Susan Marshall. De Frutos’s previous Cocteau-inspired 
work, the deliriously blasphemousEternal Damnation to Sancho and Sanchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/15/in-the-spirit-of-diaghilev>, 
caused a huge rumpus, but I salute the adventurousness of this project, which 
will be a co-production with the opera company and feature dancers from the 
independent dance sector as well as members of the Royal Ballet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Froyal-ballet-new-season-crystal-pite-wayne-mcgregor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11520a95f3d636f2bf581f7ab3ff5b20da6b4dd1%2F0_248_3754_2252%2F3754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Ballet's%20new%20season%3A%20another%20tiptoe%20towards%20equality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Froyal-ballet-new-season-crystal-pite-wayne-mcgregor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Ballet%27s%20new%20season%3A%20another%20tiptoe%20towards%20equality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Froyal-ballet-new-season-crystal-pite-wayne-mcgregor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11520a95f3d636f2bf581f7ab3ff5b20da6b4dd1%2F0_248_3754_2252%2F3754.jpg>
 Wayne McGregor’s Chroma, one of the choreographer’s two works returning this 
season. Photograph: Bill Cooper/PR Image 
The third new work is by Wayne McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wayne-mcgregor> and comes with a 
commissioned score by Steve Reich in honour of the composer’s 80th birthday. 
Reich’s propulsive rhythms and orchestral colours have inspired some of 
McGregor’s finest works, and this new ballet is something of a celebration for 
him, too, as he marks his 10th anniversary as resident choreographer at the 
Royal.

It’s being presented within an all-McGregor triple bill (a new experiment in 
single-choreographer evenings that follows on from the current season’s 
all-Wheeldon programme). Also in the triple bill isChroma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/apr/29/chroma-where-ballet-meets-the-white-stripes>
, whose initial success at the Royal inspired McGregor’s appointment. For this 
revival, the London dancers will be joined by members of theAlvin Ailey company 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rFj40CFXhtk> – an experiment that promises to 
deliver an interesting chemistry of styles.

Another innovation will be the Clore Studio event that precedes the main 
performance, a double bill of works by young choreographers whom McGregor has 
mentored during the last decade. Robert Binet and Charlotte Edmonds are both 
promising, and it would be good to see more events like this, facilitating the 
transition of new dance talent to the main stage.

A more controversial feature of the McGregor evening is likely to be the 
revival ofCarbon Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/08/royal-ballet-review>, the 
choreographer’s rather wilful 2012 experiment in combining ballet and live rock 
music. I didn’t love the ballet, but I like O’Hare’s willingness to give second 
chances to new works. It’s good housekeeping, giving choreographers a chance to 
tinker and audiences a chance to reappraise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Froyal-ballet-new-season-crystal-pite-wayne-mcgregor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a063bb21f87f021ca23d5785c2de20cd7da3dfb%2F0_85_1069_1336%2F1069.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Ballet's%20new%20season%3A%20another%20tiptoe%20towards%20equality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Froyal-ballet-new-season-crystal-pite-wayne-mcgregor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Ballet%27s%20new%20season%3A%20another%20tiptoe%20towards%20equality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F06%2Froyal-ballet-new-season-crystal-pite-wayne-mcgregor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a063bb21f87f021ca23d5785c2de20cd7da3dfb%2F0_85_1069_1336%2F1069.jpg>
 Crystal Pite, bringing new work to the Royal Ballet this season. Photograph: 
PR Image 
Other returning works will be McGregor’s full-length Woolf Works, for me a 
highlight of last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/12/royal-ballet-woolf-works-five-star-review-wayne-mcgregor>
; plus David Dawson’s The Human Seasons and Christopher Wheeldon’s Strapless. 
Older works that return to the rep are MacMillan’s Anastasia and William 
Forsythe’s The Vertiginous Thrill of Exactitude, last performed by the company 
15 years ago, whose wittily wickedly deconstructed classicism should sit 
beautifully on its current crop of young virtuosi.

O’Hare’s commitment to new and contemporary work has created a clear shift in 
the company aesthetic: it’s striking that next season features only two 
19th-century classics, The Nutcracker and Sleeping Beauty, though these will be 
offset by a number of 20th-century staples: Balanchine’s Jewels, MacMillan’s 
Mayerling, Ashton’s Fille Mal Gardée, plus an all-Ashton programme of 
Marguerite and Armand, Symphonic Variations and The Dream.

If the Royal Ballet’s image is beginning to evolve, English National Ballet 
are snapping at its heels. Next week the company will be performing a triple 
bill created entirely by women, and its next season sees two more adventurous 
projects: a contemporary version ofGiselle 
<http://www.ballet.org.uk/whats-on/akram-khan-giselle/> created by Akram Khan 
and a company premiere of Pina Bausch’s shatteringly inventive Rite of Spring. 
There are positive moves from other companies, too. Scottish Ballet is soon to 
premiere David Dawson’s poetic new take on Swan Lake and, in the autumn, two 
works by women come into the repertory (Pite’s Emergence and a new creation by 
company member Sophie Laplane). Meanwhile, Northern Ballet and Birmingham Royal 
Ballet both present newly commissioned works by women: Cathy Marston’s Jane 
Eyre and Jessica Lang’s Wink, inspired by Shakespeare’s sonnets.

It’s been a long time coming – but British ballet is collectively hauling 
itself into the 21st century.
 