
If Ayn Rand <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ayn-rand> were alive today, 
would she be a member of the Tea Party?

The controversial writer – whose philosophy, Objectivism 
<http://www.aynrand.org/site/PageServer?pagename=objectivism_intro>, advocates 
the "virtue of selfishness" – has long been something of a literary hero to 
American conservatives and the rise of the rightwing populist movement has only 
worked to increase Rand's popularity.

Tea Party members can't get enough: references to the writer's works appear on 
their protest signs; political favourites such as Rand Paul namedrop her; and 
they seem staunchly devoted to promoting thefirst instalment of the three-part 
film adaptation <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0480239/> of her epic tome, Atlas 
Shrugged <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atlas_Shrugged>, which opened modestly, 
if not quietly, last weekend in around 300 theatres across the US. The 
conservative grassroots groupFreedomworks took the helm in promoting the film 
<http://www.freedomworks.org/blog/mkibbe/world-premiere-trailer-of-atlas-shrugged-at-cpac>
, sharing the online trailer with its mailing list and hyping the movie's 
opening day – 15 April, America's tax day.

The low-budget movie with its cast of nobodies received resolutely scathing 
reviews –it garnered a dismal 7% from critics on Rotten Tomatoes 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/atlas_shrugged_part_i/> – yet, through 
conservative support, it still managed to pull in enough revenue to justify 
expanding the film to more screens. By the end of April, Atlas Shrugged: Part 1 
could be on as many as 1,000 screens.

Despite the buzz, rigorous devotees of Objectivism aren't likely to appreciate 
Atlas's big screen treatment. For the uninitiated, Atlas Shrugged depicts a 
dystopian US where irrational government officials work with greedy socialist 
corporate heads to impose draconian regulations and taxes on those who have 
achieved success through hard work and natural talent. The novel's heroine is 
Dagny Taggart, an ambitious railroad executive, who teams up with Henry 
Rearden, an innovative metal manufacturer, to set out to save the country from 
being crushed by the collectivist government. Along the way, they partake in 
rambling diatribes about the glory of achievement and the nobility of pursuing 
greatness. It's rousing stuff – the first time, anyway – until it's belabored 
again and again throughout the novel. Sound familiar?

The sections of the book that made it into Part 1 certainly seem written 
directly for current conservative interests, namely that a small section of the 
population must fight against the oppressive restrictions and heavy taxation of 
a socialist government. Yet, probe beyond the triteness of Rand's plot and the 
fragmented rendering of her philosophy, and striking discrepancies between her 
Objectivism and conservative sentiment become apparent.

Yes, Rand was a staunch advocate of capitalism and limited government. She was 
also a staunch advocate of abortion rights and sexual hedonism, and an atheist 
to boot, which her conservative admirers have largely ignored. Rand and her 
characters maintained that morality wasn't something that could be imposed by 
outside institutions, rather should be aconsequence from individuals acting in 
their own rational self-interest 
<http://aynrandlexicon.com/lexicon/morality.html>. Which, obviously, steps way 
out of line with the thinking of the Tea Party,which encompasses the religious 
right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/feb/25/tea-party-movement-republicans>
.

As Jennifer Burns, the author of Goddess of the Market: Ayn Rand and the 
American Right 
<http://www.amazon.com/Goddess-Market-Rand-American-Right/dp/0195324870/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&s=books&qid=1280548391&sr=8-1>
, has said, today's conservative pundits have found thatthey "can use the parts 
of Rand they want to use and not engage the rest" 
<http://www.frumforum.com/conservatives-make-room-for-ayn-rand>. Which is where 
one of the most glaring incongruities between Tea Partiers and Rand's 
philosophy appears: Rand, almost above all else, championed the individual over 
the collective. The notion that a populist movement is using her name and 
economic philosophies to mobilise their broader political goal is laughable. 
During her life, Rand was outspoken in her disgust for Republicans, feeling 
that they were soft on individuals' rights. Today, it is only Randians who can 
argue that her philosophy is being inadequately promoted.

However, there is a silver lining for Rand purists: while the movie's 
publicity has managed to stir up paltry interest among cinema-goers, it has 
succeeded in awakening a larger interest in the literary work. Rand's novel has 
sold around 100,000 copies a year in the US since its publication, and since 
the financial crisis and the rise of the Tea Party, that number has increased 
five-fold. The movie's publicity has only propelled sales yet higher – the 
opening weekend saw thebook version of Atlas Shrugged shoot to the No 4 spot on 
Amazon's bestseller list 
<http://blogs.forbes.com/marcbabej/2011/04/17/atlas-shrugged-movie-boosts-book-to-4-on-amazon-bestseller-list/>
.

So, while the Tea Party's promotion of Rand has made a splash, Objectivists 
can take comfort knowing that the impact has largely been on book sales. If one 
has to delve into Randian territory, it's better to go straight to the master's 
words rather than a choice interpretation of them or convenient soundbites.
 