
Mark Morris Dance Group <http://markmorrisdancegroup.org/>

It's been a while since the great American choreographer has been in Britain 
with new work â€“ but that's not because he's been slacking. This return season 
at Sadler's Wells features two programmes with seven UK premieres, and with an 
exuberantly eclectic range of scores. Music has always been the principal 
inspiration for Morris's work, and the variety in this season is reflected at 
one extreme by A Wooden Tree, Morris's response to the whimsical fantasy of 
Scottish poet Ivor Cutler, and Socrates, his marvellously poetic dialogue with 
the austere music of Eric Satie's score. The works in between include the fine 
ensemble piece Crosswalk; a new duet, Jenn and Spencer; and Festival Dance, a 
setting of Hummel's Piano Trio in E that weaves together some of Morris's most 
elaborately inventive patterns and motifs.Sadler's Wells, London, 27 November 
to 1 December,sadlerswells.com <http://www.sadlerswells.com/>

Hofesh Shechter: Sun <http://www.sadlerswells.com/show/Hofesh-Shechter-Sun>

Shechter's latest work promises to deliver a blaze of energy as it pits 14 
dancers against a stage of smoky chaos and a soundtrack featuring the 
choreographer's own music.Sadler's Wells, London, 30 October to 1 November, 
then UK tour, hofesh.co.uk <http://hofesh.co.uk/>

Cedar Lake Contemporary Ballet <http://cedarlakedance.com/>

This is the first UK tour for this New York company, which brings a 
thrillingly talented ensemble of dancers and a repertory that includes work by 
the talented Canadian Crystal Pite and Jo Stromgrem's super-charged and 
charming Necessity, Again.Sadler's Wells, London, 27-8 September, then UK tour, 
danceconsortium.com <http://www.danceconsortium.com/touring/cedar-lake-2013/>

Dance Umbrella <http://www.danceumbrella.co.uk/>

This wonderfully flexible dance festival marks its 35th year with a programme 
that ranges across day and night-time events, indoor and outdoor spaces. 
Familiar names include theTrisha Brown Dance Company 
<http://www.trishabrowncompany.org/>, but there is also a clutch of less 
well-known performers, including the vividly provocative Ivo Dimchev.Various 
Venues, London, 3-20 October,danceumbrella.co.uk <>

Royal Ballet: McGregor, Dawson, The Rite of Spring 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/mixed-programmes/chroma-new-dawson-the-rite-of-spring>

The first mixed bill of the Royal's season sees a welcome return for Wayne 
McGregor's Chroma and a new ballet by David Dawson, the Dutch-based 
choreographer whose work hasn't been seen nearly often enough in Britain.Royal 
Opera House, London, 9-23 November, roh.org.uk <http://www.roh.org.uk/> 
 