
The cancellation of the so-called "March for Sharia" which was to have been 
held last Saturday by Islam4UK (al-Muhajiroun 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Muhajiroun>'s latest incarnation) should be 
viewed as a clear victory for all those who were fed up with the group's 
inflammatory antics.

A couple of weeks ago on Cif I discussed 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2009/oct/21/al-muhajiroun-protest-london>
 the planned march. It had been set to start outside the Houses of Parliament, 
where al-Muhajiroun said they would call for the dismantling of our democracy, 
and end at Trafalgar Square, where they said they would hold a rally to demand 
that "authority is handed over to the Muslims".

They also helpfully posted images of Buckingham Palace ("Buckingham mosque") 
and Trafalgar Square ontheir website <http://www.islam4uk.com/> depicting what 
they would look like under their vision of the sharia.

It was all typically insane and provocative stuff transparently designed to 
undermine social cohesion and to set communities against each other. Since my 
Cif piece was published calling for a counter-demonstration against the 
provocateurs from al-Muhajiroun and requesting those who were proud to live in 
a multi-faith and multicultural society to join us, the response had been very 
encouraging.

The next day I was contacted by someone who had very kindly designed a nice 
Muslims4UK logo for us and someone else had set up a Muslims4UK facebook group 
to help publicise the counter-demo. It quickly attracted hundreds of members. 
The day after that, a friend had got abasic website <http://muslims4uk.org.uk/> 
up and running for us. The only actual expense I incurred was for the design 
and printing of the three-metre-long banner which was meant to be draped over 
the railings at our counter-demo.

The day after I handed in my official "notification to hold a procession" form 
to the police, they contacted me to say that a number of groups had registered 
to hold counter-protests against al-Muhajiroun. It was apparent that had they 
gone ahead, al-Muhajiroun would have been significantly outnumbered by their 
opponents, despite the dishonest bluster on their website claiming 
"overwhelming support from the Muslim community".

And what are we to say of the role played in all this by some of our tabloids, 
particularly, the Daily Express and its sister paper, the Daily Star? Were it 
not for the tabloids, al-Muhajiroun's followers would be recognised for what 
they are: a minuscule group of unemployed and sad fantasists of no real 
interest to anyone except perhaps the security services. With the help of the 
Express group, however, al-Muhajiroun have acquired a national profile and 
notoriety massively out of proportion to their tiny base. The Express actually
told its readers <http://www.dailyexpress.co.uk/posts/view/134080> last week 
that "up to 5,000 extremists" were expected to take part in the march. It was a 
ludicrous number as anyone familiar with al-Muhajiroun's many previous 
publicity stunts would have quickly confirmed.

At work I now have colleagues who approach me asking why Muslims are coercing 
them into changing their lifestyles. When I ask them to tell me about what it 
is that they have actually been forced to give up or change, I get blank looks 
in return. It is obvious that they have unthinkingly bought into the 
anti-Muslim narrative that the Express and Co have been relentlessly peddling 
for a number of years now and evidently with some success.

This free publicity appears to be plainly important to the followers of 
al-Muhajiroun and their sense of self-esteem and has also given them the 
perfect means by which to amplify their hate-filled message and further their 
goal of polarising communities against each other.

It is no coincidence that the appearance and rise of the openly anti-Muslim 
English Defence League (EDL) occurred soon after al-Muhajiroun's last publicity 
"success": its disgraceful protest in Luton against the return of soldiers from 
the tour of duty in Iraq last March. Since that time we have seen a number of 
arson attacks on mosques in Luton, Bishop's Stortford, Woolwich and Sunderland.

What we have here is a vicious circle of mischief-makers each seeming to 
reinforce the other.Al-Muhajiroun <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun>
 want the publicity. The Express group wants a Muslim bogeyman. The EDL just 
seem to want trouble.

Oh, and finally, here is a graphic of the banner we had designed for our 
counter-demo that never was. The rascals from al-Muhajiroun owe me Â£165.
 