
London jazz festival

The singer, composer and bassist Esperanza Spalding 
<http://www.esperanzaspalding.com/> has broken out of the jazz loop with more 
pop-oriented music, but she comes to the 2013 LJF as a virtuoso double bassist, 
part of a trio with the pianist Geri Allen and drummer Terri Lyne Carrington. 
Sonny Rollins, the original headliner, has had to pull out for health reasons, 
but the 10-day event comfortably maintains its world-class, star-packed stature 
with artists including thelegendary saxophonist Wayne Shorter 
<http://www.wayneshorter.com/> with the BBC Concert Orchestra, pianist Brad 
Mehldau <http://www.bradmehldau.com/> playing a rare synthesiser show, 
guitarist John McLaughlin <http://www.johnmclaughlin.com/> and percussionist 
Zakir Hussain <http://www.zakirhussain.com/> celebrating the pioneering 
east-west Shakti group,composer Carla Bley <http:> in a trio with bassist Steve 
Swallow and Britain's Andy Sheppard, and dozens more international stars, 
creative locals and newcomers appearing all over the city.Various venues, 
London, 15-24 November,londonjazzfestival.org.uk <>

Bright Phoebus Revisited

The late Lal and Mike Waterson's album Bright Phoebus was a classic of 70s 
folk. Now it's performed live for the first time, by a cast including Jarvis 
Cocker and members of the Waterson dynasty. Barbican, London, 11 October, 
barbican.org.uk, <> then touring until 16 October. 

Matthew Bourne/Marsden jazz festival  <http://www.marsdenjazzfestival.com>

The fearlessly curious Bourne <http://matthewbourne.com/> premieres a 
synthesiser extravaganza for this eclectic Pennine festival, which also 
features the New York saxistDavid Binney <http://www.davidbinney.com/>, 
guitaristChris Sharkey <http://chrissharkeymusic.com/>, rising young 
trumpeter/composerLaura Jurd <http://www.laurajurd.com/> and many others. 
Various venues, Marsden, West Yorkshire, 11-13 October,marsdenjazzfestival.com 
<>

Hugh Masekela and Larry Willis

The South African horn virtuoso and the jazz fusion pianist met in the 1960s 
at the Manhattan School of Music. They reunite for an intimate reworking of 
American classics, with an African edge.Turner Sims 
<http://www.turnersims.co.uk/>, Southampton, 5 November, turnersims.co.uk, then 
touring until 16 November.

David Murray Infinity Quartet 

Names like Coltrane and Mingus were invoked when the soulful, sermonising 
American saxophonist David Murray <http://www.davidmurraymusic.com/> appeared 
in the 1970s. He didn't quite reach their heights, but he has nonetheless been 
one of jazz's most viscerally exciting artists for more than 30 years.Ronnie 
Scott's, London, 14-15 October,ronniescotts.co.uk 
<http://www.ronniescotts.co.uk/>, then touring until 19 October.
 