
Reading on a mobile? Click here to listen. 
<http://soundcloud.com/guardianaudioedition/edition_19_03_2013>

In this week's edition:

• The budget: if Osborne has no answers, who does? The interesting question is 
not what the chancellor will say on Wednesday, but whether Ed Balls dares set 
out his alternative.Click here to read this article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/mar/17/osborne-budget-will-not-solve-britains-problems>
by John Harris

• The election of a new pope is God's Olympics: global publicity, weeping 
crowds – and no meaning. The papal election matters only to those made 
miserable by the church's reactionary leadership.Click here to read this 
article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/mar/14/election-of-new-pope-gods-olympics>
by Simon Jenkins

• Nation's Noodle lives up to its name as production moves to UK
Golden Wonder noodles, currently shipped from China, will be made in Leeds in 
latest example of 're-shoring'.Click here to read this article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/mar/17/nations-noodle-production-moves-uk>
by Rupert Neate

• The black, female polo player changing perceptions in 'sport of kings'
Uneku Atawodi is the only black woman in the world playing the game 
professionally - and she usually draws quite a crowd.Click here to read this 
article. <http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/mar/14/black-female-polo-player>
by Monica Mark in Lagos

• Harlem Shake: could it kill sampling? An unexpected viral dance craze shot 
Baauer's Harlem Shake to the top of the Billboard charts. Almost immediately, 
legal letters began to arrive. So, can cut-and-paste culture continue to 
flourish on the internet?Click here to read this article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/mar/13/harlem-shake-internet-killing-sampling>
by Dorian Lynseky

• In this week's audiobook review we look back at the career of Minette 
Walters, whose first crime novel The Ice Room was published in 1992, and we 
catch up with the latest from Fred Vargas, The Ghost Riders of Ordebec.

• The Guardian Audio Edition is supported by Audible.co.uk. To listen to the 
audiobooks reviewed in this week's edition go toaudible.co.uk/guardianaudio 
<http://www.audible.co.uk/guardianaudio>
 