
In a year when the Samuel Johnson prize (now the Baillie Gifford prize for 
non-fiction) has dumped Samuel Johnson and theMan Booker International prize  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/man-booker-international-prize>has 
reinvented itself as an annual award for books (instead of a biennial one for 
authors), the so-called “Baftas of the book trade” has been transformed too. 
Formerly the Bookseller industry awards, the prizegiving was relaunched on 
Monday as theBritish Book Industry awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/09/the-loney-wins-book-of-the-year-british-book-industry-awards>
; a change that involves taking part of the name of the National/British book 
awards, aka the Nibbies – last held in 2014, and currently comatose – and 
moving on to its turf by adding five prizes for 2015’s top titles to the 
existing ones for retailers and publishers. The nib symbol that gave the 
Nibbies its name seemed to have been sneakily appropriated too in the logo for 
the as yet acronym-lacking ceremony (the Bribbies? The Bribos?).

The new awards came last, which could be seen as a laudable assertion that 
books matter most – they were top of the bill, with the unveiling of the 
overall book of the year as the long evening’s climax – but also meant that (as 
prizes Nos 20-24) they were announced when the audience, and perhaps host 
Mariella Frostrup, were at their most impatient for the BBIAs to be over so 
they could hit the bar or go home.

Before them came trophies for booksellers and individual publishers or agents, 
the latter group notable for all being won by women, who often emerged from 
all-female or female-dominated shortlists: Pavilion’s Tina Persaud, nurturer of 
colouring-book queen Millie Marotta (editor of the year); Macmillan’s Michele 
Young (rights professional); David Higham’s Lizzy Kremer, whose authors include 
Paula Hawkins (agent); and Doubleday’s Alison Barrow, PR for Hawkins’sThe Girl 
on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/08/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-review-novel>
(publicity campaign).

After half-time and supper, the gongs for publishers gave the impression that 
the Dodo’s decree (“all must have prizes”) inAlice in Wonderland had guided the 
judges, as every giant conglomerate was catered for – Macmillan’s Picador took 
best imprint, Hachette’s Hodder best educational publisher, HarperCollins best 
children’s list and PRH’s Transworld publisher of the year. Indy success was 
hence confined to the victory of Oneworld, home to Marlon James, in the 
independent publisher division where they were opposing each other.

Seemingly mimicking the Costas in selecting category winners that then compete 
for an overall prize, the climactic book awards displayed a similar imbalance – 
three fiction prizes and only one for non-fiction, a slight improvement on the 
Costas’ 4:1 – and consequently an equally unsatisfactory non-fiction lineup; 
though the problem was that it was too miscellaneous rather than (like the 
Costas’ biography-only category) too narrow, forcing Mary Beard’s SPQR to 
bizarrely battle such foes as a Ladybird humour title and the cookbook
Deliciously Ella.

Andrew Michael Hurley: 'There is no place more terrifying than your own mind'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/11/andrew-michael-hurley-there-is-no-place-more-terrifying-than-your-own-mind>
To Frostrup’s delight, the victor was Lars Mytting’s surprise Christmas hit 
Norwegian Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/16/norwegian-wood-lars-mytting-man-made-things-trees-robert-penn-review>
, which no less surreally joined the fiction (Hanya Yanagihara’sA Little Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/05/a-little-life-hanya-yanagihara-review>
), debut fiction (Andrew Michael Hurley’sThe Loney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/28/the-loney-andrew-michael-hurley-review-gothic-novel>
) and children’s (David Solomons’sMy Brother Is a Superhero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/31/my-brother-is-a-superhero-david-solomons-review>
) winners on the best-of-the-best shortlist. It might be viewed as inauspicious 
that these inaugural awards’ supreme prize went to a book that wasn’t actually 
eligible,The Loney having been originally published in 2014 (by Tartarus) 
before John Murray acquired it. After four hours of applauding and guzzling, 
however, most BBIA banqueteers had either forgotten that the 2015 Costa judges 
(who also made it their debut novel winner) had been forced to explicitly bend 
their rules to accommodate Hurley’s book, or if they could remember were too 
weary to care.
 