
Peaky Blinders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/video/2013/aug/16/peaky-blinders-cillian-murphy-video>

Its producers will be wary of any "British Boardwalk Empire" comparisons, 
since calling The Hour the "British Mad Men" weighted expectations 
unflatteringly. But there are similarities that make it inevitable, 
particularly its luscious period sets and plot driven by the criminal 
underworld.Peaky Blinders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/peaky-blinders> takes place in 
Birmingham, 1919, and Cillian Murphy stars as Tommy Shelby, leader of the 
eponymous gang, so-called because they carry blades in their caps. Over six 
episodes, they cross paths with the police, the government, communists and the 
IRA, so it's certainly ambitious – and it looks gorgeous, too. Helen McCrory 
and Sam Neill add to a heavyweight cast.12 September, 9pm, BBC2.

The Blacklist <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k9_qgX7pTlc>

Homeland season three is due on UK screens soon, but for those tired of its 
preposterousness, The Blacklist offers a fresh take on the concept thriller. 
James Spader is a master criminal who turns FBI informant; it's packed with 
twists, and Spader hams it up a treat.Late September/early October, Sky Living.

The Wrong Mans <http://thewrongmans.tumblr.com/>

It's rare to describe a new show as both a sitcom and a thriller, but that's 
whatJames Corden <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-corden> and Mathew 
Baynton have conspired to make in this six-parter. The duo play two men who 
stumble across a car crash and get caught up in a sinister conspiracy.Autumn, 
BBC2.

Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T3T-evQZiQo>

Cult hero Joss Whedon <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joss-whedon> 
follows his Avengers movie superhit with more from the world of Marvel, helming 
this typically savvy story of a secret military espionage agency. Fingers 
crossed it's more Buffy than Dollhouse.Autumn, Channel 4.

Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/apr/10/doctor-who-50th-anniversary-episode>

It's not just that we're waiting for Matt Smith to regenerate into Peter 
Capaldi (and Twitter to finally collapse under the weight of The Thick of It 
jokes): it's also time for the 50th anniversary celebrations. A highlight will 
undoubtedly be the Mark Gatiss-penned drama about the very first episode, An 
Adventure in Space and Time.November, BBC1.

Masters of Sex <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JqwahKjI2bg>

Channel 4 have snapped up this new 12-part drama, made for Showtime in the US, 
which stars Michael Sheen and Lizzy Caplan as real-life sexual-behaviour 
researchers William Masters and Virginia Johnson. Expect repression, 
liberation, exquisite 1950s detail – and plenty of you-know-what.
Autumn, Channel 4.

Why period drama + crime = perfect solution


The fastest way to get a drama commissioned this autumn, it seems, has been to 
write in some criminal activity by law-breakers in corsets or spats. In 
addition to Peaky Blinders' 1920s gangland epic, the BBC also has Quirke, an 
Andrew Davies adaptation of the John Banville novels. Gabriel Byrne is the 
titular pathologist Quirke – we never get a first name – who heads out onto the 
streets of 1950s Dublin to investigate the mysterious deaths of those who end 
up on his mortuary slab. ITV has jumped forward to the 60s and recommissioned 
its Morse prequel Endeavour for another four episodes, while Sky Living is 
reviving the undead for Dracula, a Victorian-set 10-parter starring Jonathan 
Rhys Meyers. as the ultimate bloodsucker. In this retelling, the count travels 
to London and poses as a man of science, though his true intentions involve 
wreaking bloody revenge on his enemies. Expect more historical accuracy from 
The Great Train Robbery, a BBC1 drama split into two parts, which tells the 
story of the 1963 heist in two films – one from the perspective of the 
criminals, and one from that of the cops. It's written by current golden boy 
Chris Chibnall, still riding high on the success of Broadchurch.Rebecca 
Nicholson
 