
If you want to know what haircut to get at any given moment, George Northwood 
is a pretty good man to ask. The hairdresser to celebrities includingAlexa Chung
 <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung> , Rosie Huntington-Whiteley 
and Laura Bailey, Northwood is in the know. And his tip right now is the bob. 
“I have noticed a thing at the moment where women want to cut their hair and 
make a statement,” he says. “It’s part of an experimental moment where girls 
want hair to say something about them.” Hence the uptake of the bob.
 Elli Goulding shows off her new bob on Instagram. Photograph: 
elliegoulding/instagram 
Northwood is so into the style, in fact, that he has launched a Bob Bar 
<http://georgenorthwood.com/bobbar/index.html> in partnership with Redken at 
his central London salon. It sounds gimmicky but the truth is, Northwood isn’t 
plucking the style out of the air. He is reacting to requests from customers in 
his salon, but celebrities have also opted for the bob in droves. Lady Gaga, 
Jessica Alba and Ellie Goulding are three who have had the chop this year and 
they followSienna Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/jan/03/fashion-sienna-miller-in-pictures>
 and Jennifer Lawrence.

Its new popularity has even been linked to the country coming out of recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/23/austerity-celebrities-hair-short-bob-sienna-miller-rosamund-pike-cheryl-fernandez-versini-newspaper>
, something Northwood agrees with. “Times are getting better and girls are more 
confident in themselves,” he says, pointing out the way the bob plays into how 
we dress now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fapr%2F07%2Fbob-spring-new-versatile-haircut-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F7%2F1428406828576%2F863fba7b-a9fa-434e-8107-f4ccbed6ad3e-1531x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20bob%20%E2%80%93%20spring's%20new%20versatile%20haircut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fapr%2F07%2Fbob-spring-new-versatile-haircut-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20bob%20%E2%80%93%20spring%27s%20new%20versatile%20haircut&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fapr%2F07%2Fbob-spring-new-versatile-haircut-alexa-chung%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F7%2F1428406828576%2F863fba7b-a9fa-434e-8107-f4ccbed6ad3e-1531x2040.jpeg>
 George Northwood’s ‘Margot’ bob, inspired by Gwyneth Paltrow in The Royal 
Tenebaums 
Northwood advocates four types of bob including an Alexa-ish choppy number and 
a sleek style inspired by Margot from TheRoyal Tenenbaums 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OWKcO35aeSM> and “the supermodel bob” – 
basically a long bob that means you hair is still long enough for an up-do. 
Northwood is anything but prescriptive as to which one you choose. These styles 
are jumping-off points – the idea being that you bespoke your bob to your own 
needs. There are even wigs to try out before you commit to the cut. “They’re 
interesting as a way to match your clothes – you can dress up if you have a 
messy bob for example, because it balances things out,” he says.

In short, bobs are fast becoming the haircut of 2015. Prepare yourself for the 
chop.
 