

Reading this on mobile? Click here to listen 
<https://soundcloud.com/guardianaudioedition/edition_21_05_13>

In this week's edition:

• Fury at corporate tax avoidance leads to call for a global response. Anger 
over the financial affairs of multinationals such as Google, Amazon and 
Starbucks is gathering momentum in Westminster. Now the UK is poised to lead 
the debate about international tax reform at next month's G8 summit. By Tracy 
McVeigh.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2013/may/18/corporate-tax-avoidance>

• 'Recessions can hurt, but austerity kills' - In the US, more than five 
million people have lost access to health care. In Greece, there's a 200% 
increase in HIV cases. And in some of the worst-hit countries, suicide rates 
are up. David Stuckler, author of an explosive new book, says the facts speak 
for themselves. By Jon Henley.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2013/may/15/recessions-hurt-but-austerity-kills>

• Angelina Jolie has done something extraordinary. In publicly discussing her 
double mastectomy, the actor has challenged the celebrity industry to rethink 
its bizarre values – and she has done all women a huge service. By Hadley 
Freeman.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/may/14/angelina-jolie-double-mastectomy-women>

• Human cloning developments raise hopes for new treatments. People with 
conditions such as heart disease or Parkinson's could benefit from tissue grown 
with their own DNA. By Robin McKie.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/2013/may/18/human-cloning-heart-disease-genes>

• Baz Luhrmann the director of The Great Gatsby is under no illusions that his 
style is everyone's cup of tea – and that, he says, is why he has such a 
kinship with the novel's author. By Xan Brooks.Click here to read article. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2013/may/16/baz-luhrmann-great-gatsby-fitzgerald>

And our audiobook review looks to the future with Eric Schmidt and Jared 
Cohen's The Digital Age, and celebrates fifty years since the publication of 
Richard Feynman's Lectures on Physics.

The Guardian Audio Edition is supported by Audible.co.uk. To listen to the 
audiobooks reviewed in this week's edition go toaudible.co.uk/guardianaudio 
<http://www.audible.co.uk/guardianaudio>.
 