
The Scottsboro Boys <http://scottsboromusical.com/>

For those of us who despair of the modern musical's narcissistic obsession 
with showbiz, this piece should come as a salutary shock. Created byJohn Kander 
and Fred Ebb <http://www.songwritershalloffame.org/exhibits/bio/C217>, whose 
many hits include Cabaret and Chicago, it deals with the notorious case of nine 
black teenage boysaccused of rape in Alabama in 1931 
<http://law2.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/scottsboro/scottsb.htm>. Their 
rushed trial and the application of lynch-mob law led to furious protests, and 
the palpable miscarriage of justice eventually brought about the end of 
all-white juries in the American south. It's strong stuff for a musical, but 
Susan Stroman's production garneredgreat reviews when first seen in New York in 
2010 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2013/may/30/entertainment/la-et-cm-scottsboro-boys-review-ahmanson-theatre-20130531>
, and it now arrives in London with many of its original production team and a 
predominantly British cast, including Julian Glover. After the recent uproar in 
the US followingthe shooting of black teenager Trayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/25/colin-powell-zimmerman-verdict-questionable>
, the show should have plenty of contemporary resonance.Young Vic, London, 18 
October to 23 November,youngvic.org <http://www.youngvic.org/>

Black Jesus 
<http://www.finboroughtheatre.co.uk/productions/2013/black-jesus.php>

Anders Lustgarten, currently the most provocative political playwright in 
Britain, sets his new piece in Zimbabwe in 2015, after the fall of President 
Mugabe. A Truth and Justice Commission is created to investigate past crimes, 
only to encounter unexpected moral dilemmas. David Mercatali directs what 
promises to be a highly controversial play.Finborough, London, 1-26 October, 
finboroughtheatre.co.uk <http://finboroughtheatre.co.uk/>

Richard II <http://www.rsc.org.uk/whats-on/richard-ii/>

David Tennant plays Shakespeare's flawed king in the opening salvo of Gregory 
Doran's new RSC regime. A strong supporting cast includes Nigel Lindsay as 
Bolingbroke and Michael Pennington as John of Gaunt; much is expected given the 
huge success of the Tennant-Doran Hamlet in 2008.Royal Shakespeare Theatre, 
Stratford-upon-Avon, 10 October to 16 November,rsc.org.uk <>; Barbican, London, 
9 December to 25 January,barbican.org.uk 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=14613>

Hecuba <https://tickets.dundeerep.co.uk/public/show.asp>

Euripides' tragedy about the defeated Trojan queen is one of the greatest 
anti-war plays ever written. Frank McGuinness's sparkling translation is 
directed by Amanda Gaughan and staged in a specially constructed auditorium in 
one of the UK's most consistently adventurous theatres.Dundee Rep, Scotland, 
17-26 October,dundeereptheatre.co.uk <https://tickets.dundeerep.co.uk/public/>

Let the Right One In 
<http://www.nationaltheatrescotland.com/content/default.asp?page=home_LetTheRightOneIn>

John Tiffany's acclaimed National Theatre of Scotland production, which opened 
earlier this year, is said to produce gasps of terror. Jack Thorne's play is 
based on a creepy novel and film about a bullied teenage boy called Oskar and 
his neighbour, Eli, who has been an adolescent for an alarmingly long time. 
Martin Quinn and Rebecca Benson play the leads in a sophisticated shocker.Royal 
Court, London, 29 November to 21 December,royalcourttheatre.com 
<http://royalcourttheatre.com/>

Blood + Chocolate <http://www.pilot-theatre.com/?idno=1183>

Frontline heroics, conscientious objectors and the manufacture of chocolate 
are part of the mix in this ambitious promenade show, set during the first 
world war. Two of the north's most interesting companies, Slung Low and Pilot, 
join forces with York Theatre Royal to create a large-scale, city-wide piece 
involving professional and community actors.Theatre Royal, York, 3-20 October,  
yorktheatreroyal.co.uk <http://yorktheatreroyal.co.uk/>

1984 <http://headlong.co.uk/work/1984/#details>

Robert Icke's Headlong production of Romeo and Juliet reinvented that 
well-worn tragedy and made it seen fresh-minted; Duncan Macmillan's Lungs was 
edgy, dark and contemporary. With stories of state spying rarely more topical 
than now, the pair's new adaptation should make Orwell's dystopian vision seem 
frighteningly pertinent.Nottingham Playhouse, 13-28 September, then touring,  
headlong.co.uk <>

 Tomorrow's Parties 
<http://www.forcedentertainment.com/page/144/Theatre-Performances/132>

On a makeshift fairground stage, two performers speculate what the future 
might bring. Utopias collide with dystopias; the probable slams against the 
improbable. Radical theatre-makers Forced Entertainment take a delirious, 
fairylight-wreathed look at what happens next.Crucible Studio, Sheffield, 3-4 
October,then on a UK tour 
<http://www.forcedentertainment.com/page/3020/Tour-Dates> 
forcedentertainment.com  <> 

Musical chairs: an overview of autumn theatre

What is striking this autum is how many key institutions are in fresh hands. 
Vicky Featherstone has already made her mark at the Royal Court with a summer 
rep season, but her programme proper starts withDennis Kelly's The Ritual 
Slaughter of Gorge Mastromas <> (5 September) and continues with an import from 
her old stamping-ground, National Theatre Scotland, in the shape of the spooky
Let the Right One In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/09/let-right-one-in-review> (29 
November). Meanwhile Laurie Sansom, who has taken over at NTS, promises new 
work that thankfully will address the burning issue of Scottish independence.

It's all change in the Midlands, too, with Gregory Doran now ensconced as 
director of the Royal Shakespeare Company and launching the autumn season with
David Tennant starring in Richard II 
<http://www.rsc.org.uk/whats-on/richard-ii/david-tennant-gallery.aspx> (10 
October). Doran shortly announces his programme for 2014, and I'd expect to see 
further adventures in Shakespeare's Histories and Stratford's Swan reverting to 
drama from 1570 to 1750. Over in Birmingham, Roxana Silbert is now at the helm 
of the refurbished Birmingham Rep, where an ambitious season includes her own 
production ofMoli√®re's Tartuffe 
<http://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk/event/tartuffe/> with Mark Williams (1 
November).

The peripatetic director Rupert Goold returns from making his first Hollywood 
movie to take over at the Almeida, London, where he starts with a musical 
version of Bret Easton Ellis's American Psycho (3 December). The audacious
Headlong <http://headlong.co.uk/work/american-psycho/> company, which Goold 
founded, is now in the hands of Jeremy Herrin and launches an autumn tour of 
1984 at Nottingham Playhouse (13 September). But the big news will be the 
announcement of the next director of the National Theatre. Expect to hear 
something before the NT's 50th anniversary celebrations begin in October. 
Rumour suggests the National may make break the mould by creating dual 
directors.
 