
It is impossible to ignore the current wave of excitement surrounding the 
internet of things (IoT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/oct/16/internet-of-things-ipv6>). 
Listed as one ofGartner's Top 10 Strategic Technology trends for 2014 
<http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2603623>, and taking centre stage at this 
year'sCES in Las Vegas <http://www.cesweb.org/>, the implications of being able 
to connect almost any device to the internet have set tongues wagging. But what 
exactly are we looking at here? More than a handful of "things" – a network of 
intelligent connected devices. Talking machines.

To understand the scale of this network, we need to look to a future where 
hundreds of billions of devices are connected to the internet. This won't just 
bewearable technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/apr/03/wearable-technology-machine-to-machine>
 – wristbands and glasses – it will be devices that form part of our critical 
national infrastructure.

Intelligent devices are designed to measure something or actually do something 
on a scale that we can't and in places that we would never venture. Compared to 
today's analogue and manual systems they have the potential to dramatically 
increase security across our critical national infrastructure, protecting 
against attack, reducing the risk of human error and saving money on a grand 
scale.

Without enabling our networks and systems to make more informed data-driven 
decisions, concepts such as thesmart grid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/may/20/smart-grid-risk-security>
 would be impossible and the environmental benefits it promises would be far 
out of reach.

This is why we refer to these devices as intelligent, they capture, process 
and communicate data often in real-time. This data might be personal data 
(carrying significant legal implications with regard to privacy if 
compromised), or environmental readings, such as measurement of temperature or 
pressure.

This second category of information will have a direct impact on crucial 
decisions our infrastructural systems make. Which floodgate should be opened? 
Which runway should a plane land on? Which reactor should be shut down? Other 
devices will actually be taking those actions, controlled from far away.

Their pivotal role in this level of decision making means it is essential that 
we are able to trust what these devices are saying and control what they do. We 
need to be sure that we are talking to the right thing, that it is operating 
correctly, that we can believe the things it tells us, that it will do what we 
tell it to, and that no-one else can interfere along the way.

Needless to say, establishing trust in a broad range of things across 
dispersed settings and at massive scale is a challenge. The devices themselves 
are vulnerable to physical attack, the networks over which they communicate are 
untrusted and the back end systems and data repositories are attractive 
honeypots for thieves and terrorists. Opportunistic attackers, hacktivists, 
'man-in-the-middle', malicious insiders and even governments have their eyes 
open to the possibility of intercepting critical data in transit, or seizing 
control of the devices.Reports of the first global cyber attack on the IoT 
<http://www.proofpoint.com/about-us/press-releases/01162014.php> will have done 
nothing to allay these concerns.

This starts to raise the same sorts of questions as e-commerce did fifteen 
years ago. It's a "one to many" trust issue. That is, one organisation, such as
Amazon <http://www.amazon.co.uk/>, interacting with millions of customers now 
becomes one electric utility interacting with millions of smart meters. Mutual 
authentication, secure communications and high integrity messaging will become 
core security foundations for these systems – all at internet scale.

An internet scale 'problem' will require an internet scale solution and 
fortunately we already have technologies that can pave the way. Public key 
infrastructure (PKI <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_infrastructure>) 
is the mechanism by which data is encrypted as it is passed over the internet 
whether for online banking, tax filing or email.

PKI uses digital credentials to identify web sites, devices and users and 
therefore determine access to sensitive data. Each 'digital certificate' is 
based on a pair of cryptographic keys – a public key, and a private one, which 
must be kept secret and only used by the device or user in question to which it 
belongs. But beware, failure to correctly manage these keys (the 'K' in PKI) 
brings the entire security model into question and potentially leaves an open 
door for attackers.

As more intelligent devices are connected to the internet, the potential 
privacy implications and general false sense of security associated with weak 
key management and data compromise will become critical. WithGoogle's purchase 
of Nest Labs, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/partner-zone-brand-union/google-nest-labs-home-design>
 all eyes are on home automation, but these concerns stretch further when we 
consider the connected car, the connected body – the connected everything.

The internet of things is really only about two things: trust and control.

Richard Moulds is a vice president, strategy at Thales e-Security 
<http://www.thales-esecurity.com/>
 