
First, a confession or two. I know I was meant to read Tim Powers's The Anubis 
Gates next 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/oct/02/fantasy-worm-ouroboros-eddison?showallcomments=true#CommentKey:4f00f076-7ef7-4f71-b884-8bfa07a09350>
, butGene Wolfe <http://mysite.verizon.net/~vze2tmhh/wolfe.html> arrived first 
in the post and so I got stuck in; by the time poor old Tim arrived a few days 
later, I couldn't be prised away. In my ignorance I hadn't realised The Book of 
the New Sun is actually four novels; my edition was of the first two, The 
Shadow of the Torturer and The Claw of the Conciliator, so this post is about 
those.

My other admission is to trepidation: Wolfe is revered – and I mean seriously 
revered – by authors fromNeil Gaiman 
<http://www.sfsite.com/fsf/2007/gwng0704.htm> to George RR Martin and Ursula Le 
Guin, both of whom have called The Book of the New Sun a masterpiece. Although
not everyone likes it 
<http://www.waggish.org/2007/11/23/gene-wolfe-the-book-of-the-new-sun>, one 
extremely detailed essay says "it could be argued that The Book of the New Sun 
is science fiction's Ulysses <http://www.ultan.org.uk/review-botns/>". Crikey. 

Second: a couple of wonderings. A few of you (JamesWMoar, MaxCairnduff, 
RobKill, AddisonSteele) had warned me not to tackle Wolfe while I was still 
reeling from the intense Elizabethan-style English of The Worm Ouroboros (or 
his "linguistic porridge", as AddisonSteele put it – true, but I do like 
porridge). I imagined that I'd be glooping along through olde worlde syntax, 
but Wolfe isn't like that at all. Yes, there's plenty of odd words – "fuligin" 
for black, "carnifex" for torturer, "destriers", which are sort of 
super-horses. But I found this all added to the other-ness of the world Wolfe 
has created; I didn't exactly understand some words until I looked them up but 
I knew what he meant by them, and I loved his "note on translation" at the end 
of the first book, when he tells us how he went about "rendering this book - 
originally composed in a tongue that has not yet achieved existence – into 
English". Did you warner-offers find it irritating? I really enjoyed it.

Also, while The Shadow of the Torturer 
<http://www.worldfantasy.org/awards/awardslist.html> won the World fantasy 
award in 1981 and has the trappings of fantasy (young man, long sword, 
mysterious destiny), surely it's really science fiction? Set a million years in 
the future on a world with a dying sun, where the moon is green and irrigated, 
daylight is red, and "rotting jungles" circle "the waist of the world", it 
follows the story of Severian, a torturer in the decaying Citadel who shows 
mercy to a prisoner he's fallen in love with. Rather than being killed for his 
crime, he's exiled, given an ancient sword (Terminus Est) and sent to the 
distant city of Thrax. On his way out of the vast urban sprawl of Nessus, his 
adventures include fighting a duel with a flower (more deadly than it sounds), 
accidentally stealing the Claw of the Conciliator (a glowing, seemingly magical 
jewel) from a temple and fishing a girl, Dorcas, out of a lake where the dead 
are sunk.

The story is recounted by Severian himself from a position in the future. He 
is, I suspect, brilliantly unreliable; as well as the challenge of picking 
through his statements, this is a world which Wolfe never explains directly – 
the reader has to piece its realities together, which is hugely satisfying.

He goes on to perform a couple of executions, meet a mysterious troupe of 
travelling players, escape underground man-apes who have mutated from their 
human origins through "eons of struggles in the dark" and take part in a 
cannibalistic ritual which confers the substance of a dead person's mind to the 
eater. We even get a bit of Christopher Marlowe. I'd worried that Severian's 
occupation would mean endless gruesome descriptions of torture, but this isn't 
the case at all – apart from a leg-peeling, a excoriated dog, and Severian's 
few beheadings, Wolfe steers clear of the grisly, and manages to make his 
torturer-hero if not sympathetic, then definitely charismatic. (Unlike Terry 
Goodkind, who seems to revel in his Mord-Sith's perversions – although 
mentioning Goodkind in the same blog as Wolfe feels a bit sacrilegious, so 
apologies for bringing him up.)

I loved Shadow and Claw – was blown away, in fact. The whole thing is 
dreamlike in quality, unfathomably large in scope, deliciously, slyly puzzling. 
It's enormous fun picking away at Severian's ideas about the past of his far 
future Urth, at the mysteries of his companions Jonas (why does he have a 
mechanical hand?) and Dorcas (was she resurrected?), at what the Claw might 
actually be – and at how truthful and accurate our narrator, for all his 
protestations that he remembers "every rattling chain and whistling wind, every 
sight, smell and taste", really is. "Trust the text implicitly. The answers are 
in there,"Gaiman tells us <http://www.sfsite.com/fsf/2007/gwng0704.htm>. Then 
"do not trust the text farther than you can throw it, if that far. It's tricksy 
and desperate stuff, and it may go off in your hand at any time." I think a 
second read is definitely going to be in order; I'm also champing at the bit 
for the second half to arrive.

What do you think? I suspect you'll mostly be huge fans, but I'd be interested 
to know why you think The Book of the New Sun isn't better known. Yes, it's 
acclaimed by fellow SFF authors and isclearly held in huge esteem 
<http://web.mac.com/paddybon/Site/a_tribute_to_Gene_Wolfe.html> all over the 
place <http://www.ultan.org.uk/review-botns/> – hell, there's even Wolfian 
scholarship <http://www.ultan.org.uk/> out there – but despite all this I'd 
still say it hasn't yet made it to the mainstream. Why is that? It's certainly 
good enough. Could it be the cover (my version hasSeverian wearing what looks 
to be a big leather codpiece 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/1857989775/ref=sib_vae_dp>)? I'd love to 
know what you think.

Meanwhile, next up is Mr Powers and The Anubis Gates, which I'm taking on 
holiday (along with New Sun books three and four – would you be interested in a 
post on those once I'm done?). Can't wait.
 