
It could hardly have come at a more spookily appropriate time: just when 
film-fans and the media are getting excited about the entertaining new sci-fi 
movie The Martian, about a troubled Nasa mission to Mars, released this week in 
the UK and the US. Matt Damon’s lovely chops in his space-helmet are all over 
the airwaves and the billboards, promoting a film with which Nasa has 
cooperated, with generous use of their branding. And now Nasa itself has chosen 
this moment toget us all excited about some news about the red planet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/across-the-universe/live/2015/sep/28/water-on-mars-buildup-to-nasa-mystery-solved-announcement-live>
.

They’ve offered an answer to David Bowie’s famous question about whether there 
is life on Mars. Well … yes! Or rather … not exactly! But there is water. Water 
that could sustain life! Possibly! Nasa has now revealed that there is evidence 
of stain-marks on Mars’s canyons and crater-walls: water is trickling downhill 
before drying up in the valleys and plains. The water flows could lead Nasa or 
another country’s space agency to potential sites where life onMars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/mars> could be found.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fthe-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433860441835%2FKP_267419_crop.jpg_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Martian%20trailer%3A%20Matt%20Damon%20makes%20Mars%20home%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fthe-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Martian%20trailer%3A%20Matt%20Damon%20makes%20Mars%20home%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F09%2Fthe-martian-trailer-matt-damon-mars-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F9%2F1433860441835%2FKP_267419_crop.jpg_640x480.jpg>
 The Martian trailer: Matt Damon makes Mars home 
Exciting stuff. You would have to be a very dull and earthbound sort of person 
not to be intrigued by this. But asour science editor Ian Sample points out, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/28/nasa-scientists-find-evidence-flowing-water-mars>
 discovering residual evidence of water on Mars is not exactly new. Pictures 
beamed back to Earth way back in the 1970s showed evidence of dried-up rivers 
once submerged beneath ancient lakes and Nasa’s probes are always discovering 
circumstantial evidence of water on Mars. Ten years ago, its Mars Global 
Surveyor probe sent back pictures of what may have been water bursting through 
a gully, and four years ago Nasa’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter camera captured 
images of what appeared to be streams flowing down crater walls.

Of course, perhaps only a cynic would say that Nasa has to keep alive in all 
our hearts the romance and glory of space travel to stay in tax-funded 
existence, and so the possibility of water on Mars is an article of faith. And 
if there is an entertaining movie about a Nasa mission to Mars, which at 
certain points is almost a feature-length ad forNasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> … well why not time your latest 
announcement to coincide with its release? To coin a phrase: it isn’t rocket 
science.

The Martian review - Ridley Scott's playful sci-fi runs out of fuel before 
reaching home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/11/the-martian-ridley-scotts-playful-sci-fi-runs-out-of-fuel-before-reaching-home>
When I heard about the news from Nasa, I put on my DVD edition of Stanley 
Kubrick’s2001: A Space Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001-a-space-odyssey> which, among its extra 
features, includes a film of the promotional speech given at the time by Arthur 
C Clarke, who wrote the story on which the film was based. To uproarious 
laughter from his audience, Clarke revealed that the Apollo management 
committee had rescheduled an official meeting so that they could get to the 
premiere.

And then Clarke revealed something truly staggering. Here is what he said: “As 
you know in the last few weeks, there has been this tremendous excitement among 
the astronomers over the extraordinarily precise and rhythmic radio impulses 
coming from a point between Vega and Altair [that is, two of the stars in the 
‘summer triangle’ formation, respectively in the Lyra and Aquila 
constellations] which may yet turn out to have a natural explanation, but its 
periodicity and characteristics are so extraordinary that no explanation as yet 
seems very feasible. Sooner or later we expect we will receive proof that other 
intelligence exists in this universe.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-martian-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443692316933%2FKP_505265_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Martian%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-martian-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Martian%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-martian-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443692316933%2FKP_505265_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The film team review The Martian 
Oh my God! Just as 2001: A Space <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> 
Odyssey was coming out … space aliens were trying to make contact! With beeping 
radio signals! Weren’t they? It must have been huge news at the time. It must 
have boosted ticket sales for 2001. Why has this mindblowing event been 
forgotten? Perhaps, after all the excitement died down, scientists did indeed 
discover a “natural explanation” of the sort Clarke warily acknowledged, and 
everyone dropped the matter.

Well, never mind. If Nasa scientists and film-makers and their respective PR 
teams can find a common interest, why not? Cinema flourishes, and who knows? 
Maybe there is water on Mars – and much else besides.
 