
Doctor Brown: Befrdfgth 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/doctor-brown-befrdfgth/>

The undisputed current champion of world comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/21/doctor-brown-comedy-interview> – 
last week's Edinburgh comedy award followed a Barry award in Melbourne – brings 
hislatest adventure in audience-mauling and smouldering silent comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/aug/23/doctor-brown-edinburgh-festival-review>
 to London.Soho theatre, London, 30‑October to 10 November. sohotheatre.com 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/>

Fear of a Brown Planet 
<http://www.frogandbucket.com/manchester-shows/special-events/fobp-visual1_layout-1/>

Last year's UK debut by Aamer Rahman and Nazeem Hussain was one of the 
highlights of the Edinburgh fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/16/fear-of-a-brown-planet-edinburgh-review>
: smart and funny, political but never preachy comedy from the bracingly new 
perspective of two Aussie Muslims.Frog & Bucket, Manchester, 16 September, then 
touring.frogandbucket.com <http://www.frogandbucket.com>

Pappy's: Last Show Ever <http://www.pappyscomedy.com/>

This irresistible trio of goons (Tom Parry, Ben Clark and Matthew Crosby) hit 
their dizziest heights yet at this year's Edinburgh fringe, with a now 
hilarious, now heartbreaking – and always winningly ramshackle – show imagining 
their own swansong.Heslam Park, Scunthorpe, 28 September, then touring. 
yorkshirecoastcomedy.co.uk <http://yorkshirecoastcomedy.co.uk/>

John Shuttleworth <http://www.shuttleworths.co.uk/home.html>

Before the Alan Bennett of the Bontempi organ goes out on tour, don't miss this
one-off charity gig <http://www.thebloomsbury.com/event/run/1718>, in which 
cover versions of his imperishable oeuvre (includingI Can't Go Back to Savoury 
Now <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8eh72REd_s> and Two Margarines on the Go 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-K4cEocL5kI>) are performed by Vic Reeves, 
Heaven 17, Reverend and the Makers, and, er, Barbara Dickson. Bloomsbury 
theatre, London <http://www.thebloomsbury.com/>, 22 September. Then touring 
from 1 November.shuttleworths.co.uk <http://www.shuttleworths.co.uk/home.html>
 