
Sleepless nights, set-tos and screwed-up paper retrieved from the bin – all 
the stuff great architecture is made of. Right?

For anyone with the slightest suspicion of the insidious, futile processes at 
work behind the glossy facades of the world's so-called 'starchitects', a new 
documentary by Spanish architectAngel Borrego Cubero 
<http://www.o-s-s.org/angel-borrego-cubero/?lang=en> makes for compulsive 
viewing.

The Competition <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2647618/>, which has its UK 
premiere at theBarbican 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/film/event-detail.asp?ID=16312> tonight, follows 
the trials and tribulations of five stellar practices competing in a doomed bid 
to build a new national museum for Andorra, back in 2009. As the global 
financial crisis hit rock-bottom, no job was too small for architects whose 
dreams of dotting Middle Eastern deserts with their snazzy signatures had been 
revealed as a hopeless mirage. A museum the size of a department store, for a 
tiny microstate nestled in the folds of the Pyrenees, was not something to be 
sniffed at.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F59223875&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F59223875> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F59223875&media=>
With an application form open to anyone who had won the Pritzker Prize, “or 
similar qualifications”, the callout attracted the likes ofNorman Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/norman-foster> and Zaha Hadid, Frank 
Gehry and Jean Nouvel – as well as the Pritzkerless but plucky Dominique 
Perrault.

The documentary, to which the architects agreed as part of the entry 
requirements, charts the surreal process by which “iconic” projects are 
conjured, over a matter of weeks, by bleary-eyed interns, in a mysteriously 
haphazard manner.

It is a routine, familiar to anyone who has worked on competitions of this 
kind, that jumps and jolts between utterly different proposals: one minute the 
answer is a ground-scraper; the next it is a willowy tree. We see Gehry's 
assistants diligently screwing up scraps of paper and piling them into crumpled 
totem poles. Perrault's staff, stuck for inspiration, turn their model upside 
down, and hey presto, it makes sense! Nouvel's team start sketching a gaping 
yonic gash through the centre of their building: “In section, when it looks 
like something sexual, we are close,” quips the designer.
 World-weary … Frank Gehry inspects a range of models before his presentation 
to the jury. Photograph: The Competition 
There is an air of desperation throughout, as the competing teams grasp 
blindly for novelty forms, trying to second-guess the desires of a client they 
have never met, in a context they have never seen, for imaginary future users 
they will never know. The entire process is exposed as an absurdist endeavour, 
fatuous shapes dressed up with just enough detail to be convincing for the jury 
presentation, seductive images geared towards massaging the vanity of a culture 
minister.

The architects' offices are revealed as factories constructed for maximum 
inefficiency, where untold hours are spent churning out multiple options, only 
for the maestro to arrive at the last minute and overturn the tables. There are 
late-night pizzas and despondent cigarette breaks, as teams await the arrival 
of their prima donna principals, who swoop in to damn the product of their 
labours.

“Fuck, make some holes!” screams Nouvel, inspecting an elevation of tiny 
windows, packed in a grid across the building's facade. “You prefer big holes?” 
asks the project leader. “No, I don't prefer big holes!” he snaps back. “I 
prefer normal holes!” before drifting out of the room, his role as the 
pantomime villain firmly established.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F08%2Fthe-competition-film-shows-how-starchitects-really-work%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F7%2F1399482555155%2F9a1af49d-61f7-47a9-9fe0-ffd18200273e-1020x612.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Competition%3A%20a%20documentary%20that%20exposes%20how%20'starchitects'%20really%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F08%2Fthe-competition-film-shows-how-starchitects-really-work%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Competition%3A%20a%20documentary%20that%20exposes%20how%20%27starchitects%27%20really%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2014%2Fmay%2F08%2Fthe-competition-film-shows-how-starchitects-really-work%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F7%2F1399482555155%2F9a1af49d-61f7-47a9-9fe0-ffd18200273e-1020x612.png>
 Pantomime villain … Jean Nouvel makes his frustrations known. Photograph: The 
Competition 
Gehry is shown to be world-weary and resigned, bumbling around his workshop 
between tables piled high with mindless heaps of junk. A lifetime as a purveyor 
of crumpled metal forms to aspirational second-tier cities has clearly taken 
its toll. “I don't know,” he sighs, in front of a lumpen black tower that has 
the look of a fossilised turd. “It's a crazy idea maybe.”

Hadid is notable by her absence – her expert PR man no doubt knowing all too 
well how the film would pan out – while Foster is vindicated as the one 
architect with the sense to drop out of the race, before his practice wasted 
precious resources on an elaborate charade that would ultimately come to 
nothing.

“Any competition is as good as the way that it's run,” he says in a fleeting 
cameo, speaking from an armchair with the measured tones of an all-knowing 
psychiatrist. “It can only be as good as the people who are organising it, 
writing the brief, selecting the people who will judge it, and the process of 
judging it. And their standards vary. Sometimes they're fantastic, sometimes 
they're, shall we say, a little suspect.”

Try to visit the National Museum of Andorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/andorra>, and you'll realise which it was to 
be.

• In a similar vein, watch four star architects compete to design the 425 Park 
Avenue tower in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2012/nov/19/architects-zaha-hadid-norman-foster>
 