
The skirt of the summer is here. Marks and Spencer’s much talked about “It 
piece”, a 1970s-style suede skirt with a price tag of £199, finally went on 
sale this weekend in selected stores and will be shipped to the thousands who 
have ordered it online.

Although the skirt’s official launch date is not until 14 May, the buzz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/01/this-seasons-cult-item-the-autograph-suede-skirt>
 around the brown pencil skirt began in February, when it was spotted on the 
likes of model Alexa Chung and American socialite Olivia Palermo. Since then, 
it has been featured in numerous fashion magazines and blogs, includingVogue and
Glamour, and on runways at New York fashion week.

Natalie Miles, a 35-year-old account manager at skincare brand Elemis, made a 
special trip to Marks’s flagship Marble Arch store in London last Friday and 
decided that the skirt lives up to the hype. “I heard about it online a few 
months ago and I really like the design and feel of it. M&S has got a lot 
better in recent years and this is a really nice piece,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fsuede-skirt-marks-and-spencer-strike-gold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F10%2F1428704928293%2F92a2ebfa-6a44-4556-818b-dfc8aa8bbfe0-726x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20summer%20of%20suede%3A%20will%20M%26S%20strike%20gold%20with%20%E2%80%98timeless%E2%80%99%20skirt%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fsuede-skirt-marks-and-spencer-strike-gold%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20summer%20of%20suede%3A%20will%20M%26S%20strike%20gold%20with%20%E2%80%98timeless%E2%80%99%20skirt%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fapr%2F12%2Fsuede-skirt-marks-and-spencer-strike-gold%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F10%2F1428704928293%2F92a2ebfa-6a44-4556-818b-dfc8aa8bbfe0-726x2040.jpeg>
 Olivia Palermo in the skirt. Photograph: Rex 
Jayne Saunders, the store’s manager, agreed, adding that she was pleased with 
the reaction so far. “Our customers have been really positive. We sold our 
first one within minutes of the store opening.”

While this is good news for M&S, some shoppers were left disappointed. “They 
don’t have it in my size,” said Miles, as she looked through the rail to find 
it only had size 14s and above. “Oh well, it was a lot of money anyway.”

A faux suede version of the skirt has already sold out, and social media 
chatter has apparently drawn customers to stores. Such is the interest stoked 
by the skirt that it is credited by Marc Bolland, chief executive of M&S, with 
helping the retailer to its first rise in clothing and homeware sales in almost 
four years, after first-quarter results saw its share price rise by more than 
5%.

A spokesperson for M&S said: “We offered customers the opportunity to register 
their interest in the skirt, to be notified when it is available, and several 
thousand registered. It attracted so much attention the store brought forward a 
limited first drop to this weekend. This is a great example of how our 
interpretation of the key catwalk trends has landed well with customers and the 
fashion media.”

Queralt Ferrer, head of design, thinks the popularity of the item is an 
encouraging sign. “The demand from our customers for premium investment pieces 
is always high. The suede skirt is a perfect example of this. It’s a timeless, 
wearable item that has a really luxe finish. It can be worked into any existing 
wardrobe for a 1970s look or an everyday outfit.”

Although a single item cannot save a floundering retailer, high-profile hits 
such as this can improve brand image of a brand in fashion circles and appeal 
to a wider audience.

Lily Russo, fashion editor at Grazia, which first included the skirt in its 
February issue and is featuring it again this week, thinks the piece has stood 
out as the must-have buy of the season and that M&S is right to have high hopes 
for its success. “I think part of the reason it has garnered so much interest 
is that, ultimately, it is a classic wardrobe buy,” said Russo. “Suede skirts 
can be hard to come by – especially at this length and on the high street. Add 
the buzz generated through PR and celebrity sightings and you have a sellout 
product. Plus the 1970s trend is huge for summer.”

Russo thinks M&S’s waiting list strategy was clever. “There’s been a lot of 
exposure on social media, and the fact that it is hard to get hold of has made 
it sell even faster. There is a lot of competition on the UK high street, 
especially in our current economic climate, and M&S has done a great job of 
appealing to new customers.”
 