
“The bike is a good place to work for a writer,” wrote Paul Fournel in Need 
for the Bike. “First, he can sit down; then he’s surrounded by windy silence, 
which airs out the brain and is favourable to meditation; finally, he produces 
with his legs a fair number of different rhythms, which are so much music to 
verse and prose.”

There is something inherently literary about the act of cycling. The great 
cycling road races – especially theTour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> – were originally designed to 
be read about rather than watched. The tours were first organised by sporting 
newspapers to boost sales, and before the rise of television coverage the 
results were consumed in print. There is something novelistic about a bicycle 
race, too. Each stage is a chapter. In the peloton there are heroes and 
villains, protagonists and a cast of supporting characters.

Perhaps it’s inevitable, then, that the best cycling books aren’t 
technological histories of the bicycle, or scholarly accounts of the great road 
races, or biographies of famous racing cyclists – fascinating though many of 
these are – but stranger books, ones that tell their stories through and with 
the bicycle.

1. Flann O’Brien, The Third Policeman 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Flann+O%E2%80%99Brien%2C+The+Third+Policeman+%281968%29&order=relevance&dir=desc>
 (1968)

Though he wasn’t much of a cyclist himself, Flann O’Brien must be the patron 
saint of all cycling literature. InThe Third Policeman, written at the end of 
the 1930s but published only posthumously, he outlined his “Atomic Theory” of 
cycling: spend too long on a bike, O’Brien argued, and you’ll begin to exchange 
atoms with your machine. “You would be surprised at the number of people in 
these parts,” says one of the titular policemen to the nameless narrator of 
O’Brien’s novel, “who are nearly half people and half bicycles.”

In the circular hell described in the book, keen cyclists end their lives 
sleeping standing in hallways with their elbows propped up against walls. 
Bicycles take on humanity, and begin creeping around at night and stealing from 
pantries. It’s all gloriously weird.

2. Samuel Beckett, Molloy <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/molloy.html> (1951)

O’Brien’s fellow Irishman Beckett was a huge cycling fan. The literary critic 
Hugh Kenner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/nov/28/guardianobituaries.books> argued 
that his most famous (and most famously absent) creation, Godot, was himself 
based on a Monsieur Godeau, a French national champion racer.

The spirit of cycling suffuses Beckett’s novel Molloy. You can hear the pedal 
strokes in the staccato rhythms of his sentences. Molloy himself is so 
dependent on his bicycle that when he is separated from it he can barely move, 
and is forced to ratchet himself along the road on his crutches. For Beckett, 
bikes were more than mere vehicles: they were prostheses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2F10-best-cycling-books-tour-de-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436458156563%2F7ff22bbb-7469-4d57-8629-d28537ed7f0d-1020x687.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20best%20books%20about%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2F10-best-cycling-books-tour-de-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20best%20books%20about%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2F10-best-cycling-books-tour-de-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436458156563%2F7ff22bbb-7469-4d57-8629-d28537ed7f0d-1020x687.jpeg>
 Samuel Beckett, huge cycling fan. Photograph: Jane Bown 
3. Alfred Jarry <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alfredjarry>, The Supermale 
(1902)


Alfred Jarry was a surrealist playwright and founder of “Pataphysics”, which 
he defined as “the science of imaginary solutions”. He was also a fanatical 
cyclist. Jarry rode a fixed-gear bike around Paris, letting off pistols to 
deter attacking dogs as he went. Later he scandalised French society by wearing 
his cycling garb to the funeral of the poetStéphane Mallarmé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/15/stephane-mallarme-poems-in-verse-review>
.

Written during the “heroic era” of bicycle road racing, The Supermale is a 
novella about a group of bicycle riders engaged in a race from Paris to Asia. 
Powered by a mysterious “perpetual motion food”, they reach speeds of 300km per 
hour. One of the racers dies but is unable to stop pedalling as he is 
contractually obliged to finish the race.

4. HG Wells <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hgwells>, The Wheels of Chance 
(1896)

For Irish and French writers the bicycle was a futurist vehicle, but for Wells 
it was nostalgic and essentially comic. His social satire narrates a cycling 
tour of the south coast taken by a draper’s assistant, Hoopdriver. On his ride, 
Hoopdriver suffers punctures, falls off a lot, and falls in love with another 
rider (wearing her “rationals”, or cycling trousers – cycling did much for a 
woman’s right to wear sensible clothing during this period). InThe Wheels of 
Chance the bicycle emerges as a tool for social and sexual mobility. 

5. Luigi Bartolini, Bicycle Thieves (1946)

Though Vittorio de Sica’s film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/19/film-review-bicycle-theives> is 
better known, Luigi Bartolini’s novel, on which it is based, is equally 
wonderful, and quite a lot funnier. In it the bicycle promises to provide an 
escape from the poverty of postwar Italy. An unemployed man named Antonio is 
offered a job putting up posters around Rome; on his first day of work he has 
his bike stolen and searches the city for it, before becoming a bicycle thief 
in turn.

If you’ve ever had a bicycle stolen, you will know Antonio’s pain. And you 
will also recognise, perhaps, the moral quandaries such a loss can provoke.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2F10-best-cycling-books-tour-de-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436456941075%2Fcb689c35-e004-48ee-9b87-a3f9dc360fd1-1020x800.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20best%20books%20about%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2F10-best-cycling-books-tour-de-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20best%20books%20about%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2F10-best-cycling-books-tour-de-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436456941075%2Fcb689c35-e004-48ee-9b87-a3f9dc360fd1-1020x800.jpeg>
 The 1948 film adaptation ofThe Bicycle Thieves. Photograph: Allstar 
6. Tim Krabbé, The Rider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jun/30/top10s.cycling> (1978, trans 
2002)


The Dutch are a nation of cyclists, but they’re not so well known as bicycle 
racers. There are not enough hills in the Netherlands to make for interesting 
multi-stage racing. But Dutch writer Tim Krabbé’sThe Rider is not only the best 
evocation of a bicycle race, but also one of the finest ever novels about sport.

Krabbé describes – pedal stroke by pedal stroke and kilometre by kilometre – 
an amateur one-day classic race.The Rider reads like the deranged interior 
monologue of the bicycle itself. It’s a novel that’s almost perfect.

7. Paul Fournel, Need for the Bike (2001)


Fournel is a member of the French avant-garde literary group Oulipo, founded 
in the 60s byRaymond Queneau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/02/hitting-streets-raymond-queneau-review>
. Oulipians favour “constrained writing” techniques, playing with palindromes 
and mathematical rules, or producing novels without the using the letter “e”.

Fournel’s book is constrained in terms of subject matter: it is a short, 
intense love letter to the bicycle, a cyclo-philosophical treatise on what it 
means to go through life on two wheels. It’s a bit likeZen and the Art of 
Motorcycle Maintenance 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/zen-and-the-art-of-motorcycle-maintenance-4.html>
, but less pretentious and much more entertaining.

The secret life of a cycle courier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/01/my-life-cycle-courier-london-cyclogeography>
8. James Waddington, Bad to the Bone 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/bad-to-the-bone.html> (1998)


Part murder-mystery, part cycling thriller, this is a great novel about the 
commercialisation of the modern sport of cycling. It’s very funny, too: full of 
satirical excesses and bodily goings on.

It’s also good on the ethics of doping and the way in which professional 
cyclists are reduced, through the demands of their sport, to what Waddington 
calls “fleshbags of blood and sinew. The usual appetites are suppressed. 
Everyone just works, eats and sleeps … Legitimate, maybe, but it’s close to 
vampirism for an honourable profession.”

9. Matt Seaton, The Escape Artist 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/escape-artist.html> (2002)

For many, cycling is an escape from the daily grind, but in Matt Seaton’s 
memoir of his time as an amateur competitive cyclist, it provides an escape 
from a great loss. Soon after he became a middle-aged man in Lycra, Seaton’s 
wife, Ruth Picardie, was diagnosed with breast cancer.Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> is often a way of controlling 
suffering, and in this terrifically moving memoir it becomes a way of coming to 
terms with grief, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2F10-best-cycling-books-tour-de-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436457485851%2F06a0b096-6dce-41f7-b052-f91af35bc83a-2060x1349.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20best%20books%20about%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2F10-best-cycling-books-tour-de-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20best%20books%20about%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2F10-best-cycling-books-tour-de-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436457485851%2F06a0b096-6dce-41f7-b052-f91af35bc83a-2060x1349.jpeg>
 Matt Seaton, a middle-aged man in Lycra. Photograph: Sarah Lee/Guardian 
10. David Rose, Vault <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/vault-7.html> (2011)

Rose’s debut is a clever thriller about snipers, espionage, and the postwar 
world of competitive cycling. Two intertwining narratives in this metafictional 
“anti-novel” tell the story of a cyclist-turned-spy who delivers state secrets 
from the midst of the peloton. It is a short, sharp joy.

• Jon Day’s Cyclogeography 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/319475/s/cyclogeography/>
 is published by Notting Hill Editions.
 