
Arthur Koestler is back in the news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthur-koestler> – or at least back on the 
books pages. The reason for this is the publication of Michael Scammell's 
excellent,long-awaited biography <http://www.nybooks.com/articles/23591>, which 
I've been reading in preparation forthis event tomorrow 
<http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2010/01/koestler-the-indispensible-intellectual>
, where I'll be interviewing Scammell.

A lot of discussion, inevitably, has focused on Koestler's bullying, sexually 
predatory side, which became news more than 10 years ago when it was first 
uncovered in all its grimness by David Cesarani in anearlier biography 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/244230.stm>.

This is a bit of a pity, not because the way someone behaves towards women 
doesn't matter – of course it does. But because it deflects attention from 
everything else worth thinking about. And in Koestler's case, there really is a 
lot to think about.

His life, for a start, was extraordinary, both in its eventfulness and in the 
way it took in so many of the 20th century's major currents. He was at various 
points both a Zionist and a communist and, after becoming disillusioned with 
communism, a leading critic of the Soviet Union (in which he travelled around 
in the 1930s). He was imprisoned by Franco in 1937 and only narrowly escaped 
the Nazis during the second world war. He was there when Israel was created; he 
hung out with the existentialists in Paris; he played a leading role in 
launching the west's postwar propaganda offensive against the Soviet Union and, 
later, in the campaign to end the death penalty in Britain. In the 60s, he even 
took LSD withTimothy Leary <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timothy_Leary>.

As Scamell rightly stresses, he had a knack for being ahead of his time: he 
saw the dangers of communism earlier and much more clearly than many on the 
left; he was an early advocate of nuclear disarmament, of European integration, 
and of the need to assist persecuted writers. And of course there are the 
writings for which he was justly celebrated, including, inDarkness at Noon 
<http://www.randomhouse.co.uk/vintage/vintageclassics/title.htm?command=Search&db=/catalog/main.txt&eqisbndata=0099424916>
, one of the most influential political novels of the 20th century.

Yet today Koestler is a strangely marginal figure. Why is this? Partly, or 
perhaps precisely because he was so much a creature of the 20th century. The 
battles he fought are no longer quite our battles, and he seems sealed off from 
us by all that has happened since his death in 1983 – most notably, of course, 
the collapse of communism.

But another factor, of which Scammell's biography makes one very aware, is 
nationality. Koestler never really belonged anywhere, including Britain, where 
he spent the majority of his time after the war. This was often a source of 
strength during his lifetime – it meant he could rove from country to country 
and immerse himself in whatever was happening. But in the longer term, writers 
need the backing of a home nation to flourish. Writers like Orwell and Camus, 
both of whom Koestler was friendly with, are of course today very much national 
figures. Koestler, by contrast, remains oddly rootless. At one point, Scammell 
tellingly quotes the criticRaymond Mortimer 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Raymond_Mortimer> on why Koestler's writings, 
though fascinating, were also oddly "dislikable". It's because, Mortimer wrote, 
they neglected "the necessity or even the existence of gardening".
 