
I first met Alison Steadman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alison-steadman> not when I was sent to 
interview her, but when she arrived to interview me. She needed to know how 
women journalists behaved for a film she was making. Were we all teeth and 
shoulderpads (this was the early 1990s)? And did we really rummage through 
celebrity dustbins?

I don't know what I said to her, but it clearly didn't ring true because, a 
week later, she was back, more anxious this time. She'd found out she was going 
to have to interview Edwina Currie. For real, on camera. The catch was that she 
would be in character but Edwina wouldn't. "Don't worry," I told her (or, at 
least, she says I told her). "You've done far more research than I ever would."

I was not the only journalist she interviewed on the way to creating Jackie 
Johns, bitch columnist, for Les Blair's television film News Hounds. We've all 
assured ourselves that Jackie Johns was not actually based on us - and yet we 
all know that Steadman's great strength as an actress is her uncanny nose for 
the bits of ordinary people that are vulnerable to satirical assault.

Look at Beverley from Abigail's Party (model: a Selfridges make-up lady 
Steadman once saw demolish a plain little shopper who had the misfortune to get 
sucked into a demonstration). Look at Jane Horrocks's mother in The Rise and 
Fall of Little Voice (model: a middle-aged battle-axe she met on a cast outing 
to a Bolton nightclub). Both characters were created through precisely the sort 
of exhaustive homework that she was doing for News Hounds.

What makes it odder is that Steadman does not appear to be a particularly 
sharp or satirical person. She seems a down-to-earth, straight-to-the-chin sort 
who talks warmly of her family and honestly of her professional ups and downs. 
Once again she has been reduced to a state of nervous excitement - only this 
time it's by the prospect of returning Joe Orton's first play, Entertaining Mr 
Sloane, to the West End theatre in which it was premiered in 1964.

In this immaculately unpleasant comedy she plays Kath, a manipulative widow 
who pursues a bisexual psychopath. So is Kath modelled on some unfortunate 
interviewee? Improvisation, she says, is very different from appearing in a 
scripted play. While one involves creation, the other involves interpretation. 
"Kath is a real mix of childlike, vulnerable and manipulative: she's the 
mother, the seductress. She's so unsubtle but, in other ways, she knows exactly 
what she's doing. Of course, you have to understand the feelings in the play to 
an extent, otherwise you couldn't do it. There are times on stage playing Kath 
when I feel this terrible emotional well. A bit of that is Alison feeling very 
sorry for her and channelling that pity into her."

It's at this point that the distinction between improvisation and scripted 
plays breaks down. "The older you get, the more things you feel and the more 
you can remember," she says. To that extent, acting gets easier with age. "Like 
having a baby put into your arms. Before I'd had a baby I'd played a woman 
giving birth and I had a crack at it, but when I had my own baby I realised I'd 
been terrible. I'd done my research, of course, but no one really tells you 
what it's like."

The ability to store these memories at a subconscious level and pull them out 
when the occasion demands takes a particular kind of intelligence. It's an 
empathetic intelligence, an actor's intelligence, which Steadman has in 
abundance. Sometimes it surfaces in merciless flights of mimicry; sometimes it 
sends a shiver of recognition through you.

By her own admission, Steadman, 54, wasn't a high-flyer at school. "Basically, 
I would impersonate anyone as a child. I loved Shakespeare and dancing and 
baking and poetry. Everything else I hated. You'd find that's true of many 
actors: they'll say they were good at art and impersonating the teachers, but 
that they felt inadequate. That was me."

As a grammar school girl in Liverpool she joined the local youth theatre - a 
hobby that was tolerated rather than encouraged by her parents. Her father was 
a product supervisor for a local engineering firm and her mother a housewife. 
There was no tradition of showbusiness in her family. Her grandfather, though, 
had been a grainer and marbler, and her grandmother a milliner. "Who knows if, 
in another generation, they might have been an artist and a designer?"

She had left school and was working in the local probation office when, 
without telling anyone what she was up to, she took two days off and sneaked 
down to London for a drama school audition. She got in. There she found people 
who were happy to stay up into the early hours discussing Chekhov. She also met 
Mike Leigh, an up-and-coming director who was drafted in to direct a student 
show. She wasn't in the show, but they met again when she was back in Liverpool 
working at the Everyman Theatre. He offered her a part in a BBC Play for Today 
and a relationship formed that was to lead to more than 20 years of marriage, 
two sons and some of the definitive theatre and film work of the 20th century, 
from Abigail's Party and Nuts in May to Life is Sweet.

Although she and Leigh split up five years ago, they have worked together 
since, on his film Topsy-Turvy, and she sees no reason why they shouldn't do so 
again. "We got on extremely well before when we worked together. People would 
say to me, 'He's your husband - don't you argue?' and we didn't because we were 
so serious about our work. That was how we got together in the first place, and 
it hasn't changed."

It was through work, too, that she met her current partner, the actor Michael 
Elwyn - on the set of the BBC wartime drama No Bananas. And it was through work 
that she chose finally to announce her split from Leigh - during a press 
conference for No Bananas in the Imperial War Museum.

But she is quick to point out that, though she loves her work, it isn't 
everything to her. Yes, she would like to make more films, but she also enjoys 
doing voice-overs (she has done everything from cartoon pantomime to Spitting 
Image). She's also a "home bird" who enjoys pub quizzes and says: "The happiest 
times in my life have been with my two boys [both of whom are now grown up]. If 
I ever did a job that took me away from them, I'd make sure I had six weeks off 
afterwards to do normal things like taking them swimming."

Perhaps that easygoing nature, that lack of a killer drive, is one reason she 
hasn't quite scaled the heights one might have expected of her - a reality that 
was brutally pushed home when, despite winning an Olivier award for the stage 
version of The Rise and Fall of Little Voice, she was dropped from the film in 
favour of her friend Brenda Blethyn.

But there's another reason, too, which is tied up with her particular skill as 
an actor - her ability to lose herself in a role. It seems highly likely that 
she will go down in history not as Alison Steadman, but as Bev from Abigail's 
Party - she of the menacing shoulders and the murderous Essex vowels. Having 
spent most of her 30s trying to run away from the part - "For a while all 
people wanted of me was Beverley with knobs on" - she now accepts that 
Abigail's Party was "something a bit special".

Like many special things, it might so easily not have happened. If a 
television studio hadn't just happened to fall vacant at exactly the right time 
(between finishing the play and recording the film, Steadman had her first 
baby) ... If an ITV strike hadn't meant that a staggering 16m viewers tuned in 
... If all these pieces hadn't fallen into place, Abigail's Party might well 
have been dimly remembered as a sell-out fringe production by a group of 
little-known actors at Hampstead Theatre.

Coming to terms with Beverley has been part of growing up for Steadman. "It 
comes in stages: first you are determined to top it, then you begin to wish 
people would talk about anything else. I now realise it's actually very nice 
that, 23 years on, people still recognise and appreciate it. There are people 
who've come up to me and said: 'I became an actor because of that.' "

Â• Entertaining Mr Sloane previews from today at the Arts Theatre, London WC2 
(020-7836 3334), and runs until April 7.
 