
This House <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/this-house>

James Graham has a formidable track-record as a chronicler of modern history: 
in Eden's Empire (2006) he tackled the Suez Crisis. He now moves to a larger 
stage with a play about 1974, when an inconclusive election raised the spectre 
of coalition government. Phil Daniels and Philip Glenister star.National 
theatre, London <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/venue/cottesloe-theatre>, 18 
September to 1 December

The Astronaut's Chair 
<http://www.theatreroyal.com/prod-productions_details.asp?pid=1879>

Why didn't women play a bigger part in the space race? Rona Munro explores the 
female pioneers who aimed to fly higher. Drum theatre, Plymouth 
<http://www.theatreroyal.com/>, 20 September to 6 October

The Legend of Woesterdam 
<http://unicorntheatre.com/unicorntheatre.com/the-legend-of-woesterdam>

Studio Orka, a Belgian collective of site-specific artists, has created this 
adventure show for children aged eight-12 in a secret location. A huge hit all 
over Europe, it tells of a city where people have lost the ability to love.
Mitcham Common, London,organised by the Unicorn theatre 
<http://unicorntheatre.com/unicorntheatre.com/the-legend-of-woesterdam>, 21 to 
23 September 

Medea <http://citz.co.uk/whatson/info/medea2012/>

Rachael Stirling plays a woman spurned, with murderous consequences. Mike 
Bartlett rewrites Euripides to make it a play for today, in which Medea is a 
modern wife and mother intent on punishing the man who has deserted her.
Citizens' theatre, Glasgow <http://citz.co.uk/>, 27 September to 13 October, 
then touring.headlongtheatre.co.uk <http://headlongtheatre.co.uk>

Red Velvet 
<http://www.tricycle.co.uk/current-programme-pages/theatre/theatre-programme-main/red-velvet/>

Indhu Rubasingham kicks off her tenure at the Tricycle with a new play by 
Lolita Chakrabarti <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0149808/> about the 19th-century 
African American actor Ira Aldridge. Adrian Lester plays this iconic figure, 
who broke down cultural barriers by playing many Shakespearean roles 
traditionally reserved for white actors.Tricycle, London 
<http://www.tricycle.co.uk/>, 11 October to 24 November

The River <http://royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/the-river>

After Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2011/nov/02/jez-butterworth-jerusalem-video-interview>
, Jez Butterworth's new play has been eagerly awaited: there has been a real 
hoo-ha over the fact that Ian Rickson's production takes place in the tiny 
Theatre Upstairs. But it is an intimate three-hander, starring Dominic West, 
Miranda Raison and Laura Donnelly, and it seems right that artistic 
considerations should predominate. Tickets for each night's show will be 
available online from 9am or at the box-office from 10am.Royal Court, London 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/>, 18 October to 17 November

The Effect

Enron writer Lucy Prebble is reunited with director Rupert Goold in this 
exploration of love and neurology. Billie Piper and Jonjo O'Neill will star as 
the lovers who meet while undertaking a pharmaceutical research trial. Tickets 
go on sale 24 September.National theatre, London. 23 November to January 2013. 
nationaltheatre.org.uk <http://nationaltheatre.org.uk>

The Spire

William Golding had aspirations to be a playwright but it is the novels 
everyone remembers. It seems right that Salisbury Playhouse should stage the 
premiere of Roger Spottiswode's adaptation of this 1964 fable, about a dean 
gripped by the obsession that he has been chosen by God to build a huge 
cathedral spire.Salisbury Playhouse, 1 to 24 November

Rats' Tales <http://www.royalexchange.co.uk/event.aspx?id=582>

Folk tales from around the world reinvented for the stage. The pairing of poet 
laureate Carol Ann Duffy with director/designerMelly Still 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/nov/22/theatre1> should make this a 
terrific family show. Expect something enchanting, cheeky and a little bit dark.
Royal Exchange, Manchester <http://www.royalexchange.co.uk/page.aspx>, 29 
November to 12 January 2013
 