 Watch a live stream of the panel debate from 12pm BST on Thursday 26 May 
Continue <http://gamecity.org/continue-conference-2016/> is a new annual 
conference from theNational Videogame Arcade <http://gamecity.org/>, supported 
by Arts Council England, about exploring the role of video games in 
contemporary culture. A mix of presentations, case studies and hands-on 
playing, the event aims to set the agenda for games and culture over two days.

Videogames are a remarkable artform that can help save UK culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2016/apr/29/uk-culture-games-policy-continue-conference>
As a media partner for the event, we will be hosting a panel discussion about 
the untapped value of video games to the cultural establishment – and not only 
financially.

The discussion will be streamed live via Twitch 
<https://player.twitch.tv/?channel=nationalvideogamearcade> (embedded below) 
from 12pm BST on Thursday 26 May. The panel features:

• Ian Livingstone, author and entrepreneur 
<https://twitter.com/ian_livingstone>
• Sarah Brin, writer and curator <http://sarahbrin.com/>
• Sir Peter Bazalgette, chair, Arts Council England 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/>
• Martha Henson, digital producer and consultant, Frankly Green and Webb 
<http://www.franklygreenwebb.com/>
• Iain Dodgeon, broadcast, games and film manager, Wellcome Trust 
<https://wellcome.ac.uk/>
• Kristy Diaz, digital producer, Threshold Studios 
<http://thresholdstudios.tv/>
• Simon Parkin (chair), writer and journalist <http://www.simonparkin.com/>

We’re also inviting you to submit questions for the discussion. Email 
continue@gamecity.org <mailto:continue@gamecity.org> with your thoughts, 
comments and questions for the panel.

Miss the live stream? Watch the discussion again here 
<https://www.twitch.tv/nationalvideogamearcade/v/68695385>

The Culture Professionals Network is a media partner for Continue 
<http://gamecity.org/continue-conference-2016/>, which takes place on 25 and 26 
May

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>
 