
Man Utd v Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> (Saturday 
12.45pm)

The background to this game – if Liverpool don't win, it's over for another 
year and United equal their record of 18 titles – has been done to death, but 
what might be of interest is to see which team blinks first. Even though 
Liverpool need three points, they only really know one way to play away from 
home, and even if they do win tomorrow it's unlikely that they'll change the 
fact that their only winning margin at Old Trafford since 1990 has been 1-0. 
United, contrary to popular opinion, don't always buckle their swash, either. 
In the very biggest games, even at home, United also like to play on the 
counter-attack, a fact that only Jose Mourinho has really noticed. United's 
last two home games against Liverpool, a 3-0 win last March and a 2-0 win in 
2006-07, have been tactical masterclasses in which they quietly put their 
opponents to sleep, as they did against Chelsea in January. In the last 12 
months United have a staggering home record of P29 W26 D3 L0. But it has to end 
sometime.

Almería v Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> (Sunday 
8pm)

Barcelona were scintillating in their 5-2 midweek demolition of Lyon. So 
what's new? They have been largely unstoppable at home all season. What 
trophies they get to lightly finger come May will, you suspect, be decided by 
their away form, starting with a decidedly tricky trip to Almería on Sunday. 
Barça have won just one of their last six on the road, whereas Almería – 
happily ensconced in mid-table – haven't lost at home since November, when 
Zavvi was still open forbusiness and the music world's biggest wedgie magnet 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/entertainment/2009/03/13/scotsman-left-me-in-tears-after-giving-me-a-wedgie-reveals-pete-doherty-86908-21193847/>
 was called Pete Doherty. If Real Madrid win in Bilbao on Saturday night, 
Barcelona will go into theAlmería game only three points clear 
<http://touchline.onthespot.co.uk/guardian/StatsCentre.asp?CTID=29&Lang=0>. 
What's the Spanish for squeaky-bum time?

Gillingham v Shrewsbury <https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> 
(Saturday 3pm)

Wait, come back! Pull your head out of the Premier League-sized hole at your 
other end and have a look at League Two, which has been great this season. With 
three teams automatically promoted, only five points separate second and 
eighth. In among that pack are Gillingham and Shrewsbury, who meet on Saturday. 
Gillingham may be among the country's less pleasant away trips –just ask Peter 
Crouch <http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/article422672.ece)> – but 
Shrewsbury desperately need to improve their lopsided record sooner rather than 
later: no side in the four divisions can match their 14 home victories; only 
one side (Stoke) has fewer than their one away win. Gillingham, for their part, 
will want revenge after being slaughtered 7-0 at Shrewsbury earlier in the 
season. And there could be an, ahem, emotional reunion between Gillingham's 
Mark McCammon and Shrewsbury's Moses Ashikodi: when the pair were at Millwall, 
Ashikodi was suspended after allegedly pulling a serrated one on McCammon 
during a row in the canteen.

Trabzonspor v Galatasaray <https://www.theguardian.com/football/galatasaray> 
(Sunday 5pm)

These two clubs generally get on famously, united by a mutual loathing of 
Fenerbahce, but that will go out the window on Sunday. With the Big Four all 
chasing the surprise leaders Sivasspor –only three points separate the top five 
<http://soccernet.espn.go.com/tables?league=tur.1&cc=5739> – both desperately 
need a result. Especially the champions Galatasaray, who lie in a relatively 
ignominious fifth place. This is how bad finishing fifth would be for 
Galatasaray: only once in the last 24 years have they finished outside the top 
four. In fact, scratch that,this is how bad finishing fifth would be for Gala: 
even Graeme Souness got them into the top four.
 