
"Just hours ago," announced CNN's Anderson Cooper from New York last 
Wednesday, "the British Medical Journal – BMJ – did something extremely rare 
for a scientific journal. It accused a researcher,Andrew Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, of outright fraud."

The occasion for this judgment was a BMJ editorial 
<http://www.bmj.com/content/342/bmj.c7452>, backing the first report in a 
series by me <http://www.bmj.com/content/342/bmj.c5347>. Following some two 
dozen of my MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) vaccine stories inthe Sunday Times 
<http://briandeer.com/solved/solved.htm> – dating as far back as February 2004 
– I'd brought the evidence together in a 16,000-word epic for the journal, plus 
10,000 more in references and footnotes. It laid out the full gory detail 
behind the flaws in Wakefield's original Lancet paper that kicked off the 
scandal over MMR and its supposed link to autism, leading to a significant drop 
in uptake of the vaccine.

This followed earlier revelations that he had been hired by a firm of lawyers 
to make a case against the three-in-one shot, that he had been paid £435,643, 
plus expenses, and that families were recruited for the study through 
anti-vaccine groups, rather than being a random sample.

But a Philadelphia-based commentator was not impressed by the BMJ's 
intervention. "It doesn't matter that [Wakefield] was fraudulent," Dr Paul 
Offit, a vaccine inventor and author in Pennsylvania,was quoted in the 
Philadelphia Inquirer 
<http://articles.philly.com/2011-01-07/news/27015054_1_autism-vaccine-link-autism-and-vaccines-childhood-vaccines>
 the next day as saying. "It only matters that he was wrong."

I wasn't surprised. From his establishment vantage-point, this was the third 
time Dr Offit had popped up to opine on the issue. Twice previously he'd been 
quoted as saying that my findings were "irrelevant" (although he'd been happy 
enough to use them in his books). Science had spoken, his argument went. There 
was no link between the vaccine and autism. It was experts like him who should 
rule on this matter, he seemed to imply, not some oik reporter nailing the 
guilty men.

Offit wasn't alone. Over the past few years, many of the MMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> vaccine's medical champions have 
queued up to take a pop at my investigation. They've never found any fault in 
its accuracy or originality. But it was as if they felt that somehow it wasn't 
right.

"Actually, I would like to speak in defence of Andrew Wakefield," said 
Guardian Bad Science columnist Dr Ben Goldacrein a BMJ video 
<http://www.bmj.com/site/video/mmr.xhtml>, long after I first skewered the 
man's research but before Wakefield was struck off by the GMC. "I'm not sure it 
was necessarily a bad piece of research."

Between July 2007 and May 2010, as the longest-ever General Medical Council 
disciplinary hearing lumbered forward from my investigation, Dr Michael 
Fitzpatrick – another author who has defended MMR –denounced the GMC's 
inquiries as a "witchhunt" 
<http://www.spiked-online.com/index.php?/site/article/401/>.

So, what's my point? I think these comments reveal a striking pattern: doctors 
default to defending other doctors. In fact, until recently there was a GMC 
regulation that banned them from bad-mouthing colleagues.

But in the specifics of their stance there seemed the idea that scholarly 
debate, epidemiology and suchlike, should arbitrate. Truth would emerge from 
the "scientific method", not from "we can reveal" media muck-raking.

Such faith in science was also the apparent view of Wakefield's medical 
school, when in 1998 he launched the MMR scare in afive-page paper in The Lancet
 <http://briandeer.com/mmr/lancet-paper.htm>.

Next week in the BMJ, I will go further, showing how the old boys' network of 
the medical establishment was mobilised to protect him. Are you getting the 
picture yet?

But times are changing. Wakefield's fall from grace is now slicing another 
scalp. One of the most insidious cartels at the heart of British science is 
being torn apart: the two top journals in medical science.

The Lancet once championed him. The BMJ has now nailed him – and commended my 
contribution. "It has taken the diligent scepticism of one man, standing 
outside medicine and science, to show that the paper was in fact an elaborate 
fraud," they wrote in last week's editorial.

Let battle commence, I say. Let doctors expose each other. Let journals 
compete to get the truth out first. Because 13 years passed before I slayed the 
MMR monster. And although a single, severed hand may yet come crawling across 
the floor, for science and public safety 13 years is still too long.

Brian Deer <http://briandeer.com/> is an investigative journalist

This article was amended on Wednesday 12 January 2011. The original suggested 
the quote from Dr Ben Goldacre was from an article by him in the BMJ. It also 
didn't make clear the quote pre-dated the GMC's ruling. This has been corrected.
 