
Ricardo Baca answered reader questions today for nearly two hours. Scroll down 
to read through the highlights

When Colorado's recreational marijuana law goes into effect on January 1, the 
Denver Post  <http://www.denverpost.com>will be ready. Veteran reporter Ricardo 
Baca, the paper's music and entertainment editor, will take on a new beat: pot. 
The Post anticipates that the business and culture of marijuana will be 
Colorado's biggest story this year, and has put Baca at the helm of its 
coverage. And as Baca explained 
<http://blogs.denverpost.com/editors/2013/11/27/qa-with-ricardo-baca-the-posts-new-marijuana-editor/1410/>
 on the Post this week, he isn't exactly a stranger to Mary Jane:

I’ve covered concerts for a living over the last 15 years. That means hanging 
out with musicians, working with people in the industry, attending music 
festivals in Austin and the Coachella valley and New York and LA. So yes. And 
though I’ve never been a full-on stoner, I’ve shared concerts and conversations 
and late-night sessions at the bar, and had Twitter wars with thousands of them.

Ricardo Baca will join us today to talk all things pot with Guardian readers 
during a live Q&A. We asked him a couple of questions to get started, but ask 
him anything you want to know in the comments and check back at 2pm ET | 7pm 
GMT to read his responses. 

What kinds of marijuana-related stories do you want to tell?

On January 1, 2014, pot will be more legal in Colorado than anywhere else in 
the world. It's true. The Post already owns this news beat in Colorado, but we 
want to expand on the very important legislation coming out of the state house 
and city council. We also want to tell stories from the perspectives of the 
dispensary owner, the cannabis consumer, the anti-pot activists, the growhouse 
workers and the suburban group of moms who get together once a week to 
semi-secretly smoke out in their basements or backyards. We'll also document 
how Colorado laws vary from those in Washington, Uruguay and the Netherlands. 
And we'll talk about the best video games of the year to play while under the 
influence, American TVs trending toward pot-friendliness and lots, lots more. 

Some freelancers will write news from those pot hotbeds I mentioned. Others 
will write criticism, reviewing different strains of weed and all types of 
edibles. I'm still looking for many of these freelance positions, so if you're 
an experienced writer with a story to tell, hit me up. Bonus points if you live 
in any of the aforementioned places.

So how does someone end up a marijuana editor anyway?

So after nine years as the Post's music critic and another two years as the 
paper's entertainment editor, I was approached about this job last month. 
There's a bit more to the story, starting with The Underground Music Showcase 
(UMS), which I co-founded with my buddy. More than 10 years later we found 
ourselves with 300-plus bands filling out 30 venues over four days in Denver's 
arty Baker neighborhood. A few years into the festival, I founded the music 
blog Reverb (heyreverb.com <http://heyreverb.com/>). And with colleagues and 
mostly volunteer freelancers, we built it into one of the region's most vital 
music resources. Both The UMS and Reverb are still thriving and my editors said 
it was partially that ability to create something from scratch that got them 
thinking about appointing me to the new pot editor position.

Do you have an interesting job or know someone who does? To suggest the next A 
Day's Work Q&A, email Ruth Spencer <mailto:ruth.spencer@theguardian.com>

Highlights from the Q&A:

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4386860> SmokinGardener  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4386860> 04 December 2013 3:35pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29520129> 
Do you need an assistant?

Answer:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 7:08pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29526604> 
At the moment, yes. But there's no money in the budget for that. There is, 
however, money in the budget for freelancers. And yes, we are still in the 
market for a freelance pot critic - a position that must be located in the 
great state of Colorado. Interested parties for the Colorado-only critic 
position or pitches for stories (coming from anywhere on Earth pot is news) can 
be directed to me at rbaca@denverpost.com

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4711935> crespo29  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4711935> 04 December 2013 3:36pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29520166>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
I assume that marijuana , like almost anything ingested, affects different 
people in different ways. How much do you agree with this assertion?

Answer:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 7:17pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29526867> 
I agree with this 100 percent, not based on science but on personal experience.

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10162022> Guardian staff 
erinmccann  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10162022> 04 
December 2013 3:38pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29520216> 
I'm assuming this exempts you from any random drug testing the paper may run 
on employees?

Answer:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 7:28pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29527150> 
Erin, I am not exempt from the paper's testing policy. But they've gone on 
record to say that they only test if given reason to. A bit more on that: 
http://bit.ly/1cwbK1Y

A follow up to Erin McCann's question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4033847> DopplerEffect  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4033847> 04 December 2013 3:52pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29520661>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
I'm assuming this exempts you from any random drug testing the paper may run 
on employees?

Yes, I'm wondering the same thing.

As the laws now stand, can an employer dismiss an employee who tests positive 
for marijuana on a drugs test, and if so would the dismissed employee have 
grounds for taking legal action against the employer?

Answer:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 7:31pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29527242> 
Doppler, yes a company can fire an employee for a positive test. Will the 
employee have legal footing to appeal? From what I've read, I don't believe so. 
Here's one of the more high-profile cases involving American football player 
Von Miller. He tested positive, and even though he lives in a state where it's 
a legal activity, his workplace (the Denver Broncos, our NFL franchise) 
suspended him: http://bit.ly/191iJB3

And one more follow up:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2876607> Lazytoo  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2876607> 04 December 2013 4:05pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29521099> 
I doubt the Post goes in for random drug testing - especially of journos - 
but the general point here is interesting....there are plenty of CO companies 
that do this and word is some will maintain the Federal stance - i.e., pot 
illegal. I'm sure this will be one (of many) grey areas - probably heading to 
the courts.

Answer:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 7:35pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29527338> 
Many grey areas indeed. And that's what makes this such a fantastic story. 
Sides on both sides are intensely passionate. The phrase "brave new world" is 
being used all over the place for a reason - Colorado really is a testing 
grounds of sorts. Washington state is absolutely watching, and so is Uruguay. 
I'm sure the Dutch are curious as well.

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2594399> Mujokan  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2594399> 04 December 2013 3:43pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29520387> 
Does legalization lead to greater availability of outdoor-grown organic pure 
sativa strains, and is there any relative health benefit associated with that?

Answer (in two parts):
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 7:43pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29527541> 
Great question. I have a note out to a dispensary/grower pal, and I'll reply 
back here if he gets back to me. I do know that a large majority of legal 
cannabis here is grown indoors (our growing season is short given the high 
altitude/snow), but I also know that growers are talking about greenhouses.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 8:44pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29529011> 
Hey, Mujokan. A colleague of mine Ean Seeb runs Denver Relief, a prominent 
Colorado dispensary, and here's what he had to say about your question: 
"Legalization will of course lead to a greater supply of cannabis. However, the 
growing conditions in Colorado do not allow for a long outdoor season, 
therefore it is realistic that we will see a evolution into greenhouse grows to 
supplement existing indoor cultivation facilities. Regarding health benefits, 
one could reasonably argue that the greater supply of cannabis, the greater the 
health benefit for the general public. The more cannabis that is grown the more 
people it can help!"
Hope that helps.

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12386635> spiralpad  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12386635> 04 December 2013 
3:46pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29520507>  This 
comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Do you thing this is the beginning of the end for the lunacy of prohibition? 
(the utterly failed, murderous, insane, freedom-destroying lunacy?)

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 7:51pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29527715> 
Spiralpad, it is commonly referred to as dominoes. First it was medical in a 
few states. Then it was decriminalized in a few others. More and more states 
joined the fold. Then voters passed recreational retail pot here in Colorado 
and Washington state a year ago, and now people are already talking about the 
potential of Oregon and others following our lead. Pot is still illegal under 
federal law, mind you, but for now the feds are saying they're leaving these 
kinds of decisions to the states without their interference.

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3761271> JamesValencia  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3761271> 04 December 2013 3:59pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29520906>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
In a specialist magazine, there are endless things to discuss.

But in a mainstream paper, I suspect there are only so many news stories in a 
Colorado context: So do you see yourself generalising this to cooking, 
gardening, for example, to give this role more material ?

Answer:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 7:56pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29527869> 
James, we already have been reporting on pot as an ingredient in the kitchen 
(http://bit.ly/191lLoP), pot in your backyard garden (http://bit.ly/191lzpx and 
http://bit.ly/191lGBI). Want a killer recipe for a cannabis-zucchini bread? 
Check that first link, which ran in print in The Denver Post a few months ago. 
Post readers will see much more of this (as well as stories addressing the 
culture of cannabis in our daily lives) in the coming year in addition to the 
news coverage that we've focused so much on.

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10101869> Guardian staff 
RuthSpencer  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10101869> 04 
December 2013 3:59pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29520928> 
How is Colorado's "recreational use" law different than the drug laws in the 
Netherlands and some of the other "hot spots" you mentioned? Do you think 
Colorado's marijuana law will slowly become even more open/progressive?

Answer:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 8:10pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29528183> 
The comments here are on-point for the most part. Each comparison has its own 
similarities and dissimilarities. Colorado and Washington legalized it at the 
same time, but our retail shops will open well before theirs - and the 
regulations (and the process behind those regs) will be quite different. In 
Colorado tourists will be able to purchase pot, but tourists won't have that 
freedom in Uruguay, from what I understand. In the Netherlands, pot is 
technically illegal, even though it's tolerated; In Colorado, it is legal.

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4374642> GoogleWhack  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4374642> 04 December 2013 4:04pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29521058>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
As someone who has recently stopped smoking cannabis after many many years of 
use, and not light use either I've always been unsure on the effects on ones 
mental health, as with any drugs there are associated mental health problems 
(even caffeine makes some suffer from anxiety). Do you think a change in the 
law will allow for better research in this area and if cannabis is found to 
have a detrimental effect on someone's mind permanently maybe better strains 
that do not have such effects?

There are of course already studies suggesting what levels of THC, CBD and CBN 
are found in strains have different effects but could legalisation lead the way 
to more factual evidence and possible safer outcome for users (if it is proven 
there are negative effects)?

Answer:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 8:14pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29528266> 
Yes. We're already seeing an increase in research, and I believe that will 
continue. Also, this recently written article might speak to your other 
question: http://bit.ly/191nRFi

Question:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11425564> Guardian staff 
heatherlong  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11425564> 04 
December 2013 4:10pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29521271> 
Do you envision doing "marijuana reviews" of different brands/products in the 
way most news outlets do food or movie reviews?

Answer:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> Guardian contributor
ricardobaca  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12589732> 04 
December 2013 8:46pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/29529055> 
Heather, absolutely. There will be reviews of different strains and edibles. 
I'm still looking for a Colorado-based freelance critic.
 