
Role

I’m a registered manager for a support service called Laurel Leaf Support. We 
provide support and care, primarily to adults who have a learning disability, 
in their own homes. I oversee the daily running of the organisation to ensure 
we provide a safe and effective service.

How I got here

My brother has complex learning disabilities. Shortly after his birth, my 
parents were told by doctors that he would be dead within five years. I am 
slightly older than him and saw his determination to be able to walk when he 
was around four years old.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthe-secret-to-good-social-care-more-listening-less-talking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442484407907%2F55fb3dfd-cb1d-4fe4-b375-463f6848d499-856x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20to%20good%20social%20care%3F%20More%20listening%2C%20less%20talking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthe-secret-to-good-social-care-more-listening-less-talking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20to%20good%20social%20care%3F%20More%20listening%2C%20less%20talking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthe-secret-to-good-social-care-more-listening-less-talking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F17%2F1442484407907%2F55fb3dfd-cb1d-4fe4-b375-463f6848d499-856x1020.jpeg>
 Christopher Dunn: ‘Social care can be the most fulfilling field of work.’ 
With support and guidance he did it by the time he was seven, and continues to 
stride around to this day. My brother is now 32 and our organisation provides 
support to him. If anything inspired me to work within social care, this was it!

I have now worked in social care for over 12 years as a support worker, line 
manager and, now, registered manager. This is a role that I have been in since 
February 2014, when I set up Laurel Leaf Support.

A typical day

I start by checking our schedule planner to see what activities are being 
carried out and who is on duty that day. This gives me an idea of where people 
are and what is going on.

Issues crop up throughout the day. It was recently brought to my attention 
that a person using our service kept forgetting to take their mobile phone with 
them when going into the community independently. This could be a potential 
risk if they needed to contact someone in the event of an emergency, so after 
discussing it with them we agreed to put a picture of a phone next to the front 
door to help remind them. This simple idea has resolved the issue, and it shows 
how effective pictures can be to aid communication.

Although I try and get out to see people using our service as much as I can, I 
do miss carrying out direct support, as this really is the most rewarding part 
of what we do.

The issues affecting my work at the moment

Access to suitable funding for care is under immense strain. It is a real and 
potential threat to the safety of those that we provide support and care to, as 
well as the wider community. At present, our service can meet the needs of 
those we care for. But it concerns me that this may not be the case if any 
funding is withdrawn.

'Caring for people is an awesome responsibility'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/08/caring-for-people-is-an-awesome-responsibility>
The moment I’ll always remember

For many years I supported a young man with Down’s syndrome. He’d recently 
moved to the area and wanted to take part in the community. We spotted an 
advert for a mainstream taekwondo class, and he said he’d like to give it a go. 
We visited the class and they were very welcoming, and after the first couple 
of months he got his first belt. He was completely dedicated to his taekwondo 
and I was honoured to be there when he got his black belt four years later!

One thing I’d like to change about my job

There is a substantial amount of paperwork that needs completing. Although a 
lot of it is essential, I wish there wasn’t quite as much!

What I love most about what I do

Social care <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> can be the most 
fulfilling field of work. Although I’m primarily office based now, I usually 
participate in supported day trips and holidays. Knowing that you are aiding 
someone to participate in an activity they want to do that otherwise might have 
been inaccessible to them can give you the most rewarding feeling.

One thing I wish I’d known when I started out

Successful social care and support is reliant on more listening and less 
talking.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 