
Did you see the "Creepy Carnival 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/chloesorvino/2014/07/22/koch-brothers-back-creepy-carenival-where-clowns-deter-millenials-from-obamacare/>
" from the Koch brothers on the Washington Mall the other day? Sponsored by the 
youth-outreach tentacle of the brothers' operation, it featuredPennywise the 
Clown <http://stephenking.wikia.com/wiki/It_(creature)> doppelgangers dunking 
millennials into "High-Risk Pools" – though, surely, they missed an opportunity 
to nail some old people to death panels. (There was no word about the presence 
of funhouse mirrors to artificially shrink the outsize influence of the Kochs 
on our national agenda.)

These two men have commanded center stage in the dark-money circus since the 
US supreme court started the political money free-for-all four and a half years 
ago. The Kochs havebecome the focus of electoral campaigns themselves 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2014/apr/03/nation/la-na-democrats-koch-20140404>.

But however effective they may be as conservative bogeymen, the real problem 
with the Kochs is not that they are ultra-conservative. The problem is that 
they are a leading indicator that our political system is morphing from 
elections based on ideology to elections based on the preferences of individual 
donors.

Big "fundraisers" like the Kochs don't care so much about candidates or 
parties. They care about policies, and that tendency to narrowly target their 
dollars naturally pushes candidates to tailor their platforms to issues more 
than coherent ideologies. Jjust look atSheldon Adelson and Israel 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/24/opinion/sunday/what-sheldon-adelson-wants.html>
, orTom Steyer and green energy 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/tom-steyers-slow-and-ongoing-conversion-from-fossil-fuels-investor-to-climate-activist/2014/06/08/6478da2e-ea68-11e3-b98c-72cef4a00499_story.html>
, orPaul Singer and gay rights 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-fix/wp/2014/04/04/the-money-man-behind-pro-gay-marriage-republicans/>
 – or the Koch brothers themselves, whose political manipulations have always 
been based in afervent economic libertarianism more than purely Republican 
politics 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/05/30/charles-and-david-koch-the-minds-behind-libertarianism-3-0.html>
.

The negative focus on mega-donors on both sides of the aisle 
<http://www.motherjones.com/mojo/2013/11/house-republicans-public-financing-campaign-finance-reform>
 is having one effect: it's turning Americans firmly against the current 
electoral financing system.According to Gallup 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/163208/half-support-publicly-financed-federal-campaigns.aspx>
, fully 50% of the country would support a federally funded campaign finance 
system withno private contributions whatsoever; 79% would vote for a law 
limiting contributions in some way.

As a result, the movement for a small-donor revolution in campaign finance is 
slowly clawing its way into themainstream 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/06/campaign-finance-reform-has-to-be-cross-partisan/372983/>
. The leading general in that revolution, Lawrence Lessig – who launched Mayday 
Pac to blow up big money in politics by raising big money – justsurpassed 
<http://time.com/2967157/lawrence-lessig-campaign-finance/> his initial 
fundraising goal of $5m by raking in $7.6m in small donations. (Ironically, a 
few mega-donors will be kicking in another $5m in matching funds.)

But Lessig's Kickstarter-esque project is itself the kind of single-issue 
project that has, to date, been the purview of fundraising behemoths: he plans 
to give the money only to candidates who hew to his vision of campaign finance 
reform. Like them, it lays the groundwork for the decentralization of parties, 
whether or not Lessig's own goals are achieved.

As it stands, the number of Americans who identify with a particular political 
party do so now withunprecedented intensity 
<http://campaignstops.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/09/17/look-how-far-weve-come-apart/>
, and the number of Americans who don't identify with either partyhas grown as 
well 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/166763/record-high-americans-identify-independents.aspx>
. Sheer frustration could move some – or perhaps many – independents who 
currently favor a particular party to a more radicalized center.

Disillusioned with actual politicians, apolitical activists could make the 
candidates the least important part of a ballot by donating to and campaigning 
for policies, rather than politicians. And that is what issue-oriented Super 
Pacs, like Lessig's and others, are counting on: small donors, and voters 
interested in issues over ideology – or, at least issues-as-ideology.

The idea of non-partisan issue activism is an old one, but what's changed is 
the degree of overall partisanship and our expectations of infinite, 
individualized choice today. When we've got Uber in our hands and Spotify 
playlists inside our headphones, it seems reasonable to expect technology could 
do the same for democracy.

Anil Dash 
<http://dashes.com/anil/2012/02/politics-is-a-business-a-big-broken-one.html>, 
a tech activist and entrepreneur, envisions a kind of Amazon for activism – a 
literal marketplace of ideas, wherein a donor with a little money and a few 
major passions could shop for candidates that fit an issue checklist. They 
could even target those who appear particularly "flexible", based on a database 
matching their voting history to donors, or particularly in need of cash to 
keep the campaign going. These, of course, are tactics that big money donors 
have long used to sway the opinions of politicians. The question is whether the 
aggregation of enough small donors could be equally effective.

But do today's policy crises even lend themselves to the micro-targeted 
solutions that app-enabled voters could select? Do we wind up with solutions to 
climate change, or just pockets of pollution? And what issues disappear 
entirely when pressures from both special interest big donors and special 
interest small donors push parties to the breaking point?

As it is, just the system is broken – or bent, leaning heavily in the 
direction of that easy mega-donor money. The undoing of campaign finance reform 
has made more and more obvious to more and more people; Larry Lessig's project 
to leverage that disgust will spotlight the ugliness just in time for 2016. 
Perhaps it will drive at least some conversations, if not solutions.
 