
News Corp papers act as one on Zaky Mallah

The Murdoch stable of newspapers outdid itself on Wednesday, producing a set 
of front pages about the ABC’s under siege Q&A program so uniform they appear 
to have come out of the one newsroom.

The Courier Mail took top prize for conflating the Isis flag with the ABC’s 
logo with the headline “It’s your ABC”. This made the Daily Telegraph’s front 
page look decidedly modest with its Terror Vision headline accompanied by a 
photoshopped image of Q&A audience member Zaky Mallah holding a gun inside an 
old-fashioned TV set.

Inside, however, the Tele didn’t hold back, screaming “Whose Side Are You On”, 
echoing Tony Abbott’s accusations against the ABC. That ran across a 
double-page spread above a doctored photograph of Q&A host Tony Jones hosting a 
panel of terrorists. The unanswered questions the paper had asked the ABC were 
included in the package. The Herald Sun had a similar inspiration, going with 
“ABC of jihad” and conflating the Isis flag with the ABC logo. Greens senator 
Scott Ludlam spoke for many when he tweeted: “@couriermail you people are 
absolutely out of your minds”.

Senate failure ads to SBS bleak times

The SBS <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs> managing director, Michael 
Ebeid, is facing a $28.5m hole in his budget for the next four years after 
legislation designed to allow more ads in prime time failed to pass the Senate 
on Wednesday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fnews-corp-headlines-scream-in-unison-over-zaky-mallah-the-weekly-beast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F278457866f6b5ad4d4929bbd600c1f3c740e4b9c%2F0_171_2032_1219%2F2032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20News%20Corp%20headlines%20scream%20in%20unison%20over%20Zaky%20Mallah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fnews-corp-headlines-scream-in-unison-over-zaky-mallah-the-weekly-beast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20News%20Corp%20headlines%20scream%20in%20unison%20over%20Zaky%20Mallah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjun%2F24%2Fnews-corp-headlines-scream-in-unison-over-zaky-mallah-the-weekly-beast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F278457866f6b5ad4d4929bbd600c1f3c740e4b9c%2F0_171_2032_1219%2F2032.jpg>
 SBS says it will have to cut programming after having a plan to increase its 
paid advertising was rejected by the Senate. Photograph: Ryan Pierse/Getty 
Images 
Ebeid said the broadcaster had no more fat to cut and the shortfall would 
affect programs and services. “SBS will now need to consider its contingency 
plans internally, provide an impact report to the federal government and review 
our overall funding. Once this process is complete, SBS will be in a position 
to outline further details about the impact the failed legislation will have on 
the organisation.”

The Coalition cut the multicultural broadcaster’s funding by $53m in the 2014 
budget, and $28.5m of that was supposed to be made up by the additional revenue 
from advertising.

Shorten support at Fairfax

Fairfax Media’s recent treatment of Labor’s leader, Bill Shorten, has not gone 
unnoticed. The Sydney Morning Heraldran a strong editorial last week 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/smh-editorial/bill-shorten-should-consider-his-future-amid-awu-revelations-20150617-ghq7r5.html>
 all but calling for the opposition leader to resign.

“The position of Bill Shorten as federal Labor leader is becoming untenable,” 
the Herald thundered. “The latest revelations of his union past published by
Fairfax Media <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fairfax-media> on Wednesday 
afternoon raise further doubts and questions about his suitability as 
alternative prime minister.” But is the Herald suddenly turning against Shorten?

Bill Shorten and the Australian Workers' Union – the allegations explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/24/bill-shorten-and-the-australian-workers-union-the-allegations-explained>
Well if you have been following the paper’s editorial line you will see that 
he has been consistently criticised by the paper for being too tied to old 
Labor structures and too slow to modernise the party. When an investigative 
team started rolling out stories about Shorten’s union days the position 
appeared to harden. And don’t forget the Herald also supportedTony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> for prime minister at 
the last election.

Bauer magazine staff hit by breaking news

If you needed further proof that print media is struggling, here’s a sad 
story. When the microwave broke in one of the communal kitchens atBauer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer> Media – publisher of 60+ magazines in 
Australia, including Women’s Weekly, Cosmopolitan and NW – the company refused 
to shell out for repairs or a replacement.
 A collection bowl for a new microwave in the staff kitchen at Bauer Media. 
The entrepreneurial staff put a bowl by the broken model to raise funds while 
HR debated the issue with the company, which said it would be happy to order 
one and invoice individual magazines for the expense. The eventual solution 
reached was to approach a public relations company for a complementary product, 
which is now happily installed. Our insider gives the caveat: “Full disclosure, 
there is another microwave at the other end of the floor. But there are about 
70 people on the floor.” A cursory Google search suggests Harvey Norman has 
microwaves retailing for $88. Gone are the days when staff were treated to a 
$200 Christmas hamper by former owner Kerry Packer as owner of what was then 
ACP.


The Saturday Paper’s big day

The Digital News Report: Australia 2015, published last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/17/australians-love-world-news-and-digital-media-but-never-mind-the-politics>
 ,
contained fascinating insights into how we are consuming digital news in 
comparison with print and broadcast news. One little nugget grabbed some 
attention. The major report, by the News & Media Research Centre at University 
of Canberra, found that when asked about what news brands they had consumed in 
the past week, 8.7% of respondents nominated the Saturday Paper.

Produced by Morry Schwartz, publisher of the Monthly, and edited by 
25-year-old former Fairfax journalist Erik Jensen, the paper is only just over 
a year old. The research was a little surprising because News Corp’s the 
Australian, the more established newspaper, fared worse – it was only nominated 
by 8.4%.

In his commentary included in the report the Australian’s media commentator of 
many years Mark Day mentioned the finding. “The section on brands contains some 
surprises,” Day wrote. “My affiliation with the Australian may be an influence 
here, but I am doubtful about the suggestion that the Saturday Paper (8.7%) is 
accessed more than the Australian (8.4%). This is strongly counter-intuitive. 
Given the readership levels described in the Enhanced Media Metrics Australia 
figures, there appears to be a need for further explanation.” The traditional 
news sources like the TV networks were dominant in the survey, with the ABC 
accessed by 47.5% and Seven 40.9%.
 