
1. By paying artists nothing, we risk everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/may/19/paying-artists-nothing-uk-talent>

Pay was one of the key issues for the arts sector in 2014, which is reflected 
in the fact that two of our most read pieces of the year covered income, fees 
and expenses. Arts activist Susan Jones offered the first of these features in 
May when she revealed that 71% of artists don’t get a fee for publicly-funded 
exhibitions. According to research from thePaying Artists campaign 
<http://www.payingartists.org.uk/>, the average annual income for an artist is 
now just £10,000, which represents a £6,000 drop in real income since 1997. “No 
one should have to work for free,” she wrote. “Artists, just like teachers, 
surgeons or plumbers, have every right to expect payment for the work they do.”

2. We can’t afford to impede the work of disabled artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/dec/11/disabled-artists-support-cuts-webchat-roundup>

In December we launched a roundup of the best comments from a Guardian webchat 
on thecuts, changes and threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/13/disability-arts-cuts-changes-threats-webchat>
 to disability arts. It made for a sobering read, in particular comments from
Graeae Theatre Company <http://www.graeae.org/> artistic director Jenny Sealey 
on the cuts to Access to Work. “I’ve been very public about our very real fear 
that the company will fold in six years’ time if we have to cover access 
costs,” she said. “It feels like we’re going back 30 years and once again, the 
arts are the domain of the non-disabled privileged. This is a human rights 
issue.”

3. Edwin Coomasaru on the International New Media Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/23/edwin-coomasaru-international-new-media-gallery>

2014 was also the year we launched our new interview series Tech talk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/series/tech-talk>, 
which puts a spotlight on the young creatives doing interesting and innovative 
things at the intersection of art and technology. Edwin Coomasaru, director of 
theInternational New Media Gallery <http://www.inmg.org/> was the pick of a 
strong list of rising stars. He spoke to us about founding the online-only 
gallery and why 2015 could be the year exhibitions are curated by algorithms.

4. Crowdfunding for the arts: top tips from the experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/20/crowdfunding-arts-top-tips-experts>

Host a launch party, keep an eye on costs and don’t forget to say thanks 
advised our crowdfunding webchat panel in August. £3bn was raised globally in 
2013 through crowdfunding, which shows it’s anything but a passing fad. 
Entertainment and the arts raised £600,000 of that. So what can you do to make 
your next project hit that 100% target? Make it personal, said artist Lucy 
Sparrow: “The video is so important but you have to get in front of the camera 
and put yourself out there. I would be wary about donating money to someone who 
was secretive about themselves.”

5. Smithsonian Photo Contest 2014 finalists – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/gallery/2014/apr/30/smithsonian-photo-contest-2014-finalists-pictures>

One of our personal highlights from a year of creative and colourful galleries 
was this entry from the Smithsonian’s annual photo contest. From Japanese snow 
monkeys to Indonesian spear fishers, more than 50,000 images were submitted to 
the museum from 132 different countries. Competition categories included 
Americana, altered image, the natural world, people, travel and mobile.
 A shot of a coastal brown bear, one of thousands of entries for the 2014 
Smithsonian Photo Contest. Photograph: Daniel D'Auria/Smithsonian.com 
6. New music is at risk if we continue to undervalue composers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/18/future-new-music-composers-report-pay>

Sound and Music chief executive Susanna Eastburn offered the second of our 
most read pay pieces of 2014. Professional composers are being asked to create 
new pieces for shockingly low fees, she wrote, referencing a report carried out 
by the national charity. The average fee per commission in 2013 was just 
£1,392, research revealed, while the average annual commission income fell from 
£3,689 to £2,717.

7. Why drawing needs to be a curriculum essential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/may/29/drawing-needs-to-be-curriculum-essential-education>

Our most read piece launched in 2014 was this blog from Anita Taylor, director 
of theJerwood Drawing Prize 
<http://jerwoodvisualarts.org/jerwood-drawing-prize-2014>, on why drawing needs 
to be seen as an essential part of the curriculum at all levels for all 
subjects. “With a history as long and intensive as the history of our culture, 
the act of drawing remains a fundamental means to translate, document, record 
and analyse the worlds we inhabit,” she wrote. “The role of drawing in 
education remains critical, and not just to the creative disciplines in art and 
design for which it is foundational.”

8. Theatre in the UK: love it or lose it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/19/theatre-uk-love-lose-david-brownlee>

Does theatre in the UK need your love? That’s the question UK Theatre’s 
<http://www.uktheatre.org/> David Brownlee asked on the day we launched 
#LoveTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/05/love-theatre-day-twitter-uk>
, a 24-hour online celebration of all things stage. British theatre is a 
thriving and internationally successful sector, he wrote, but cuts and 
diminishing coffers are cause for concern.

9. How we made a circus app for children with autism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/26/show-and-tell-circus-app-autism>

One of the picks from a year of App stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/series/app-story> is 
this one from Circus Starr community engagement manager Cath Logan, who 
revealed for us the ins, outs and intricacies of creating Show and Tell, an app 
that uses social storytelling to capture the essence and unpredictability of 
circus for a very literal audience. Her top tip for other mobile developers in 
the arts space? Remember you are not Candy Crush.

10. Watershed’s Dick Penny on the Bristol arts scene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/feb/18/interview-dick-penny-watershed-bristol>

In February we chatted to Dick Penny, managing director of Watershed 
<http://www.watershed.co.uk/>, as part of Arts head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/series/arts-head>, a 
regular series in which we interview some of the most influential and inspiring 
people heading up our cultural organisations and venues. The Bristol arts 
centre chief spoke about the city’s unique creative position, its elected mayor 
and why more organisations should step out of their comfort zones. “The arts 
need to be the haven in the storm,” he said. “Helping people find new ways to 
explore and understand the pressures and complexities of life; to build 
community and shared confidence in a better world.”

Have you got a story for the network in 2015? Contact us here 
<mailto:matthew.caines@theguardian.com>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 