
Nikolai Gogol: Dead Souls (1842)
Franz Kafka: The Castle (1926) 
George Grossmith: Diary of a Nobody (1892)

They say the triangle is the most stable geometrical figure, which is strange 
because it would also appear to be the most unstable and volatile formation in 
human relationships - take the love triangle, for example. While geometry has 
never inspired me, I have always valued comedy and absurdity in literature. 
Therefore, I am prepared to grapple with geometry in order to create my own 
menage a trois involving three wonderful works, by Gogol, Kafka and Grossmith.

The colour and breadth of Gogol's world, his reckless and cheerful no-good 
heroes with their wonderfully memorable facial features, names, mannerisms and 
speech habits - these are what make good comic literature. On the surface, the 
novel is about Chichikov, who travels around Russia buying up dead souls as 
part of a cunning confidence trick, but critics have always held that the 
novel's title does not refer to the trade in deceased peasants, but to all 
Russia, with her dead soul, her empty, heartless nobility and civil servants, 
and her drunken, lazy people. Gogol presents us with a fascinating gallery of 
characters, as, one by one, we meet the nobles from whom Chichikov buys the 
dead souls. All the portraits are drawn with love, not hate, but these 
characters are either pointlessly energetic, like Nozdrev, or senseless 
dreamers, like Manilov.

In Dead Souls, most of the action takes place in, or near, the town of "N", 
which symbolises all Russia, implying that the action could take place anywhere 
in the country. In Kafka, on the other hand, neither countries nor towns have 
any significance at all. His world is black and white, simplified to the level 
of abstract symbols. There is no world, there are no countries. There is only 
the castle, the village, its inhabitants, and "K", who is trying to gain 
admittance to this abstract world. Kafka's heroes have a sad fate. None of them 
can fit into the established and proper misery of human existence. K's efforts 
to get into the castle are made only in the hope that a free place will appear 
at the dirty table of life, that he will become like the other inhabitants of 
the village: faceless parasites.

The colour and endless scope of the Russian love of life lends Gogol's Dead 
Souls surprising charm. Kafka's faceless and amoral heroes, on the other hand, 
inspire no sympathy at all. In spite of that, and despite the absence of a 
clear plotline, the reader is drawn into events. He follows the heroes "with 
his ears", eavesdropping on the dialogues that contain madness and humorous 
good sense in equal proportions.

To complete my triangle of 19th and 20th century comic literature, I would 
like to place an "island" work, The Diary of a Nobody. Here the circumstances 
are absolutely different. Charles Pooter, a man with a biography, a face, a 
surname, and even a proper wife and a degree of affection for his none to 
noteworthy existence, gives a sprightly and daily account of his own life in 
the form of a diary. His credo is "Home Sweet Home", and his greatest 
achievements a witty and angry letter to the laundry service and the return 
dispatch of some bad eggs accompanied by another scornful epistle.

This is a wonderful diary of a civil servant from the city, who, in truth, has 
nothing to write about. Take, for example the entry for April 8: "No events of 
any importance. Except that Gowing strongly recommended a new patent 
stylographic pen, which cost me nine and sixpence, and which was simply nine 
and sixpence thrown in the mud."

â€¢ Andrey Kurkov's novels include Death and the Penguin 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781860469459>
 