
A great photograph is a moment liberated from time. If we could see what 
happened before and after this beautiful stillness and hear the cacophony of 
yells and arguments that must have filled reality’s soundtrack at a protest in 
Baton Rouge against the taking of black lives, theheroic stand of Iesha L Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/11/baton-rouge-protester-photo-iesha-evans>
 would just be a fragile glimpse of passing courage. It might even be entirely 
lost in the rush of images and noise. Instead, Reuters photographerJonathan 
Bachman <http://www.jonathanbachmanphotography.com/portfolio> was able to 
preserve a simple human act of quiet bravery and give it an almost religious 
power.

It is not just that time has frozen but that, in stopping its stream, the 
camera has revealed a near-supernatural radiance protecting Evans, as if her 
goodness were a force field. The heavily armoured police officers inevitably 
look slightly inhuman. They may have good reason to wear such all-covering 
protective suits and helmets, so soon after asniper killed five officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/how-dallas-protest-shooting-night-unfolded>
 who were policing a protest in Dallas but, in their hi-tech riot gear, they 
unfortunately resemble futuristic insectoid robots, at once prosthetically 
dehumanised and squatly, massively, menacingly masculine.

Evans, by contrast, shows her calm, composed face and bold, straight body, 
protected by nothing more than a dress fluttering in the summer breeze. She is 
a Botticelli nymph attacked by Star Wars baddies. And yet they seem to stop, to 
yield, held back by something that radiates from her inner composure, her 
possession of the truth. In the instant that Bachman has caught for ever, the 
two officers appear confused, paralysed, even defeated by her decorous protest. 
Their bodies arch backwards, away from her, recoiling in recognition of her 
power. The officer nearest to the camera looks truly nonplussed, out of his 
depth, his meaty white hands flailing.

'She was making her stand': image of Baton Rouge protester an instant classic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/11/baton-rouge-protester-photo-iesha-evans>
People have compared this confrontation between massed forces of authority and 
a single protester with the famous image ofa man facing a column of tanks in 
Tiananmen Square in 1989 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tank_Man#/media/File%3ATianasquare.jpg>, or the
1967 photograph of a “flower child” 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/b/b2/Jan_Rose_Kasmir.jpg> in front 
of a row of armed soldiers at the Pentagon. Yet the power of this particular 
image is stranger than that. It summons up supernatural forces. The goodness of 
Iesha Evans is radiant and that radiance can stop the police in their tracks. 
Her ramrod immobility not only expresses moral strength but literally gives her 
a superpower. (Evans’s only comment about the picture, in a Facebook post, was: 
“I appreciate the well wishes and love, but this is the work of God. I am a 
vessel!”)

A moment stilled from days of rage creates a stillness, a silence, into which 
we pour our belief in the human spirit. The violence cutting through the US 
gives way, mercifully, to an image of nonviolent heroism that recalls the 
righteous, from Martin Luther King to Rosa Parks. Yet is this picture popular 
because it expresses the truth, or because it softens it?

This image is beautiful, yet it evades the harsh facts that are tearing 
America apart. To put it bluntly, it is not young women in floaty dresses who 
are being killed in cold blood on video by police officers. It is white 
America’s fear of young black men that is truly at issue here – and this 
picture allows us to forget that.Alton Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-baton-rouge-investigation-department-of-justice>
 was shot dead in Baton Rouge when arresting officers already had him on the 
ground. That andthe killing of Philando Castile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philando-castile-shooting> are just the 
latest in a series of depressingly similar cases in which there seems to be 
overwhelming evidence that young black men are considered fair game for any 
trigger-happy law enforcement officer or security guard. In turn, 25-year-old 
Micah Johnson shot dead five police officers in a cycle of violence that has to 
make us ask if racism is incurably rooted in America’s stained history, if 
black lives matter at all to white America.

No wonder we turn to this picture for a kind of healing, a twinkling of 
optimism. This is an image that evokes the heroic days of the civil rights 
movement: a hopeful moment seized from a storm of horrors. Yet it may be a 
beautiful illusion, whose gentle strength will break as soon as the next gun is 
fired.

My best shot: ‘I knew straight away what was happening’ Photographer Jonathan 
Bachman on his classic shot of the Baton Rouge protests

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbaton-rouge-protester-botticelli-nymph-attacked-by-star-wars-baddies-iesha-evans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76b9e558ed0fb6ba89794dd930d5139cdb4432c9%2F0_73_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Baton%20Rouge%20protester%3A%20'a%20Botticelli%20nymph%20attacked%20by%20Star%20Wars%20baddies'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbaton-rouge-protester-botticelli-nymph-attacked-by-star-wars-baddies-iesha-evans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Baton%20Rouge%20protester%3A%20%27a%20Botticelli%20nymph%20attacked%20by%20Star%20Wars%20baddies%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F12%2Fbaton-rouge-protester-botticelli-nymph-attacked-by-star-wars-baddies-iesha-evans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76b9e558ed0fb6ba89794dd930d5139cdb4432c9%2F0_73_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Another of Bachman’s photographs, showing a protester in Baton Rouge being 
pinned down by police officers. Photograph: Jonathan Bachman/Reuters 
A group of people had come to demonstrate in front of the Baton Rouge police 
headquarters. They were blocking one of the lanes of traffic on the Airline 
Highway. That prompted this big mix ofLouisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana> law enforcement officers and 
sheriffs from surrounding parishes, as well as the Baton Rouge police 
department, to come out to try to clear the road.

They had successfully cleared the demonstrators off to the side, but there 
were some people who weren’t willing to move. So I started photographing that 
confrontation. I heard someone over my shoulder say: “Wow – she’s going to get 
arrested.” I turned around and saw this woman just standing there. I knew 
straight away what was happening; they were arresting her and she was making 
her stand.

I just got into position and was able to snap the shot. I thought it was 
important – the woman in the dress is posing no threat and these two male 
officers are coming to detain her. She didn’t say anything, she didn’t resist 
arrest, and the officers didn’t throw her to the ground or drag her off. It was 
very peaceful. I feel the photo is very representative of the peacefulness of 
the protests that have taken place in Baton Rouge over the past week.

As I took the image, I wasn’t thinking of any other pictures [such as Flower 
Power by Bernie Boston’s Vietnam protest shot 
<http://media.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/photo/2007/03/17/PH2007031701303.html>
 or Stuart Franklin’s photo of“tank man” at Tiananmen Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography-blog/2014/jun/03/stuart-franklin-tiananmen-square-tank-man>
]. I hardly had any time to reflect at all; as soon as I took the photo, I had 
to go back to my car in a parking lot to file it, using a hotspot from my phone.

From what I saw earlier in the week – people chanting “No justice, no peace” 
and “Hands up, don’t shoot” – this is as tense as the situation got in Baton 
Rouge; there was a lot going on and I was just trying to get into a good spot 
to document it. I shoot a lot of sports, and speed is key. You have got to keep 
an open eye – these things happen so quickly. There are tricks, of course, such 
as looking in your LCD screen to catch reflections off that. Also, Reuters sent 
me on a hostile-environment training course a couple of months ago and I found 
that incredibly useful.

I actually filed another photo first, of a woman confronting the police with 
her arm raised. This one followed about 30 seconds later. I got back from Baton 
Rouge to 54 emails and 77 text messages. But the real hero of this story is 
that woman; she deserves all the praise. It was super brave to just stand there 
and make her stand; I was just off to the side, taking a picture.

As told to Nell Frizzell
 