
Ali Larijani, Iran’s parliamentary speaker, has long been an advocate of 
better relations withRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and his 
recent interview with TASS, in which he spoke of Iran’s “eastern orientation, 
first of all towards Russia…[as] the country’s strategic choice”, is no 
surprise.


But Iran’s relationships with all international powers are becoming more 
nuanced as the result of changes in the region. Last July’s nuclear agreement 
with world powers, including the ‘Great Satan’, has helped produce a diplomatic 
palate with many shades of grey. There are few steadfast allies or implacable 
enemies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Firan-russia-israel-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fdc4431afb3fbce662a9fd08e60caf7232851c8%2F0_0_4473_2972%2F4473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tricky%20triangle%20of%20Iran%2C%20Russia%20and%20Israel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Firan-russia-israel-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20tricky%20triangle%20of%20Iran%2C%20Russia%20and%20Israel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Firan-russia-israel-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fdc4431afb3fbce662a9fd08e60caf7232851c8%2F0_0_4473_2972%2F4473.jpg>
 Iranian parliamentary speaker Ali Larijani gives an interview to Russian news 
agency TASS in Moscow on 20 April. Photograph: Alexander Shcherbak/TASS 
For Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, Russia is a strategic ally 
in supporting Syria’s president Bashar al-Assad, and Russia is also a potential 
partner in shaping the global gas market as the two countries with the largest 
reserves. But there are still important differences between Moscow and Tehran.

Even though Russia is contracted to Iran over nuclear energy – the provider of 
Bushehr, Iran’s only operating station, and in talks over eight more – it 
blocked neither Iran’s referral to the UN security council in 2006 nor the 
subsequent sanctions.

In 2005 Larijani began his first of two years as secretary of the Supreme 
National Security Council pursuing a ‘tilt to Moscow’ that he believed could 
stop both referral and UN sanctions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Firan-russia-israel-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59f8f061247c53428a4dbb786b02fb2d7ecd146a%2F0_0_3026_2136%2F3026.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tricky%20triangle%20of%20Iran%2C%20Russia%20and%20Israel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Firan-russia-israel-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20tricky%20triangle%20of%20Iran%2C%20Russia%20and%20Israel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Firan-russia-israel-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59f8f061247c53428a4dbb786b02fb2d7ecd146a%2F0_0_3026_2136%2F3026.jpg>
 Iranian Ambassador to Russia Mehdi Sanai seen ahead of a meeting of Russian 
State Duma Chairman Sergei Naryshkin with Ali Larijani. Photograph: Anna 
Isakova/TASS 
In January 2006, as the prospect of referral to the security council loomed, 
Larijani told me in an interview in Tehran that Iran was exploring 
possibilities with Moscow for enriching uranium on Russian soil. Larijani was 
in typical good form, with the quick wit of aman who had studied Kant 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2009/06/larijani-between-khamenei-and-kant.html>
.

Expressing disdain for the western countries’ request for a document 
supposedly from the network of rogue Pakistani scientist AQ Khan showing a 
weapons design, Larijani quipped: “If you can find anyone in the world who can 
make a bomb with one and a half pages, we will cover their whole body with 
gold.”

Larijani’s sharpness didn’t, however, make the ‘tilt to Moscow’ successful. I 
was later told by a regime insider thatAyatollah Ali Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, the leader, felt 
badly let down by Larijani when Russia backed UN sanctions, and one can surmise 
this was a factor in his replacement in October 2007 by Saeid Jalili.

A decade later, the Geneva nuclear agreement has made possible closer ties 
between Iran and Russia, with Moscow now saying it will supply the S300 missile 
defence system it deemed blocked under UN sanctions. Russian companies are 
itching to win contracts in Iran.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Firan-russia-israel-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe612114c7a7757a6cd68b69a0fa7498a683dfd25%2F0_0_1924_1615%2F1924.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20tricky%20triangle%20of%20Iran%2C%20Russia%20and%20Israel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Firan-russia-israel-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20tricky%20triangle%20of%20Iran%2C%20Russia%20and%20Israel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Firan-russia-israel-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe612114c7a7757a6cd68b69a0fa7498a683dfd25%2F0_0_1924_1615%2F1924.jpg>
 Syrian President Bashar Assad, right, speaks with Iran’s Deputy Foreign 
Minister Hossein Amir Abdollahian, left, in Damascus, Syria, in 2015. 
Photograph: Uncredited/AP 
Tehran and Moscow are also on the same side in Syria backing president Assad, 
with Iranian advisors from the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and Russian 
air strikes and a more limited troop presence. But even in Syria, there are 
nuances – and one important difference between Iran and Russia is rooted in 
Moscow’s close relationship withIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>, a state Tehran says it will never 
recognise.

When Russia began bombing groups in rebellion against Assad in September, 
there was a real danger of a flare-up with Israel, which has itself hit targets 
in Syria on the other side of the conflict, given its concerns over Assad’s 
alliance withHezbollah <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hezbollah>, the 
militant Lebanese group with whom it last went to war in 2006.

Yossi Alpher, a former Mossad analyst and operative, recently told me that 
“coordination” between Russia and Israel overSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and been a success and represented “a 
major strategic development in the Middle East”.

“When the Russian air-force began setting up in the Alawite coast of Syria, 
the first foreign leader to go to Russia, who rushed to meet Putin, was Bibi” 
Netanyahu, Israeli prime minister, said Alpher. “[Netanyahu told them]: ‘Okay 
we’ll have our armies coordinate. You’re bombing, we occasionally bomb to 
interdict arms transfers to Hezbollah’.”

The biggest potential flashpoint between Russia and Israel has been in Russian 
planes flying over Israeli-held territory in the Golan – but both sides have 
been prepared to take the action necessary to prevent the kind of incident in 
whichTurkey downed a Russian plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/turkey-shoots-down-jet-near-border-with-syria>
 in November.

“We shot down Syrian planes that flew over the Golan, but not Russian planes,” 
said Alpher, adding that co-ordination had been done “very efficiently” given 
that reaction time in such incidents might be only seconds.


Alpher has a long standing interest in Iran’s role on the wider regional chess 
board. His book Periphery, published last year, looked at a doctrine according 
to which Israel has long sought allies in the Middle East, including Iran 
before the 1979 Revolution: in it, he recalled his presence in a discussion in 
Mossad in 1979 overwhether to kill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/jun/05/mossad-assassination-irans-khomeini-says-israel-agent>
 Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.

Alpher’s compelling new book, No End of Conflict 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/410215/>, focuses on 
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in an attempt to restore the centrality of an 
issue he feels is being neglected, and in it he looks at Israel’s growing 
relations with the Arab states, including Saudi Arabia, that are born in part 
of a shared fear of Iran.

“We have never had the present degree of strategic cooperation with our Arab 
neighbours – with Egypt over Gaza and Sinai; with Jordan with regard to Syria 
and Iraq; with the Saudis with regard to Iran and Daesh [Islamic State group],” 
he told me. “They’re not pressuring us on the Palestinian issue, which makes 
the issue less urgent.”

Unlike many of the Israeli right, Alpher is unhappy with this. He believes 
demographic change in the occupied West Bank is undermining the chance of a 
two-state solution with Israel remaining a democratic, Jewish state. “[As] we 
swallow up the West Bank and east Jerusalem, and do nothing about Gaza,” he 
told me, “we are pushing ourselves down this slippery slope towards becoming 
something that is no longer a Jewish, Zionist, democratic entity.”

Like Larijani, Alpher has his eye on Russia, and plans his next book on 
Israel’s relationship with Moscow going back to the Soviet period.

His “former bosses” in Mossad have told him it will have to be a novel. “They 
said, ‘You wanna write about this? Only as fiction’.”

The Tehran Bureau is an independent media organisation, hosted by the 
Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau <https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>
 