
The Threepenny Opera (1956)

From the Observer review by Kenneth Tynan (12 February 1956): It has taken a 
long time to establish a bridgehead in London for the works of Bertolt Brecht … 
A Brechtian, let me explain, is one who believes that low drama with high 
principles is better than high principles with no audiences; that the worst 
plays are those which depend wholly on suspense and the illusion of reality; 
and that the drama of the future will be a wedding of song and narrative in 
which neither partner marries beneath itself. The Threepenny Opera is the pure 
meat of Brecht: rough, harsh and salty on the palate. It is dated, if at all, 
only in the sense that most contemporary musicals are obsolete. It sets reality 
to music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11deaa270d97a69d4a8a4448dee098d4d67c35d0%2F0_0_3713_2481%2F3713.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11deaa270d97a69d4a8a4448dee098d4d67c35d0%2F0_0_3713_2481%2F3713.jpg>
 John Osborne, right, with Kenneth Haigh who played Jimmy Porter in Look Back 
in Anger. Photograph: Frank Pocklington/Getty Images 
Look Back in Anger (1956)

From the Guardian review by Philip Hope-Wallace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1956/may/09/mainsection.fromthearchive> (9 
May 1956): The English Stage Company at the Royal Court theatre last night 
brought forward a first play by a young man, John Osborne. It is by no means a 
total success artistically but it has enough tension, feeling and originality 
of theme and speech to make the choice understandable, and must have awoken 
echoes in anyone who has not forgotten the frustrations of youth.

Mr Osborne’s hero, a self-pitying, self-dramatising intellectual rebel who 
drives his wife away, takes a mistress and then drops her when his wife crawls 
back, will not be thought an edifying example of chivalry. But those who have 
not lost the power to examine themselves will probably find something basically 
true in the prolix, shapeless study of a futile, frustrated wretch, even if 
they do not get as far as extending much sympathy to him.


The Entertainer (1957)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79b3175cf223d1d2d74e9d725e4dfea9820d71dc%2F0_0_1752_2601%2F1752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79b3175cf223d1d2d74e9d725e4dfea9820d71dc%2F0_0_1752_2601%2F1752.jpg>
 Laurence Olivier with Dorothy Tutin during rehearsals for The Entertainer. 
Photograph: PA 
From the Great performances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/06/laurence-olivier-in-the-entertainer-great-performances>
 series by Michael Billington: Everything about Olivier’s Archie Rice looked 
right from the moment you first saw him: the check suit, the bow tie, the white 
socks, the grey bowler hat. But Olivier, who frequented the old Collins’ Music 
Hall before starting rehearsals, didn’t just get the costume right. He once 
described himself as a born “pub entertainer”, and also caught the seedy 
heroism of the standup comic … It was the first sign of the theatrical 
establishment of the day embracing the Royal Court.

Roots (1960)

From the Observer review by Kenneth Tynan (3 July 1960): The miraculous thing 
about Roots – part two of Arnold Wesker’s trilogy – is that its author has 
managed to build an intensely moving play out of the raw materials of 
old-fashioned kitchen comedy, if not of outright farce. Ignorant rustics, 
pap-fed on pop songs; baths taken in the kitchen; the domestic row in which Mum 
won’t address Dad except through a third person; the family high tea, complete 
with trifle, mayonnaise bottle and uncomfortably brilliantined yokels; the arty 
daughter with ideas above her station; the wife who tells her ailing husband 
that he has indigestion between the shoulder blades … His achievement is to 
have set them in a context of such tangible reality that sympathy banishes 
belly laughs. It is Chekhov’s method, applied not to the country gentry but to 
the peasants at the gate.


The Knack (1962)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f836edb7c9a4ea369f2070b3d4626027b773325%2F0_254_3898_4696%2F3898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f836edb7c9a4ea369f2070b3d4626027b773325%2F0_254_3898_4696%2F3898.jpg>
 Rita Tushingham and Julian Glover during rehearsals for The Knack. Photograph: 
Keystone/Getty Images 
Ann Jellicoe, playwright: My play The Sport of My Mad Mother won a prize in 
the Observer’s playwriting competition, set up by Kenneth Tynan, and was 
produced at the Royal Court in 1958. Then I wrote The Knack, whose characters 
all grew from people I knew. Rita Tushingham was wonderful. She could mime 
anything – she’d just do it off the top of her head. The Royal Court was an 
extraordinary place and George Devine, its artistic director, an extraordinary 
man. He once said, referring to the title of my first play: “I regard myself as 
your mad uncle.”

Without doubt, it was the most exciting time of my life. The 60s were 
beginning to swing. Anything seemed possible at the Court. If you had an idea, 
they would take it up. If you wanted to put on a revue, George would give you 
all the support you needed. I remember my husband, the photographer Roger 
Mayne, put up one of his nude photographs somewhere backstage. The lighting man 
said: “As long as that photograph stays there, I’m not going to light Ann 
Jellicoe’s plays.” George, who knew more about lighting than anyone, said: 
“Look, either you light Ann’s plays or I’ll light Ann’s plays.” That was the 
kind of support you had.

Saved (1965)

From Laurence Olivier’s letter to the Observer (21 November 1965): May I be 
allowed a word concerning the much-fought-over play Saved, byEdward Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/edwardbond>, at the Royal Court? … In his 
play of marvellously observed dialogue and first-rate dramatic form, Bond 
places his act of violence in the first half, as is done in Macbeth, Julius 
Caesar, etc. Unfortunately the extreme horror of this scene has run away with 
most dramatic criticism and blinded it to the rare qualities shown in the rest 
of the play … Saved is not for children but it is for grown-ups, and the 
grown-ups of this country should have the courage to look at it: and if we do 
not find precisely the mirror held up to nature in which we can see ourselves, 
then at least we can experience the sacramental catharsis of a very chastening 
look at the sort of ground we have prepared for the next lot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc207c7a11337d22185650cef90b7e2f553aa9f77%2F0_0_846_1461%2F846.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc207c7a11337d22185650cef90b7e2f553aa9f77%2F0_0_846_1461%2F846.jpg>
 Laurence Olivier’s letter to the Observer in defence of Edward Bond’s Saved. 
The Lion and the Jewel (1966)

Wole Soyinka, playwright: I’d moved from Nigeria to England and was at Leeds 
University. In 1957, when I was supposed to be doing my postgraduate studies, I 
went down to London and became absorbed by the Royal Court, where I was a 
script-reader and a kind of intern. This was just after Look Back in Anger.John 
Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnosborne> was very angry with the 
establishment, contemptuous of what you might call bourgeois values. He enjoyed 
acting and would join us in our experimental performances. There was a lively 
group of us – we wrote plays, did sketches.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2266aa59c4e548cd723dbdad6079355fe017256%2F0_108_3060_3656%2F3060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2266aa59c4e548cd723dbdad6079355fe017256%2F0_108_3060_3656%2F3060.jpg>
 Wole Soyinka. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
I went back to Nigeria and a few years later the Court put on my play The Lion 
and the Jewel. You could describe it as a comedy on the clash of cultures – 
that theme can be heavy-handed, solemn and tragic, but I preferred to look at 
the comical side. They invited me to London to see it. William Gaskill was 
artistic director by then. He kept up the free spirit of the Royal Court. I got 
along with him very well. The Lord Chamberlain’s office had been a powerful 
force of censorship and the Royal Court led a revolt against it. They 
circumvented the Lord Chamberlain by creating a private members’ club, so that 
you saw plays on a membership basis. The idea was revolutionary – just like 
many of the plays.


DH Lawrence triptych (1968)

From the Observer review by Ronald Bryden (17 March 1968): The image of the 
dead miner in his woman’s arms which ends The Widowing of Mrs Holroyd completes 
Peter Gill’s trilogy of plays by DH Lawrence at the Royal Court like the 
central panel of a great, long-dispersed triptych falling into place. Almost 
the best thing about this superb enterprise was the inspiration of putting 
together the three plays of childhood, marriage and death in a Nottinghamshire 
village as one panorama of English working-class life.

Individually, perhaps, none of the plays [the others were A Collier’s Friday 
Night and The Daughter-in-Law] is quite a masterpiece. They are too early, too 
careful, each too narrow in scope for that. But even separately they have a 
truth and purity which makes the theatre’s normal currency of charm, humour and 
spectacle seem vulgar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f76c829510ea4f509c6022f2e6a36a5f7f2312e%2F5_0_1659_1910%2F1659.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f76c829510ea4f509c6022f2e6a36a5f7f2312e%2F5_0_1659_1910%2F1659.jpg>
 Review of DH Lawrence triptych at the Royal Court 
Revenge (1969)

From Nicholas de Jongh’s review (4 September 1969): We expect 26-year-old 
Cambridge graduates who have won an Arts Council bursary to write plays about 
young people’s convoluted sexual hangups, operating in circumstances of 
dissolution and boredom. Howard Brenton’s Revenge, presented at the Royal 
Court’sTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Upstairs, is 
different. His play, wrongheadedly subtitled a melodrama, is a curious 
assimilation of styles and manners, which owes something both to Orton and 
Dürrenmatt, but manages to create a technique of its own, ultimately concerned 
with the conflict between villain and police – a clash between two fanaticisms.


The Rocky Horror Show (1973)

Richard O’Brien: It was a golden moment to work there. I remember day after 
day of sitting on the front steps of the Court with all the other actors coming 
and going. We were very lucky to get Rocky done in the Theatre Upstairs. If the 
director Jim Sharman hadn’t twisted their arm a little, I don’t think it would 
have been put on. Over the years, it’s become the most successful show to ever 
come out of the English Stage Company. They’re still slightly embarrassed by 
that fact. The heavyweights there always wanted serious drama. The Court asked 
Jim to direct a David Williamson play, The Removalists. He said: “I will – as 
long as I can have three weeks’ fun upstairs first.” We took it from there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea4c94328a92fc9c0269d1faf5e09af964352c9d%2F76_495_2190_1669%2F2190.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea4c94328a92fc9c0269d1faf5e09af964352c9d%2F76_495_2190_1669%2F2190.jpg>
 Richard O’Brien. Photograph: Jane Bown 
David Bowie was bringing theatre into rock’n’roll at the time. I’d seen 
rock’n’roll put into theatre but it was always pastiche. I wanted real 
rock’n’roll, in the simplest way. We squeezed 62 people into the audience 
upstairs. We stretched white fabric over the pillars, to make it look like a 
cinema screen, and had the band hidden behind. We had seats from an old cinema. 
The budget was tiny but Michael White stepped in and gave us £2,000 – an 
unusual amount for a little fringe theatre show. I had no idea whether people 
would like Rocky. But if we’d have been told to go and write our own reviews, 
we couldn’t have done any better.

Class Enemy (1978) 

From Michael Billington’s Guardian review (7 April 1978): Nigel Williams’s 
Class Enemy strikes me as exactly the kind of play the Royal Court exists to 
uncover: a scathing study of one of the dark corners of our social system 
written with what one can only call a blazing promise. Set in a south London 
comprehensive school, it may endow the neglected inmates of class 5K with an 
excessive insight into their own problems, but as a piece of theatre, it has 
the impact of a fist … Bond made a similar point in Saved: that, however 
brutalising and arid a particular world may seem, there is something hopeful in 
an act as simple as a boy mending a chair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32e882fed7a4137da3d875ce40c33e62ce1f8430%2F0_0_2400_1584%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32e882fed7a4137da3d875ce40c33e62ce1f8430%2F0_0_2400_1584%2F2400.jpg>
 Andrea Dunbar. Photograph: Don McPhee for the Guardian 
The Arbor (1980)

From a Guardian report by Andrew Veitch (12 March 1980): The Royal Court is 
giving four of the best entries in its Young Writers festival professional 
productions in repertory at the Theatre Upstairs for three weeks. There’s 
enough vitality here, and enough potential, to confound the greyest of 
greybeards … Last, and most striking, The Arbor by Andrea Dunbar is given the
Max Stafford-Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/max-stafford-clark> 
bare-boned, take-it-or-leave-it treatment, with nowt but canvas chairs as beds, 
or even a car. It’s the raw story of a 15-year-old girl from the Arbor estate 
in Bradford (now Ripper-land) … Perhaps its greatest quality is its simplicity: 
the plot is sketched out by actors lurking in the off-stage gloom, leaving the 
dialogue to carry us along. The effect is to expose every crevice of the 
characters.

Top Girls (1982)

Max Stafford-Clark (from How we made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/jan/16/how-we-made-top-girls>): Caryl 
Churchill was a writer I very much wanted to involve in the Royal Court when I 
was artistic director. We’d done a few things together, and she had this idea 
for a play that opened with mythical women from history having a dinner party. 
The dialogue was overlapping, with all these dashes written into the script, a 
technique she’d pioneered in an earlier play, Three More Sleepless Nights. I 
said: “Caryl, this is terrific, but you’ve written it for a cast of 17.” In 
1982, a cast of 10 was pushing the boat out financially. Caryl said that was 
fine – we could double up, with the actors playing two or more parts – and so 
we rehearsed with a cast of seven. Directing Top Girls was like being behind 
the wheel of a Rolls-Royce: it’s a wonderful machine that works, whether you 
can drive it or not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc019da712df8a043436c1b788959c7bea86ff4a7%2F484_444_4163_2498%2F4163.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc019da712df8a043436c1b788959c7bea86ff4a7%2F484_444_4163_2498%2F4163.jpg>
 ‘Directing Top Girls was like being behind the wheel of a Rolls-Royce.’ 
Photograph: Sue Adler for the Observer 
Victory (1983)

From Rosalind Carne’s Guardian review (28 March 1983): Howard Barker is a 
powerful and prodigious dramatist – one of our best. His latest play, subtitled 
Choices in Reaction, is set at the time of the restoration of Charles II, 
though with greater concern for modern echoes than historical precision. After 
the crushing of the rebel faction, a puritan widow, Bradshaw (Julie Covington), 
seeks her husband’s mutilated corpse, a quest which takes her from rural 
Suffolk into the court itself … The picaresque form gets appropriately 
picaresque treatment, by turns heightened, vulgar, poetic and often crudely 
exaggerated … Prudes will loathe it, as will the squeamish.

Our Country’s Good (1988)

Amanda Redman, actor: We all felt so cool to be working there. It was where 
young actors wanted to be. Max Stafford-Clark offered me a part in Our 
Country’s Good byTimberlake Wertenbaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wertenbaker>. For me, Max was God. He 
terrified the life out of me but he is a genius. He expected everyone to be at 
the top of their game. I was starstruck: I was working with stalwarts from the 
Court like Ron Cook and Linda Bassett. It was a frightening process. Max had a 
very particular way of working. There was a lot of improvisation and 
workshopping. That’s very freeing but incredibly intense. It was heady stuff. 
Timberlake and Max would constantly discuss how scenes were working. Sometimes 
you’d come in the next morning and whole scenes had gone.

Our Country’s Good is the story of convicts who went out to Australia in 1788 
and put on a play, Farquhar’s Restoration comedy The Recruiting Officer. We did 
a revival of The Recruiting Officer in tandem with Our Country’s Good. The 
Court did so much new writing that Max was used to talking to his writers all 
the time, every night, changing lines and scenes. He couldn’t do that with 
Farquhar, so he wrote to him in a diary, which was published as a wonderful 
book called Letters to George.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2912e73d70662c9852c99ff9989ef378916e1fd%2F0_25_3277_1967%2F3277.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2912e73d70662c9852c99ff9989ef378916e1fd%2F0_25_3277_1967%2F3277.jpg>
 Pamela Nomvete, Cecilia Noble and Joanne Campbell in Talking in Tongues. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Talking in Tongues (1991)

From an Observer feature by Lisa O’Kelly (18 August 1991): When Winsome 
Pinnock was 16 she used to hang around theRoyal Court theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/royal-court-theatre> most weekends. “I was a 
real stage-struck teenager, sitting on the steps in Sloane Square.” Now, 13 
years on, she is the Royal Court’s writer-in-residence and her latest play, 
Talking in Tongues, is about to open … It focuses on the lives of black women 
who have grown up in Britain, exploring their feelings towards white women and 
confronting their sexual relationships with black and white men … The previous 
generation of (mostly male) black playwrights tended to steer clear of such 
complex matters, opting for a robust, overtly political theatre. Pinnock 
prefers “to deal subtly with politics through emotional experience … I want to 
dig deep into the secret places of my characters’ minds and air those thoughts 
and feelings which are usually left unspoken.”

Hysteria (1993)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F535682fdab2b90ea46b71270012b94230cc7d160%2F0_0_1577_2162%2F1577.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F535682fdab2b90ea46b71270012b94230cc7d160%2F0_0_1577_2162%2F1577.jpg>
 Henry Goodman as Sigmund Freud in Hysteria. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for 
the Guardian 
From a feature by Lyn Gardner (31 August 1993): Relations between the Royal 
Court and the Freud Museum were cordial until the latter got whiff of the 
knickers. Now the museum may no longer wish to be associated with Hysteria, a 
play which may – or may not – feature the underwear of Freud’s daughter, Anna, 
several naked women and a swan. Hysteria, subtitled Fragments of An Analysis of 
An Obsessional Neurosis, is written by Terry Johnson … “He is,” says Phyllida 
Lloyd, the director of Hysteria, “a complex theatre writer. He so completely 
understands the medium that he can work on different levels simultaneously. 
That’s real craftmanship. The challenge for a director is to try to reconcile 
the styles.”

The other, and perhaps more pressing, challenge for Lloyd and designer Mark 
Thompson is to deal with the play’s demanding design requirements. There are 
not many plays whose stage directions include phones which turn into lobsters 
and clocks which melt. Such effects are difficult to achieve in the theatre, 
harder still on a Royal Court budget … “With false memory syndrome so much in 
the news this is a very topical play,” says Lloyd, “but Hysteria is full of so 
many tantalising and provocative ideas. It attempts to untangle the complex web 
of the man.” She adds with a twinkle in her eye: “I hope this play will do 
something to address the imbalance of Oleanna” – the controversial David Mamet 
play which immediately preceded it.

Live Like Pigs (1993)

From Lyn Gardner’s review (26 October 1993): From the punitive Elizabethan 
Poor Laws to the harassment of present-day travellers, English society has 
invented strictures and structures that reward those who settle down in little 
hutches, and turn the homeless into social outcasts. The clash of these two 
cultures reverberates loudly around the Royal Court Upstairs in this pertinent 
revival of John Arden’s play, first performed here 25 years ago. You wouldn’t 
know it. The language, spiced with a dark humour, spits and sings. The 
situation is piercingly relevant to the 1990s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F708c97ee62c59c245d971449db49b63e71752cb8%2F0_323_2699_1620%2F2699.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F708c97ee62c59c245d971449db49b63e71752cb8%2F0_323_2699_1620%2F2699.jpg>
 Katie Mitchell, centre, directs Ruth Lass and Kristin Hewson in Live Like 
Pigs. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
All power to Katie Mitchell and Classics on a Shoestring for recognising the 
relevance and poetry of a play which hasn’t had a major production for more 
than 20 years … Ken Tynan and early critics tended to see the play as an attack 
on the welfare state. Arden’s even-handedness and the play’s interludes of 
Brechtian balladeering make it seem much more a parable about intolerance and 
prejudice, and a powerful plea for the need for harmonious co-existence … There 
are marvellous, unassuming, generous performances from the entire cast, though 
I particularly liked Kathryn Hunter’s Big Rachel, not the “tall, handsome 
termagant” of Arden’s description, but a small, malevolent figure with a 
fearsome growl.

Blasted (1995)

Kate Ashfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jan/12/kate-ashfield-sarah-kane-blasted>
, actor:I read it on the bus one day when I was rehearsing Nick Grosso’s 
Peaches, directed by James Macdonald upstairs at the Royal Court. James was 
also doing Blasted and he gave me the part of Cate. I hadn’t done very much 
theatre at all. Sarah Kane’s writing was really shocking and surprising. The 
first scene is quite naturalistic – you don’t expect it to become as extreme as 
it does. Some of the stage directions are so striking: there are lines like “He 
eats the baby.” I was a bit worried about the blowjob scene. I didn’t know how 
we’d do some of the scenes in such a small, intimate space.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe055b8bb6afb56fb4525a0856a6523826fb9fa89%2F0_0_2400_1441%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe055b8bb6afb56fb4525a0856a6523826fb9fa89%2F0_0_2400_1441%2F2400.jpg>
 Pip Donaghy and Kate Ashfield in Blasted. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
At the read-through, some people at the Court were saying that it would be so 
dark and hard to do. But it was the opposite in rehearsals: we were all 
laughing all the time. The way I remember it, Sarah was there every day during 
rehearsals. She was really confident about her writing and had thought long and 
hard about the play. She was very pedantic about the grammar – what was a comma 
and what was a full stop. She was very bright and very funny … There was talk 
of Blasted transferring to the West End. If we’d all been free I think it would 
have gone directly into a theatre. But I had another commitment so it didn’t 
happen. I do remember feeling quite relieved because it really is a dark play. 
It was only on at the Court for three or four weeks – I couldn’t have stomached 
a long run.

Mojo (1995)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5927eaa4f4eea1feae7eb6508faec9b3b095bca1%2F0_192_3482_2089%2F3482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5927eaa4f4eea1feae7eb6508faec9b3b095bca1%2F0_192_3482_2089%2F3482.jpg>
 Tom Hollander, Aidan Gillen and David Westhead in Mojo. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
From Michael Billington’s review (20 July 1995): Jez Butterworth’s Mojo marks 
the Royal Court’s most dazzling main-stage debut in years. The fast-paced 
dialogue and the 1958 Soho gangland setting constantly suggest an Anglicised 
American Buffalo: this is a world in which little men talk big and dirty to 
disguise their panic and paranoia … Echoes abound: not only Mamet but Cagney 
gangster movies and even the recent work of Tarantino … It is not, I guess, 
intended as a real portrait of Soho in the 50s: it’s more Pulp Fiction than 
Espresso Bongo. But Butterworth’s nightmare vision is beautifully articulated 
in Ian Rickson’s hectic production and the ensemble playing is first-rate … At 
26, Butterworth already knows how to rhythm a play, write cracking dialogue and 
build tension: I just pray the movies and cop series don’t bag him before he 
goes on to develop as a dramatist. He’s a great find.

Shopping and Fucking (1996)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8b26ec8a55ca0a0e9d7a443453d570d78a8e517%2F8_0_1619_1712%2F1619.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8b26ec8a55ca0a0e9d7a443453d570d78a8e517%2F8_0_1619_1712%2F1619.jpg>
 Michael Billington’s review of Shopping and Fucking. 
From Michael Billington’s review (3 October 1996): The title is brutally 
explicit. But then so is Mark Ravenhill’s first play, jointly presented by Out 
of Joint and the Royal Court at the Ambassadors in London. It puts on stage a 
world of alienated youth for whom sex is simply a commercial transaction and 
for whom shopping and consumption are sexually arousing … Ravenhill’s target is 
clear: the perverted values of a world that believes, in the words of the 
ecstasy dealer, that “money is civilisation” … He leads us to expect, in the 
penultimate scene, that we shall witness Gary’s horrific need for anal 
penetration with a knife – mercifully we don’t but Ravenhill plays on our fears 
in ways I find suspect … Strangely, the chief sensory impression left behind, 
for all the sex and violence, is of the vile smell of the cheap 
microwave-cooked food which the characters hurl at each other in a symbol of 
society’s conspicuous waste.

East is East (1996)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F250900820968ab1f7a4337974717f4b2402fdd4f%2F0_0_3537_5046%2F3537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F250900820968ab1f7a4337974717f4b2402fdd4f%2F0_0_3537_5046%2F3537.jpg>
 Nadim Sawalha and Linda Bassett in East Is East. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
From Michael Billington’s review (26 November 1996): Ayub Khan-Din, whose East 
Is East riotously occupies the Royal Court Theatre Upstairs, is not the first 
writer to spot the dramatic possibilities in mixed Anglo-Pakistani parentage: 
Hanif Kureishi’s early work is all about the painful aspects of cultural 
collision. What makes Khan-Din unusual is that he opts for exuberant comedy and 
views the subject from a historical perspective … What lifts the play off the 
ground is Khan-Din’s hilariously accurate picture of family life. He shows the 
sundry divisions among the children, ranging from mockery of their tyrannical 
dad to, in one case, total adherence to his Islamic faith. He also captures the 
double standards of the immigrant traditionalist: in the play’s most telling 
line Ella, expected to put up with domestic battery while helping with 
chip-shop battering, reminds her husband, “I’m a Muslim wife when it suits you.”

The Chairs (1997)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd06aa4023a710bda9ef0347c3456a5c7c7d66000%2F0_42_2228_1337%2F2228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd06aa4023a710bda9ef0347c3456a5c7c7d66000%2F0_42_2228_1337%2F2228.jpg>
 Richard Briers and Geraldine McEwan in The Chairs. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
From Susannah Clapp’s Observer review (30 November 1997): The Royal Court and 
Theatre de Complicite have a hit on their hands. In some respects it is an 
unlikely one. Eugene Ionesco’s The Chairs, first produced in Paris in 1952, the 
year before Waiting for Godot, skips between farce and tragedy, between fantasy 
and philosophical speculation. With the wrong touch, it could easily seem arid 
or arch or simply a quaint piece of 50s absurdism. But Simon McBurney’s 
production at the Duke of York’s [the Court’s temporary base while its Sloane 
Square home was being renovated] has perfect pitch. It has a sparkling 
translation by Martin Crimp and dizzying performances by Geraldine McEwan and 
Richard Briers. It dusts off and remakes a piece of theatrical history … Briers 
is full of subtle twists: by turns babyish and an incipient bully. McEwan finds 
a perfect niche for her rococo artificiality … The closeness of their acting 
together has the Complicite hallmark. So does the orchestration of sound 
effects: buzzers and bells and fanfares rise together in an unearthly chorus.

Via Dolorosa (1998)

From an interview with David Hare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/david-hare> (4 September 1998): I could 
have written an article but journalism just doesn’t stick. I know far more 
about subjects I’ve seen plays about than those I’ve read about in newspapers 
or magazines … It’s rare for journalism to scour deep into the underlying 
meaning of a subject. Of course, reactions to this play will be diverse, and 
I’ll be fiercely attacked by Middle East specialists. But my claim has always 
been that people think more deeply when they think together. That’s what 
theatre does.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1b289c04a942b3e66e687e539a232ac92b1330d%2F0_0_1424_2085%2F1424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1b289c04a942b3e66e687e539a232ac92b1330d%2F0_0_1424_2085%2F1424.jpg>
 David Hare in Via Dolorosa. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
At the same time, I hope the play will be seen as a meditation on art. I talk 
about my visit to Yad Vashem, the museum of the Holocaust, and the sense that 
its sculpture and painting seem superfluous when set against the bare facts. I 
also understand the feeling of a Palestinian poet who wishes that a play could 
be half a poem and that you didn’t have to worry about the audience.Stephen 
Daldry <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-daldry>, who is directing, 
says that the play only starts cooking when you forget it’s about Israel and 
Palestine … I suppose the test of this play will be whether audiences respond 
to the questions that certainly intrigue me. What does art add to this 
situation in the Middle East? How, if at all, does it illuminate?

Terrorism (2003)

From Michael Billington’s review (15 March 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/mar/15/theatre.artsfeatures1>): A play 
with this title has an obvious resonance right now. But the extraordinary thing 
about this deft and brilliant piece by Siberia’s Presnyakov brothers is the way 
it extends the definition of “terrorism” to embrace most of modern Russian 
life. Structurally, the play is rather like a violent version of La Ronde; 
tonally, its mood of dazzling apocalyptic farce suggests the novels of Kurt 
Vonnegut or Joseph Heller … This is a play about the breakdown of society in 
contemporary Russia. What astonishes is the cool, sardonic wit that the 
Presnyakov brothers bring to their task. And this is beautifully realised both 
in Sasha Dugdale’s translation and in Ramin Gray’s poker-faced production. 
Instead of treating the characters as Gogolian grotesques, Gray assumes that 
violence is now an everyday fact of Russian life.

My Name Is Rachel Corrie (2005)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d845d0bb89c588b784904bf34545271456dca4d%2F0_43_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d845d0bb89c588b784904bf34545271456dca4d%2F0_43_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Megan Dodds in My Name Is Rachel Corrie. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
From a feature by Katharine Viner (8 April 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/apr/08/theatre.israelandthepalestinians>
): I was asked by the Royal Court to edit the writings of Rachel Corrie into a 
drama withAlan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-giant-of-british-film-and-theatre-dies-at-69>
, who was also directing. I had read the powerful emails she sent home from 
Gaza, serialised in G2 [days after she was killed by an Israeli bulldozer in 
the Gaza Strip trying to prevent the demolition of Palestinian homes]. But I 
didn’t know that Rachel’s early writing – before she even thought of travelling 
to the Middle East, from her days as a schoolgirl, through college, to life 
working at a mental-health centre in her home town of Olympia, Washington – 
would be similarly fascinating.

The challenge was trying to construct a piece of theatre from fragments of 
journals, letters and emails, none of which was written with performance in 
mind … We’ve tried to do justice to the whole of Rachel: neither saint nor 
traitor, both serious and funny, messy and talented, devastatingly prescient 
and human and whole. Or, in her own words, “scattered and deviant and too 
loud”. We chose Rachel’s words rather than those of the thousands of 
Palestinian or Israeli victims because of the quality and accessibility of the 
writing. As Rickman says, “The activist part of her life is absolutely matched 
by the imaginative part of her life. I’ve no doubt at all that had she lived 
there would have been novels and plays pouring out of her.” The tragedy is that 
we’ll hear no more from Rachel Corrie.

Motortown (2006)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e6ca6a55451426b7a0fce81bde8b9d5d994d866%2F0_151_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e6ca6a55451426b7a0fce81bde8b9d5d994d866%2F0_151_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Ony Uhiara and Daniel Mays in Motortown. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
From Lyn Gardner’s review (25 April 2006): In Georg Büchner’s Woyzeck, a young 
illiterate soldier returns home from war and is so alienated that his only way 
of expressing himself is through violence. In the latest play fromSimon Stephens
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/simon-stephens>, it is Danny – a squaddie 
who has served in Basra – who is bringing the war back home. To Danny it is not 
Iraq, but England that is the foreign country. “I don’t blame the war. The war 
was all right. I miss it. It’s just you come back to this,” he says … It is an 
England where the “war on terror” is waged using the tactics of the terrorists. 
It is also a place of dubious moralities, small-time arms dealers and middle 
class swingers and anti-war protesters.

Nobody is coming up smelling of roses, and this England has all the stinking 
attractions of a dog turd … Anyone familiar with Stephens’ previous work may be 
in for a bit of a shock. In his excavations of working-class life, Stephens has 
often displayed a tender touch. Motortown is like being run over by a 10-tonne 
truck that doesn’t bother to check that you are still breathing.

Gone Too Far! (2008)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac56742f9c9f92ed01badacc74ca6559895a2355%2F0_234_3502_2102%2F3502.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac56742f9c9f92ed01badacc74ca6559895a2355%2F0_234_3502_2102%2F3502.jpg>
 Zawe Ashton in Gone Too Far! Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Bola Agbaje, playwright: I found the Royal Court’s Young Writers programme 
online. I wasn’t looking for the Court in particular. To be honest, I wasn’t 
even looking towards theatre – I was looking for a writing course on feature 
films. But it was an easy process: you signed up and turned up. Our tutors were 
Levi David Addai, whose play 92.3FM was on at the Court, and the director Dawn 
Walton. Each week we read and analysed a play, had mini-workshops, talked about 
structure, then went along to the Court’s bar. At the end of the course we were 
given a few weeks to write a play – that’s when I wroteGone Too Far! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/jul/29/gonetoofar> I wanted to write 
a play about Peckham, where I grew up, about my Nigerian-British heritage and 
about knife crime. More than any of my other plays, it was a really organic 
process. I just went with what I was feeling; my emotions at the time. Dominic 
Cooke had just taken over at the Court and he selected Gone Too Far! for the 
Young Writers’ festival.

The Court felt like a family-run business. Everyone was so friendly and 
welcoming and excited to develop something new. They’re so good at making you 
feel like part of the family – you just don’t get that at every theatre.

Jerusalem (2009)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e5188900b6ca23e5848ea98cd252eb41369673%2F107_302_3962_2376%2F3962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-23%23img-23&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e5188900b6ca23e5848ea98cd252eb41369673%2F107_302_3962_2376%2F3962.jpg>
 Mark Rylance as Johnny ‘Rooster’ Byron in Jerusalem. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
From Susannah Clapp’s Observer review (19 July 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/19/jerusalem-royal-court-review>): 
Jez Butterworth’s gorgeous, expansive new play keeps coming at its audience in 
unpredictable gusts, rolling from comic to furious, from winsome to bawdy … At 
the centre of Jerusalem is a wild man of the woods. Johnny “Rooster” Byron is a 
long-time mobile-home dweller, whose encampment, and existence, are under 
threat from the local townspeople and the police, and perhaps from his own 
enthralled but treacherous raggle-taggle retinue. Rooster is a drug dealer, an 
old biker, a dispenser of alcohol to the underage, a shielder of youth from 
more ferocious predators, a fabulist, a lord of misrule and a summoner of 
spirits.

Butterworth puts into Rooster’s mouth gilded phrases and foul oaths, 
incantations and elaborate, detail-stuffed stories. He tells of golden stags 
and babies born with teeth and chest hair. He boasts about being kidnapped by 
traffic wardens. Mark Rylance doesn’t so much act the Rooster as embody him. In 
a further proof of his chameleon powers, he seems to have changed shape, to 
have thickened and grown in bulk … When he tells a story, he has the eerie but 
intimate touch of an enchanter; someone who sees everyone but seems to be 
looking only at you.

Sucker Punch (2010)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffb648cd06e564818025d29a46a505eaf074c715%2F0_0_1817_2800%2F1817.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-24%23img-24&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffb648cd06e564818025d29a46a505eaf074c715%2F0_0_1817_2800%2F1817.jpg>
 Daniel Kaluuya in Sucker Punch. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Miriam Buether, set designer: The Court is a versatile theatre for designers. 
For Mike Bartlett’sMy Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/may/10/theatre4>, we basically built a 
whole new building inside the Court. We took out all the auditorium seats and 
did the same forSucker Punch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jun/20/sucker-punch-theatre-review>, 
written by Roy Williams and directed by Sacha Wares. We needed to create an 
arena for a sports event in the theatre, in a believable manner. I knew there 
had to be a boxing ring and a gym and that both had to work in parallel.

We created an onstage balcony so they could turn it into a theatre in the 
round. It was quite a challenge to build – it looked, on the plan, more like an 
oil rig. It was difficult and expensive but they kept it to use on other shows. 
Designers often have battles with theatres about changing seating and 
reconfiguring the space, but your role is to design a whole environment 
properly. They let you do a lot at the Court. Taking out all the seats and 
buying a load of bucket chairs for the entire downstairs? That’s major. But 
they’re prepared to go all the way.

Constellations (2012)

Sally Hawkins, actor: Nick Payne’s play is about so many things: it’s a love 
story in several dimensions, across the multiverse. It was like nothing else 
I’ve ever read. Rafe Spall and I had to establish a rhythm. I had moments on 
stage where I realised I had no idea which universe I was supposed to be in. 
I’d think: Rafe is in another universe and I can’t quite remember how to get 
into that universe. Rafe could always tell – he saw the fear in my eyes a 
couple of times. But it was a thrilling ride – an intimate two-hander where 
you’re going 100 miles an hour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9259a2dea76921cb7fb3b195876398fd306ec082%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-25%23img-25&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9259a2dea76921cb7fb3b195876398fd306ec082%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Sally Hawkins and Rafe Spall in Constellations. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
At the Court, you’re protected. They are all about trying things out – if it 
doesn’t work, it doesn’t work. It doesn’t matter, that’s how you learn. The 
Theatre Upstairs is incredibly intimate. You’re aware of every single cough or 
twitch. The play touches a few nerves – it creeps up on you. Some people had 
quite violent reactions to it. Somebody fainted one night and was dragged out. 
You never really know what you’re going to get when you go to the Court.

Tom Scutt’s design was so beautiful. I cried when I first saw it. Some of 
those balloons pulsated. On the last night, we all came outside to say goodbye. 
We didn’t really know whether there was a life beyond the Court for the play. 
It started to snow and, lit up from below, these thick, thick flakes of snow 
looked just like the balloons. I’ll never forget it.

Off the Page (2014)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbritain-isnt-eating-microplay-guardian-royal-court-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F14%2F1415981480777%2FBritain-Isnt-Eating-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain%20Isn't%20Eating%3A%20a%20microplay%20by%20the%20Guardian%20and%20the%20Royal%20Court%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbritain-isnt-eating-microplay-guardian-royal-court-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%20Isn%27t%20Eating%3A%20a%20microplay%20by%20the%20Guardian%20and%20the%20Royal%20Court%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F17%2Fbritain-isnt-eating-microplay-guardian-royal-court-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F14%2F1415981480777%2FBritain-Isnt-Eating-001.jpg>
 Watch Britain Isn’t Eating, the first of six microplays created by the Royal 
Court and the Guardian 
Vicky Featherstone, Royal Court’s artistic director, in a news story (17 
November, 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/17/guardian-royal-court-off-the-page-plays-online>
): Playwrights and theatre-makers are continuously hungry for inspiration and 
challenge, and that is frequently found in the pages of our great newspapers. 
The journalistic instinct to speak truth to power, and uncover the previously 
covered, feeds directly into the Royal Court’s drive to say what was unsaid and 
bring us to a deeper understanding of the world we live in. The form ofour 
microplays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/off-the-page-microplays-royal-court-guardian>
, where theatre meets film in an inescapably theatrical setting, feels like a 
new adventure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-26%23img-26&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1027537a8d66e321e5198a5849a9954a6d7b543a%2F0_266_4748_2847%2F4748.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-26%23img-26>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Royal%20Court%20at%2060%3A%20look%20back%20in%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F24%2Fthe-royal-court-at-60-look-back-in-wonder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-26%23img-26&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1027537a8d66e321e5198a5849a9954a6d7b543a%2F0_266_4748_2847%2F4748.jpg>
 The power of patriarchy … Hangmen. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian
Hangmen (2015)

From Lyn Gardner’s blog (30 December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/dec/30/hangmen-martin-mcdonagh-west-end-enduring-gallows-humour>
): The abolition of the death penalty is at the heart of Martin McDonagh’s 
play, and the title definitely doesn’t just refer to Albert Pierrepoint and 
Harry Allen, Britain’s last hangmen, who appear in McDonagh’s play in a 
fictionalised form. The hangmen are the men in cloth caps who use patriarchy to 
maintain their power. Anyone who thinks that the England of the 1960s was a 
kinder, safer, more gentle place only has to buy a ticket for the play to see 
that idea hung out to dry with a hefty dose of gallows humour … There are 
plenty of moments when McDonagh almost seems to be baiting the audience: how 
far can he push us? What can he make us laugh at? The racist, the homophobic, 
the misogynistic? The 60s and its attitudes still lurk under a veneer of 
21st-century political correctness.
 