
History teaches that commentators write the Labour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> off at their peril. This 
newspaper has been inthe left-liberal game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/may/03/election2005.comment> for too 
long to make that mistake. Nevertheless, Labour’s future as a potential party 
of government in the foreseeable future is at genuine risk, partly because of 
the softness of the Labour vote exposed in the Brexit referendum, partly 
because of its own internal arguments, partly because of its lack of a credible 
programme, and partly because of the currentConservative poll lead 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/poll-surge-for-theresa-may-against-corbyns-labour-a3311706.html>
, which has led to talk of an early general election.

Two weeks before the ballot papers go out in Labour’s 2016 leadership 
election, the party’s condition should be a matter of concern to all who wish 
it well. Responsibility for this predicament is widely shared. But solving it 
can only be achieved by openness, compromise and conciliation. That seems far 
off. On Tuesday, two substantial senior figures, the former leader Ed Miliband 
and the current deputy leader Tom Watson – neither of whom can remotely be 
dismissed simply as Blairites – became the latest to go public with their 
doubts about Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership. Meanwhile another senior figure,Andy 
Burnham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, confirmed he will 
walk away from Westminster if he is elected mayor of Greater Manchester next 
May.

Any one of these events would normally sound a warning for Labour’s hopes. All 
three together set the alarm bells ringing loudly. Messrs Burnham, Miliband and 
Watson come from very different parts of theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> tradition. They have different 
political stances and records. They are not acting in concert. Yet, like Mr 
Corbyn, they are all entitled to have their views and arguments taken seriously 
and discussed with respect, without threats of any kind.

In his interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/09/tom-watson-interview-jeremy-corbyn-labour-rifts-hug-shout>
 Mr Watson expresses puzzlement and exasperation with the kind of Labour party 
over which Mr Corbyn presides. He does so in mostly emollient language, but his 
underlying dismay is impossible to conceal. He sees a party turned in against 
itself and where opponents no longer listen to one another. He fears that 
Labour’s Miliband-era rule changes are allowing entryists to take advantage of 
well-meaning leftwing members to drive a wedge between the membership and the 
MPs. He cannot understand how a leader who has lost support in parliament can 
continue. Mr Watson yearns for a return to a more stable Labour party, with a 
leader chosen by the old electoral college that existed after 1981 and a shadow 
cabinet elected by MPs. He is right in some ways, but he is spitting into the 
wind, as the dismissive response from Mr Corbyn’s supporters confirmed on 
Tuesday.

Mr Miliband’s intervention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/09/ed-miliband-endorses-owen-smith-for-labour-leader>
 is not as outspoken as Mr Watson’s, but it carries special weight in the light 
of his own traumas. Mr Miliband withdrew quickly from the arena after the 
election defeat in 2015 and has avoided controversy – and any hint of 
disloyalty to Mr Corbyn – until the start of Labour’s post-Brexit leadership 
crisis. His endorsement of Owen Smith on Tuesday was that of a Labour 
politician who fears that Theresa May talks to the left while governing to the 
right – and who fears an early general election. Courteous as ever, Mr Miliband 
avoided any mention of Mr Corbyn’s leadership. But he evidently believes that 
Mr Corbyn is not up to the job as he himself understands it.

Mr Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
 has also avoided explicit criticism of Mr Corbyn. Instead he has decided to 
seek attainable real power in Greater Manchester (Labour also chose the former 
MP Siôn Simon as its Birmingham mayoral candidate on Tuesday). Mr Burnham’s 
decision is both positive and negative for Labour: positive in that it 
recognises the importance of local politics, negative in that it suggests he 
believes a Labour government is now too remote a prospect to be worth waiting 
around for in Westminster.

None of these three messages to Labour is beyond criticism. Mr Watson 
expressed himself unguardedly. Mr Miliband is the author of some of Labour’s 
current difficulties. Mr Burnham has lost two leadership elections he might 
have won. But these are all serious figures, steeped in modern politics, whose 
commitment to the Labour cause is lifelong and beyond dispute. This does not, 
in itself, make them right. But it entitles them to be listened to in good 
faith. The dangers for Labour in its current mood are that neither side is 
listening any longer to the other and that both have become too simplistic 
about the immense task Labour currently faces if it is to govern again.
 