
Florence + the Machine messed up a Manchester Davis Cup fixture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/05/florence-machine-scupper-great-britain-davis-cup-manchester-arena>

Florence Welch and her band may have made a few enemies in the world of tennis 
this week – and no, that doesn’t sound particularly threatening to me, either. 
Davis Cup supporters hoping to watch Andy Murray play the semi-final in 
Manchester will have to suck it up and venture elsewhere, after Welch’s agent 
said “no thanks” to relocating one of the indie band’s gigs. Their scheduled 18 
September date at the Manchester Arena clashes with the first day of the tennis 
tie – and the Lawn Tennis Association has until next Wednesday to find a new 
venue.

A viral video convinced Foo Fighters to play in an Italian town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/01/foo-fighters-cesena-italy-viral-video-dave-grohl>

If you can’t stand the idea of 1,000 people playing a Foo Fighters song, then 
welcome to hell. One man pulled together a huge performance of Learn to Fly, in 
a now-viral video asking the Foo Fighters to perform in the northern Italian 
town of Cesena. Frontman Dave Grohl responded – ooh-er, in Italian – with a 
video message of his own. He really is determined to earn the title ofRock’s 
Nicest Guy 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/dave-grohl-grants-birthday-wish-invites-fan-to-drum-with-foo-fighters-20150714>
 in 2015, isn’t he?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJozAmXo2bDE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJozAmXo2bDE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJozAmXo2bDE&media=>
David Byrne wants streaming services to be more transparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/03/david-byrne-calls-for-transparency-from-labels-and-streaming-services>

Where music-streaming royalties are concerned, Byrne believes it wouldn’t hurt 
to follow the money. In aNew York Times piece 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/02/opinion/sunday/open-the-music-industrys-black-box.html?smid=fb-share&_r=2>
, the musician and label owner called for greater transparency from the likes 
of Apple Music. He wanted to know how much he’d be likely to earn in royalties 
during the service’s three-month trial period, but says he was blocked at every 
turn.Get Taylor Swift on the blower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/22/apple-music-royalties-free-trial-taylor-swift>
, David: I’m sure she’d be able to send out a couple of tweets and sort 
something out.

Keith Richards called Sgt Pepper’ a ‘mishmash of rubbish’

Well, Richards isn’t one to mince his words. He’s spoken rather disparagingly 
of the Fab Four in the past, and was at it again ina recent interview with 
Esquire 
<http://www.esquire.com/entertainment/music/interviews/a36899/keith-richards-interview-0915/>
. “If you’re the Beatles in the 60s, you just get carried away – you forget 
what it is you wanted to do,” he said. “You’re starting to do Sgt Pepper. Some 
people think it’s a genius album, but I think it’s a mishmash of rubbish, kind 
of like – ‘Oh, if you can make a load of shit, so can we.’” So … you didn’t 
like it, Keith?

Dr Dre released his first studio album in 16 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/07/dr-dre-compton-first-listen-review>
 ...

At long last, Dre delivered. Compton: A Soundtrack by Dr Dre was inspired by 
forthcoming NWA biopic,Straight Outta Compton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/31/straight-outta-compton-review-an-energetic-a-side-let-down-by-a-bloated-b-side>
, and premiered on Apple Music on Thursday. The album is packed with guest 
features, from Eminem, Jill Scott, Kendrick Lamar, Xzibit (he’s still rapping? 
OK) and others – so far, fans seem pleased. I suppose all that time making 
expensive headphones could distract even the most hard-working among us.
Dr. Dre (@drdre) 
#Compton <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Compton?src=hash> Stream it now, 
uncensored, only on@AppleMusic <https://twitter.com/AppleMusic>. 
http://t.co/nbebhWfLqw <http://t.co/nbebhWfLqw> pic.twitter.com/lA83KfE71E 
<http://t.co/lA83KfE71E>
 <https://twitter.com/drdre/status/629444314486026240> August 7, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/drdre/status/629444314486026240> 
… And it features a contentious Eminem lyric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/07/eminem-criticised-over-lyric-on-dr-dres-compton>

Speaking of Eminem <https://www.theguardian.com/music/eminem>, he’s only gone 
and recorded a guest verse on the new Dre album that people find offensive. 
Shocker. A line about rape on track Medicine Man seems to have some fans 
wondering when Marshall Mathers will be ready to leave behind his early image – 
of a perpetually infuriated, misunderstood teen – and cut down on the violent, 
misogynistic lyrics.

Someone launched a campaign to save the bassoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/01/save-the-bassoon-campaign-endangered-instrument>

There’s a woodwind crisis afoot. Bassoons, well-known for looking like a 
shotgun into which you can blow to produce music, aren’t as popular as they 
once were. And that’s the problem Dutch musician Bram Van Sambeek is trying to 
solve, with theSave the Bassoon 
<http://muziekweek.nl/en/programma/gmw15-red-de-fagot/> campaign. If someone 
can find a way to tie this into the last vestiges of everyone’s empathy for 
Cecil the Lion, the campaign may stand a chance.

Mariah Carey is going to appear on TV show Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/06/mariah-carey-empire-season-2-says-lee-daniels>

Carey was born to do this, surely. A list of the pop star’s signature looks – 
gold, glinting diamante jewels, fur and metallic stilettos – already reads like 
a typical outfit worn by Empire’s Cookie Lyon, played by Taraji P Henson. 
Series creator Lee Daniels broke the news of Carey’s planned appearance on the 
show, wehn she was given a star on Hollywood’s Walk of Fame on Wednesday. 
Though there aren’t any details yet on what part Carey will play on the Fox 
hip-hop drama, I’m just hoping the calibre of her performance will be more 
Butler than Glitter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fdr-dre-compton-album-save-bassoon-week-in-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb61cfe9a6ea17bb1ee1d71d74a4a441a60591b70%2F179_179_2591_1556%2F2591.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20week%20in%20music%3A%20Dr%20Dre's%20Compton%2C%20saving%20the%20bassoon%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fdr-dre-compton-album-save-bassoon-week-in-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20week%20in%20music%3A%20Dr%20Dre%27s%20Compton%2C%20saving%20the%20bassoon%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fdr-dre-compton-album-save-bassoon-week-in-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb61cfe9a6ea17bb1ee1d71d74a4a441a60591b70%2F179_179_2591_1556%2F2591.jpg>
 Empire approaching … Mariah Carey, with her brand-new Hollywood Walk of Fame 
star. Photograph: Startraks Photo/REX Shutterstock 
11m people signed up to Apple Music in its first month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/06/apple-music-listeners-spotify-rival>


Note: the radio and music streaming service is still in its free trial period, 
so this figure has to be taken with a pinch of salt. Since magically appearing 
on iPhones and Macbooks around the world on 30 June,Apple Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple-music> has racked up half as many 
trial users as paying Spotify subscribers. We’ll come back to this one in early 
October, when there’ll be more sense to make of it.

Cilla Black died, aged 72 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/02/cilla-black-dies-aged-72>

The singer and television personality died in Spain on Sunday, as the result 
of a stroke. Though known in recent years as the host of ITV’s Blind Date, 
Black started her career in entertainment in 1963, with two No 1 singles.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fcilla-black-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438521348798%2FKP_378669_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20life%20and%20work%20of%20Cilla%20Black%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fcilla-black-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20life%20and%20work%20of%20Cilla%20Black%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F02%2Fcilla-black-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F2%2F1438521348798%2FKP_378669_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The life and work of Cilla Black – video  