
Anoka, Minnesota: ‘He tells it like it is’

Anoka, Minnesota, may be only a 35-minute drive from liberal downtown 
Minneapolis, but this isMichele Bachmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michele-bachmann> country, part of a 
string of northern ex-urban suburbs that are solidly Republican.

Alicia Machado, Miss Universe weight-shamed by Trump, speaks out for Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/alicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton>
These days, it’s also predominantly Trump country. The female Trump supporters 
the Guardian spoke to here vigorously defended their candidate as the one that 
will be best for women, and ultimately the country. They were unconcerned about 
his comments on women and weight orAlicia Machado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/alicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton>
.

“Even though he goes on rampages and he says dumb things sometimes, I really 
believe he will fight for this country,” says Kim Stone, 41 the general manager 
of 201 Tavern, a downtown bar. “I thinkHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is a bully. I think she 
is, versus Trump, an evil person. I just want to see somebody finally get 
something done, and he will. I think he has a lot to learn, but I think that 
when he gets into office, he’ll do what he says he’s going to do, and maybe we 
need somebody like that, and not an extra politician who has been in politics 
all these years.”

Kathy Fossber, 66, a retired Medicare specialist, sat in the leafy back patio 
of a hip coffee shop called the Avant Garden, catching up with a friend who 
knitted throughout the conversation.

“Clinton is bringing this up, but it happened many, many years ago. Why is she 
doing this? (...) Maybe back then, at that time, he felt she was putting on 
weight, and of course it made her mad, but he calls it like it is,” she says.

“She represents Miss Universe, and she still did even after the time was up, 
so she had that obligation to keep herself as she was when she won the contest. 
She was representing women at that time,” she added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f543e28af9c486a7d31f2fdd490cd1e47fdced3%2F0_334_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Republican%20women%20unfazed%20by%20Trump's%20sexism%3A%20'I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20it%20matters'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Republican%20women%20unfazed%20by%20Trump%27s%20sexism%3A%20%27I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20it%20matters%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f543e28af9c486a7d31f2fdd490cd1e47fdced3%2F0_334_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Jody Christensen. Photograph: Jared Goyette 
Jody Christensen, 47, a business owner, wore a black jacket and a headband 
adorned with skulls as she prepared to jump on the back of a motorcycle.

“I don’t think it matters. I really don’t give a shit about Miss Universe. 
That’s not what politics are about. We should be talking about protecting our 
country, and taxes.”

In her view, Trump would be the better candidate for women. 

“He would be great for women because he believes in business, and he has top 
executives in his company that are women. You want to work for a living? Then 
he’s the person you want. You want to be on welfare? Then you should vote for 
Hillary Clinton.”

Neely Miarka, 43, worked the pull tab booth at another downtown bar, selling 
lottery tickets.

“I think it was taken out of context. I don’t think he was trying to say, 
‘hey, you’re a fat slob’. Hillary isn’t all that great either, she’s not 
standing up for women. Who says Hillary is going to, just because she is one? 
We’ve given these politicians how many years to try? Hundreds and hundreds of 
years, and they haven’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff5ced51f516869ad96f1d8a2d9e7d0f5275ed05%2F0_99_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Republican%20women%20unfazed%20by%20Trump's%20sexism%3A%20'I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20it%20matters'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Republican%20women%20unfazed%20by%20Trump%27s%20sexism%3A%20%27I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20it%20matters%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff5ced51f516869ad96f1d8a2d9e7d0f5275ed05%2F0_99_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Amy Domino. Photograph: Jared Goyette 
For Amy Domino, a 36-year-old waitress at the same bar, Trump’s comments were 
inconsequential.

“I think he says a lot of off color things. It doesn’t really matter. It’s his 
views. I think it’s perfectly fine that he says how he feels. It’s just who he 
is. I support his other views as far as being a Republican, and pro-gun.”

Trump Tower, New York: ‘No women in the White House’

On a rainy Friday in New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, 
Joyce, Rene and Jessica, three friends on vacation from Georgia and Florida, 
trekked through the bad weather to check out Trump Tower. “We made it a point 
to come see this,” said Joyce, who works for her local church. “We’ve been 
walking for blocks,” Jessica, who also works for the church, added.

All Trump supporters, the three friends weren’t bothered by the Republican 
nominee’s sometimes harsh statements about women.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb27aa6907be92411eb60d2a4c9f0d0551ee5822%2F0_530_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Republican%20women%20unfazed%20by%20Trump's%20sexism%3A%20'I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20it%20matters'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Republican%20women%20unfazed%20by%20Trump%27s%20sexism%3A%20%27I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20it%20matters%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb27aa6907be92411eb60d2a4c9f0d0551ee5822%2F0_530_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Marie and Katy with their husbands. Photograph: Nicole Puglise 
“People always say things they shouldn’t say, and just because he’s in the 
spotlight, they’re going to bring it all out,” Jessica said. “We all regret 
things that we’ve said or done. But I was raised old school and it’s called 
forgiveness and nobody’s perfect.”

“Who cares about Rosie O’Donnell or Miss Universe not being skinny?” she added.

While the friends said they don’t hate Clinton, Rene said they don’t believe 
women should be in the White House. “The three P’s,” Rene said. “Police 
officers, preachers or presidents.” Joyce, however, said she would have voted 
for formerAlaska <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> governor Sarah 
Palin.

While she didn’t watch the debate on Monday, Joyce thought that Clinton 
bringing up Trump’s comments about Machado was keeping undecided voters from 
“looking at the big picture”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe926d3fa0f1141fac751f44e2278dbd2f8e050c3%2F0_233_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Republican%20women%20unfazed%20by%20Trump's%20sexism%3A%20'I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20it%20matters'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Republican%20women%20unfazed%20by%20Trump%27s%20sexism%3A%20%27I%20don%E2%80%99t%20think%20it%20matters%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fdonald-trump-alicia-machado-republican-women-sexism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe926d3fa0f1141fac751f44e2278dbd2f8e050c3%2F0_233_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Michelle and Terry. Photograph: Nicole Puglise 
Marie and Katy, two retired elementary school teachers from south-east Texas, 
also thought Clinton bringing up Trump’s past comments was unfair. On vacation 
in New York, they decided to stop in the Trump Cafe for lunch.

“She has done far worse towards women than he ever has,” said Marie, 72, 
adding she was glad he “got away” from making comments about women’s 
appearances.

Her husband, Clovis, added: “This world is not about women’s weight. It’s 
about who is going to do the best for our country.” Both women agreed.

She has done far worse towards women than he ever has
Marie 
Trump’s comments bothered Michelle, 49, a homemaker from Florida and an 
undecided voter. “I don’t like it. I didn’t like it when he made them,” she 
said when asked about Trump’s past remarks about women. “And to hear more 
things about him, like the pageant contestant – I had never heard that before – 
that even turns me off more so.”

She thought Trump was crazy for saying Clinton doesn’t have a presidential 
look. “It has nothing to do with what you look like. If that was the case, Bill 
Clinton would still be in office,” she joked.

Michelle often debates politics with her sister, Terry, 57, who will be voting 
for Clinton. Terry laughed, not unkindly, when she heard her sister talk about 
Trump’s comments. “Are you sure you don’t know who you’re voting for?” she said.

Anchorage, Alaska: ‘He needs to control his mouth’

At Hi-Rollers Hair Salon in Anchorage, Amie Haakenson, 45, was waiting for her 
color to set. She’s a registered Republican planning on voting for Trump. His 
comments about weight weren’t wise, she said, but there are larger issues in 
the election to consider.

“I am an overweight, middle-aged woman. I could really care less about the 
(weight) comment,” she said. She was more bothered by the fact Trump didn’t 
seem to be reining in inappropriate comments as she’d hoped he would as he 
became a more seasoned candidate. “He needs to control his mouth, that’s what 
he needs to do,” she said. “To be quite honest, I say things that are 
inappropriate sometimes too, like everyone else, but I try not to let them come 
out when I am the face of an organization, much less the face of the free 
world.”
A presidency isn’t just about one person, it’s about the group of people that 
they bring with them, she said.

On the campus of University of Alaska in Fairbanks, social work professor Kim 
Swisher, 43, a life-long moderate Republican, said she believes strongly in 
second amendment rights and noted that her mother campaigned for Nixon. But 
Trump’s weight comments pushed her over the edge.

“The weight thing concerns me,” she said. “I’m a professional woman, and I’m a 
size 16. What his comments have done for me, they have affirmed that due to my 
size, I would be invalid in a world where Trump leads.”

She was particularly disappointed in the Republican party for not offering 
voters a better choice. “This is not the Republican party I have voted for in 
the past,” she said.

Peggy Treadway, 30, works at an employment agency in Anchorage. In the office 
on Friday, she described herself as an outdoorsy woman who fishes in the summer 
and rides snow mobiles in the winter.

“I’ve always voted Republican, always, but this year I don’t really know,” she 
said. Trump should never have brought up a woman’s weight, she said. “Honestly, 
it just adds to the pile of stones that makes me not really like him as much. 
It’s another strike against him. I don’t how many strikes it will take before I 
say enough is enough. I don’t really like the alternative, though.”

Outside the Safeway grocery store in Wasilla on Friday, Lisa Smith, 43, an 
independent voter and mother of four foster children, said she’d gained weight 
due to a medication she was taking after spending many years as a size four. 
And for that reason, Trump’s comments felt especially cruel.

“I’m considered obese. What is it, Miss Piggy, he called one of those 
contestants?” she said.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> 
and girls whose bodies don’t fit Trump’s standards have a hard enough time. “To 
hear somebody called that, it makes our self-esteem even worse,” she said.
 