
Spoken word (or performance poetry as it’s also known) has been creeping into 
the public consciousness of late. Thanks to sites such as YouTube and 
SoundCloud, artists have found a digital platform on which to share their voice 
and their work. Performers such asKate Tempest <http://katetempest.co.uk/>, 
George the Poet <http://www.iamgeorgethepoet.co.uk/> and Jess Green 
<http://www.jessgreenpoet.com/>, and festivals such as Glastonbury and The Last 
Word <http://www.roundhouse.org.uk/whats-on/2016/the-last-word-festival-2016/>, 
have also helped. Performance poetry is fast becoming a staple of the 
entertainment circuit.

Aside from the obvious entertainment spin that spoken word puts on this 
traditional form of literature, it’s now being (rightly) recognised for its 
positive impact on the mental wellbeing of performers. I often hear about new 
and inspiring ways that the poetic voice is being used to achieve this, 
engaging with people from all walks of life, across a range of sectors.

I lecture at Bath Spa University. In 2005 we introduced the first ever 
performance poetry module in the UK. We’ve seen a pattern emerge in terms of 
the reasons why students choose to study with us – and it’s not simply to 
further their poetry careers.

The experience of going on the stage and performing has seemingly validated 
the person I am.
Robert Garnham 
In many cases it’s to relieve stress, boost confidence or deal with a variety 
of mental health problems. One of my students, Kate Jeanes, credits performance 
poetry for helping her cope with her extreme anxiety disorder. Performing under 
the name Kathryn O’Driscoll, she tackles her issues head on with her poem,
Don’t look at my legs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y8RW00YZkk4>.

There are other great examples of this. The Spoken Word Education Programme 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=48LdD6gtnH0>, run by Goldsmiths University 
<http://www.gold.ac.uk/pg/ma-writer-teacher/> and leading performance poetry 
organisation,Apples and Snakes <http://www.applesandsnakes.org/>, uses poetry 
to raise children’s confidence, self-expression and leadership skills. The 
spoken word educators – a group of established performance poets – have been 
running the programme across six London schools for three years. Increased 
confidence has been noted as one of the key changes among participants. 
Perhaps, rather than for just a few chosen schools, the practice could be 
rolled out on a national level.

We’re now seeing many performance poets openly advocating spoken word and how 
it has helped to transform their lives. AsRobert Garnham 
<https://robertdgarnham.wordpress.com/210-2/> writes on his personal blog, in a 
post 
<https://robertdgarnham.wordpress.com/2016/03/21/how-spoken-word-changed-my-life/>
 entitled, How Spoken Word Changed My Life:

I feel incredibly confident now with who I am as a person and how I conduct 
myself in life, because the experience of going on the stage and performing has 
seemingly validated the person I am.

As recognition of this value spreads, so does the range of sectors embracing 
the idea. Complementing conventional medical practices,Brighton Health and 
Wellbeing Centre <http://www.wellbeing-centre.org/> now offers performance arts 
therapy. It’s one of the first NHS practices in the UK to integrate 
complementary therapies and healing arts.


To strive, to seek, to find … a career in poetry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/nov/10/to-strive-to-seek-to-find-a-career-in-poetry>
Spoken word <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/spoken-word> is expressive 
and free, enabling performers to speak openly and honestly about issues in a 
controlled and safe environment. The link between the arts and mental wellbeing 
is by no means a new phenomenon; it has long been recognised. But that’s why 
it’s so encouraging to see a rise in popularity of spoken word – opening up 
opportunities for many more people to benefit.

Other universities have followed in our footsteps by setting up performance 
poetry modules, so together we’re reaching a greater number of young people and 
helping them to overcome anxieties, fears and barriers.

Long may this growth continue, because if performance poetry continues to heal 
souls as well as entertain, it will always be a success.

Lucy English is reader in creative writing at Bath Spa University 
<http://www.bathspa.ac.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 