
I have good reason for remembering the first time I read The Picture of Dorian 
Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/27/dorian-gray-oscar-wilde-uncensored>
. Its conceit was captivating, in more ways than one. Gray unwittingly makes a 
Faustian pact whereby his own youthful beauty remains unblemished, while a 
portrait he hides in an attic shows the ravages visited on his face and body by 
his ugly character.

It was a Friday afternoon in the summer of 1984, and I sat in the living room 
of my flat in Edinburgh, absolutely gripped. I knew I wasn’t going to be able 
to finish it in a single sitting, as I really, really wanted to. My friend 
Eileen was coming to stay for the weekend, she’d be arriving in the early 
evening, and I knew that I didn’t quite have the time. But the appointed hour 
came and went, and she didn’t show. So I carried on reading.

Wilde believed beauty was everything. Yet his novel is more persuasive as a 
tract asserting that beauty is nothing

Minutes after I’d finished the novel, Eileen turned up, explaining that she 
was late because she’d been early. Rather than waiting at the coach station, 
she’d gone to the library, where she got so mesmerised by a book that she’d 
missed the bus. She’d had to leave this great book behind, but she was 
desperate to get another copy and carry on.

That was quite funny, I told her, because I’d been thrilled that she was late, 
having been reading a compelling book myself. She should readmy book, I 
insisted, offering it to her enthusiastically. Eileen stared at me, eyes wide, 
mouth open, shocked, suspicious, unguarded, like a certain portrait in a 
certain attic, stripped of its social mask, struggling to contain sheer 
reaction. I stared back. I thought she was about to have a seizure of some kind.

“That’s it,” she gasped, holding her hands out towards this neat Penguin 
paperback without quite committing to touching it. “That’s the book I was 
reading.” The coincidence is filed, for both of us, under: Totally Weird 
Moments.

Maybe I’d have forgotten the book, had it not become a precious artefact of 
serendipity-in-friendship, one we enjoy dusting off every few years, just to 
relive the pleasure of being a couple of suggestible 20-year-olds in the throes 
of a mild hysteria. For us, it represents an unbreakable bond, as if sharing 
your whole adult life isn’t bond enough.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fpicture-dorian-gray-hypocrisy-ravage-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438791215885%2F90f6059c-2a5d-4afe-8422-7a233e4e2687-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Picture%20of%20Dorian%20Gray%20made%20me%20forever%20suspicious%20of%20the%20self-righteous%20%7C%20Deborah%20Orr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fpicture-dorian-gray-hypocrisy-ravage-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Picture%20of%20Dorian%20Gray%20made%20me%20forever%20suspicious%20of%20the%20self-righteous%20%7C%20Deborah%20Orr&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F06%2Fpicture-dorian-gray-hypocrisy-ravage-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438791215885%2F90f6059c-2a5d-4afe-8422-7a233e4e2687-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Angela Lansbury in the 1945 film version of The Picture of Dorian Gray 
Photograph: Courtesy Everett Collection/Rex Features 
For me, The Picture of Dorian Gray is not just a clever supernatural 
melodrama, but also a profound text, a horrible vision of the power and frailty 
of human self-delusion. It’s not profound in the way Wilde intended, I don’t 
think. At that time, in 1890, he believed that beauty was everything. Yet his 
only novel is more persuasive as a tract asserting that beauty is nothing. The 
inversion is all the more touching, all the more upsetting, because – had Wilde 
understood and heeded the insights of his own story – he surely would not have 
delivered himself up to his own destruction with the reckless hypocrisy that he 
did.

It seems wrong, casting Wilde as the author of his own misfortune. He is now 
seen so religiously as a martyr to homophobia that it’s almost forgotten that 
it was this gay man himself who started legal action against the Marquess of 
Queensberry, declaring it libellous to suggest he was a “sodomite”.

The pivotal moment in Dorian Gray is when Dorian, having done some charity 
work out of alarm at the unflattering cast that hedonism has etched on his 
portrait’s face, visits the attic to see how his good deeds have improved his 
expression. Instead, he sees an ugly sneer of hypocrisy despoiling his 
perfection all the more. It’s made me eternally suspicious of the 
self-righteous, which is not a good thing, on the whole. But it makes me all 
the more sad for Wilde, who knew how hypocrisy could ravage a man’s self-image, 
but chose to protect his public image instead.

My Wilde binge didn’t start and end in that one day. I carried on that summer 
reading everything he wrote and everything I could find that had been written 
about him. It was an escape, a relief, an unjust victimhood that could be 
understood more impartially because it had no personal parallel at all with me.

At that time I was furious about class discrimination, Thatcherism, the 
miners’ strike, all that. The fury was made worse by the fact that I’d gone to 
a posh university, the first in my family, and discovered – oh woe, oh 
confusion – that privileged people quite often seemed friendly, interesting, 
generous and likable.

It was from these people that I first learned properly about feminism, which 
until then had been something on the telly called “women’s lib”, which my 
mother said was nonsense. But it seemed weird, taking lessons about oppression 
from these young women who’d had more opportunities in life than pretty much 
every male I’d ever known until I fell in with their crowd.

How a feminist anthology taught me that outsiders can pull together | Mark 
Haddon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/sparew-rib-reader-book> 
Wilde, of course, had been a highly privileged man himself, privileged in 
background, education, intelligence and talent. None of which had stopped him 
from dying at the age of 46, broken and in exile. I became fascinated by gay 
rights, a proper fag-hag. Watching homophobia being exposed as a shameful 
weapon wielded by bullies and cowards has been a joy in my life, not because I 
think it has any primacy over other prejudices, but because it seemed more 
easily isolated and therefore more easily legislated against. I think recent 
history has borne this out. So, when the absolutely necessary railing against 
the “dead, white males” gained currency, I thought, “Up to a point, but … 
Oscar.”

Decades later, when I heard about intersectionality 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intersectionality>, I simply thought: “Yup, 
that’s what’s been missing from this stuff all along.” Gay rights were the 
low-hanging fruits of anti-discrimination. So to speak. The rest is much 
harder, but at least there’s an example that offers room for optimism. Perhaps.

I still think it’s too formulaic, the compiling of league tables of 
victimhood. The sense that you get from the most absurd quarters is that their 
own personal sense of victimhood is the one that, once sorted, will liberate 
the world. Many people chose identity politics over socialism in the 1980s, 
maybe just because these were positive changes that seemed possible, at a time 
when the tide surged against a universal egalitarianism. I know that Dorian 
Gray changed me. But there’s no portrait in my attic, so I don’t know whether 
it changed me for the better or for the worse, just as I don’t know when or if 
the rising tide of inequality will ever turn again.
 