
To grasp the real meaning of the law on abortion in Northern Ireland, put out 
of mind the finger-jabbing abstractions of the Protestant politicians and the 
Catholic priests, and instead listen to the voices of the women who have lived 
with the practical consequences. This week they have beensharing their stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/06/abortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video>
 through the Guardian: tales of racking up debts to fund clinic fees in 
England, of lonely flights taken without the partner who should have been there 
to hold a hand, tales ofseeking advice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/northern-ireland-abortion-ban-sarah-ewart-interview>
 from doctorstoo fearful of prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/northern-ireland-medics-fear-prison-abortion-advice>
 to say anything useful, of sourcing illicit pills on the internet and 
fervently hoping that you’ve read the instructions right, and of the need to 
get your story straight before making a judgment about whether the bleeding has 
got to the point where A&E cannot be avoided.

Such terrible things are happening within the UK of 2016. One lesson is the 
sheer futility of presuming to second-guess the ethical and practical judgments 
that women make about their own wombs. However much a moralising lawmaker may 
wish to force a woman to carry on with a pregnancy she does not want, whatever 
obstacles he may put in the way of her taking control, he will often fail. When 
an unwanted pregnancy can warp a whole future, neither the travel costs nor the 
dangers of self-administered treatment will be a decisive deterrent, any more 
than the occasional horrors of the backstreet abortion prevented them happening 
back in Britain’s ownVera Drake <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0383694/> days. 
The rest of the UK woke up to this reality half a century ago, with the 
Abortion Act of 1967. But such is the macho, sectarian politics of Northern 
Ireland that the province remains saddled with Victorian law, and indeed, in 
certain respects, the last few years have seen the regime of criminalisation 
become harsher.

A woman qualifies for an exceptional termination only where continuing with a 
pregnancy would render her a “physical or mental wreck”. As well as being shot 
through with misogyny, this anachronistic legal test is hopelessly ambiguous. 
And so it left doctors room, until a few years ago, to invoke maternal mental 
health in justifying the abortion of abnormal foetuses already fated not to 
survive. But after some alarmist noises from the attorney general,John Larkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/26/northern-ireland-abortion-larkin>
 – a manwho once likened abortion 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-20010143> of deformed foetuses 
to “putting a bullet in the back of the head of the child two days after it’s 
born” – the executive issueddraft guidelines 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-21712388> in 2013, which precluded any 
automatic exception for fatal foetal abnormalities, and also highlighted the 
legal threat hanging over practitioners giving advice. Although this was only 
draft policy, doctors were cowed, and the tiny number of abortions performed in 
the provincedived in 2013-14 
<https://www.dhsspsni.gov.uk/sites/default/files/publications/dhssps/hs-termination-of-pregnancy-stats-13-14.pdf>
. It was in this context, with the state effectively mandating women to go 
through with stillbirths, that a high court judge ruled in November that the 
near-blanket ban breached the Human Rights Act. It was,Mr Justice Horner 
explained 
<https://www.courtsni.gov.uk/en-GB/Judicial%20Decisions/SummaryJudgments/Documents/Court%20declares%20abortion%20law%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%20breaches%20European%20Convention%20on%20Human%20Rights%20by%20faili/j_j_Summary%20of%20judgment%20-%20In%20re%20NIHRC%20(Termination%20of%20Pregnancy)%2030.11.15.htm>
, no use weighing the rights of the unborn child against the rights of the 
mother when that child was anyway doomed. It wasnot “unborn life” that was 
being protected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/01/the-guardian-view-on-abortion-in-northern-ireland-the-wrongs-of-missing-rights>
, only the certainty of unborn death down the road.

The political will may, perhaps, be mustered to fix the specific problem of 
fatal foetal abnormalities. But even that is not guaranteed: Mr Larkin’s
reaction to November’s ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/30/northern-ireland-law-on-abortion-ruled-as-incompatible-with-human-rights>
 was to seek out grounds for appeal. Beyond that, the judgment may also move 
things along on rape cases, where the unspoken aim of some anti-abortionists, 
restricting female sexual autonomy, does not apply. But even as a female first 
minister takes up the reins, there are few hopes for any wider recasting of 
reproductive rights.

Several women who had an abortion relayed to the Guardian the burden of living 
with painful secrets, and the dread, or the experience, of having that secret 
betrayed. The concern of the old political order may very well be to lock this 
shame culture in place. In doing so, however, it brings nothing but shame on
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.
 