
The greatest film stars inspire certain labels that stick to them as surely 
and superficially as school nicknames.Marlon Brando 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/marlonbrando> is always a “screen legend”. 
Lauren Bacall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/13/lauren-bacall-obituary> is 
a “siren” and Montgomery Clift, a “heart-throb”. As for Audrey Hepburn, she 
was, and is, “iconic”: occasionally, an “icon of elegance”, sometimes a “style 
icon”, but mostly, just plain “icon”.

As labels go, it could be worse. It is certainly less reductive than “sex 
symbol” (Marilyn’s fate). Hepburn’s enduring iconic status is a sign of how 
strong her cultural currency remains. Fashion writers invoke her constantly. 
When enthusing about sunglasses or little black dresses or gloves, it is still
de rigueur to mention that scene from Breakfast at Tiffany’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/breakfast-at-tiffany-s>, with Hepburn 
clutching a paper cup of coffee and a croissant, staring coolly into a window 
full of jewellery.

Now, more than 70 photographs of the star can be seen in a small but dazzling 
exhibition at the National Portrait Gallery. Half are from the personal 
collection of her children, Sean Hepburn Ferrer (the son she had with her first 
husband, actorMel Ferrer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/jun/05/obituaries.usa>) and Luca Dotti 
(the son she had with her second husband, an Italian psychiatrist). Ferrer and 
Dotti own their mother’s name as Audrey Hepburn™. In 2013, they granted 
permission toGalaxy chocolate to recreate her image in CGI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/oct/08/how-we-made-audrey-hepburn-galaxy-ad>
. You may have seen the adverts; they had aRoman Holiday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96156/roman-holiday> vibe, with a young 
Audrey driving through Italy in an open-top car. Her sons also worked closely 
with the NPG on the new exhibition. Its title, you may not be surprised to 
hear, isAudrey Hepburn: Portraits of an Icon.

Breakfast at Audrey's: the Hepburn family photo album unlocked – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/may/19/breakfast-at-audreys-the-hepburn-family-photo-album-unlocked-in-pictures>
And what an icon she was. As Billy Wilder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/billywilder> said: “God kissed Audrey Hepburn 
on the cheek, and there she was”, meaning: she was born a star. No one has ever 
worn a white shirt quite as she did. To peruse this glamorous collection of 
photographs – including work byCecil Beaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/dec/02/audrey-hepburn-back-scene-big-break-national-portrait-gallery>
,Yousuf Karsh <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/jul/15/guardianobituaries1>
 andIrving Penn <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/irving-penn> – is to 
be reminded how sublimely photogenic Hepburn was. Others have been called 
gamine, but only she fully inhabited that identity: the skittishness and 
innocence. On another face, to have eyebrows so darkly painted and eyes so 
swishily lined might have seemed overkill; on her it looked natural. She 
photographed equally well in black-and-white and in colour. Here she is in 
1951, in one of her informal black tops, grinning for American Vogue, like a 
child with a secret. And there she is four years later, radiant in pink 
Givenchy couture during the filming ofWar and Peace 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0049934/>.

Even in family album snapshots – or at least the examples chosen by the NPG – 
she has a ballerina’s poise. The earliest image in the exhibition shows her in 
1938 aged just nine. She has a Milly-Molly-Mandy haircut and no eyeliner yet, 
but she has already mastered how to smile for the camera without giving 
everything away.Richard Avedon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/oct/02/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries1>
 – whose 60s portraits are some of the most haunting in the exhibition, 
accentuating the vulnerability of her swan neck – claimed that he found Hepburn 
paradoxically hard to photograph. She left so little work for him to do: 
“However you defined the encounter of the photographer and subject, Audrey won.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434631588361%2F556fb26b-2a5e-4a7d-8724-99cb20649706-1302x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cult%20of%20Audrey%20Hepburn%3A%20how%20can%20anyone%20live%20up%20to%20that%20level%20of%20chic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cult%20of%20Audrey%20Hepburn%3A%20how%20can%20anyone%20live%20up%20to%20that%20level%20of%20chic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434631588361%2F556fb26b-2a5e-4a7d-8724-99cb20649706-1302x2040.jpeg>
 Audrey Hepburn age nine, taken by an unknown photographer in 1938. Photograph: 
courtesy of the National Portrait Gallery London 
Our continued reverence for Hepburn is interesting because it reveals the 
extent to which we remain in thrall to beautiful stills. An icon is something 
lovely and precious but also motionless: symbolic, not real. It is a flat 
picture of a golden saint before which you kneel, unworthy. As such, an 
exhibition of photography – rather than a film retrospective – may be the 
perfect way to pay homage to Hepburn’s charm.

In theory, we inhabit the age of the moving image: Netflix, YouTube, Skype. 
Yet the Hepburn with the enduring fame and cachet is not, as you might expect, 
the witty, talky one who could actually act –Katharine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/katharinehepburn> – but the one who 
photographed well. The more you look at the exquisite images in the 
NPG exhibition, the more you see that Hepburn’s genius for still imagery far 
eclipsed her achievements in motion pictures. I wonder how many now watch her in
Sabrina <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0047437/>, a rather odd and stilted 
romantic comedy in which Hepburn gives one of her many less-than-convincing 
performances as a chauffeur’s daughter torn betweenHumphrey Bogart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/humphreybogart> and William Holden 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000034/>. Yet we still recall the black slacks and 
ballet flats she wore in that picture, and her sylph-like waist.

The cult of Hepburn as “icon” has often seemed to be less about devotion to 
her film work and more a way for other women to put themselves down. Who can 
live up to that level of chic, not to mention the extreme slenderness? Hepburn 
herself insisted she ate “awfully well at meals”, but still, her figure would 
be a dangerous one for others to emulate. “Audrey maintained an impressive 
31.5in-22in-31.5in her entire life,” remarked Pamela Keogh in her deeply 
annoying 2008 bookWhat Would Audrey Do? Timeless Lessons for Living with Grace 
and Style <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/what-would-audrey-do.html>.

As Billy Wilder said: ‘God kissed Audrey Hepburn on the cheek, and there she 
was’, meaning: she was born a star

In the exhibition catalogue, curator Helen Trompeteler 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/research/staff-research-profiles/helen-trompeteler.php> 
admits that film “was just one of the ways Hepburn’s image was shaped, and 
arguably not the most enduring”. She points out that at the height of Hepburn’s 
career, audiences would often see a film only once, whereas photographic stills 
were treasured, to be viewed over and over again. Through such publications as 
Picture Post and Picturegoer, Hepburn’s image reached a huge public. She was on 
the cover of Life magazine nine times, more than any other celebrity (Marilyn 
only managed seven). In 1954, Vogue magazine said that she had so captured the 
public imagination that she had established a new “standard of beauty”. It was 
the costume designerEdith Head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/28/edith-head-google-costumes-hedren-hepburn>
 who first spotted that Hepburn was more like a model than an actor. Head 
worked with Hepburn onRoman Holiday and said “her figure and flair told me, at 
once, that here was a girl who’d been born to make designers happy”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434631664090%2Fcb0a5b76-0e4e-4b9d-9c13-a7bc49ca33b9-1002x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cult%20of%20Audrey%20Hepburn%3A%20how%20can%20anyone%20live%20up%20to%20that%20level%20of%20chic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cult%20of%20Audrey%20Hepburn%3A%20how%20can%20anyone%20live%20up%20to%20that%20level%20of%20chic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434631664090%2Fcb0a5b76-0e4e-4b9d-9c13-a7bc49ca33b9-1002x1020.jpeg>
 Undated photograph of Audrey Hepburn. Photograph: Norman Parkinson/National 
Portrait Gallery London 
To go from Hepburn in photographic form to one of her actual film performances 
is often a disappointment. She spoke in princessy tones as if English were a 
foreign language, which it was. Her mother was a Dutch baroness and her father 
– who abandoned them when Audrey was six – was an English fascist. Audrey and 
her mother spent the war in the Netherlands, where they suffered terrible 
malnutrition, and the little girl was always warned that she must not speak 
English in public. Perhaps this explains the strained intonation in her voice. 
The problem is not with her accent – after all, that was no obstacle forIngrid 
Bergman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ingmarbergman> – but the sense that 
she is often failing to connect with the basic register a line requires. Her 
best performance by far was inMy Fair Lady, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/my-fair-lady> where, cast as Eliza Doolittle, 
Hepburn’s default mode of speech is presented as something put-on and fake. It 
is a shock to go from this film to Funny Face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/feb/27/funny-face-film-love-fashion-audrey-hepburn>
, say, and realise that it is just the way she talks, not something that Henry 
Higgins has taught her. Another bonus inMy Fair Lady is that Hepburn’s voice 
was not used during the songs – she mimed toMarni Nixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/25/marni-nixon-hepburn-musicals-monroe>
’s singing – which gives her acting a rare feeling of freedom. She could devote 
herself to pure gesture and was never as affecting as when miming to “I Could 
Have Danced All Night”.

As a young woman, Hepburn didn’t aspire to be an actor, but a ballet dancer. 
Her mother saved every penny for ballet lessons and after the war they came to 
London, where Audrey danced in the chorus of whatever shows would take her, 
earning a little extra as a model in newspaper ads for Lacto calamine, a “skin 
food”. She got her first big break when the French writerColette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/15/colette-my-hero-helen-simpson> 
spotted her in a hotel lobby and wanted her for the lead role inGigi on 
Broadway. Hepburn replied, without false modesty: “I’m sorry, madame, but 
I wouldn’t be able to, because I can’t act.”

This body of images burnishes the sense we have that Hepburn must have been 
one of the greatest film stars of all time

It turned out this was no obstacle to becoming a huge star. Icons do not need 
to act; they only have to be, and no one was better at existing in front of a 
camera than Audrey Hepburn. Whether she is cuddling children on a Unicef 
mission to Sudan or posing in a crisp pink shirt on the cover of Life magazine, 
she is mesmerising. This body of images burnishes the sense we have that 
Hepburn must have been one of the greatest film stars of all time. The American 
Film Institute ranked her the third best female screen lead, ahead ofGreta Garbo
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/greta-garbo> and Judy Garland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jun/23/from-the-archive-judy-garland>.

But in the end, her most indelible images are the static ones; it’s easier 
to worship something fixed than something in motion. The NPG exhibition 
includes a Sam Shaw photo of Hepburn during the filming ofLove in the Afternoon 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0050658/> in 1956. She is sitting at a bar wearing 
a coat, surrounded by laughing, drinking men. She stares straight at us, with 
the loneliness of someone in anEdward Hopper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hopper> painting. There is more 
poignancy and depth in this single photo than in the entire movie, in which 
Hepburn plays the ingénue toGary Coope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/21/gary-cooper>r’s old roué. Our 
need to make Hepburn into an icon suggests that it is often the idea of a 
classic film that we love more than the thing itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434631443001%2F6a113f13-cf4f-4492-9e82-260991c46833-2060x1369.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20cult%20of%20Audrey%20Hepburn%3A%20how%20can%20anyone%20live%20up%20to%20that%20level%20of%20chic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20cult%20of%20Audrey%20Hepburn%3A%20how%20can%20anyone%20live%20up%20to%20that%20level%20of%20chic%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fcult-audrey-hepburn-how-can-anyone-live-up-level-of-chic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434631443001%2F6a113f13-cf4f-4492-9e82-260991c46833-2060x1369.jpeg>
 Audrey Hepburn photographed by Sam Shaw during the filming of Love in the 
Afternoon, 1956 (seen here for the first time). Photograph: The Sam Shaw Family 
Archives/Sam Shaw Inc, shawfamilyarchives.com 
A few nights ago, I watched Charade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/13/charade-audrey-hepburn-cary-grant>
. It is a 1963 comedy crime caper set in Paris, directed byStanley Donen 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0002045/> and starring Hepburn and Cary Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/carygrant>. It features clothes by Givenchy 
and music by Henry Mancini. The plot is one of multiple identities, with shades 
ofNorth by Northwest <https://www.theguardian.com/film/north-by-northwest>. It 
has amazing modernist opening credits, like a Mondrian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/piet-mondrian> painting come to life. 
I thought I was going to love it. The plot lurches from mystery to jeopardy to 
romance, but unlike Grant, who slides smoothly into his usual ambivalent 
character, Hepburn never seems able to summon the requisite emotions. You do 
not share her fear or understand what she feels for Grant. “I’m having 
a nervous breakdown!” she announces, in a phone booth, in such a baffled voice 
she could be Eliza Doolittle enunciating “the rain in Spain falls mainly on the 
plain”.

And yet, throughout Charade, Hepburn looks preposterously good, in a series of 
chic belted shift dresses, pillbox hats and 60s swing coats. I paused the film 
to make a cup of tea. When I came back, it was freeze-framed on Grant and 
Hepburn watching a Punch and Judy show. Grant is in a debonair suit; Hepburn 
wears a red coat and coral lipstick. Even though I was bored byCharade, in 
still form, it suddenly looked like a classic piece of cinema, rich with 
glamour and intrigue. I stared at that immortal frozen face for another moment, 
before un-pausing it and letting the static icon melt back to faltering life.

• Audrey Hepburn: Portraits of an Icon 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/whatson/hepburn/home.php> runs from 2 July to 18 October 
at the National Portrait Gallery.
 