
Overview


By Chris Marais and Julienne du Toit, authors of Karoo Keepsakes I and Karoo 
Keepsakes II – Traveller’s Companions to the Heartland of South Africa

The Karoo is South Africa’s magical desert space, its version of New Mexico, 
the Outback or the Gobi. A vast, ancient seabed straddling the midriff of the 
country, the Karoo (a Bushman word for “dry place”) is the size of Germany. In 
the past two centuries, more than 100 towns, villages, settlements and railway 
sidings have sprung up in the region, but the population has always been 
sparse, never topping the one-million mark.
Map for Karoo 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/travel_sa_karoo/giv-27167aNHHNQLFYaxp/>
These open plains, mostly surrounded by flat-topped hills and mountains in the 
distance, are South Africa’s soul spaces. They have also become the permanent 
home of some of the country’s most creative people, in the form of novelists, 
outsider artists, crafters, musicians, eccentrics, town champions, beer 
brewers, chefs, sculptors, internet wizards, funky hoteliers and a new breed of 
dynamic young farmer. These days, the Karoo feels the beat of theAfrikaBurn 
Festival <http://www.afrikaburn.com/> deep in the Tankwa desert as the crowds 
light up the night with fire, full-volume sounds and a creative passion.

This is the age of the Karoo road trip, where you set aside as many days as 
you can spare, fill up the petrol tank and head out on a dead-straight blacktop 
that could become a dirt road, complete with wine, meat on the coals and a sky 
full of stars. And it’s the least expensive holiday you can have in South 
Africa.

You can’t get from Johannesburg to Cape Town without crossing the Karoo. A 
hundred years ago, long before the N1 Great North Road, the route through the 
interior was tough, tortuous and constantly punctuated with farmers’ gates. 
People travelled this way armed with large bags of boiled sweets to reward the 
children who would open the gates.
 ZigZag Magazine’s Karoo playlist 
This countryside has seen the plodding progress of the large dinosaur-like 
reptile bradysaurus, which thrived here 250-odd million years ago in the 
Permian period, and the fleet footsteps of Africa’s first people, the Bushmen, 
on the hunt for eland. On a stroll, you may discover fossils, Bushmen 
arrowheads, settler coat buttons and spent cartridges from a Boer War skirmish. 
It has been scored by the passage of millions of springbok on their migrations 
across the plains, devouring all before them. It has witnessed the arrival (in 
about the fifth century AD) of theKhoikhoi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/06/south-africa-khoisan-legal-action>
 with their flocks of goats and fat-tailed sheep, to be followed by the 
European-origintrekboers (itinerant farmers), many of whom ultimately formed 
the farming communities that still occupy the land.

Today, your journey might involve trading stores, a pub crawl in the middle of 
nowhere, a random anti-fracking protest march in a mountain village and the 
lure of the never-ending road.

They say at first one travels from place to place; then one travels from face 
to face, as happens in the Karoo. Here are some of the faces you’ll encounter.

Frontier bars and farm stalls


By Wally Lange, co-owner of the Tankwa Padstal (roadside farm stall) on the 
R355 between Ceres in the Western Cape and Calvinia in the Northern Cape
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa54643be113099a2cf5b20b9a5d7cc0d35e29d99%2F0_345_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa54643be113099a2cf5b20b9a5d7cc0d35e29d99%2F0_345_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Wally Lange chats with a customer at Tankwa Padstal 
When Tankwa Padstal was burned down by an arsonist in September 2014, the 
AfrikaBurners (festivalgoers), the bikers who pass here, and the road-trippers 
heading north all donated money to rebuild it, along with odd bits of decor to 
furnish it. We were up and going again within three months.

We are almost next to the Tankwa Karoo national park 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/tankwa/>, the closest true desert to Cape Town. 
The young people who come to this area want the dry heat, the clean air and the 
stripped-down environment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedc5581c5cb170ee1d7c418a0ccb4af9acfbdc16%2F0_345_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedc5581c5cb170ee1d7c418a0ccb4af9acfbdc16%2F0_345_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Wally’s sister-in-law, Susan Lange, behind the counter at the Tankwa Padstal 
general dealer 
Sometimes I’m amazed at the people we see. They look like sushi eaters who 
should be on Clifton beach in Cape Town, but here they are, dazzled by the heat 
and the rough roads and the huge distances. There’s no cell phone signal and 
their hire cars really look like they’ve been through the mill.

But a few days later, when they come back from the national park or AfrikaBurn 
or wherever they’ve been, they look happy and relaxed. Lots of them don’t want 
to leave. They hang around here the whole day, eating and drinking and 
swimming, offering to work for free.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc974d8b014d7c934c19b34f90f09d285312769d5%2F0_332_4985_2993%2F4985.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc974d8b014d7c934c19b34f90f09d285312769d5%2F0_332_4985_2993%2F4985.jpg>
 The outside entertainment at the Tankwa Tented Camp, near the celebrated 
Padstal 
As a family, we know all the great local hideaways. Apart from our bar, there 
are two other drinking spots worth visiting: the pub atGannaga Lodge 
<http://gannagalodge.blogspot.co.uk/>, which serves real traditional Karoo food 
like mutton neck stew and grilled lamb tails, and the Onverklaar Bar, part of 
theTankwa Tented Camp <>. The Onverklaar Bar (Undeclared Bar) has many 
surprises and delights, including a large wooden box called Pandora, which is 
full of dressing-up costumes – perfect for that Tankwa pop-up party. Guests at 
the tented camp are its main patrons, but passers-by are also welcomed.

There’s another popular place close to us, called Die Mond 
<http://www.cape-hike.co.za/camping/die-mond/> (The Mouth), which is a green 
oasis in the middle of the desert. The resort lies beside a large body of water 
and consists of a campsite and a cluster of basic bungalows. Hot water and 
wind-powered LED lighting is available, but there’s no cellphone reception.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95c5db0527cd47d89a21a7eb03033d8ce0dff00a%2F0_251_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95c5db0527cd47d89a21a7eb03033d8ce0dff00a%2F0_251_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The Rustic Art guesthouse 
When we’re in Calvinia, we check in at the local butchery and then the Rustic 
Art <https://www.travelground.com/accommodation/calvinia-rustic-art> guest 
house. The guest house is part of the recently launched Republic of Rusticana, 
full of old enamel signs, found objects, paintings, ceramics and tastefully 
decorated car wrecks. The owners, Dirk and Sonja van Rensburg, are lovely 
eccentrics, Karoo hippies who welcome you into their home.

Festivals in Karoo


By Pieter Naude, co-founder of the Williston Mall and the Williston Winter 
Festival
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fded722409be6f06da73ace23073da547bc7fe0f7%2F220_360_4677_2806%2F4677.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fded722409be6f06da73ace23073da547bc7fe0f7%2F220_360_4677_2806%2F4677.jpg>
 Pieter Naude at the Doppies Bar, Williston Mall 
Karoo cultural events bring visitors and locals together in a special way. 
Take theWilliston Winter Festival 
<http://www.sa-venues.com/events/northerncape/williston-winter-festival/>, 
which we stage in the first week of September every year. It’s a celebration of 
the Nama Riel, a traditional dance with really catchy music that tells stories 
of hunting and courtship.

The Nama Riel has a deep history, going back to the days of the first people 
of the Karoo – the Bushmen. It was then taken up by others – Khoikhoi herders 
and later farmworkers in the region. There are Nama Riel dancing groups all 
over the Northern Cape these days, participating in cultural festivals and 
performing in their home towns at the weekend. Because dances are traditionally 
held on deep sand and involve swift kicking motions, the locals say it’s a good 
Nama Riel if “the dust rises before you”. The riel almost disappeared for 
decades, but is now enjoying a massive revival, and they’re starting to teach 
it in the schools of Williston. The community has incredible pride in the 
dance. In fact, I’d say it’s more popular around here than rugby.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8084fd76092f1b7ce834a771c2873562b5f94a1%2F0_270_5183_3109%2F5183.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8084fd76092f1b7ce834a771c2873562b5f94a1%2F0_270_5183_3109%2F5183.jpg>
 The Nama Riel almost disappeared but is now enjoying a massive revival 
Festivals, like ours and the Draad Karretjie (wire car) Grand Prix in 
Philipstown <http://philipstown.co.za/events.html> are a great way for visitors 
to gain insight into the culture of the Karoo. Just don’t expect anything too 
packaged and polished. There was nothing much happening in Philipstown before 
the locals realised that their own crafters made the finest wire car models 
around. Four years ago the first Philipstown Wire Car Grand Prix was held, 
which sees the community’s young people go on a mad dash through the village 
streets. Now it’s grown into a one-day festival held every year in October, and 
it’s become famous with visitors from all over joining in the fun.

In the last weekend of August, a week before our winter festival, Calvinia (80 
miles west of Williston) holds itsHantam Vleisfees 
<http://www.hantamvleisfees.co.za/files/4114/5587/1390/home_eng.html> (Meat 
Festival), but it’s not only about chops, steaks and spicy sausage. Veteran 
tractors chug up from the Western Cape, and there is traditional boer music. The
Middelpos Bazaar <https://www.facebook.com/MiddelposBasaar/> is also one of our 
favourite events. Middelpos is one of the tiniest settlements in the Karoo, 
made famous by the great UK-based (but South African born) actor Antony Sher in 
his book, Middelpost. The church bazaar is in September and it’s held in the 
street. We go down there to support all the stalls selling regional cheeses, 
meat and biltong. Then we dance the night away to the sounds of aboere orkes – 
a farmers’ orchestra, complete with accordion, piano and guitar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9345031cdecb2493ec4237079fe8eb635925476%2F0_167_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9345031cdecb2493ec4237079fe8eb635925476%2F0_167_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 AfrikaBurn 
Next year, I’m going to paint my toenails and attend AfrikaBurn 
<http://www.afrikaburn.com/> again. The little African brother of Nevada’s 
Burning Man is held over a week every autumn (April 25 to May 1 this year) on a 
private farm called Stonehenge, adjacent to the Tankwa Karoo national park. 
When it began in 2007, barely 1,000 people came – now there’s a 2016 attendance 
cap of 11,700 tickets. It’s the most vibey, peaceful mass collection of 
celebrating South Africans you’ll find. People go there to be creative and have 
fun – it’s a temporary city of art, theme camps, costume, music and 
performance. It culminates with the night-burning of various giant artworks but 
really ends with the Moop (matter out of place) patrol, where hundreds of 
people pick up every last trace of human detritus, leaving the festival grounds 
as clean as they found them.

Karoo food tradition


By Gordon Wright, Slow Food Karoo chef
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55c1c6efce7b507caffd8f5930b0712c43e77408%2F487_633_4430_2658%2F4430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55c1c6efce7b507caffd8f5930b0712c43e77408%2F487_633_4430_2658%2F4430.jpg>
 Gordon Wright pictured at the Graaff-Reinet club 
Karoo food has never strayed beyond the traditional. If you talk meat here, 
you’re talking Karoo lamb, mutton and venison. The hunters and herders ate this 
food, along withveldkos – the indigenous plant food that the Bushmen first 
pointed out to the colonists.

I would point visitors to restaurants in the town of Graaff-Reinet 
<http://www.graaffreinet.co.za/listings/dining/graaffreinet/graaffreinet>, like 
the newly opened Meerkat Deli or theColdstream 
<https://www.facebook.com/ColdstreamRestaurant/>. The Meerkat Deli offers a 
selection of sliced meats, Karoo cheeses and a variety of home-grown organic 
items like pickled agave buds and glazed figs, to eat there or on the go. The 
Coldstream, named after the British regimental unit that occupied Graaff-Reinet 
during the Anglo-Boer War, is where you go for meat dishes of ostrich, beef and 
springbok.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d664c746e5be0a1868ffb0cc63cb13cba07ce32%2F0_288_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d664c746e5be0a1868ffb0cc63cb13cba07ce32%2F0_288_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Braais are the most common dining experience in the Karoo 
And I really recommend braais (barbecues) with friends, old or new. 
Self-catering places in Graaff-Reinet normally come complete with outside braai 
facilities, so you can make dinner the adventure of the day: hunt down the 
local butcher, ask for good lamb chops. You will probably find that the meat 
comes from a farm nearby, and the town has its own recipe forsosaties – lamb or 
beef kebabs usually marinated in lightly curried sweet and sour sauce. Let them 
advise you on how to cook them, then gather up something to drink at theDrostdy 
Hotel <http://www.graaffreinet.co.za/listing/drostdy_hotel> wine shop, perhaps 
one of the Rupert labels like the 2013 Terra del Capo Arne, a juicy red. Pop in 
briefly at the supermarket for some green stuff and a bag of braai wood and 
you’re good to go.

On the second night, drop in at the Graaff-Reinet Club 
<http://www.graaffreinet.co.za/listing/the_graaff_reinet_club>, a historic 
former gentleman’s establishment that still has about 250 stalwart members but 
welcomes visitors. Order a cold one and you’ll soon find the members are pretty 
friendly. The chances are that an hour or so later, you’ll be enjoying some 
true Karoo dining hospitality in good company. The point is, in the Karoo 
you’re a traveller, not a tourist. You are encouraged to interact with the 
locals you find here. The social life is what makes this region special for us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb208d0e02c5986b60598b5d58cc64131be1d3f07%2F0_207_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb208d0e02c5986b60598b5d58cc64131be1d3f07%2F0_207_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Bikers gather at the Karoo Lamb for a potjie dinner (stew prepared outside) in 
Nieu Bethesda 
When we visit neighbouring towns in the region, we like to eat at the Karoo 
Lamb <https://www.facebook.com/KarooLambRestaurant/> (where pot-cooked meals 
are the speciality) and theBrewery and Two Goats Deli 
<http://www.eatout.co.za/venue/the-brewery-and-two-goats-deli/> (for Karoo Ale 
and ploughman’s platters starring goat’s cheese and kudu salami) in Nieu 
Bethesda (30 miles north of Graff-Reinet);Mila’s 
<https://www.facebook.com/Milas-135578310841/>, 100 miles east of Graff-Reinet 
in Cradock, for superb pizzas and wonderful local warmth, and theVictoria Manor 
Hotel <http://www.tuishuise.co.za/victoria_manor_cradock.htm> (the elegant 
1850s-era grand hotel serving traditional Karoo dishes), also in Cradock; the
Butcherbird <https://www.facebook.com/TheButcherBird/> (fine dining) in Bedford 
(50 miles south of Cradock); and a brand new daytime venue in Tarkastad called
The Story 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Story-Coffee-Shop/1604113519833813>, which 
serves eggs benedict breakfasts, interesting salads and light lunches.

The Karoo art scene


By Charmaine Haines, one of South Africa’s leading ceramicists
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb13f613035d65b8065f9b96909c0117c04e6fce2%2F657_629_4036_2422%2F4036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb13f613035d65b8065f9b96909c0117c04e6fce2%2F657_629_4036_2422%2F4036.jpg>
 Charmaine Haines in her Nieu Bethesda studio 
Semi-deserts like the Karoo often attract creative souls. These are places 
where the mind can open up, places for retrospection and reflection, an 
authentic life experience. The Karoo is a sacred space, and many people 
recognise that. Even so, the high standard of the art comes as quite a surprise 
to visitors.

The town of Nieu Bethesda, where I live, rose to fame because of a very 
eccentric woman called Helen Martins who was anoutsider artist 
<http://www.tititudorancea.org/z/outsider_art.htm>. Whenever anything is 
written about the Art Brut movement, theOwl House 
<http://www.sa-venues.com/things-to-do/easterncape/visit-the-owl-house/> of 
Nieu Bethesda is mentioned. Back in the 1960s, Helen turned her family home 
into what would become the outsider art centre of the Karoo, and a great 
tourist attraction for Nieu Bethesda. With her craftsman-assistant, Koos 
Malgas, she worked in cement and glass, building an imaginarium that drew from 
all religions and told many stories – the Three Wise Men, something from Omar 
Khayyam, in the corner stands an all-seeing owl and there’s a cross-legged 
Buddha. PlaywrightAthol Fugard <http://profiletheatre.org/12-13/about-fugard/>
’s play and subsequent film, The Road to Mecca, was based on the life and work 
of Helen Martins. Today, the Owl House is a museum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb661a88f7843a9213c6b78366ebd20f9a36f12c9%2F0_182_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb661a88f7843a9213c6b78366ebd20f9a36f12c9%2F0_182_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 The Owl House 
For artists, the Karoo is an incredible place. For example, my neighbour 
Annette van der Hulst, who is a seamstress, once asked someone for a kudu horn. 
People got to hear of this, so soon she had a long stream of people bringing 
her kudu and cow horns. Eventually, she worked out a way of putting anappliqué 
(needlework technique) of Shweshwe (a printed dyed cotton fabric widely used 
for traditional clothing) and other scraps of cloth on them – sort of a fusion 
modern art kind of thing. You’d never get that happening in a city. The Karoo 
forces you to see and use what is around you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F564dc54d9bfe5a5c8b67bd8e53c7ebea8ea1a31a%2F0_509_3867_2320%2F3867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F564dc54d9bfe5a5c8b67bd8e53c7ebea8ea1a31a%2F0_509_3867_2320%2F3867.jpg>
 Frans Boekkooi, Nieu Bethesda sculptor and his bust of local resident, the 
playwright Athol Fugard 
I’d recommend going to the Bethesda Art Centre <http://nieubethesda.org/>, 
which exhibits the most amazing lino-cuts, and appliquéd quilts, telling the 
myths, narrative and dreams of the Karoo and South Africa. There’s an amazing 
series of lino-cuts that depict the Karoo under threat of fracking – it tells 
the story beautifully. The threat of fracking and uranium mining in the region 
has evoked new ways of expression, and a degree of urgency to save it. There 
have been quite a few exhibitions on the subject, the prime one beingFear & Loss
 
<http://www.mutualart.com/Exhibitions/The-Industrial-Karoo---Fear---Loss/4685297CE7D85D50#Info>
, which has been moving around the country, and which looks at the interplay of 
heritage, culture, politics and economics and the way all of this impacts on 
the land and the communities who live on it.

Then there is Frans Boekkooi <http://www.fransboekkooi.co.za/>, who is a 
world-class sculptor who fashions slim, finely balanced figures (including a 
bust of South African playwright Athol Fugard) out of his own amalgam of resins 
and metals. He has his studio on the way to the Brewery and Two Goats Deli 
(covered earlier in the Gordon Wright food section) in Bethesda. Everything is 
in walking distance here.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ecbf9093a8cd687c4d892121aaaf18c63966bf0%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ecbf9093a8cd687c4d892121aaaf18c63966bf0%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The cement friezes of the Camel Yard in Nieu Bethesda 
In Graaff-Reinet, the Rupert family have several galleries and their 
collections are always worth seeing. The Drosty Hotel has an art gallery next 
to the wine shop, but the Ruperts’ main displays are at theHester Rupert Art 
Museum <http://www.rupertartmuseum.co.za/>, which holds more than 100 works by 
famous South African artists - Maud Sumner, Maggie Laubser, Irma Stern, 
Gregoire Boonzaier – in a beautifulDutch Reformed Mission Church 
<http://www.sahistory.org.za/places/graaf-reinet>, dating from 1821, the fifth 
oldest church building in South Africa.

Another town I really recommend for anyone interested in art is Prince Albert 
<http://www.princealbert.org.za/home/>. The town just flows with creativity, 
from galleries and photography to weaving and food. Using a great little guide 
called the Prince Albert Arts and Design Map (available from the Tourism 
Association office in Church Street), you can visit thePrince Albert Gallery 
<https://www.facebook.com/princealbertgallery/> (regular exhibitions by artists 
working in many disciplines), an evening one-man show calledArt After Dark 
<http://www.sa-venues.com/things-to-do/westerncape/art-after-dark-show-tour/>, 
the Watershed (a series of art showrooms),Karoo Looms 
<http://www.karooweavery.co.za/> and Striking Metal 
<https://www.facebook.com/strikingmetal/>, where you can watch a blacksmith at 
work. And I love those wire and bead angels made by the Vondeling women’s 
co-operative nearWillowmore 
<http://www.sa-venues.com/attractionsec/willowmore.php>. What a winning 
concept. They hit it so right.

The Karoo outdoors


By Alan Hobson, fly-fisherman and guide
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dfdbc1287275875b16c8cc488cc540fbce0c588%2F0_272_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dfdbc1287275875b16c8cc488cc540fbce0c588%2F0_272_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Alan Hobson casts out in the Little Fish river near Cradock 
Over the years, I’ve taken many visitors out along the river courses and dams 
up in the mountains of the Karoo. Invariably, the first question they’ll ask me 
is: “Can I get mobile reception here?” When they realise they’re totally 
disconnected from their devices, their faces register shock. And then they 
begin to focus on their immediate surrounds - the landscape, the moment of 
being out in a sweeping jumble of big mountains, thick bush, vast valleys and 
along the Little Fish river where, hopefully, they will catch a trout or a 
yellowfish. And that’s when the magic happens, the stress falls away and the 
outdoor learning begins.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3df63007cb6bdcbe57b500baab40763d764e87c1%2F0_116_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3df63007cb6bdcbe57b500baab40763d764e87c1%2F0_116_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Springbuck on the plateau at the Mountain Zebra national park outside Cradock 
If you have a good guide, a walk through the Karoo is an incredible 
experience. One sight of a fossil embedded in a riverbank takes you back 
hundreds of millions of years. The next moment you’re watching a life or death 
struggle between an ant lion and its prey. Or, as you prepare to fish at the 
riverside, you focus on the minute movements of a dragonfly over the water.

There’s no quick-fix, fast-food way of thinking out here. You come with an 
enquiring mind, you come low-tech and you come prepared to experience and learn 
about whatever you encounter. We have a great and growing network of farmstays 
likeGlen Avon <http://www.glenavonfarm.co.za/>, Somerset East; Wellwood 
<http://www.graaffreinet.co.za/listing/wellwood_guest_cottage>, Graaf-Reinet; 
Doornberg <https://www.facebook.com/doornbergfarm/> and Ganora 
<http://www.ganora.co.za/>, Nieu Bethesda; Hillston 
<http://www.hillstonfarm.co.za/> and Melsetter 
<http://karoospace.co.za/advert/mount-melsetter-karoo-house-hunt-middelburg/>, 
Middelburg; orLowlands 
<http://karoospace.co.za/advert/lowlands-country-house-fish-river/>, near 
Cradock. Karoo farmstays are authentic, fun to visit and inexpensive. Add to 
that our national parks: Cradock’sMountain Zebra national park 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/mountain_zebra/>, Graaff-Reinet’s Camdeboo 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/camdeboo/>, Beaufort West’s Karoo 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/karoo/>, Kimberley’s Mokala 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/mokala/>, the Namaqua 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/namaqua/> on the north-western coastline, and 
theTankwa Karoo <https://www.sanparks.org/parks/tankwa/>. All are wonderful 
places to begin your relationship with the Karoo outdoors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a4addd6e45d6659f63c864c1982c9b54fb60865%2F0_462_2798_1680%2F2798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a4addd6e45d6659f63c864c1982c9b54fb60865%2F0_462_2798_1680%2F2798.jpg>
 Mountain biking is a popular pursuit in the Karoo. Pictured is the Swaershoek 
Challenge near Cradock 
You might think there’s nothing to do at night out here. You would be wrong. 
Just sit around the braai fire, listen to the stories. Ask a farmer or your 
guide to take you on a slow drive through a Karoo landscape on a moonlit night. 
You will be amazed at the wealth of creatures that emerge: hedgehogs, 
porcupine, aardvark, wild cats.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0670fb693cdf9f238a1e0c910500f42e048483f%2F0_112_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0670fb693cdf9f238a1e0c910500f42e048483f%2F0_112_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Traffic calming … the Karoo is full of wildlife 
Then go quiet and try to pick out the yelp of the jackal out there in the 
dark, or the sound of the nightjar calling. Before you go to sleep, move away 
from the firelight, get comfortable in your sleeping bag and look up at the 
stars. You’ve never seen them so close, and in such multitudes.

Readers’ tips and Instagram shots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/17/instagram-snapshots-the-karoo-through-the-eyes-of-locals>

Near Sutherland

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4c7dcf594769832d7e0e81fc80d596043bada50%2F0_92_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-20%23img-20&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4c7dcf594769832d7e0e81fc80d596043bada50%2F0_92_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: sartjie/Guardian Witness/Sartjie 
Sutherland, a couple of hours’ drive east of Tankwa Karoo national park, sits 
on top of a plateau in a part of the Karoo known commonly as the Moordenaars 
Karoo (Killers Karoo), probably because it is so sparsely populated and the 
landscape so unforgivingly dry. But its clear air makes for cool summers and 
freezing winters (it sometimes snows in Sutherland), and for an ideal place in 
which to locate one ofSouth Africa’s most important astronomical observatories 
<http://www.salt.ac.za/>. The town itself – like so many Karoo dorpies 
(villages) – is small and pretty, and the observatory is really worth a visit, 
but hiking in this incredible landscape is an extraordinary experience.
sartjie

Heartland

 Photograph: Guardian Witness/jankaap 
Life in the Karoo isn’t easy, but those who live there and work the land are 
surrounded by a starkly beautiful landscape.
jankaap

Karoo night drive wildlife

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d45588733ddb094f14784d97665213bc321d5fb%2F0_0_2108_1266%2F2108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-21%23img-21&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d45588733ddb094f14784d97665213bc321d5fb%2F0_0_2108_1266%2F2108.jpg>
 Dusk silhouettes … a brace of black wildebeest in the Camdeboo national park 
outside Graaff-Reinet. Photograph: Chris Marais 
Take time to travel on a dirt road at night in the Karoo because besides the 
star-studded sky you will see an amazing array of nocturnal animals. We were so 
lucky to see a huge shooting star on our trip on a dirt road outside the Karoo 
town of Richmond (75 miles west of Middelburg). We also saw two different types 
of hares including the elusive riverine rabbit, an owl, a fox, a jackal, a 
duiker and a pair of equally elusive aardwolf. It was amazing to see how alive 
this piece of dry land became at night.
Donsievanwyk

Booktown festival, Richmond
The little town of Richmond boast three excellent secondhand bookstores 
<https://antiquarianauctions.com/sellers/richmond-books-and-prints>, Classic 
Books <http://www.richmondnc.co.za/classicbooks.html>, Richmond Books and 
Prints and The Book Orphanage all situated in in beautiful Victorian houses in 
Loop street. The town also hosts the annual Richmond Book Festival where 
writers and poets from all over the world gather to celebrate literature.
Donsievanwyk

Red Stone Hills
Rent a cottage at this amazing farm, set in some surprising geological 
formations that will change the way you think about the Karoo. We stayed here 
for just one night and are longing to return. The stars, the birds, the 
stillness make this the heart of the Karoo for us. Near Oudtshoorn, Western 
Cape, itself full of surprises, and easy to get to with a car, but you’ll feel 
like you’re on a different, magical planet.
Doubles from around £30, redstone.co.za <http://www.redstone.co.za/>
esdee

The Swartberg mountains

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F150d27ab6dba3e6f6a024b4fc5a185c9d4839352%2F0_21_3607_2165%2F3607.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20guide%20to%20the%20Karoo%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Falternative-city-guide-the-karoo-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-22%23img-22&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F150d27ab6dba3e6f6a024b4fc5a185c9d4839352%2F0_21_3607_2165%2F3607.jpg>
 A waterfall on the Meiringspoort pass, Oudtshoorn. Photograph: Alamy 
A friend drove us out to his favourite local spot at sunset. We all live in 
Prince Albert, which is on the very edge of the Swartberg, which is a 
micro-biosphere with numbers of unique plants and a huge range of fauna. 
Between Prince Albert and Oudtshoorn lie two routes – the pass over the 
mountains, and the Meiringspoort pass which follows the winding path of the 
river between spectacular, lichen covered red mountains, and past a waterfall 
which fills the lake below, believed for many years to be the home of a 
mermaid. On the way, one may see baboons, mongoose, leopard tortoises, small 
gazelles and, between dusk and early morning, the beautiful kudu antelope.
MrsSpinster
 