
A headline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/what-has-the-un-achieved-united-nations>
 with “UN” and “half a trillion dollars” is bound to trigger familiar 
criticisms: a bloated bureaucracy with fat-cat staff that hasn’t achieved its 
aims – after all, war and poverty still exist, right?

I understand this reaction. For most of us, $500bn (£325bn) is a sum beyond 
comprehension. Surely even world peace can be bought for that amount.

But it’s not very much when you compare it to the five trillion dollars spent 
annually on fossil fuel subsidies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/18/fossil-fuel-companies-getting-10m-a-minute-in-subsidies-says-imf>
 (which are buying inaction on climate change) or global military spending of 
$1.8tn per year. The UN is estimated to have cost $0.5tn over 70 years, an 
average of just over $7bn a year. Brits spend more on takeaways.

Is there waste within the UN system? Of course. Is there an organisation of 
85,000 staff in more than 190 countries without? And yes, some UN staffers make 
good money (the secretary general has the same salary as David Cameron). Others 
work in warzones for$8,457 
<http://www.un.org/Depts/OHRM/salaries_allowances/salaries/syria.htm> a year.

The UN is a lifeline: for the 90 million people it feeds each year, and for the
thousands who took refuge 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=51740#.VfJ6is5cOkI> last month in 
its peacekeeping compound fleeing violence in Central African Republic. And it 
benefits us all in countless seen and unseen ways, from air safety regulations 
to the coordination of satellites. Those of us who live in relative comfort 
only notice its value when the system breaks down, as is happening now, with
funding shortfalls forcing UN agencies to cut back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/06/refugee-crisis-un-agencies-broke-failing>
 services to refugees.

While there have been many occasions on which it has been too timid or slow to 
respond, for the most part it is not the UN but our governments that fail us. 
It is they who set the UN’s agenda and budget.

In 1945, the UN’s founders aspired to build a better world. Their decision was 
a pragmatic one, reached by weighing the downsides of compromise with the 
devastation of war.

Today, in our globalised world of nuclear weapons and climate change, the 
consequences of armed conflict and non-cooperation are more serious. But the 
far-sighted leadership of 1945 is lacking. The public spirit of that era – when 
people saw benefit in agreeing to have a little less so that everyone could 
have more in the future – I’d like to think it still exists, even if it takes
heartbreaking pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/07/guardian-decision-to-publish-shocking-photos-of-aylan-kurdi>
 of a little boy for it to resurface.

Having experienced its shortcomings, UN officials are often the first to 
criticise it. Many, particularly those inagencies that need to beg 
<http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c119.html> for money each year, are 
reluctant to say that instead of cost savings, many UN programmes need more 
money and that these funds should be regular, not voluntary, contributions. But 
someone needs to say it.

When I read “half a trillion over 70 years”, my reaction was: so what? The UN 
could have spent 10 times that amount and still be value for money. We cannot 
put a price on the lives it has saved or improved immeasurably, including our 
own.

70 years of the UN: $500bn. Saving millions of lives, helping countries gain 
independence, negotiating peace deals, vaccinating 58% of the world’s children, 
eradicating smallpox, closing the ozone hole, creating the international human 
rights system, and so on, and so on: priceless.
 