
The view is breathtaking. Sheer cliff faces extend beneath the gondola as it 
glides from theStyrian town of Ramsau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2008/oct/19/travelawards2008-wintersports> 
to the southern part of the Dachstein Massif, home to three glaciers.

Upon arrival, visitors to the mountain are greeted by a green model dinosaur. 
The figure is meant to amuse children, but it has taken on a symbolic role too: 
glaciers belong to a dying breed. All three of the Dachstein’s glaciers – the 
Gosau, theHallstätter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/08/ghost-cities-of-china-wade-shepard-review-planning>
 and the Schladminger – have shrunk this year.


The southern gondola lift first opened up the Dachstein in 1969. “Any climate 
change deniers should pay us a visit,” said Karl Höflehner, technical manager 
at Planai-Hochwurzen, the company operating the lift.

The glacier melt is in full flow under the glare of the mid-summer sun. 
Streams of clear water cut through the ice, thawing crystals crunch underfoot 
with every step. It is a natural cycle, but problems occur when summertime 
losses cannot be replenished in the winter. This is what is now happening to 
the glaciers of the Dachstein Massif. Strategic parts have been covered with 
white fleecing to slow down further melting. Höflehner believes the glaciers 
will lose half a metre in height this year.

The Austrian Green party drew attention to the situation on the Dachstein 
Massif by organising a “no planet B” event. “With December’s UN climate talks 
[in Paris] now fast approaching,Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> shouldn’t come to Paris with 
nothing to offer. Instead we should aim to serve as a model for climate 
protection,” said Eva Glawischnig, the Greens’ federal spokesperson.

“Glaciers are the thermometers of our planet,” said Rudi Anschober, regional 
environment secretary. He calls for a “globally binding” deal in Paris.

In the state of Upper Austria, scientists have been measuring the fluctuations 
in the size of the Hallstätter glacier since 2006. The research is funded by 
the state government and Energie AG, an infrastructure group, and is carried 
out by the Institute for Interdisciplinary Mountain Research (IGF), part of the 
Austrian Academy of Sciences, in conjunction with Blue Sky Wetteranalysen, a 
weather forecaster. Their research shows a downward trend in glacier mass, but 
the weather dictates annual ice losses. The 2008-2009 cycle was particularly 
dramatic, with the glacier losing 103 centimetres in height.

Michael Zemp 
<http://www.geo.uzh.ch/en/units/physical-geography-glaciology-and-geomorphodynamics/about-us/staff/michael-zemp>
 is a glacier scientist at the University of Zürich who sees the retreat of 
glacier termini – a glacier’s bottom-most tip – as a “delayed and strong 
indicator” of climate change. He discusses the case of theAletsch glacier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2008/mar/17/glaciers.climatechange>
, the largest and longest glacier in the Alps. It takes this glacier 50 years 
to respond to climatic shifts. In the unlikely event that climate change comes 
to an immediate halt tomorrow, the Aletsch would still shrink by two to three 
kilometres in response to today’s warmer climate.

Speed of glacier retreat worldwide 'historically unprecedented', says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/04/speed-glacier-retreat-worldwide-historically-unprecedented-climate-change>
“The glaciers currently under observation are thinning out by between 50 
centimetres to a full metre each year. That’s two to three times more than the 
20th century average,” Zemp observes. The glaciers on the Dachstein correspond 
to this global trend.

The Alps are, Zemp claims, the worst hit mountains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/31/alps-skiing-climate-change>
. And in Austria the situation is more dramatic than in Switzerland because the 
mountains are lower. “Glaciers are the best natural indicators of climate 
change,” the geologist says. Forecasts predict that 90% of the ice will have 
disappeared by the end of the century. “In Austria this will come sooner.”

Worldwide, only 37 glaciers have been continuously observed and documented by 
scientists for more than 30 years, Zemp claims. He is the director of theWorld 
Glacier Monitoring Service <http://wgms.ch/>, which recently published an 
alarming study showing that glaciers are rapidly receding worldwide. And the 
trend has accelerated since the beginning of the 21st century.

Data from 2,300 glaciers in 36 countries were used for the study. Some of the 
47,000 data points go back to the 16th century. Even so, finding enough 
evidence is still tricky, Zemp told Der Standard. Many of the world’s 200,000 
glaciers simply have no data. Drawings, watercolours, oil paintings, even 
documents from legal disputes serve as important historical records.

Poles known as ablation stakes are used in glaciology to bore deep into the 
ice at key points on the glacier. When scientists later return to the 
instruments, they can identify changes in the glacier’s height. New 
technologies, however, mean laser scans can be taken of the glacier from an 
aeroplane. A specialised laser pointer outside the aeroplane is directed at the 
glacier and measures the time it takes for the light to be reflected back from 
the surface. “Using millions of light points we can assemble a 3D picture of 
the surface,” Zemp says. This method has opened up swathes ofSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland> and Austria to researchers.

The glaciologist criticises the way research grants are given out. Monitoring 
– the constant observation of a phenomenon – is not regarded as innovative, 
which is why there is no money for glacier research. International data sharing 
and networking has been done on a voluntary basis. It means there is always 
some uncertainty about the availability and quality of the data.

A glimmer of hope comes from the growth of glacial ice in other regions in the 
world. The termini of Norway’s glaciers are one example. In the 1990s, they 
grew by 100 metres at the coast. But, for Zemp, this was only a short-term 
phenomenon. “There was an increase in winter snow. The growth had already 
halted by the year 2000.”

Translation: Simon Pickstone/VoxEurop <http://www.voxeurop.eu/en> 
 