
If this year’s US presidential election has taught us anything, it is that 
celebrity or notoriety can be translated into electoral success. But it’s hard 
to see how that can apply to the imploding anti-star of American politics: 
Anthony Weiner,immortalised in the year’s most horribly watchable documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/weiner-review-anthony-new-york-mayor-documentary>
, by Josh Kriegman and Elyse Steinberg.

Weiner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/weiner> was a talented Democratic 
politician who appeared to have overcome sex scandals from his time in Congress 
and was running for New York mayor. He was clearly a smart, vigorous, committed 
guy. But then he has to quit – a catastrophe which the film captures in real 
time – when it becomes clear he has not kicked his habit of texting and 
tweeting lewd photos of himself to women.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-no-9-weiner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff42734c7265dc17c4f5ff8d287effcb83f4b89e%2F0_0_5196_3464%2F5196.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20films%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3A%20No%209%20Weiner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-no-9-weiner%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20films%20of%202016%20in%20the%20UK%3A%20No%209%20Weiner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-no-9-weiner%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff42734c7265dc17c4f5ff8d287effcb83f4b89e%2F0_0_5196_3464%2F5196.jpg>
 Anthony Weiner, campaigning in 2013 to be NYC mayor, is the subject of a 
captivating documentary. Photograph: Richard Levine/Corbis via Getty Images 
Weiner reviewed and cinemagoers ejected from Ab Fab 'for laughing' – the 
Dailies film podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/audio/2016/jul/06/weiner-reviewed-ab-fab-dailies-film-podcast>
To make things more embarrassing, Weiner was married to Huma Abedin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/huma-abedin-hillary-clinton-anthony-weiner-emails>
, the elegant and cerebral aide to Hillary Clinton. This documentary made 
Weiner a minor legend, and when Donald Trump’s campaign did its best to 
publicise Clinton’s emails part of the purpose was plainly to bring Weiner and 
his errant weiner into the public domain, however indirectly. Did Huma figure 
that she could, like Hillary, stand by her man? At any rate,she left him after 
this film was released 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
.

Weiner the documentary is a classic study of conceit and self-delusion, of a 
man with an almost fanatical reluctance to admit that something is wrong. And 
poor Weiner the man is really a classic case of sex addiction, perhaps the most 
obvious example ever to have exposed himself, as it were, for the movie camera.

 * The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-full-list> 