
The Act of Killing <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SD5oMxbMcHM> won the 
documentary prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/16/baftas-2014-documentary-act-of-killing>
 at the Baftas last week and is the favourite to win the much-coveted Oscar. I 
watch many documentaries on behalf of the BBC each year and I go to festivals. 
I'm a doc obsessive. By my own, not quite reliable reckoning, I've been asked 
by fans to showThe Act of Killing on the BBC at least five times. I've never 
encountered a film greeted by such extreme responses – both those who say it is 
among the best films and those who tell me how much they hate it. Much about 
the film puzzles me. I am still surprised by the fact thatso many critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/20/10-best-films-2013-the-act-of-killing>
 listed it among their favourite films of last year.

For those who haven't seen the film, it investigates the circumstances in 
which half-a-million Indonesian leftists were murdered in the 1960s, at the 
instigation of a government that is still in power. You might think this is a 
recondite subject, worthy of a late-night screening for insomniacs or atrocity 
buffs on BBC4, but, no, the film-makerJoshua Oppenheimer 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/envelope/moviesnow/la-et-mn-joshua-oppenheimer-act-of-killing-20140218,0,6446847.story#axzz2tsa0DbNo>
 has made the subject viewable by enlisting the participation of some of the 
murderers. He spent some years hanging out with them, to his credit luring them 
into confessions. But he also, more dubiously, enlisted their help in restaging 
their killings. Although one of them, the grandfatherly Anwar, shows mild 
symptoms of distress towards the end of the film, they live in a state of 
impunity and it is thus, coddled and celebrated in their old age, that we 
revisit them.

So let me be as upfront as I can. I dislike the aesthetic or moral premise of 
The Act of Killing. I find myself deeply opposed to the film. Getting killers 
to script and restage their murders for the benefit of a cinema or television 
audience seems a bad idea for a number of reasons. I find the scenes where the 
killers are encouraged to retell their exploits, often with lip-smacking 
expressions of satisfaction, upsetting not because they reveal so much, as many 
allege, but because they tell us so little of importance. Of course murderers, 
flattered in their impunity, will behave vilely. Of course they will reliably 
supply enlightened folk with a degraded vision of humanity. But, sorry, I don't 
feel we want to be doing this. It feels wrong and it certainly looks wrong to 
me. Something has gone missing here. How badly do we want to hear from these 
people, after all? Wouldn't it be better if we were told something about the 
individuals whose lives they took?

I'd feel the same if film-makers had gone to rural Argentina in the 1950s, 
rounding up a bunch of ageing Nazis and getting them to make a film entitled 
"We Love Killing Jews". Think of other half-covered-up atrocities – in Bosnia, 
Rwanda, South Africa, Israel, any place you like with secrets – and imagine 
similar films had been made. Consider your response – and now consider whether 
such goings-on inIndonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> are 
not acceptable merely because the place is so far away, and so little known or 
talked about that the cruelty of such an act can pass uncriticised.

The film does not in any recognisable sense enhance our knowledge of the 1960s 
Indonesian killings, and its real merits – the curiosity when it comes to 
uncovering the Indonesian cult of anticommunism capable of masking atrocity, 
and the good and shocking scenes with characters from the Indonesian elite, 
still whitewashing the past – are obscured by tasteless devices. At the risk of 
being labelled a contemporary prude or dismissed as a stuffy upholder of 
middle-class taste, I feel that no one should be asked to sit through repeated 
demonstrations of the art of garrotting. Instead of an investigation, or indeed 
a genuine recreation, we've ended somewhere else – in a high-minded snuff movie.

What I like most about documentary film is that anything can be made to work, 
given a chance. You can mix up fact and fiction, past and present. You can add 
to cold objectivity a degree of empathy. You will, of course, lie to reluctant 
or recalcitrant participants, in particular when they wish not to divulge 
important pieces of information. And trickery has its place, too. But 
documentary films have emerged from the not inconsiderable belief that it's 
good to be literal as well as truthful. In a makeshift, fallible way, they tell 
us what the world is really like. Documentaries are the art of the journeyman. 
They can be undone by too much ambition. Too much ingenious construction and 
they cease to represent the world, becoming reflected images of their own 
excessively stated pretensions.

In his bizarrely eulogistic piece defending The Act of Killing 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/history/2013/07/the_act_of_killing_essay_how_indonesia_s_mass_killings_could_have_slowed.html>
 (of which he is an executive producer), Errol Morris, the documentary maker, 
compares the film to Hamlet's inspired use of theatre to reveal dirty deeds at 
the court of Denmark. But Hamlet doesn't really believe that theatrical 
gestures can stand in for reality. Nor, we must assume, did his creator. A more 
apt analogy than Morris's might come from Shakespeare's darkest play,Macbeth. 
What would we think if Macbeth and his scheming wife were written out of the 
action, replaced by those low-level thugs paid to do bad business on their 
behalf? We might conclude that putting them centre stage, in the style ofThe 
Act of Killing, was indeed perverse and we'd be right.

There are still half-forgotten, heavily whitewashed atrocities from the last 
century, such as theBengali famine  
<http://www.ibtimes.com/bengal-famine-1943-man-made-holocaust-1100525>allowed 
to occur during the second world war through the culpably racist inattention of 
British officials; the never wholly cleared-up question ofFranco's mass killings
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_Terror_(Spain)>; or the death of so many 
millions in the 1950s as a consequence ofMao's catastrophic utopianism 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Leap_Forward>. Those wondering how to 
record such events will no doubt watchThe Act of Killing, but I hope they will 
also look at less hyped, more modestly conceived depictions of mass murder. In
Enemies of the People 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/dec/26/enemies-of-the-people-review> 
(2010), the Cambodian journalist Thet Sambath goes after the murderers of the 
Khmer Rouge. He finds Pol Pot's sidekick, but it is the earnest, touching quest 
of Sambath himself that lingers in the mind, rather than the empty encounters 
with evil-doers. Atrocity is both banal and ultimately impossible to comprehend.

Writing in 1944, Arthur Koestler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthur-koestler> was among the first to gain 
knowledge of the slaughter of eastern European Jews and he estimated that the 
effect of such revelations was strictly limited, lasting only minutes or days 
and swiftly overcome by indifference. Koestler suggested that there was only 
one way we could respond to the double atrocity of mass murder and contemporary 
indifference and that was by screaming.

I'm grateful to The Act of Killing not because it's a good film, or because it 
deserves to win its Oscar (I don't think it does), but because it reminds me of 
the truth of Koestler's observation. What's not to scream about?

Nick Fraser is editor of the BBC's Storyville 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006mfx6> documentary series
 