
Environmentalists and indigenous reindeer herders are calling on the Queen, Sir
David Attenborough <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough>
 and Stephen Fry to disassociate themselves from a charity contracted to help a 
mining operation in a national park in Finland.

Fauna and Flora International (FFI), whose patron is the Queen, has been hired 
by the British-listed mining companyAnglo American 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-american> to assess the 
environmental value of Viiankiaapa, a stunning 65 sq km (25 sq mile) habitat 
for 21 endangered bird species in the Arctic circle.

The research includes an assessment of whether equivalent land could be 
offered as “compensation” for wetlands damaged by the extraction of massive 
deposits of platinum, nickel, copper and gold.

But Jukka Kaaretkoski, a reindeer herder of Sami ancestry from nearby Kersilö, 
told the Guardian that the drilling would take a heavy environmental toll and 
be a “terminal” blow for local herders whose animals graze there.

“Mines cause traffic, noise, grit, pollution and contamination of water 
supplies,” he said. “Many young reindeer herders are in danger of losing their 
future livelihoods because of it. We cannot even plan for the future because of 
the fear and insecurity. ”

Riikka Karppinen, a Green party councillor in the local Sodankylä 
municipality, added: “I think this is colonialism, because the big mining 
company has come here from another country and we are in too weak a position to 
protect our homeland.”

About 90 bird species live in Viiankiaapa – including pygmy owls to 
broad-billed sandpipers – many nesting amid the bogs and moors that host a 
variety of endangered plant species.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-queen-and-david-attenborough-urged-to-cut-ties-with-charity-linked-to-finland-mining-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc823ffd93d1da15c4175e7ab3e4e4dc5c9542cf4%2F0_0_2231_3347%2F2231.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Queen%20and%20David%20Attenborough%20urged%20to%20cut%20ties%20with%20charity%20linked%20to%20Finland%20mining%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-queen-and-david-attenborough-urged-to-cut-ties-with-charity-linked-to-finland-mining-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Queen%20and%20David%20Attenborough%20urged%20to%20cut%20ties%20with%20charity%20linked%20to%20Finland%20mining%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-queen-and-david-attenborough-urged-to-cut-ties-with-charity-linked-to-finland-mining-plans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc823ffd93d1da15c4175e7ab3e4e4dc5c9542cf4%2F0_0_2231_3347%2F2231.jpg>
 The ruff is among some 90 bird species living in Viiankiaapa, many of which 
nest amid the bogs and moors that host a variety of endangered plant species. 
Photograph: Timo Helle 
But tailings – toxic waste from ore extraction – from other mining operations 
have been seeping into lakes and rivers around the town of Sodankylä, according 
toDer Spiegel 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/business/mining-boom-underway-in-finland-in-the-search-for-mineral-deposits-a-864561.html>
.

Anglo American has already drilled 180 holes in the territory – more than half 
within a designated conservation area – although this work has been paused 
pending a ruling by the Finnish supreme court on an environmental appeal, now 
expected this autumn.

“I’d like to ask the Queen and those celebrities [endorsing FFI] whether they 
truly know what they are supporting,” Kaaretkoski said. “They may think they 
are helping nature, or people like us to protect our land, but this work is 
helping to destroy these things. We would like them to disassociate themselves 
from it.”

 Neither Fry nor Attenborough, vice-presidents of the charity, were available 
to respond, while Buckingham palace declined to comment, referring enquiries to 
FFI.

Pippa Howard, FFI’s director of business and biodiversity, said: “We are 
opposed to extraction in protected areas and do not promote it, but where such 
activities are taking place with the support of host governments, one makes 
sure that best environmental practice is being applied.”

FFI believes that Anglo American is committed to best environmental practice 
but conceded that there was “a reputational risk” involved in the partnership. 
In 2013,Anglo American pulled out of the controversial Pebble project in Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/16/anglo-american-alaska-gold-mines>
, shortly after FFI ended its involvement.

Big companies such as Anglo have often been stalled by environmental 
complaints, only to be replaced by smaller, less scrupulous competitors, she 
added.

Joanna Kuntonen-van’t Riet, Anglo American’s environmental lead in Finland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/finland>, backed this up. “Once a project 
like this has been found which is rich [in mineral deposits], the reality is 
that if we walked away, someone else is 110% sure to come and take our place,” 
she said.
Viiankiaapa in Finland 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/aug/2016-08-15T13:22:18.html> 
FFI is open about  
<http://www.fauna-flora.org/initiatives/anglo-american-partnership/>its 
<http://www.fauna-flora.org/initiatives/anglo-american-partnership/> partnershi 
<http://www.fauna-flora.org/initiatives/anglo-american-partnership/>p with the 
firm <http://www.fauna-flora.org/initiatives/anglo-american-partnership/> and 
says that Anglo American has also financially supported its livelihoods and 
governance programme, as well as other more strategic projects.

Howard did not know how much this support was worth but “it is not millions, 
not even hundreds of thousands for sure,” she said.

FFI’s study for Anglo American was contracted at commercial rates, and aims 
first to establish the nature and character of ecological and wildlife value on 
the site.

“It will also see whether or not there are areas as important or equivalent in 
landscape which may benefit from restoration or protection in some form through 
the contribution of the company in the longer term,” Howard said.

In environmental circles this is called “biodiversity offsetting”, the 
conservation or restoration of a site of equivalent natural value to one which 
been destroyed.

It is required under EU law but critics argue 
<http://naturenotforsale.org/letter2eu/> that nature cannot be commodified in 
this way and that, in practice, such schemes often pave the way for 
environmentally damaging projects.

Hannah Aho, a conservation expert for the Finnish Association for Nature 
Conservation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation>, said that 
in Lapland the argument was disputed: “Viiankiaapa is not only a unique area in 
Finland, but in Europe. A mine would mean losing it altogether. Compensation is 
simply not possible in areas of such high value for biodiversity. It is also 
hypothetical, because other areas as large as Viiankiaapa no longer exist.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-queen-and-david-attenborough-urged-to-cut-ties-with-charity-linked-to-finland-mining-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2685a8b781e474387180eb8650e3b745ebe50fef%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Queen%20and%20David%20Attenborough%20urged%20to%20cut%20ties%20with%20charity%20linked%20to%20Finland%20mining%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-queen-and-david-attenborough-urged-to-cut-ties-with-charity-linked-to-finland-mining-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Queen%20and%20David%20Attenborough%20urged%20to%20cut%20ties%20with%20charity%20linked%20to%20Finland%20mining%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fthe-queen-and-david-attenborough-urged-to-cut-ties-with-charity-linked-to-finland-mining-plans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2685a8b781e474387180eb8650e3b745ebe50fef%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Drilling would take a heavy environmental toll, reindeer herders say. 
Photograph: Timo Helle 
As the peatlands of Sompio were submerged beneath the Lokka reservoir in the 
1960s, other areas would have to be restored to resemble Viiankiaapa, she said.

Anglo American says that it will be at least 10 years before any mine is 
opened there. Company assessments showed that its exploration work so far has 
caused “no significant impacts” on the site, according to Kuntonen-van’t Riet.

 She said: “If at the end of day, our technical studies show that the 
[protected] area is irreplaceable and we will impact on it in such a way that 
we can’t compensate, Finnish legislation won’t allow it to take place, our 
principles won’t allow it and EU law won’t allow it.”

In the autumn, the firm plans to establish a technical committee to consult 
widely on the methodology for establishing whether the site is irreplaceable. 
“But at the moment, they [FFI] haven’t raised any red flags saying there is a 
fatal flaw and it can’t be done,” Kuntonen-van’t Riet said.

“They are free to walk away, but we haven’t got to that stage yet and 
hopefully we won’t.”
 