
In 2011, after a long search for an agent, Andy Weir 
<http://www.andyweirauthor.com/> gave up on big publishing. He had a small and 
dedicated following as a longtime writer and webcomics artist. So he just 
posted a book he’d been writing, calledThe Martian 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18007564-the-martian>, to his personal 
website. His readers wanted to be able to read it on their e-readers, so then 
he added it to Amazon.

The next thing he knew, the thing was climbing the charts. And now, his book 
is the basis of an Oscar-nominated film with Matt Damon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/01/the-martian-review-matt-damon-ridley-scott>
. Weir, in short, is living the dream of many self-published authors.

He acknowledges that his path was unusual, of course. “Everything went 
backwards from the normal way books get made,” Weir told the Guardian. “I 
didn’t think anyone would be interested in giving me a print deal. Obviously I 
misjudged that. Heh.”

In fact, one of the strangest items in the Martian origin story is who first 
approached Weir for a proper deal. It wasn’t print publishers or film 
producers. It was a small Canadian audiobook company calledPodium Publishing 
<http://podiumpublishing.com/podium-residual-faq>. Run by a pair of friends, 
James Tonn and Greg Lawrence, the company produces what it calls “award-winning 
quality” audiobooks “for indie-minded” authors.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-martian-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443692316933%2FKP_505265_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Martian%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-martian-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Martian%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Fthe-martian-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F1%2F1443692316933%2FKP_505265_crop_640x360.jpg>
Tonn and Lawrence had once hoped to run a music label together, but the advent 
of Napster and iTunes quashed that dream. They were both attracted to artists 
who wanted to work outside of the mainstream channels to success – and they 
wanted to run something that served that community.

When, as an audio engineer, Lawrence began working in audiobooks, the fit 
seemed natural. “Audiobooks were an auxiliary business,” Lawrence told the 
Guardian.

“They were tacked on to the end of a publishing deal. Publishers would really 
only do an audiobook if [the print book] was so big that they were looking for 
ways to make money.” Lawrence and Tonn thought they could change that, by 
working with the sort of writer who was interested in publishing their 
audiobook independently.

Lawrence was the one who actually found Weir’s book, on Amazon. He is a big 
science fiction fan and says he was attracted to the story, of course, but also 
simply felt that the way the book was written helped its audiobook prospects. 
The book is structured such that the narrator, Mark Watney, is recording logs 
of his time on Mars. “That’s a dream for audio,” Lawrence said on the phone.

The company initially bought both print and audio rights, although they 
promised Weir they’d return the print rights if he got a deal with a big 
publisher. (They kept that promise.) They enlistedRC Bray 
<http://www.rcbray.com/>, a popular audiobook narrator, to record it. It was 
the first fiction project they chose. The product became a top-seller onAudible 
<http://www.audible.com/t1/30trial_at?source_code=GO1GBSH060214909Y&mkwid=s4m8yGBxL_dc&pcrid=87217045929&pmt=e&pkw=audible&gclid=CjwKEAiA8qG1BRDz0tmK0pufw3QSJACfn6olBf82k7ePG4cgZu_o53juN79_FJrM77V2rZ29NmOQnhoC_mbw_wcB>
, and promptly began winning industry awards, including a2015 Audie 
<http://www.booklistreader.com/2015/05/29/book-awards/2015-audie-award-winners-announced/>
. While no one releases audiobook sales figures, some measure of the 
audiobook’s popularity might be gauged by the fact that it now enjoys over 
100,000 reviews on Amazon. “A great book,” reads one. “Out of hundreds of books 
in my library this is one of the best.”

 Part of The Martian’s success as an audiobook is undoubtedly timing. 
Originally conceived as a narrow industry serving the blind, the audiobook 
business has exploded in the past few years. In 2015, the Audio Producers 
Association reported that more than 25,000 audiobooks were published in 2014, 
compared with about 6,700 in 2010. Podium itself plans to double its production 
of audiobooks – it has done about 200 so far – within the next year.

 Some of the increased interest is undoubtedly about the ease of buying and 
listening to audiobooks in the age of easily accessible digital audio. But, 
like podcast producers, audiobook producers also trace some of the success of 
their products to the way they can be listened to while engaged in some other 
activity – like cleaning the house, or knitting, or driving home from work. 
“It’s not so much what you’re doing, but that you’re trying to work reading 
into your life, whatever you’re doing,” Tonn said.

 It remains to be seen whether “independent” audiobooks can follow The 
Martian’s path. Self-publishing has been a dubious challenge to traditional 
publishers, at best. And although the Amazon book sales rankings often see 
self-published books cracking the bestseller lists, audiobooks from the 
self-published don’t usually seem to crack theAudible Top 10 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/wireStory/top-10-audiobooks-audible-36525967>
.

But Lawrence sees a real future for such writers. Podium doesn’t contract with 
large publishers to produce audiobooks; it will remain strictly indie for now. 
They say they work best with authors like Weir. “He had to have his hopes and 
his dreams dashed against the rocks,” Lawrence said. “He spent a lot of time 
trying to get an agent, and he just couldn’t do that. That experience made him 
think differently about writing, and about getting his work out to people.”

As for Weir, when asked if he was surprised by the way things turned out, he 
said he was. “Yes I was. But it worked out really well. The audiobook proceeds 
have been far more than I ever anticipated.”
 