
Zambia is in the middle of a massive power crisis that began in June and has 
been getting steadily worse. In Lusaka, where I live, the situation is becoming 
desperate due to eight-hour blackouts every day. Moreover, the electricity goes 
off just at the time it is most needed – when families come home from work. The 
entire family is left without electricity for lighting and for cooking the 
evening meal. So instead it means cooking on thembaula 
<http://stoves.bioenergylists.org/taxonomy/term/1820> (a simple charcoal fire) 
and eating by candlelight.

Zambian villagers take mining giant Vedanta to court in UK over toxic leaks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/aug/01/vedanta-zambia-copper-mining-toxic-leaks>
You might think this only affects the more well-off, since for the two-thirds 
of Lusaka residents not connected the electricity grid,mbaula and candles are 
the norm. But almost everyone is affected by the severe water shortage caused 
by Lusaka Water and Sewerage company not having enough electricity for its 
supply, raising fears of cholera due to lack of water for toilets and general 
hygiene.

Zambia is not Nigeria, where lack of a public supply of electricity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/21/five-questions-for-oil-dependent-nigeria-incoming-leaders>
 is the norm, and where the well-off have long had their own generators. Zambia 
is one of the wettest countries in the world, and almost all its electricity 
comes from the huge power stations at theKariba Dam 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-30850591> and Kafue Gorge 
<http://www.energoprojekt-ng.rs/en/references/underground-structures/kafue-gorge-hydroelectric-power-plant-zambia>
. Zambia is used to plenty of electricity, even selling its surplus to 
neighbouring countries.

Despite the doubling of the population since 1970, there has not been a 
commensurate increase in generation capacity

So what has happened? According to the government, which owns the Zambian 
Electricity Corporation (Zesco), the shortage is simply a result of the poor 
rainy season of 2014-15, when rainfall was about 50% below average, leaving 
insufficient water in dams for the normal electricity supply. The drought has 
affected the entire southern African region, and is therefore beyond any 
government remedy.

But if you ask ordinary Zambians in a Lusaka bar or minibus, or the opposition 
party UPND, you will hear a very different story. They will say that the real 
problem is that government has been doing too little to develop new power 
stations as demand has risen.

The indictment of the government is very telling. The Kariba power station was 
built in colonial times in 1956 and Kafue Gorge power station in 1970. Despite 
the doubling of the population since 1970, there has not been an equivalent 
increase in generation capacity. And incredibly, even when the dam water levels 
were already low, the government continued to sell electricity to Mozambique 
and SouthAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

But the worst aspect of the crisis is that Zambia’s copper mines are the 
country’s main consumers of electricity, which is used both to haul ore out of 
the ground and for extracting copper by electrolysis. The copper mines need 
about 70% of Zesco’s maximum generating capacity, with only about 20% going to 
domestic consumers.

The root of the current power crisis can be traced back to the period between 
2001 and 2008, when the state’s mines were sold off to foreign investors. Not 
only did government sell off the rundown mines for a song, but as a sweetener 
they even promised the buyers cheap electricity – subsidised by both the 
domestic consumer and the government. Hence there is no money for new power 
stations : no new capital has been generated to make use of Zambia’s huge 
surplus of water power, which instead runs unutilised into the sea.

When electricity began to run short last year, blackouts were inflicted on 
domestic consumers but not on the mines. But this year the shortfall of 
electrical power is about 25%, meaning that if it was inflicted entirely on 
domestic consumers they would have no electricity at all. Now, finally, the 
government has had to cut the copper mines’ supply.

In this sad story we see a textbook case of how to invent a power crisis. We 
see a long story of bad planning, or no planning. More than that, we see an 
absence of planning in the very area of development that is crucial for 
continuing and increasing production from the copper mines – the goose that 
lays the golden egg for this country. That, by any standards, is a massive 
folly.
 