
Hardline Muslim groups often portray the Ottoman empire 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ottoman_Empire> as a magic template for a global 
caliphate. This is then used as a springboard for grandiose arguments that 
paint a caliphate as viable, and deem it as the only credible model of 
governance for the future. These arguments are based on a belief that the 
empire adhered to a single interpretation ofsharia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sharia> (Islamic law) for over 600 years, and – 
crucially – that its success was contingent on this.

But a paper by Ishtiaq Hussain, published by Faith Matters 
<http://faith-matters.org/images/stories/fm-publications/the-tanzimat-final-web.pdf>
 on Saturday displays a very different picture. Ottoman sultans, or caliphs, in 
the 18th and 19th centuries launched secular schools and promoted the education 
of women. The period of reformation known asthe Tanzimat 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tanzimat> saw customary and religious laws being 
replaced in favour of secular European ones. More surprisingly, homosexuality 
was decriminalised in 1858 (long before many western states took their cue, and 
over a century before theAmerican Psychiatric Association 
<http://www.psych.org/Departments/EDU/Library/APAOfficialDocumentsandRelated/PositionStatements/200001a.aspx>
 declassified it as a mental illness in 1973). Contrary to the claims of 
hardline groups, religious authorities approved many of these measures.

In terms of broader social change, the Ottomans made strong attempts to 
integrate non-Muslim communities. On the cultural front, it is well known that 
a minority of people claim that Islam frowns upon artistic expression. However, 
the last sultan/caliph,Abdulmecid Efendi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abd%C3%BClmecid_II> (1922-1924) has numerous 
paintings on display in Istanbul's new museum of modern art; many others were 
also keen musicians and played a variety of musical instruments. It is 
therefore clear that the sultan/caliphs enunciated a progressive vision for a 
secular Muslim society, many years before al-Qaida and similar groups came into 
existence.

For those who dismiss President Ataturk 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mustafa_Kemal_Atat%C3%BCrk>'s vision as an 
anomaly, this reconsideration of their history must come as a nasty shock.

The purpose of Hussain's paper is to encourage people who carry the baton for 
totalitarian ideologies – including those who are inspired byAnwar al-Awlaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/02/anwar-al-awlaki> – to think 
again. The recent deaths of al-Awlaki and his demagogueOsama bin Laden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/02/osama-bin-laden-dead-pakistan> 
only mean that part of the battle is won.

The other part of the battle is ideological, and this paper boldly leads the 
way by challenging a key component of that ideology. It does a stellar job in 
exposing the fallacies that lie within extremist narratives. For example, why 
do some groups refer to the Ottoman empire as a "caliphate" when it did not 
synchronise state law with religious law?

When hardline groups present Islam as a rigid political ideology, they end up 
doing a great disservice to Islam and Muslim communities. One of Islam's 
strengths is its relevance to all places and all times, which means that it can 
take on numerous expressions according to local circumstances. Scholars like
Emory University professor Abdullahi An-Na'im 
<http://www.law.emory.edu/aannaim/> recognise that the content of the sharia is 
bound to its historical context.

An-Naim maintains that concepts such as human rights and citizenship are more 
consistent with Islamic principles than a state which purports to be Islamic 
and enforces sharia. In his book,Islam and the Secular State 
<http://blogs.ssrc.org/tif/category/islam-and-the-secular-state/>, he goes as 
far as to suggest that the very idea of an Islamic state is based on European 
ideas of state and law, and not the Islamic tradition.

It is now more important than ever for greater numbers of individuals to stand 
up against fascism and extremism – no matter where it comes from. This is why 
groups likeBritish Muslims for Secular Democracy <http://www.bmsd.org.uk/> 
(BMSD) – the organisation that I work for – have protested against both
al-Muhajiroun <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun> (in their various 
guises) andStop the Islamification of Europe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stop_Islamisation_of_Europe>.

Of course, we support the findings of this paper, and hope this is 
disseminated as widely as possible. I also hope this paper will get far-right 
groups to reconsider the history of Muslims inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, and make them realise the 
positive contribution Islam has made in countries like Turkey and Spain.

The importance of grassroots work to this end – in schools, universities, 
refugee centres and on social networking sites – cannot be underestimated. 
Finally, I would like to see the government develop a sound understanding of 
the issues in this paper, and their relevance to the British Muslim situation. 
This would be a fitting token of support for organisations like BMSD and Faith 
Matters.
 