
No one who has read The Shipping News will be surprised to learn that Annie 
Proulx <https://www.theguardian.com/books/annie-proulx> found Newfoundland 
inspiring.

"Within 10 minutes of landing on the rock I knew that this was a tremendously 
important place for me,"she once told an interviewer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00fpwdg>. "The more I saw the more I loved. I 
knew I wanted to write something about this place. And it's hard to explain – 
because it's not a loveable place. It's very harsh, the weather is cruel, you 
can hardly drive for a mile without having a moose get in your way… "

Equally importantly, she also explained that her story could only have 
happened in a place "where people are kind". Quoyle was trampled on everywhere 
apart from Newfoundland. When he got there, he was able to have a shot at 
happiness.

Judging from the comments under the first few Reading Group articles about the 
book, however, not all Newfoundland residents feel quite so fondly of Proulx as 
she does about them.

"I live in Newfoundland and have spent some time up on the coast whose 
environment and people she 'describes' and I can tell you that book is a bunch 
of malarky from page one,"frankthefist wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13650798>. "But one 
detail in particular made me angry. She has people put a Bible in an outhouse 
to use for toilet paper. Those people are particularly religious and tidy. The 
idea that they would use a Bible to wipe their arses with is too insulting to 
pass. The whole book is full of bullshit 'observations' that make a 
Newfoundlander's skin crawl. Typical Yank making it up to seem more real."

Ouch!

"I'm also from Newfoundland" Millieb added 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13673443>, "and I 
agree with frankthefist. There might be much to admire about the book, but the 
culture it describes isn't one that I recognise at all (and I grew up spending 
a fair amount of time visiting relatives and family friends who lived not that 
far from the part of the coast she's describing). Proulx is an evocative 
stylist, but the book is more of an imaginative fantasia on Newfoundland than 
any sort of accurate representation of it – not, of course, that that's 
necessarily a bad thing. And while I have eatenflipper pie 
<http://www.freeinfosociety.com/ae/recipeview.php?id=28> (wouldn't recommend 
it), the only place I've ever come across mention of a squid burger is in this 
novel."

I'm disappointed about the non-existence of squid burgers, but I don't have 
many objections to Proulx's depiction of the place itself. Surely it's Proulx's 
right to write fiction? As plenty of other people below the line pointed out, 
the fact that The Shipping News isn't entirely accurate shouldn't be seen to 
detract from Proulx's achievement.

"As others have said, she draws you in so powerfully that you become part of 
these places and lives – however 'other' they are from your own experiences – 
so that they resonate in your imagination afterwards,"wrote Soixante10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13725352>.

I would agree with that. It's now more than a fortnight since I put the book 
down – and I've read a lot since – but my quiet moments are still often filled 
with thoughts of fog rolling in, windswept coastlines and how strange it would 
be to have a moose get in the way of my car. Even if Proulx's depiction isn't 
strictly accurate, it is inspiring - as the Guardian's own Alison Flood can 
testify. "I love The Shipping News so much that we went on our honeymoon to 
Newfoundland,"she wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/13656407>, "and it is 
every bit as gorgeous as Proulx makes it sound".

Sadly, constraints of time and budget have prevented me from being able to 
visit the place myself. Besides, I've learned there are few flights from the UK 
to Newfoundland outside May to October. Newfoundland, it's safe to say, is out 
on a limb. It containsthe easternmost city in the American continent (St John's)
 
<http://maps.google.co.uk/maps?hl=en&client=firefox-a&hs=oPh&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&q=newfoundland+st+john%27s&gs_upl=3554l4955l0l5188l12l8l0l0l0l7l465l2393l2-2.4.1l7l0&bav=on.2,or.r_gc.r_pw.,cf.osb&biw=1692&bih=1028&um=1&ie=UTF-8&hq=&hnear=0x4b0ca38e6b0aa261:0x9e1fd4001f12261f,St+John%27s,+NL,+Canada&gl=uk&ei=ZA3zTsuDNofv8QPGrdCrAQ&sa=X&oi=geocode_result&ct=title&resnum=2&ved=0CCsQ8gEwAQ>
 and is so far removed from most of the rest of the world that it has its own 
timezone (Newfoundland Standard Timezone, a fiercely inconvenient three and a 
half hours behind GMT). It is also regularly visited by icebergs from May to 
July – and even if you can't see them for yourself,you can follow them on 
Twitter <https://twitter.com/#!/IcebergTweets>.

While I haven't yet visited, I have at least spoken to a few people on the 
island and while none of them are prepared to admit to the existence of squid 
burgers, they have all confirmed that other aspects of the book are true. Most 
notably, that there's an awful lot of rough weather and fog. Erin Skinner from 
Newfoundland and Labrador Tourism (the main source of the splendid photos in 
the gallery that accompanies this article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2011/dec/22/newfoundland-the-shipping-news-in-pictures>
fdafdfasdfsdad) told me that she's seen days where warm sunshine has given way 
to snow, hail and rain in quick succession. She also attests that there are 
parts of Newfoundland where "everybody knows your name" and that there are a 
great many "thriving" community newspapers.L'Anse Aux Meadows 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/4>, the isolated northerly part of Newfoundland 
that roughly corresponds to the area described in the novel, is served byThe 
Northern Pen <http://www.northernpen.ca/>. I'd advise any fan of The Shipping 
News to give it a read. When I clicked on it, joyfully,the lead article 
contained a picture of a grounded boat and notes about a storm 
<http://www.northernpen.ca/News/2011-12-20/article-2842738/Taking-stock-after-the-storm/1>
. (Sample line: "He's confused not only to how his home of 17 years survived 
last Thursday night's violent wind storm but also what to do with the bridge 
considering it is no longer attached to his house instead it lays upside down 
about 15 metres away.") Other pleasures includeda piece about snowmobiles 
<http://www.northernpen.ca/News/2011-11-28/article-2815354/Replacement-groomer-to-renew-faith%2C-bring-better-trails%3A-NLSF/1>
, andone about iceberg surveillance 
<http://www.northernpen.ca/News/2011-12-05/article-2825271/Were-watching-you-icebergs/1>
.

Quoyle would be in his element. So too, I'm beginning to think, would I. I 
haven't even mentioned the fact that Newfoundland is also reputed to offer some 
of the world's best whale-watching opportunities and it's stunningly beautiful. 
There's even a thriving literary scene, witha literary festival in a national 
park in August <http://writersatwoodypoint.com/> – and if that sounds a little 
too hectic, there are a number of writing residencies available ona retreat on 
the isolated Fogo island <http://artscorpfogoisland.ca/?page_id=6>. I fondly 
await having an excuse to see it for myself…
 