
Frankly, the memory of I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings finding its way into my 
hands is as lost as the well-thumbed paperback itself, but I can still see its 
cover clearly. The dark green spine with the bitten apple that indicated it was 
a Virago publication. The young African-American girl wearing what looked like 
a nightie, walking past a small house while reading a book. The picture’s 
background was pale beige, its colours muddy, except for the strange, beautiful 
name Maya Angelou, spelt out in sloping, purple letters. I thought it 
uninspiring for a book, but the name drew me,Maya Angelou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/07/michelle-obama-bill-clinton-maya-angelou-memorial-service>
. This was Scotland in the early 1980s. The names of the people around us 
were hard-edged and familiar. This author had music in her name.

I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings is the first of several volumes of 
autobiography. Three-year-old Maya’s parents decide to “put an end to their 
calamitous marriage”, and so she and her four-year-old brother Bailey are sent 
to stay with their grandmother (soon known as Momma) in the town of Stamps, 
Arkansas, where “segregation was so complete most black children didn’t really, 
absolutely know what whites looked like”. Momma runs a general store. Her 
customers are cotton pickers and young Maya witnesses the relentless hardship 
of their daily lives.

Angelou perceives poetry as having the power to enable us to recognise each 
other

At the age of eight Maya returns to her mother’s home in California where she 
is raped by her mother’s lover, Mr Freeman. His subsequent murder, for which 
the child mistakenly feels responsible, robs Maya of her voice. She knows, and 
is afraid of, the power of words.

Already in love with the poets James Weldon Johnson, Countee Cullen, Edgar 
Allan Poe and Shakespeare, Maya regains her voice after a neighbour she admires 
tells her “words mean more than what is set down on paper”. She convinces Maya 
that she cannot truly love poetry until she can speak it out loud. The book 
ends with Maya living in San Francisco, where she graduates from high school 
and becomes an unmarried mother at the age of 16.

Written boldly, this sequence of events might see I Know Why the Caged Bird 
Sings consigned to the “difficult lives” section of bookshops, but this is not 
a misery memoir. The book explores African American history through the 
portrayal of one young woman’s life. It demonstrates the iniquities wrought by 
slavery, racism and institutionalised violence and shows that learning, music 
and poetry have the potential to offer not merely escapism, but a bridge 
towards dignity in the most undignified of situations.

Angelou is no apologist. Like the abolitionist Frederick Douglass she is 
incensed by suggestions that slaves and cotton pickers sing because they are 
happy. One of the potentials Angelou identifies in the arts is the ability to 
propel individuals beyond their own existence. Angelou perceives poetry in 
particular as having the power to enable us to recognise and know each other, 
as she finds in Shakespeare’sSonnet 29 
<http://shakespeare-online.com/sonnets/29.html> (When, in disgrace with fortune 
and men’s eyes). In later years she would describe Shakespeare as“a black girl” 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/sexes/archive/2013/01/what-maya-angelou-means-when-she-says-shakespeare-must-be-a-black-girl/272667/>
.

I was not sophisticated enough a reader to articulate much of this on my first 
reading, but the integrity of Angelou’s vision helped me to experience the 
power of words and writing. It may seem presumptuous, but there were moments 
when I met myself, a white, bookish Scot, in the life of the young, bookish 
Angelou. Her ability to involve me in an existence so different from my own was 
largely due to her writing style.

I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings is written from life, but uses some 
conventions of fiction. The people in young Maya’s world are brilliantly 
characterised, we hear them talk and feel their joys, fears and humiliations. 
When Momma retains her dignity despite being insulted outside her store by a 
group of young white girls, I felt Maya’s triumph. The need for self-respect is 
one of several themes running through the book.

Maya Angelou obituary
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/28/maya-angelou> 
Rejected by her parents and society at large, Angelou is an outsider, 
something most teenagers, even those in comfortable circumstances, consider 
themselves. The book is punctuated by references to her ugliness, another 
feeling I related to. (I felt a little betrayed to discover she was beautiful.) 
Finally, the paperback itself was testament to the fact that, despite the odds, 
she had become a writer. If Angelou, born in a country that was hostile to her 
very existence, had managed to become a published writer, might there be a 
sliver of a chance that I could too?

Angelou was the first author I plucked up the courage to see at the Edinburgh 
international book festival. She was there and she existed, inside and outside 
of me, her voice reading her words. I thought my mind might explode.

She helped me to better understand the black American experience. Her words 
continue to resonate. Forty-six years after the publication of her memoir, 
African Americans aretwice as likely to be shot by police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/01/black-americans-killed-by-police-analysis>
 as their white peers. Reading of the deaths ofMichael Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michael-brown-shooting>, Eric Garner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/13/new-york-city-pays-59m-in-settlement-with-family-of-eric-garner>
,Walter Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/walter-scott-shooting>, and 
Freddie Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/freddie-gray> takes me back 
to Angelou’s line: “The black woman in the south who raises sons, grandsons and 
nephews had her heartstrings tied to a hanging noose.”
 