
Until last week, the Israel-Palestine Centre for Research and Information 
wouldn't have rung any bells in literary circles. But this changedafter the 
Jerusalem-based organisation <http://www.ipcri.org> – which aspires to serve as 
an "intellectual platform for Israelis and Palestinians to create and develop 
new concepts ... that enrich the political and public discourse" – published a 
Hebrew translation of Alaa al Aswany's bestseller,The Yacoubian Building 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2007/feb/17/fiction.featuresreviews>, on its 
website. The "rare privilege" of reading the book was offered to "(expand) 
cultural awareness and understanding in the region". However, the organisation 
neglected to seek Al Aswany's permission before acting thus.

Some context: Although Al Aswany's book has been translated into 19 languages, 
the author has, until now, refused to permit its translation into Hebrew. 
Needless to say, he was not impressed with the actions of the IPCRI. "What the 
centre and the translator did is piracy and theft,"he told news agency AFP 
<http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5h_i6EiD7vtTEDvpp-uKAqO0L9VpQ?docId=CNG.c8806b0465005156c3ed4b83c649cb5d.7d1>
 , "I will be complaining to the International Publishers' Association."

One cannot but sympathise with Al Aswany; breach of copyright is repugnant to 
a writer. It is hard to understand how this brazen act of unauthorised 
translation and distribution can be expected to promote understanding. But 
Gershon Baskin, head of the ICPRI, doesn't see things this way.

"We didn't intend to infringe his copyright, but just to get Israelis 
acquainted with the book,"Baskin told Israeli daily Haaretz 
<http://www.haaretz.com/print-edition/news/egyptian-author-threatens-to-sue-israeli-palestinian-ngo-for-translating-book-without-permission-1.322209>
 . "The question here is whether Israelis' right to read the book outweighs his 
copyright." High-minded as this sounds, his argument holds little water. 
Copyright, after all, is the expression of proprietorial rights over 
intellectual property; Baskin can scarcely claim the high moral ground when the 
property he has given away does not belong to him.

But as is often the case in this part of the world, there may be more to the 
dispute than meets the eye. "(Al Aswany) told me that if the book was published 
inIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and there were royalties, 
he would give them to Hamas," Baskin claims. "(The) cultural boycott of the 
Hebrew language which he supports or is forced to support is a form of cultural 
terrorism, which I don't have to agree to."

On this point, at least, both parties are in agreement. Al Aswany is equally 
emphatic on this point: "My position has not changed regarding normalisation 
with Israel. I reject it completely," he told AFP.

To be critical of Baskin and the IPCRI is not difficult. While the 
organisation does admirable work in the field of cooperation and coexistence 
between Israelis and Palestinians, this does not give it rights over 
intellectual property. Ultimately, it is for Al Aswany to determine what he 
wishes to do with his property. If Baskin doesn't like this, tough luck.

But this is not to absolve Al Aswany either. To be clear: It is his absolute 
right to boycott Israel. And, to be fair, he draws a very clear distinction 
between his non-relationship with Israel and antisemitism, asin this video 
<http://bigthink.com/alaaalaswany>.

Still, one is obliged to observe that Al Aswany has nurtured a reputation as a 
literary champion of coexistence, one who uses writing as a tool for resolving 
the contradictions of our pluralistic existence. "I am writing for ordinary 
people,"he told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/27/magazine/27aswany-t.html?ref=magazine&pagewanted=all>
 in 2008. "I want everybody to be able to read my books." Similarly, he has 
argued eloquently about the facility of literature to reveal the unknown. 
"Literature makes us question things,"he told Egypt's Daily Star in 2005 
<http://www.dailystaregypt.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=157>. "It makes us more 
human."

This sits uneasily with his opposition to "normalisation". It doesn't seem 
quite right to try and have it both ways: championing one's own writing as a 
bridge to understanding, while at the same time insisting that a set of people 
be excluded from this happy feast.

That said, matters are not entirely in Al Aswany's own hands. In Egypt, the 
boycott of Israel by the state-sponsored Writers Union is absolute. One runs 
foul of this at one's own peril; for instance, Ali Salem – a respected 
playwright – wasexpelled from the union in 1994 after visiting Israel 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8285728.stm>. Perhaps Al Aswany is wary of being 
caught up in political intrigue beyond his control.

But this might be to let him off a bit too easily. Al Aswany has been critical 
of the Egyptian government in the past, and acknowledged that his fame affords 
him a level of protection many of his contemporaries do not enjoy. Would it be 
fair to expect him to stand up to what – given the existence of formal 
diplomatic relations between Israel andEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> – can be classed as official 
hypocrisy? Perhaps, perhaps not.

In any case, the matter seems destined to end up in the hands of our learned 
friends. Al Aswany has threatened to sue, but whether he will agree to testify 
– in person – in an Israeli court remains to be seen.
 