
After journalists returned to work from a three-day strike this week Fairfax 
Media’s chief executive, Greg Hywood, had some good news and some bad news 
about the future of the Age and the Sydney Morning Herald. The good news: the 
papers won’t stop printing the Monday to Friday editions this year. The bad 
news: there is no guarantee beyond those short nine months because “I can’t say 
that newspapers are forever.”

Hywood, who earns $2.5m a year, is also sticking to his rather 
counterintuitive mantra that the loss of 120 journalists is necessary to 
maintain “quality journalism”.

Fairfax columnists support striking journalists by refusing to file
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/18/fairfax-journalists-protest-as-rally-told-veteran-columnists-will-not-file>
“This is not a clickbait company,” he told ABC’s 7.30. “My commitment, having 
started here at the age of 21, is to make sure that quality journalism 
survives, that we actually do deliver that public good, but that involves 
really quite dramatic changes about the model under which we operate. And is it 
– do people like change? Most people don’t like change. Did this company make 
all the right decisions at the right time? Probably mistakes were made. But the 
fundamental fact is that these are massive structural changes.”

In Melbourne, at the Age, staff are particularly on edge as big changes are 
afoot. Most of the senior editorial roles, such as platform editors, have been 
spilled and need to be reapplied for. That’s on top of the dozens of 
redundancies that will have to be taken.


Aston’s smarting

 Despite their reputation as unionists, not all Fairfax journalists go on 
strike. The Australian Financial Review has historically taken a different 
attitude to industrial action, with many if not most of its journalists not 
members of the journalists’ union, the MEAA. Estimates vary but as many as 80% 
of journalists who work on the business paper did not go on strike last 
Thursday when the majority of the SMH and the Age walked off the job. Which 
provides some context to the decision by the AFR gossip columnist Joe Aston to 
stick his head above the parapet and remind everyone that he was not on strike.

Aston was roundly criticised by Fairfax colleagues and journalists from 
elsewhere, including News Corp and Guardian Australia, but he didn’t back down. 
Instead he wrote a column explaining why he was “not a scab” but was“turning up 
to work for my employer, as per my contractual obligation” 
<http://www.afr.com/brand/rear-window/guardian-news-corp-offer-two-cents-worth-on-fairfax-strike-20160320-gnmj1a#ixzz43lcrngYV>
.

Joe Aston (@mrjoeaston) 
Grateful for @FairfaxMedia <https://twitter.com/FairfaxMedia> colleagues 
remaining behind (= abiding by the law) to produce the news for our readers. 
We're not all on strike.
 <https://twitter.com/mrjoeaston/status/710389292606947332> March 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mrjoeaston/status/710389292606947332> 
“Meanwhile, weeks before they cover – independent, always – a federal election 
to be fought on the issue of union impropriety and thuggery, all of Fairfax’s 
reporters in the Canberra press gallery are out on a wildcat strike. Oh, the 
irony.”

Apres le Rudd 

The former Daily Telegraph editor Paul “Boris” Whittaker is starting to bring 
his tabloid troops from the Daily Telegraph to work on the Australian and 
Weekly Beast understands Gemma Jones has been approached for the powerful role 
of national chief of staff.


Daily Telegraph's Paul Whittaker named editor-in-chief of the Australian
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/02/daily-telegraph-paul-whittaker-named-editor-in-chief-the-australian>
Jones is currently the Tele’s chief of staff but she is better known in media 
circles for her clash with Paul Barry on Media Watch a few years back whenhe 
accused her of a campaign 
<http://www.abc.net.au/mediawatch/transcripts/s3834127.htm>against the then PM, 
Kevin Rudd 
<https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__www.abc.net.au_mediawatch_transcripts_s3834127.htm&d=CwMFaQ&c=ptMoEJ5oTofwe4L9tBtGCQ&r=ZRm2XwhewrM1EFKhCSrxP4D5f1w9AeAz1-lbHjtao38&m=sahZWSs8Hm0dCSTODzuv2VRoSXUW9kaThswUysvJid0&s=GyCs7rCwZspsAuwc0KdmJUT_MWvj8U3fBH720v2aau8&e=>
. Boris was the editor at the time. But Jones’s most notorious story was about 
the so-called benefits handed out to refugees by the Labor government. Headlined
“Welcome, asylum seekers – Chris Bowen and Julia Gillard’s ship of fortune” 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/national/welcome-asylum-seekers-chris-bowen-and-julia-gillards-ship-of-fortune/story-e6freuzr-1226273201568>
, the front-page story implied refugees were the lucky recipients of 
electronics and homewares “gift packs”.

“Washing machines, microwave ovens, DVDs and plasma TVs are among a 60-item 
welcome gift pack for asylum seekers offered rent-free homes in the community,” 
Jones wrote. “To fulfil a promise to move an influx of families out of 
detention, the Gillard government is now fitting out each home with up to 
$10,000 worth of furnishings and electronics. They are given food hampers upon 
arrival at rented homes where they wait for their claims to be processed.”

But, as commentators pointed out, the asylum seekers were not allowed to work 
and they left all the goods behind in the rented properties when they left.

 Rightwing  Conservative Bolt from the blue

The Bolt Report to be resurrected on Sky News five nights a week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/21/the-bolt-report-to-be-resurrected-on-sky-news-five-nights-a-week>
 The Weekly Beast was also the subject of some criticism from a fellow scribe 
this week: none other than the very busy Andrew Bolt. Bolt was unhappy with our 
reporting of his new job at Sky News. We said Bolt’s political discussion show 
The Bolt Report would be relaunched in May as a program aired every weeknight 
on Sky News andhe would continue his daily radio spot syndicated on the 
Macquarie Radio Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/21/the-bolt-report-to-be-resurrected-on-sky-news-five-nights-a-week>
. Bolt wasn’t happy we called him “right wing”, preferring the tag 
“conservative”, and he says he wasn’t dumped by Ten but chose to walk away. But 
our favourite bit was his description of our fall from grace 
<http://blogs.news.com.au/heraldsun/andrewbolt/index.php/heraldsun/comments/the_bolt_report_moves_to_sky_news/]>
 after leaving the Murdoch empire: “Amanda [Meade] has been a good media writer 
for the Australian. It seems to me that her desire to feed the Manichean 
stereotypes demanded by the tribally leftist audience of The Guardian – one 
that demands I be a ranting failure – has led her once again into error.”

Four Corners’ ‘Peter Greste-type situation’

 There is some terrific footage in the Four Corners report on corruption in 
Malaysia, which will air on Easter Monday. “I’m just a journalist at a press 
conference,” says the Four Corners reporter Linton Besser as he is surrounded 
by angry officials after he asked the Malaysian prime minister, Najib Razak, 
about allegations that up to $1.4bn was deposited into his personal bank 
account. Besser and the cameraman Louie Eroglu were later arrested, detained and
threatened with obstructing public servants in performance of their duties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/14/abc-journalists-out-on-bail-after-being-detained-by-malaysian-police>
. The executive producer, Sally Neighbour, told Weekly Beast there was a moment 
when she feared a “Peter Greste-type situation”. During a second sleepless 
night when Neighbour was on the phone trying to get a lawyer and secure their 
release she was told they might be charged with an offence that carried a 
penalty of two years’ imprisonment. Thankfully, officials released them hours 
later.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F160048641&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F160048641>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F160048641&media=>
We’re all platform-agnostic now

ABC TV announced on Thursday it was undergoing a major restructure to reflect 
the audience shift towards digital content. All programming including iView, 
children’s digital and all broadcast TV channels will move under the 
responsibility of a single role – the head of audience and digital, Rebecca 
Heap. Heap, formerly the head of strategy and digital products, will become one 
of the most powerful people in TV. The director of television, Richard 
Finlayson, said the reorganisation would ensure a “platform-agnostic” approach. 
“ABC iView is the No 1 online TV service in the country,” Finlayson said. “Our 
audiences are consuming content differently and we need to be programming for 
the future, now.”

 