
Black-clad girls and women downed tools, pens and keyboards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/03/brazil-argentina-unite-protest-sexual-violence-gender>
 in Argentina’s major cities today and took to the streets to demand “no more
machista violence”. Their strike and demonstration followed similar protests  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/03/brazil-argentina-unite-protest-sexual-violence-gender>
across the region:seven of the 10 countries with the highest rate of female 
murder victims 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/democraciaabierta/mimi-yagoub/why-does-latin-america-have-worlds-highest-female-murder-rates>
 arein Latin America <http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/107594/>, where activists say 
the phenomenon reflects not only high rates of violence, social conflict and 
organised crime, but also a cultural strain of aggressive hypermasculinity. Now 
people have had enough. Though there have been powerful women’s movements in 
the region for a long time, the campaign against gender-based violence has 
gathered momentum, culminating in the #NiUnaMenos – “not one less” – movement.

Brazil and Argentina unite in protest against culture of sexual violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/03/brazil-argentina-unite-protest-sexual-violence-gender>
The symbolic power of so many women standing together proves that focusing on 
victims does not mean portraying women as passive. These protests have given 
women a name and face and presence in death, when their killers and society 
more broadly objectified or ignored them. They have shown that violence is not 
only the result of inequality and discrimination but also a mechanism 
perpetuating such problems.

While the concept of femicide – generally understood as the misogynistic or 
gender-related killing of women – has been particularly resonant in Latin 
America, it is employed worldwide. Last year, the United Nations special 
rapporteur on violence against women, Dubravka Šimonović, urged all member 
statesto establish a “femicide watch”  
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=16796&LangID=E>
and publish the statistics each year. The UK already has such a project, the 
volunteer-runFemicide Census <https://kareningalasmith.com/tag/femicidecensus/>
, but only becauseKaren Ingala Smith 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/02/why-we-need-femicide-census> 
began tallying deaths independently.

Focusing on femicide must be done with care: it is a way of forcing society to 
confront violence against women, not of allowing authorities to ignore anything 
short of murder – both because lower-level violence is more prevalent, and 
because men who murder their partners usually have a history of attacking them. 
Acknowledging the commonalities is not a reason to ignore social and cultural 
differences that result in verydifferent patterns of crimes against women 
<http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/77421/1/WHO_RHR_12.38_eng.pdf> in 
different places, such as dowry-related violence and so-called “honour 
killings”. And the success of Latin American movements inachieving legal change 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2016/07/bolivia-measures-counteract-gender-violence-160711135302912.html>
 must be set against the difficulties of enforcing those laws and effecting a 
shift in social attitudes: not just prosecuting and punishing gender-related 
crimes but preventing them.

Perhaps the movement’s greatest value has been in making connections that are 
often overlooked: challenging the lines drawn between categories such as 
domestic and stranger violence, and related judgments about the “worthiness” of 
victims or the importance of cases. The latest protest was sparked by the rape 
and murder of a schoolgirl. But in others, marchers have reacted explicitly to 
attempts to dismiss victims on the basis of factors such as their sexual 
behaviour. Not one less schoolgirl; but, equally, not one less sex worker, or 
gang member. Paradoxically, by focusing on the value of each and every woman’s 
life, the movement turns our attention away from what they have or haven’t done 
and towards the actions of violent men – which are, after all, what must change.
 