
In the early 1970s my father Boubacar Diamanka, known as Kanta Lombi, a Fula 
<http://www.africaguide.com/culture/tribes/fulani.htm> from the Fouladou 
region, left Senegal for France one week before my birth as an illegal 
immigrant to save our family from poverty.

Given that at that time my parents did not know how to read or write, their 
entire correspondence was conducted through audio cassettes. They recorded 
themselves talking before giving the cassettes to close family friends to bring 
to France orSenegal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/senegal>.

My father heard my first cry as a newborn on one of these cassettes (a 
cassette that I found and still have)

My father heard my first cry as a newborn on one of these cassettes (a 
cassette that I found and still have). I remember on one cassette my father 
asking my mother to come closer to the speaker of the cassette player so he 
could kiss her, as if a kiss could cross the ocean that divided them. Different 
to a written letter, in the cassettes there is the tone we give to words, there 
are smiles, there is the breath of the person speaking… there is life.

I was two years old when we joined my father in Bordeaux, where the role of 
audio and video cassettes became a key tool for transmitting Fula culture and 
educational values from Senegal to France. My parents would have liked to give 
my six brothers and sisters and myself the same education as they had received 
in their birth village, but as the proverb says: “When the music changes, so 
does the dance.”

They therefore adapted to the new music that was the rhythm of their daily 
life in Bordeaux, and adapted the dance of education that they wanted to 
transmit to their children.

Since childhood, the oral culture of the Fula has run in my veins and in my 
voice. I was rocked by its proverbs and aphorisms, its stories and sayings. 
From very early on, my rap and spoken-word texts were inspired by this culture: 
by its proverbs rich in meaning and magic, these aphorisms responsible for the 
fact that the Fula do not have a country, but a culture that adapts to all 
environments and that stays almost intact across time and space. The native 
land, for us, has always been the breath between words spoken aloud.

Often, when one talks about oral culture, there is a tendency to place it in 
opposition to written culture. Fula culture, on the contrary, seems to be more 
written than ever due to the fact that the Fula from the Fouladou living in 
Bordeaux created “Dental Fouladou”, an association whose objective was to share 
the treasures of Fula heritage. Afterwards, they decided to create “Kawtal 
Janggobe Pular”, another association to teach and study the Pulaar language in 
Bordeaux, to ensure that their mother tongue survived in France, and to 
encourage the Fula in the region to learn and teach Peul.

They received books written in Pulaar from Cairo and Mauritania. Those who 
knew how to read and write taught those who were trained only as shepherds, 
then factory workers, and who never went to school. The Pulaar classes were as 
important to parents as they were to their children.
 Souleymane Diamanka with the famous Fula griot Sada Seydi in a village in 
Senegal. Photograph: Eric Blanc 
The association saved up money and ordered books written in Pulaar and printed 
in Cairo. Finally, they invited a professor of Pulaar, Djiggo Tafsirou, who 
taught at the University of Cairo, in order to further master their own 
language and train “professors of Pulaar” in Bordeaux.

These very same defenders of the Fula oral culture, most of them illiterate, 
decided to organise a conference in Bordeaux, in the La Clairière des Aubiers 
neighbourhood where I grew up, in order to unify the language. A historic 
contribution to the written language, this congress was directed by the same 
illiterate defenders of oral culture who recognised that the Fula oral and 
written culture are not in opposition, but cohabit and grow together.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWdew20syXwA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWdew20syXwA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWdew20syXwA&media=>
The cassette recordings of my father that began in order to maintain family 
ties between Bordeaux and Dakar and continued in order to promote the value of 
Fula oral culture, greatly influenced my own art. At the same time that this 
ancestral orality transformed into contemporary forms within my work, the Fula 
written culture began to occupy a central role thanks to the unification of the 
written language.

The widespread assumption that oral culture suffered due to technology and the 
rise in written culture, is in this case not a fair assumption. For the Fula 
from the Fouladou, oral culture in fact ensured the propagation of the written 
language across the global Fula community, initially spread out across the 
Sahel belt and now around the world. It is thanks to oral culture that the 
Pulaar language has had a revival worldwide.

The increase in literacy will never replace the Fula oral culture; they grow 
together in parallel. While the art of the Fulagriots 
<http://www.britannica.com/art/griot> transformed itself through modern forms 
like rap and slam, recognising the role of technology and archiving in its 
preservation, the Pulaar language was unified and propagated around the world.
 