
“For those who like that sort of thing, that is the sort of thing they like,” 
Maggie Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/maggie-smith> trilled 47 
years ago inThe Prime of Miss Jean Brodie. It’s become Smith’s defining line, 
encapsulating her expert hauteur, yes, but also perfectly describing the cosy 
teatime fare she almost exclusively makes these days. For those who like that 
sort of thing,The Lady in the Van (Sony, 12) is most pleasing.

A droll adaptation of Alan Bennett’s memoir, the most challenging thing it 
does is get its leading lady out of her habitual pearls and into the 
grime-caked rags of Mary Shepherd, the well-bred tramp who camped out on 
Bennett’s driveway for the better part of 15 years. She’s good value too: drily 
irascible, as is her wont, but eventually exposing more bruised human weakness 
than she’s permitted herself to show sinceThe Lonely Passion of Judith Hearne. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EOwqgKQl5mA>

The film is on less sure footing with Bennett himself, played by Alex Jennings 
as squabbling dual personalities – a sort of ego-id split, alike in tweediness 
– in a writerly gimmick that swiftly wears out its welcome. By its end, the 
film actually manages to accumulate four separate incarnations of Bennett; an 
impressive meta-conceit, but still no match for a single Smith.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dha4kEBtHDoc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dha4kEBtHDoc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dha4kEBtHDoc&media=>
 Brett Haley’s I’ll See You in My Dreams 
The much-touted “grey pound” audience that made a hit of The Lady in the Van 
didn’t turn up forI’ll See You in My Dreams (Universal, 12) – a shame, because 
it’s both sharper and sweeter in its delineation of the social resources that 
can desert women (even, in this case, more well-heeled ones) past a certain 
age. Beautifully carried by Blythe Danner in a rare showcase role, this ambling 
semi-comic study of a 20-year widow unexpectedly faced with two new men in her 
life takes on the pleasures and pitfalls of late-life companionship and 
sexuality with a soft, cheery touch. Which is not to say it’s a sop: there can 
be incisiveness in kindness, and even with its colour-supplement visual style, 
Brett Haley’s film feels true at every turn.

Directors Ryan Fleck and Anna Boden (Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/07/sugar-anna-boden-ryan-fleck>, 
Half Nelson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/apr/22/drama.philipfrench>) 
specialise in a more ragged kind of integrity. Things went awry with 2010’s 
hyper-quirky comedyIt’s Kind of a Funny Story, but they’re back on aching, 
bone-deep form withMississippi Grind (eOne, 15), a lovely, meandering byway of 
melancholic Americana, boasting a tremendous performance by Ben Mendelsohn as a 
hard-luck midwestern poker addict working his way south in the geographical and 
financial senses, and an unusually warm, canny one from Ryan Reynolds as the 
younger casino cruiser who becomes his ambiguous ally. It’s sly, soulful stuff, 
worthily channelling the shaggy, hang-loose character studies of 1970s US 
cinema.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOoca5idaNSk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOoca5idaNSk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOoca5idaNSk&media=>
 Ben Mendelsohn gives a great performance in Mississippi Grind. 
We needn’t dwell long on The Last Witch Hunter (eOne, 15), a dank, digitally 
cluttered occult adventure for Vin Diesel that never makes good on the loony 
promise of its best/worst line: “They took all the world’s most powerful 
witches and put them in one place – the witch prison!” NorFathers and Daughters 
(Warner, 15), a gummy, decade-jumping family melodrama, starringRussell Crowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/russellcrowe> as a seizure-prone widower and 
spectacularly untalented Pulitzer-winning novelist that couldn’t be more 90s if 
it had a title ballad crooned by Michael Bolton. Which, hang on, it does.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Flady-in-the-van-mississippi-grind-meru%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5c5ac0b80390b85d785c0bc9f65116156281a92%2F28_0_2813_1688%2F2813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van%3B%20I%E2%80%99ll%20See%20You%20in%20My%20Dreams%3B%20Mississippi%20Grind%3B%20Fathers%20and%20Daughters%3B%20Meru%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Flady-in-the-van-mississippi-grind-meru%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van%3B%20I%E2%80%99ll%20See%20You%20in%20My%20Dreams%3B%20Mississippi%20Grind%3B%20Fathers%20and%20Daughters%3B%20Meru%20and%20more%20%E2%80%93%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Flady-in-the-van-mississippi-grind-meru%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5c5ac0b80390b85d785c0bc9f65116156281a92%2F28_0_2813_1688%2F2813.jpg>
 Michael Jackson in the Spike Lee documentary Michael Jackson’s Journey from 
Motown to Off the Wall. 
There are awesome Himalayan peakscapes galore, plus a certain invigorating, 
how-did-they-do-that moxie, to recommend extreme mountaineering odeMeru 
(Universal, E). But the documentary event of the week is newly available on 
iTunes:Michael Jackson’s Journey From Motown to Off the Wall, the second of 
Spike Lee’s spirited, exhaustive windows on to the career of the 
dead-but-undeposed King of Pop that corrals a lively array of disco-dazzle 
archive footage and gregarious talking heads to track the late-70s period in 
which Jackson, by his stunted standards at least, came of age. Obviously 
indispensable for acolytes, it’s not as quite as meaty as its predecessorBad 25 
(also on iTunes), but Lee’s adoration spills infectiously from its sequinned 
satin seams.
 