
Overview

by Amy Shelver, a writer and director of Numb City Productions 
<http://www.numbcity.co.za/>, a creative youth-owned multimedia production 
company in the Nelson Mandela Bay inner city district

A ripple of rejuvenation is running through Port Elizabeth (PE), an upswing 
that, in part, has been cultivated by the city’s youth who have renewed hope in 
PE’s potential, reinventing South Africa’s hidden gem as a post-industrial 
cross-cultural hotspot.
PE map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/travel_port_elizabeth/giv-27167XAdnotqP3MDI/>
Experience the city by heading south along the 5km-long beachfront promenade 
crossing the Humewood and Summerstrand neighbourhoods. Take a dip at the best 
swimming locations in South Africa: Kings Beach, Hobie Beach, and the slightly 
wilder Pollock Beach. As with California’s Venice Beach this strip is a hive of 
activity, with runners, ironmen, cyclists and ocean-lovers all comfortably 
staking their claim on the stretch of ample strand.

The area known as Central is the museum and gallery district, the public art 
epicentre, and high-traffic Afro-cosmopolitan creative zone. Neighbouring 
Richmond Hill is a gastronome’s delight.

To the east are Port Elizabeth’s townships with their vibrant music, street 
life andshisa nyamas (Zulu for “burnt meat”/ barbecues). They feature a 
thumping underground music scene, which originally nurtured jazz greats such as
Feya Faku <http://www.theorbit.co.za/fezile-feya-faku/> and legends The 
Genuines Band <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cIquyKd5DHw>. It’s best to visit 
these areas with a trusted local by your side.

Always a migrant city, its fortunes and failures have been tied to industry, 
maritime and motor, and the people who flowed in and out. In the absence of any 
defining landmarks, it is the city’s people who shape its contours.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c169b8adb318eb786e0adf93a0c3b201eae42d1%2F0_180_1973_1185%2F1973.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c169b8adb318eb786e0adf93a0c3b201eae42d1%2F0_180_1973_1185%2F1973.jpg>
 Human resources … Port Elizabeth has moved into a post-industrial phase of its 
development 
Some of South Africa’s greatest and most gruesome moments played out in or 
near PE: the game-changing arrival of the 1820 British settlers who founded the 
town; the launch of the 1950s defiance campaign in New Brighton; apartheid; the 
first-ever black rugby clubs; and industrial revolutions.

It’s like a washed-out, weird kaleidoscope full of heyday and hope

Port Elizabeth is a blue-collar town with white-collar aspirations. For a 
while there was boom, through the middle decades of the 20th century when the 
motor industry, in Ford and Volkswagen, drove development. But global 
corporates eventually reacted to pressure over apartheid and when Ford pulled 
out in the 1980s, the city stumbled, becoming the “Ghost on the Coast”.

The historical inner city was abandoned, as residents fled to a sprawling 
suburbia and leaving behind urban decay. Then, in 2007, the Mandela Bay 
Development Agency’s revitalisation strategy saw the city claw back its former 
glory, building-by-building, street-by-street.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13e9c143b6f67fc83dfe531ef07df774348d97c6%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13e9c143b6f67fc83dfe531ef07df774348d97c6%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Full of beans … enjoying a coffee at UrbanEspress 
<https://www.facebook.com/UrbanEspress/>, Walmer 
Now PE is the place to meet people to collaborate with, and to test, incubate 
and play with ideas. It lives up to its nickname, the “friendly city”. 
Everything’s on tap: beaches, bars, music, art, wacky people, photographic 
spaces and places, bush and nature, an outdoor lifestyle to revel in – and a 
perpetual but not uneasy clash of culture. It’s like a washed-out, weird 
kaleidoscope full of heyday and hope.

Music and nightlife

By Siyabonga Radu and Siphamandla Fete of Uml 
<https://soundcloud.com/umle-sounds>e <https://twitter.com/umlesounds>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbecc1c7a17351bfd998e7d333d862f74d60975fc%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbecc1c7a17351bfd998e7d333d862f74d60975fc%2F0_0_2048_1365%2F2048.jpg>
 Siphamandla Fete (left, guitar) and Siyabonga Radu (vocals) of Umle. 
PE is a cradle for creativity. Experiences here are actually unmediated; they 
come in their raw format. PE has recording studios, indie bands, an energetic 
township music scene, and a deep musical history. Some of South Africa’s best 
artists are from PE – such as Zonke, Heavy K and Zolani from world-renowned
Freshlyground <https://www.facebook.com/freshlygroundsa/>. They were all 
nurtured here.

One of the hottest outings is the Unplugged Backyard Hangout 
<https://www.facebook.com/ubh2015/timeline?ref=page_internal> (UBH) sessions: a 
nomadic all-night gathering, from 6pm to 6am, with a long lineup of the city’s 
musicians, live art, spoken word, and performances in the Kwazakhele 
neighbourhood. It’s a symbol of the subterranean nature of much of the music 
scene in the city. In a similar vein, the bi-monthlyCookhouse Poetry sessions 
<https://www.facebook.com/CookHouse-Poetry-487413094776185/> are shaping the 
collaborative spirit of the underground.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F976d580ac5f40e24694eb4a32ff28eeff9afb11d%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F976d580ac5f40e24694eb4a32ff28eeff9afb11d%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The Colonial Kitchen is a popular bar/live music venue/restaurant in the 
Baakens Valley. Photograph: Ross Charnock 
And there are bigger stages for the city’s musicians, such as the indie 
favouritesRoof Garden Bar <http://buype.co.za/a/roof-garden-bar-2/> and the 
Chapel Street Studios <https://www.facebook.com/ChapelStreetStudios/>, in a 
building managed by production company Fly Piggy Fly.

Then there is the Music Kitchen <https://www.facebook.com/TheMusicKitchen/> in 
Newton Park, which also hostscomedy nights 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoseLinePE/>, and the riverside shabby-chic eatery 
and stage, theColonial Kitchen <https://www.facebook.com/colonialkitchen.pe/> 
in Baakens Valley.

In the townships, the best jams can be found in Zwide at Gqalane Tavern and 
Kwa-Lunga 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Oom-Colas-KwaGqalane-Zwide/423819937635943>, 
which is famous for honing local jazz talent and offering akazi (slang for 
location) stage to global stars.Billionaires 
<http://all-opening-hours.co.za/01009634/Billionaires_KwaDwesi> in KwaDwesi is 
the safe space for experimental DJs to sharpen their needles before becoming 
bigger brands. These trendy township spaces have regular gigs, jam sessions and 
open-mic nights.

In addition to all this there’s a growing festival scene merging art and 
music. In March the city’s irie sub-culture converges at the One Blood festival 
at the Grand and in June there is theRichmond Hill Festival 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheRichmondHillFestival?fref=ts>, which takes over 
the streets of the suburb.


No matter what you want, there are lots of scenes to tap into. Our townships 
are vibrant with art, music and dancers. There are so many supremely talented 
creative people here waiting to be discovered.
• Umle on Twitter <https://twitter.com/umlesounds>

Where to eat

By Vanessa Marx, chef at Savages Fine Food 
<https://www.facebook.com/Savages-Fine-Food-PE-1699613740272183/> and co-owner 
ofThe Culture Kitchen <https://www.facebook.com/culturekitchenza/>, an events 
and festival pop-up kitchen
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F835bf316771a1eff0bb320322f9632d3cbdb162e%2F0_954_1365_819%2F1365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F835bf316771a1eff0bb320322f9632d3cbdb162e%2F0_954_1365_819%2F1365.jpg>
 Vanessa Marx 
PE has never been a food capital but it’s an exciting place to be right now. 
We’re seeing restaurants push the boundaries and, for the first time, PE is 
experiencing a foodie culture of food trucks, pop-up diners and local markets, 
such as the monthlyValley Market <https://www.facebook.com/thevalleymarketpe/>: 
an alfresco celebration of food, artisanal crafts and a great place to meet 
genuine PE people. It is unexplored foodie territory and there is a hunger 
here, excuse the pun, for the more diverse offerings that we see in bigger 
cities, such as Cape Town.

A perfect PE dining day would include a starter at De Kelder 
<http://www.dining-out.co.za/md/De-Kelder-Port-Elizabeth/1454> – I love the 
wild oysters; straight out of the ocean on to your plate, they’re the best I’ve 
ever had. Grab a main at the laid-backNatti’s Thai Kitchen 
<https://www.facebook.com/nattisthaikitchen/>, with Thai goddess Natti cooking 
up authentic delights, the spicy tom yum is, well yum, just don’t order it hot, 
or you will cry. Natti and her crew often make trips to Thailand for some stash 
of secret ingredients, and she grows some produce in her back garden. It has a 
bring-your-own booze policy, which I love.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd23a69cf8ec3f544fef019bf3829fe235f08638c%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd23a69cf8ec3f544fef019bf3829fe235f08638c%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 A foodie culture is developing fast in Port Elizabeth with a desire for more 
diverse types of dish 
For dessert, there is no place better than Ginger 
<http://www.ginger-restaurant.co.za/> overlooking Hobie Beach and Shark Rock 
pier, where crêpes suzette are served the old-fashioned way flambéed at your 
table.Savages <http://www.eatout.co.za/venue/savages/> is a French-style cafe 
and deli across the road from the historic cricket ground St Georges Park in 
Central (which, in 1889, staged the first test match between South Africa and 
England). It serves breakfast, burgers, brunch, coffee and soul food.

Fushin <http://www.fushin.co.za/>, which has branches in Richmond Hill and in 
Bay West Mall (western suburbs), offers a creative union of Asian and other 
cuisines, and about the best sushi in South Africa. Its leading light isMark 
Oosthuizen <http://www.fushin.co.za/about.php>, a star chef who returned to PE 
to raise his family. He has just launchedFushin’s snazzy food truck 
<https://www.facebook.com/Fushinsushi/?fref=ps_result>. A must is the roasted 
bone marrow with black truffle and bruschetta (about £4).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf0c51d6f8a40e295af352ac09212dcf6ce71ce6%2F0_109_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf0c51d6f8a40e295af352ac09212dcf6ce71ce6%2F0_109_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Fancy that … Savages, a French-style cafe 
Fernando’s 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Fernandos-Chicken-House/469577743083557> is a 
hole-in-the-wall no-frills Portuguese restaurant, just off Russell Road in 
Richmond Hill, with juicy chicken and prawns served straight from the grill. 
Walmer-basedBrioche 
<https://www.facebook.com/Brioche-Food-and-Coffee-553255924708025/> is the 
perfect, laid-back daytime suburban spot, great for a coffee and breakfast. The
2 Fat Butchers <http://www.2fatbutchers.co.za/> in Walmer offers high-quality 
free-range meat and excellent pork pies and scotch eggs.

Masterton’s <http://www.mastertonscoffee.co.za/> is Port Elizabeth’s oldest 
coffee roaster, churning out fresh brews from its giant old brass roaster every 
morning; its aromas permeating the suburb of Central.Mella’s Dim Sum 
<https://www.facebook.com/Mellas-Dim-Sum-Noodle-Bar-980015495343877/> is an 
intimate dumpling and noodle bar just off Stanley Street in Richmond Hill; it’s 
ideal for light bites and a cosy, delicious dine and dash.

Arts scene

By 4Blind Mice <https://the4blindmice.wordpress.com/>, a visual arts 
collective of Christo Booth, Ryan Allan, Monde Goniwe and Mawande Mase, who 
paint murals in the city
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4be36bbb05bf1ef19b4e4a26aa1158138768b745%2F164_303_1770_1062%2F1770.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4be36bbb05bf1ef19b4e4a26aa1158138768b745%2F164_303_1770_1062%2F1770.jpg>
 The 4BlindMice collective: (from left) Monde Goniwe, Christo Booth, Mawande 
Mase, Ryan Allan 
There’s no shortage of talent in PE. For decades it was defined by absence 
rather than abundance – until the launch of a pioneering public art programme, 
which saw city money pour into the waning creative industry. Investment spurred 
a full-on revival of the arts scene, a gallery district and a brimming outdoor 
gallery of street art in Central and Humewood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e07bfee7c1a4b80d19532c073deb0dfee12dad%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05e07bfee7c1a4b80d19532c073deb0dfee12dad%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Much appreciated … the Underculture Contemporary pop-up gallery 
The starting point of the city’s creative rebirth is Route 67 
<http://www.nmbt.co.za/listing/route_67.html> – a collection of 67 public art 
works honouring the 67 years Nelson Mandela dedicated to achieving South 
Africa’s freedom. The greater city is also named after him, Nelson Mandela Bay. 
There are some iconic pieces, such as theVoting Line by Anthony Harris 
<http://www.anthonyharris.co.za/public.html> and Konrad Geel, but we really 
revel in those parts that force people to go deeper into the city. On St Mary’s 
Terrace, you will find the powerful’76 Youth piece 
<http://portelizabethdailyphoto.blogspot.co.uk/2014/04/76-youth-uprising-art-piece.html>
, a statement about the lost generation who fought oppression. This piece, our 
mural at the bus terminal andMkhonto Gawzela 
<http://blog.nmbt.co.za/blog/entry/meet-mkhonto-gwazela-the-talent-behind-route-67s-campanile-frieze>
’s frieze at theCampanile 
<http://www.nmbt.co.za/listing/campanile_memorial.html> memorial, compels you 
to connect with the less sanitised areas of the city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febfcc8d6d787ba8cc7e5ecec3f6d0679bb98290f%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febfcc8d6d787ba8cc7e5ecec3f6d0679bb98290f%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Art trail … Route 67 is a collection of art works honouring Nelson Mandela 
As part of the greater Nelson Mandela Bay Arts Journey, we recommend these 
galleries:ArtEC <http://www.artecpe.co.za/> is a community-centred gallery and 
studio space profiling up-and-coming artists, such as young printmakersPulp 
Press <https://www.facebook.com/pulppressprints/info/?tab=overview>. The 
Athenaeum <http://www.theathenaeum.co.za/>’s permanent collection includes the 
67 Beaded Quotes – 67 beaded works of art representing a year and a quote by 
Nelson Mandela – alongside workshop spaces and the colourful Little Theatre. 
Check out the unusualRon Belling Military Aviation Collection 
<https://www.facebook.com/GfiArtGallery/posts/512504718928018> at the Gutsche 
Family Investments Art Gallery <http://www.gfiartgallery.com/>, but the gallery 
is also an art deco nugget, designed by Gertruida Brinkman, who in 1932 became 
the first woman to qualify as an architect in South Africa. And theNelson 
Mandela Metropolitan Museum <http://www.artmuseum.co.za/> houses the city’s 
permanent regional collection of art, craft and design produced in the Eastern 
Cape.

We are continually inspired by the younger creatives, these kids are braver. 
The scene is still growing, through moments of boom and bust. There are great 
formal venues, but also informal collaborative ones emerging such as469 
<https://www.facebook.com/469BarLounge>, art-meets-music gigs at Chapel Street 
Studios <https://www.facebook.com/ChapelStreetStudios/>, and Underculture 
Contemporary 
<http://underculturecontemporary.co.za/sample-page/aidon-westcott/exhibitions/>
’s new incarnation as a pop-up gallery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F272a7de8cbf21bf91350ffa347bcc69672e50e50%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F272a7de8cbf21bf91350ffa347bcc69672e50e50%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Very palatable … an art workshop at the Athenaeum 
The city is our canvas, especially the clash of cultures in the city centre. 
If you just pause and talk to people, you are going to hear and see some cool 
stuff. It is real here – full of personality. We dig the pigeons. I once 
watched a guy stop his car for a pigeon crossing the road. That’s PE, the rough 
edges make it.

The great outdoors – on a bike

By Dameon van Antwerpen, owner of Donkin Bicycle Co 
<https://www.facebook.com/donkinbikeco>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc253ee9bc9f72e071c0003d461774883e4953959%2F574_480_1474_885%2F1474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc253ee9bc9f72e071c0003d461774883e4953959%2F574_480_1474_885%2F1474.jpg>
 Dameon van Antwerpen 
There are three things I love: food, coffee, and bicycles. In PE I’ve had 
forays into each of these industries but, so far, the best has been bicycles.

Donkin Bike Co is right in the thick of things in Central, the transit 
corridor. You see the world differently from the seat of a bike. It’s all about 
being able to stop and engage. You get to witness life in slow motion, with 
people, taxis, cars all whizzing by as you hold centre among it all. I like to 
break conventions using my bike.

PE is easygoing. Anywhere is 15 minutes away, the outdoor lifestyle is 
absurdly beautiful, the beaches are amazing and fairly quiet. A lot of the city 
remains untapped and under-explored and discovery is on your doorstep. To 
experience the city’s many faces try these routes:

Donkin Reserve to North End Lake (6km). For a proper urban route, start on the 
Donkin Reserve, cruising down the Voting Line pathway, the site of the annual 
Donkin Downhill Dash longboard event, and the public art Route 67. Continue 
down onto Govan Mbeki Street, past vendors plying their trade, colossal 
highways and underpasses, all the while weaving past cars and taxis rushing to 
get people to and from work. Coast through the back streets of North End, this 
weird suburb where industrial meets lower-middle-income suburbia. End with a
braai (barbecue) at the North End Lake boat house 
<http://www.sa-venues.com/things-to-do/easterncape/north-end-lake/>, next to 
the impressive Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9172eae483c8dfbf48440ad81e5e0dbc0ec87725%2F0_127_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9172eae483c8dfbf48440ad81e5e0dbc0ec87725%2F0_127_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Dameon at North End Lake 
Port Elizabeth harbour to Cape Recife lighthouse (15km). Start at the PE 
harbour and watch tugboats hauling in car carriers and cruise ships. Pass 
through the old railway yard heading down towards King’s Beach, circling its 
wide parking lot. Take a spin around the skate park and along the promenade 
under the palms.

Stop for a quick dip at Denvil’s Beach, then open up for a long cruise toward 
the iconic Shark Rock Pier for an ice-cream at the Red Windmill. After another 
two kilometres down the boulevard is theSomething Good 
<https://www.facebook.com/somethinggoodpe?fref=ts> roadhouse for a tasty burger 
and shake to-go. Tackle theHumpback Dolphin trail 
<https://www.nightjartravel.com/hiking/humpback-dolphin-trail> and watch the 
surfers crest waves at Pollock Beach.

The route becomes untamed towards Pine Lodge, perfect for a live music jam at 
Ziggy’s <https://www.facebook.com/ziggysrockandreggaebar/>, and the gravelly 
trip out to the Cape Recife point and lighthouse is surely worth the journey. 
Re-route with a stopover at surfers’ retreatBeer Shack 
<https://www.facebook.com/BeerShackPE/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e38406ce796620a074e638ff06fbe196b07ca90%2F0_45_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e38406ce796620a074e638ff06fbe196b07ca90%2F0_45_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The Downhill Donkin Dash longboard track 
Mount Pleasant to Seaview (20km). Port Elizabeth is home to Africa’s only 
ironman triathlon 
<http://eu.ironman.com/triathlon/events/emea/ironman/south-africa/media/media-registration.aspx#axzz4066hIgn0>
, with this route offering a gruelling experience. Start at the park at 
Boundary Lane and cruise down Seaview Road, stopping at the antique storeSecond 
Time Around 
<https://www.facebook.com/Second-Time-Around-Antiques-184052468309767/>. For a 
free bike safari, pedal parallel toRoyalston Private game reserve 
<http://www.royalston.co.za/>.


Join us at Donkin Bike Co for a regular night ride, too, to see the city by 
dusk. After a long stretch in the saddle, there is no better place to grab a 
beer thanCafé Rouge <https://www.facebook.com/Cafe-Rouge-31458789712/> in 
Richmond Hill.

Photography tour

By Rushay Booysen <https://www.flickr.com/people/rushay/>, photographer and 
hip-hop aficionado
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8c27fe4b2324c55bd919a65e7b4c0c9bfd7085e%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8c27fe4b2324c55bd919a65e7b4c0c9bfd7085e%2F0_135_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Rushay Booysen 
Port Elizabeth, where there’s a lot of tension between people and spaces, is 
an explorer and photographer’s dream. I love the melancholy of the forgotten 
areas in Central, those that haven’t been gentrified, especially the abandoned 
buildings behind Donkin Row. Cities tend to reveal themselves in the areas that 
are kind of out of sight, sitting uneasily next to the cool new zones, such as 
the Donkin Village.

The standout pockets of architectural heritage are historically and 
photographically intriguing – check out thePort Elizabeth Library 
<http://www.nmbt.co.za/listing/port_elizabeth_library.html>, City Hall and 
Opera House 
<http://www.sa-venues.com/things-to-do/easterncape/port-elizabeth-opera-house/>
. And then there are houses – Richmond Hill and Central are full of character 
homes: settler, Victorian and art deco architecture on every corner.Joe’s Garage
 <https://www.facebook.com/Joes-Garage-236245096580459/>, a tiny eclectic 
record and bookshop on Westbourne Road, is a place to meet random characters 
and to flip through vinyls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fa11b8e9f72e89d05dc9e7887d6571cfdac80f5%2F0_106_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Port%20Elizabeth%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Falternative-city-guide-port-elizabeth-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fa11b8e9f72e89d05dc9e7887d6571cfdac80f5%2F0_106_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 In a flap … disturbing PE’s ubiquitous pigeons at the City Hall 
The industrial hinterland shows the real contrasts. Starting in North End and 
pushing flush against the well-known New Brighton and Kwazakhele townships, you 
encounter old rusted shells, dilapidated mill houses, and the megalithic 
Goodyear, Eveready and PPC (cement) factories.Red Location Museum 
<http://www.freewebs.com/redlocationmuseum/> and New Brighton are vibrant, and 
best seen with someone who knows the beat of the area.

The beachfront shifts between Santa Barbara-esque venues and industrial 
wasteland, with manganese mountains meeting the endless golden King’s Beach – 
making for great photography. Shooting here is excellent – and people are 
friendly and may well invite you into their lives freely. There are regular 
Instawalks to explore with curious locals. Port Elizabeth remains somewhat off 
the beaten track, yet elicits the vertigo of being on the edge of something 
great – especially at theDonkin Reserve 
<http://www.southafrica.com/eastern-cape/port-elizabeth/donkin/>.

Readers’ tips and Instagram shots

There’s no better guide to a city than word-of-mouth recommendations: from 
people who live there and people who have visited. We asked our readers to 
share Instagram pictures and some favourite experiences in Port Elizabeth. 
These are just a few withmore here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/25/instagram-snapshots-port-elizabeth-through-the-eyes-of-locals>
.
 Playland Kings Beach, Summerstrand  Sardinia Bay beach, Port Elizabeth 
Sardinia Bay
While the Friendly City is happy to open its arms to visitors both local and 
foreign, there is one area they like to keep to themselves. A15-minute drive 
from the airport, lies the tranquil village ofSardinia Bay 
<http://portelizabeth.co/sardinia-bay/>, with its quaint pub, The Old Cash Store
 <https://www.facebook.com/cashstorepe/>, a nature reserve (also the game 
reserve) and one of the world’s best beaches. While tourists sun themselves on 
the more popular Kings and Hobie beaches, locals like to retreat to the beauty 
of this area, where you will often have the beach more or less to yourself. For 
a base while you explore this stunning area, an excellent place to stay is the
Loerie Lodge <http://www.portelizabeth-lodge.co.za/> (£18.55pp a night, room 
only, Lovemore Park). At the lodge there is varied accommodation, including a 
pet-friendly unit, and the Coach House, an authentic 1966 South African railway 
coach, which has been carefully restored. Relaxing after a hard day’s 
snorkelling with a glass of wine in hand, and staying amid countryside close to 
the beating heart of the city is wonderful.
Helen Crooks

Pollock beach
The tidal pool on this beach attracts a lot of people, especially those 
couples with younger children who are not proficient swimmers.
Joe Rotheray
 