
A week ago, the Guardian published a Long Read on Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/13/how-boots-went-rogue>, a piece 
which has provoked an extraordinary reaction. Aflood of letters from pharmacists
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/17/yours-a-stressed-pharmacist-boots-article-prompts-flood-of-letters>
 thatshows no sign of stopping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/19/boots-revelations-are-a-bitter-pill-to-swallow>
. Strong concern voiced by medical professionals, from GPs to the Royal 
Pharmaceutical Society. And the watchdog compelled to step in, so that, 
remarkably, Britain’s biggest pharmacynow faces the prospect of a regulatory 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/17/boots-regulator-investigation-general-pharmaceutical-council-nhs>
.

Our investigation reported a series of allegations from Boots’ own staff, as 
well as independent experts. We uncovered evidence that a senior manager at the 
chain was pressuring employees to milkNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> schemes for cash. Pharmacists 
suggested that professional ethics were being sacrificed for the sake of 
profit, and spoke of working conditions that threatened patient safety. All 
this appeared to stem from the business model adopted by Boots after its £11bn 
private-equity buyout in 2007. To pay back billions in loans, and to make their 
required returns, the investors pursued a model of “stretch and extract”: 
stretching finances and staff to the limit – then extracting profits.

In the light of the reaction, several conclusions can be drawn. First, Boots 
has been too hasty to deny the allegations from its own staff. If the company 
wasn’t convinced by the evidence with which it was presented by this newspaper, 
it ought to have heeded the worrying results of the survey run by the 
Pharmacists’ Defence Association. The subsequent correspondence from the very 
people the article was about – near-unanimous in their agreement, and adding 
their own experiences – ought to stir any executive team into further 
investigation. Crude denialism will not wash.

Second, the pharmacists speaking out clearly feel let down by their employer, 
their regulator and their government. Our correspondents and interviewees often 
request anonymity, for fear of reprisals from Boots or other pharmacy chains. 
Employers’ whistle-blowing procedures are mistrusted – and some correspondents 
don’t put much stock in the General Pharmaceutical Council to tackle these 
issues either. Years ago, the NHS’s own research, as well as the Royal 
Pharmaceutical Society, warned of the potential for abuse of medicine-use 
reviews (MURs), at a cost both to sick patients and to the taxpayer. Yet 
pharmacists allege that even now there is widespread abuse of this scheme and 
others – at Boots and its major rivals. For the regulator not to investigate 
these claims now, and for the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> not to begin its own probe, would 
betray indifference to a mass rip-off.

Finally, the story of Boots is at root about what happens when high finance 
preys on the high street, taking billions in public money yet legally avoiding 
taxes, and turning a 150-year-old British institution inside out to enrich a 
core of offshore investors. The damage done to hardworking professionals, to 
the public purse and indeed to public trust is huge. And yet Boots, whose 
private-equity owners cashed out in 2014, is not the only such case. The 
care-home industry is dominated by private equity, a high-borrowing, 
hard-charging business model fundamentally unsuited to that slow-growth sector. 
NHS contracts – for everything from plasma storage to hospital management – are 
being parcelled up and flogged off. That has already produced some disastrous 
results, as the staff and patients atHinchingbrooke district general hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/19/hinchingbrooke-hospital-scandal-mutual-privately-run>
 can tell you.

This isn’t about “public good, private bad”. Independent pharmacists are also 
private but don’t attract the same sort of accusations as the chains. 
Politicians (including within Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour) and the public need to 
assert certain principles. Who owns a company matters. Corporations working in 
this country and enjoying its infrastructure and well-educated workforce have 
obligations that go beyond paying the legal minimum in tax. And democracies are 
entitled to impose limits on what the rich extract from the rest.
 