
Conservatives are stuck in a perpetual outrage loop. The reappearance of Todd 
Akin <http://www.politico.com/story/2014/07/todd-akin-new-book-108745.html>, the
horror-movie villain immortality of Sarah Palin 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2014/07/09/sarah-palin-talks-a-lot-about-politics-most-voters-dont-want-to-hear-it/>
, theunseemly celebration of the Hobby Lobby decision 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/118498/hobby-lobby-sex-and-responsibility-answer-erick-erickson>
 – these all speak to a chorus of "la-la-la-can't-hear-you" loud enough to 
drown out the voice of an entire generation. Late last week, the Reason 
Foundationreleased the results of a poll about that generation 
<http://reason.com/assets/db/2014-millennials-report.pdf>, the millennials; its 
signature finding was the confirmation of amass abandonment 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/03/07/millennials-in-adulthood/#social-and-religious-views>
 ofsocial conservatism and the GOP 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/republicans-have-another-major-demographic-issue-on-their-hands/2014/03/09/398deb46-a79d-11e3-8599-ce7295b6851c_story.html>
. This comes at a time when the conservative movement is increasingly 
synonymous withmean-spirited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/08/nancy-pelosi-porn-miley-cyrus-gop-women-problem>
,prank-like 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/27/jackass-journalism-breitbart-brat-pack>
 andcombative 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/06/guns-target-open-carry-texas> 
activism andself-important grand gestures 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=ted+cruz&oq=ted+c&aqs=chrome.1.69i57j0l5.3144j0j4&sourceid=chrome&es_sm=91&ie=UTF-8#q=ted+cruz&tbm=nws>
. The millennial generation has repeatedly defined itself as the most socially 
tolerant of the modern era, but one thing it really can't stand is drama.

Republicans were already destined for piecemeal decimation due to the 
declining numbers of their core constituency. But they don't just have a 
demographic problem anymore; they have stylistic one. The conservative strategy 
of outrage upon outrage upon outrage bumps up against the policy preferences 
and the attitudes of millennials in perfect discord.

We all can recognize the right's tendency to respond to backlash with more 
"lash" (Akin didn't disappear, hedoubled down 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2014/07/10/todd-akin-takes-back-apology-for-legitimate-rape-comment/>
 on "legitimate rape"), but it seems to have gained speed with the age of 
social media and candidate tracking. The Tea Party's resistance to the 
leavening effect of establishment mores and political professionals has been a 
particularly effective accelerant. Palin's ability to put anything on the 
internet without any intermediary has rendered her as reckless as any tween 
with a SnapChat account. Akin'swhiny denouncement of Washington insiders 
<http://www.thewire.com/politics/2014/07/todd-akin-takes-back-apology-over-legitimate-rape-theory/374214/>
 is likely to make himmore credible with a certain kind of base voter 
<http://www.wnd.com/2014/07/did-todd-akin-get-a-raw-deal/>. The midterms are, 
as we speak, producing another round of Fox News celebrities, whether or not 
they win their races:the Eric Cantor-vanquishing David Brat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/11/david-brat-win-eric-cantor-house-majority-leader>
, Mississippi's Chris McDaniel and the hog-castrating mini-Palin,Jodi Ernst of 
Iowa 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/06/03/sarah-palin-clone-may-cost-gop-iowa-s-senate-seat-if-she-wins-primary.html>
.

The fire-with-fire attitude of hardline conservatives has its roots in the 
petulant cultural defensiveness adopted by the GOP – especially the Christian 
right – during the culture wars of the 90s. Their siege mentality bred an 
attitude toward liberals that saw every instance of social liberalization as 
proof of their own apocalyptic predictions and conspiracy theories. Gay marriage
will lead to acceptance of beastiality and pedophilia 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/05/07/pat-robertson-gay-marriag_n_199312.html>
. "Socialized medicine"will lead to the euthanizing Grandma 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2009/dec/18/politifact-lie-year-death-panels/>
. Access to birth controlwill lead to orgies in the streets. 
<http://jezebel.com/5889443/rush-limbaugh-calls-birth-control-advocate-a-whore>

Then came Obama's election, the Zapruder tape for the right's tin-foil hat 
haberdashers – a moment in history that both explained and exacerbated 
America's supposed decline. Dinesh D'Souza, the Oliver Stone of the Tea Party,
has now madetwo movies about the meaning of Obama's presidency 
<http://www.breitbart.com/Big-Hollywood/2014/03/07/Dinesh-D-Souza-To-CPAC-Audience-Wait-Until-President-Obama-Sees-My-New-Film>
. The first, 2016: Obama's America,garnered an astounding $33m at the box office
 <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/genres/chart/?id=documentary.htm>, and his 
lawyers blamed disappointing returns from this summer's Americaon a Google 
conspiracy to confuse moviegoers about its showtimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/09/rightwing-us-film-maker-claims-google-search-is-politically-biased>
. (Of course.)

The GOP has long staked a claim on The Disappearing Angry White Man, but they 
have apparently ever-narrowing odds of getting a bite at millennials, who 
appear to be more like The Somewhat Concerned Multicultural Moderate. This 
generation isracially diverse 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/latino/millennials-most-racially-diverse-generation-u-s-history-n46361>
,pro-pot <http://www.ypulse.com/post/view/whats-the-next>, pro-marriage equality
 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/03/21/millennial-support-gay-marriage_n_2924993.html>
 andpro-online gambling 
<http://reason.com/poll/2014/07/10/reason-rupe-2014-millennial-survey>. They are
troubled by the deficit 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2012/12/20/the-big-generation-gap-at-the-polls-is-echoed-in-attitudes-on-budget-tradeoffs/>
 but believe in the social safety net: 74% of millennials, according to Reason, 
want the government to guarantee food and housing to all Americans.A Pew survey 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2012/12/20/the-big-generation-gap-at-the-polls-is-echoed-in-attitudes-on-budget-tradeoffs/>
 found that 59% of Americans under 30 say the government should do more to 
solve problems, while majorities in all other age groups thought it should do 
less.

The Rupe-Reason poll teases out some of the thinking 
<http://reason.com/poll/2014/07/10/reason-rupe-2014-millennial-survey> behind 
the surge of young people abandoning the GOP, and finds a generation that is 
less apt to take to the streets, Occupy-style, than to throw a great block 
party: lots of drugs, poker and gays! Millennials don't want to change things, 
apparently – they want everyone to get along. The report observes "[m]any 
specifically identified LGBTQ rights as their primary reason for being 
liberal"; and "[o]ften, they decided they were liberals because they really 
didn’t like conservatives."

But liberals can't be complacent about their demographic advantage. Their 
challenge is to resist the impulse to copycat the hysteria that has worked so 
well for the right historically. "No drama Obama" was the millennials' spirit 
animal – his popularity has sunk with the economy, but also with the 
administration's escalating rhetoric. Today, under-30 voters show a distinct 
preference for Hillary Clinton (39% according to Reason 
<http://washingtonexaminer.com/survey-millennials-like-hillary-clinton-even-more-than-obama-bad-news-for-gop/article/2550679>
,53% according to the Wall Street Journal 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/economics/2014/07/11/poll-finds-millennials-pro-pot-anti-tax-unsure-on-bitcoin/>
), and no wonder: she's as bloodless as Bill was lusty, as analytical as Bill 
was emotional. The professorial Elizabeth Warren is the logical (very logical) 
backup.

Right now, Democrats benefit from both the form and content of conservative 
message: this next generation is not just inclusive, but conflict-adverse. 
Millennials cringe at the old-man-yelling-at-gay-clouds spectacle of the Tea 
Party. Perhaps this comes fromliving in such close proximity of their parents 
for so long 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2014/07/11/its-not-your-imagination-millennials-really-are-living-in-their-parents-basement/>
. If this generation does have a political philosophy, it's this: "First, do no 
harm." If it has a guiding moral principle, it's simpler: "Don't be 
embarrassing."

Read more on the state of the GOP from Guardian US Opinion:

• Scott Lemieux: How many more scandals can the GOP invent before it finishes 
suing Obama? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/15/gop-suing-obama-john-boehner-lawsuit>

• Monica Potts: The Republican war on pizza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/14/pizza-school-lunch-battle-lobbying>

• Jessica Valenti: The GOP is calling women 'sluts' again. Will Democrats do 
anything? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/10/democrats-overturn-hobby-lobby-republicans-feminist-2014>

• Trevor Timm: The Senate is giving more power to the NSA, in secret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/10/democrats-overturn-hobby-lobby-republicans-feminist-2014>

• Ana Marie Cox: Rick Perry just might be the lunatic the GOP is looking for 
in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/10/rick-perry-gop-2016-immigration-texas>

• Plus: Clinton author Edward Klein – the difference between the truth and a 
lie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jul/14/edward-klein-blood-feud-difference-between-truth-and-lie>



 