 Spot the celebrity on the front page of The Sun's special giveaway issue 
In a burst of patriotism on behalf of England's World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> team, The Sun is 
distributing 22m copies of a special issue to almost every household in England.

The 24-page paper is being delivered over the next two days, courtesy of Royal 
Mail, as "an unapologetic celebration of England."

Its front page, headlined "This is our England", is a montage picturing 118 
personalities said to "capture the very essence of England today", which was 
inspired by the Peter Blake's cover for The Beatles' album, Sergeant Pepper's 
Lonely Hearts Club Band.
 Dear Uncle Roy... James Corden's letter to England's manager 
To use the paper's own phrase, 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/5683494/22million-free-copies-of-special-edition-of-The-Sun-to-go-to-every-English-home.html>
 the issue encapsulates "what it means to be English in our culture and our 
history, and in our blood and our bones."

The initiative, which I believe to be the first of its kind, is also a subtle 
nod to the enduring joys of newsprint. It is "a timely reminder of why 
newspapers still matter so much in all our lives" and is also an assault on 
"cynics who do not believe the newspaper industry has a place in our digital 
world."

The Sun's blurb states: "We all turn to newspapers when our heads and hearts 
are all consumed by exactly the same thing. When a nation thinks and feels as 
one, we need our newspaper."

Indeed, the anonymous blurb writer deserves a credit for the purple prose that 
follows:

"We also celebrating ourselves — the small, rain-lashed country that is behind 
those three lions on that white shirt. This England. Our England.

Our history. Our food. And 2,000 years of English heroes, including everyone 
from Wellington toRobbie Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams>...

We understand what it means to be English. We get it. This is the nation of 
Hope and Glory and Jerusalem, but it is also the land of Vindaloo by Fat Les — 
the best World Cup anthem of all time."

Anyway, back to brass tacks. The content includes advice to England's manager 
Roy Hodgson <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-hodgson> by James Corden; 
Blur's Alex James on English and South American cuisine; and chief football 
writer Steven Howard looking back at England's 1966 heroes. And, naturally 
enough, there is a lot more about football.

It is, of course, a massive promotional exercise. As The Sun's editor, David 
Dinsmore <https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-dinsmore>, concedes: "We are 
keen to show all of England just what Sun readers enjoy every day."

But it must be costing a small fortune and is further proof that both The Sun 
of 2014 and its publisher,News UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational>, are determined to put 
the past behind them.

And what better opportunity are they ever going to get than in doing so as the 
nation prepares, yet again, to dream of footballing success.

For the record, The Sun's special edition will not be delivered in Scotland, 
Wales, Ireland and to most of Merseyside, wherea very different footballing 
memory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/jun/10/sun-hillsborough-disaster>
 involving the paper cannot be eradicated.
 