
The 2016 Australian election campaign began with the hope that big ideas and 
bold positive policies might mean voters would be able to choose the party that 
inspired them the most rather than the one they despised the least.

The eight long weeks have been better than the vitriolic battles of 2010 and 
2013. But the election hasn’t entirely delivered on its promise. Ideas seem to 
have shrunk in the explaining and the campaign has too often descended into 
scares and misinformation and high-handed, self-serving demands that 
disillusioned voters should reconsider a vote for the Greens or minor parties 
because those democratic choiceswould somehow create “chaos” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/04/election-2016-turnbull-urges-voters-to-avoid-chaos-of-a-hung-parliament>
.


It soon became obvious that just eight months after he ousted Tony Abbott as 
prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/malcolm-turnbull-promises-new-style-of-leadership-but-no-change-on-key-issues>
 and Liberal leader to widespread national relief and sky-high expectations, 
Malcolm Turnbull was planning a small-target campaign. He promised to respect 
the intelligence of the electorate but has been seeking the Coalition’s 
re-election on the calculation that voters were fed up with political upheaval 
and weren’t ready to write him off just yet, certainly not in favour of the 
Labor leader, Bill Shorten.


The Guardian view on the Great Barrier Reef: the crisis they prefer to downplay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/the-guardian-view-on-the-great-barrier-reef-the-crisis-they-prefer-to-downplay>
Turnbull’s agenda is thin. His centrepiece $48bn company tax cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/corporate-tax-cuts-to-cost-budget-53bn-over-four-years>
, unveiled in a pre-election budget, was modelled as delivering a 0.6% boost to 
gross national income in a decade, but there are not convincing answers to 
questions about how much of the tax relief would flow offshore or the extent to 
which growth would fill the budget hole left by the revenue forgone. When the 
tax cuts for big corporations proved unpopular, he shifted to the more general 
claim that only a Coalition government could deliver “jobs and growth”. His
budget included a progressive superannuation policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/budget-2016-jobs-and-growth-pitch-costs-wealthy-retirees-smokers-and-multinationals>
 but he also talked about that less as abacklash in the Liberal heartland grew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/institute-of-public-affairs-plans-aggressive-superannuation-campaign>
.


His agenda has been weighed down by the often regressive “zombie” spending cuts
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/10/coalition-labor-wrangle-budget-zombie-measures>
, still lingering in the budget from 2014 but never legislated, cuts to 
government payments to the poorest Australian families and a four-week wait 
before young people could receive the dole. His climate policy and marriage 
equality plans are deliberately opaque to disguise unresolved conflicts with 
the Coalition conservatives; by his own admission,Turnbull would prefer a 
parliamentary vote to introduce marriage equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/12/malcolm-turnbull-says-plebiscite-on-marriage-equality-will-keep-issue-alive>
 (the policy of both Labor and the Greens) but he took the leadership with an 
internal agreement to keep Abbott’s unnecessary and expensive plebiscite. His 
childcare policy would leave many families better off, but its future is 
uncertain because he continues to insist it must be paid for by the family 
benefit cuts. And, astonishingly, he goes to the poll with no policies at all 
on higher education, vocational education, industrial relations or the arts.


It’s as if his re-election pitch is fuelled mostly by the sheer force of his 
confidence, because he hasn’t been in the job long enough, or exerted his 
authority over his own party sufficiently, to come up with a fully considered 
plan.


The superannuation changes are seriously good. The Coalition must fight for 
them | Gareth Hutchens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/12/the-superannuation-changes-are-seriously-good-the-coalition-must-fight-for-them>
Bill Shorten, by contrast, began the campaign with a braver, clearer and more 
progressive set of ideas than we have seen from recent oppositions. Voters were 
far more attracted to them than the Coalition had expected. Labor had already 
announced ambitious policies towind back the generosity of superannuation 
concessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/21/labor-plans-to-rein-in-super-concessions-for-wealthy-in-bid-to-raise-14bn>
 for the wealthiest and tolimit negative gearing and capital gains tax 
concessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/13/labor-promises-to-cut-negative-gearing-and-capital-gains-tax-concessions>
 – a policy that would both save money and go some way to slowing the price 
rises that are putting home ownership out of reach for so many Australians. The 
party had the courage to oppose the company tax cut and to offer slightly 
higher near-term budget deficits as the price of its health and education 
agenda and smart structural savings that would take some years to mature. It 
promised to fully fund the “Gonski” plan for schools, to more than reverse the 
Coalition’s university spending cuts, andShorten argued the case for marriage 
equality with conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jun/29/bill-shorten-on-marriage-equality-plebiscite-the-mood-in-australia-has-changed-video>
. Tying the “putting people first” message together was a noticeable shift from 
the 1980s economic consensus, an acceptance that reducing inequality was 
important for ensuring economic growth as well as a fair society.


But Labor’s full policy offering hasn’t quite lived up to its vision. After 
spending years attacking the Coalition for cutting $57bn from public hospitals 
over the next 10 years, it topped up Turnbull’s additional spend in the short 
term but offered no more money over the decade. It quietly accepted some of the 
“zombies”, including some cuts for new recipients of deeply inadequate welfare 
payments. It sketched anambitious climate policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/labor-proposes-two-emissions-trading-schemes-costing-555m>
 and had the political courage to state clearly that it would need to involve 
emissions trading schemes, but it also fudged crucial details to avoid another 
carbon tax scare campaign. It abandoned parts of its superannuation policy 
mid-campaign and said it would come up with something in government that saved 
as much money as the Coalition’s version. Despitedeep disquiet inside his party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/29/boats-block-the-view-to-labors-most-progressive-policy-stance-in-years>
, Shorten persuaded Labor’s national conference to mirror the Coalition’s 
policies to turn back asylum boats and send any arrivals to offshore detention.

As the long campaign proceeded Labor seemed to balk, to be unwilling to back 
its departure from the political and economic orthodoxy. It lacked a coherent 
economic story that tied together its policies. It appeared diverted by trying 
to minimise the difference between its near-term deficit and the Coalition’s, 
as if it doubted its own ability to argue the case against the inevitable 
charge that Labor posed a risk to the economy.

Perhaps those fears were justified by Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, an international 
earthquake that has quickly reverberated across the world and on to the 
Australian hustings. The Coalition is sure it will benefit, both from 
incumbency and the traditional advantage the Coalition has in perceptions of 
economic management competency. It took Shorten days tomount the obvious 
alternative argument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/bill-shorten-coalitions-trickle-down-economics-risks-brexit-style-alienation>
, that Australia has avoided the extremes of social division precisely because 
it retains a reasonable social safety net, but that even so, inequality is 
growing. Then he cut across his own arguments by being loose with the truth in 
some of his own last-minute scare campaigns.

The stampede to non-mainstream parties and candidates is not as fast in 
Australia as in other countries but an increasing number of voters are choosing 
someone other than the majors. The Coalition has effectively told those voters 
their choices aredangerous for the country’s political stability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jun/27/malcolm-turnbull-says-voting-for-the-coalition-the-only-way-to-guarantee-stability-video>
 – which can only be assured by a Coalition majority. Given no major party has 
had control of both houses of parliament since 2004, that’s nonsense. Indeed, 
both major parties have let themselves down with scare campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/21/scare-campaign-the-major-parties-ramp-up-some-frightening-hyperbole>
 and a ridiculous vilification of the Greens and some independents.

Scare campaigns: the major parties ramp up some frightening hyperbole | Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/21/scare-campaign-the-major-parties-ramp-up-some-frightening-hyperbole>
The Greens have released a full suite of progressive, costed policies. They 
are backed – according to the polls – by about 10% of Australians. And they 
have a track record of responsibly exercising a balance-of-power position. They 
are also the only significant party to represent the views of Australians who 
reject the offshore detention regime. The Greens would also keep up the 
pressure for crucial reforms to laws governing political expenditure and the
disclosure of political donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/23/greens-will-demand-ban-on-corporate-donations-in-hung-parliament-talks>
, changes backed by Labor and Turnbull “in an ideal world”, but which never 
seem to happen, despite asteady stream of scandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-political-donations> and 
the increasingly unsustainable task of attracting sufficient donations to pay 
for election campaigns.


The major parties have also attacked Nick Xenophon and his candidates. The 
Nick Xenophon Team’s policies are not as detailed as those of the Greens, but 
Xenophon, powerful in South Australia, has aresponsible parliamentary track 
record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/19/nick-xenophon-the-anti-politician-poised-to-cause-headaches-whoever-wins-election>
. So do Tony Windsor and Rob Oakeshott, although many other independents have 
views so extreme and platforms so sketchy it should give any voter pause.


Guardian Australia readers are able to reach their own conclusions. But in our 
view the Coalition’s offerings are thin, Labor’s go a long way towards a 
progressive program, and false threats of looming “chaos” should not deter 
voters from choosing the Greens, or other candidates with a plausible, fair 
agenda.
 