
Andrew Bolt’s political discussion show The Bolt Report will be relaunched in 
May as a program aired every weeknight on Sky News.

The Herald Sun columnist and blogger will also continue his daily radio spot 
syndicated on the Macquarie Radio Network.

 The rightwing commentator will also have to fit in his filming commitments 
for the ABC on a prime-time documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/08/andrew-bolt-corporation-columnist-to-take-part-in-abc-documentary>
 series I Can Change Your Mind About Recognition, to air on the public 
broadcaster in 2017.

Andrew Bolt corporation? Columnist to take part in ABC documentary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/08/andrew-bolt-corporation-columnist-to-take-part-in-abc-documentary>
Sky News has declined to confirm a rumour that former chief of staff to Tony 
Abbott, Peta Credlin, is considering an offer to join the 24-hour news channel 
as a commentator for the federal election.

The Bolt Report was dropped by the Ten Network last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/18/bolt-report-news-corp-refuses-to-confirm-reports-show-has-been-dropped>
 after News Corp Australia refused to keep funding its production to the tune 
of $2m.

 On pay television platform Foxtel, The Bolt Report will air live at 7pm every 
weeknight. With fewer produced packages or prerecords, it will be a cheaper 
proposition.

 Bolt will interview guests, critique the media and politicians and give his 
take on the news of the day.

 “Sky News beats all the networks in its commitment to news and true debate, 
and I am proud to be joining it,” Bolt said in the Sky announcement. “My brief: 
to unspin the usual spin and inform viewers without fear or favour on the 
issues that matter most.”

 The CEO of the Australian News Channel which owns Sky News, Angelos 
Frangopoulos, said Bolt had a proven track record of driving the news cycle and 
he would encourage debate on the one-hour program.

 “The Bolt Report is an exciting addition to our 2016 prime-time schedule and 
we are delighted to welcome Andrew to the Sky News team,” Frangopoulos said. 
“Andrew is one of Australia’s most influential political commentators whose 
analysis and views will undoubtedly add context and stimulate discussion during 
this important election year.”

George Pell tells Andrew Bolt he won't resign from Vatican position
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/04/george-pell-tells-andrew-bolt-he-wont-resign-from-vatican-position>
 Bolt has already appeared extensively on Sky recently, commentating on the 
royal commission into institutional responses to child sexual abuse from Rome 
and interviewing Cardinal George Pell live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/04/george-pell-tells-andrew-bolt-he-wont-resign-from-vatican-position>
.

 Bolt writes columns which appear regularly in the Herald Sun, the Daily 
Telegraph, the Courier Mail and the Advertiser and he also writesAustralia’s 
most-read political blog <http://blogs.news.com.au/heraldsun/andrewbolt/>.

 In an interview with the Australian on Monday Bolt said the new show would be 
similar to the one he did for Channel Ten.

 “It’s a bit scary,” Bolt told the newspaper 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/the-bolt-report-relaunches-as-nightly-show/news-story/08076e03f20422e26cbc2780142aa6ca>
. “Sky has been brilliant at news. Now it’s beefing up the views. Five nights 
with the radio show as well, so it will be full-on – but it’s an election year, 
so why not?

 “The worst thing of any of the jobs I’ve got, whether it’s the newspaper, 
radio or TV, is trying to get guests on,” he said. “You go from being fearless 
to supplicant! The big question is, will Malcolm Turnbull come on?”
 