
Are you sick? Proper sick? As in, are you so sick that doctors and therapists 
and pharmacists and nurses and scientistsdon’t know what else to do to help you 
<http://www.livestrong.com/article/81795-list-non-curable-diseases/>? Well, 
worry no more, because now the solution is at hand, with my revolutionary new 
miracle cure,Magic Beans <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jack_and_the_Beanstalk>
TM!

Developed at the top secret MacGuffin labs by research leader scientist Sue 
Doh, Magic BeansTM are a revolutionary new therapy that will DEFINITELY work 
with your body’s own natural healing processes to promote wellbeing and fight 
all manner of diseases.

How do they work, you say? Wel, Magic BeansTM incorporate quantum wave fields 
to drive nanoscopic entities to realign the internal vibrations of your cells 
so that they assume a positive and not a negative orientation, thus curing the 
disease they were causing by not doing the things the Magic BeansTM make them 
do.

Did I mention chakras? They work on them too. And the humours. And the imps 
that live in your bones and run your body via an array of complicated levers. 
Basically, however you think your body works, Magic BeansTM work in that way. 
They’re very clever.

You might say that the claims above sound ever-so-slightly far-fetched, that 
there’s no possible way that any of this makes sense if you have even the 
vaguest understanding of science. Well, fie on you, Mister Sceptical-Pants!

Contrary to what you naysayers may think, this isn’t just an example of using 
complex-sounding terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2012/dec/18/anti-science-fiction>
 to come across asmore credible than is actually the case 
<http://jls.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/11/05/0261927X15614605.abstract> to 
people who recognise the jargon but don’t really have the requisite 
understanding to realise that it’s utter utter nonsense. Far from it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fthe-new-miracle-cure-magic-beans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F172a160dd259b03bb6991fdc48e6d449e5553dd8%2F0_321_5035_3022%2F5035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20miracle%20cure%3A%20magic%20beans!%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fthe-new-miracle-cure-magic-beans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20miracle%20cure%3A%20magic%20beans%21%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fthe-new-miracle-cure-magic-beans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F172a160dd259b03bb6991fdc48e6d449e5553dd8%2F0_321_5035_3022%2F5035.jpg>
 Crystals are good for healing. Unless you use them in a suppository. Then 
they’re not so good. Photograph: Alamy 
The truth is, all of the things described above are definitely real, they’ve 
just been covered up and supressed by the scientific establishment, who don’t 
want you to know about them. Because people who dedicate their lives to finding 
treatments and cures for terrible diseases are very selfish; it has to be the
right kind of cure, one they can profit from. And if it means them or their 
loved ones succumbing to a disease they know how to cure, these scientists will 
still not admit that there are viable treatments that they’re supressing. How 
could you trust anyone that selfish?What do these “experts” know anyway? 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/3be49734-29cb-11e6-83e4-abc22d5d108c.html>

No, if you want a genuinely honest appraisal of how effective a treatment is, 
you need toask a celebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/07/noel-edmonds-in-twitter-row-after-claims-that-electronic-box-tackles-cancer>
. I’m not a celebrity myself, but let’s imagine I am one. To be honest, it’s 
not the most ridiculous thing I’ve asked you to believe so far.

Celebrities have a different take on the world to normal people, leading them 
to ridiculous inspired conclusions that would elude more “blinkered” types 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/feb/10/opinion-vs-facts-why-do-celebrities-so-often-get-it-wrong>
. As a result, celebrities can confidently make claims thatwould sound totally 
ludicrous if the average person in the street were to say them 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/07/noel-edmonds-investigated-by-advertising-watchdog-after-endorsin/?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
. However, a combination of psychological biases and neurological quirks meana 
confident, successful person is often far more convincing 
<http://www.jaapl.org/content/37/1/63.full> than someone who is more awkward or 
nervous, even if the nervous person has a 100% accurate grasp of the facts and 
the confident person isspeaking utter utter bilge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2012/aug/16/antidote-celebrities-promote-homeopathy>
.

Fame and success is all the evidence you need, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/apr/06/gwyneth-paltrows-bee-sting-beauty-treatment-just-wont-fly>
 not confusing numbers and data. Trust me, I’m (not) a scientist.



Dean Burnett (@garwboy <https://twitter.com/garwboy>) can’t really cure 
serious illness and is very suspicious of anyone who claims they can. This 
phenomenon and more are covered in Dean Burnett’s debut bookThe Idiot Brain 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Idiot-Brain-Neuroscientist-Explains-Really/dp/1783350814/ref=sr_1_1_twi_pap_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1465305829&sr=1-1>
.

The Idiot Brain 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Idiot-Brain-Neuroscientist-Explains-Really/dp/1783350814/ref=tmm_pap_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=1455958710&sr=1-1>
by Dean Burnett (Guardian Faber, £12.99). To order a copy for £7.99, go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370462/s/idiot-brain/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99. 


 