
The Guardian is to expand its event partnership with the global consultancy 
MediaGuru into Southeast Asia with the announcement that it is to hold one of 
its 2014 Activate Summits in Singapore for the first time.

Activate Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore> will take place 
on the 16 and 17 of January at the Marina Bay Sands resort.

Speakers at the event will include Mozilla Online's chairman and CEO, Li Gong, 
Paul Dempsey, president of BBC Worldwide, Arun Bansal, Ericsson's APAC 
president, Facebook's president of APAC Dan Neary, the eminent journalism 
professor and new media commentator Jeff Jarvis and Haoliang Xu, assistant 
secretary-general to the United Nations.

The Guardian's Activate platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate> brings together many of 
the world's most influential figures, through its online editorial network and 
a range of international events, to debate the role the open internet has to 
play in driving positive social change on a global scale.

The first Activate event took place in London in 2009 and since then has 
expanded globally with annual events in New York, Delhi and now Singapore, with 
plans for an Activate Africa event in April 2014 soon to be announced.

Previous Activate speakers have included Google executive chairman Eric 
Schmidt, LinkedIn founder Reid Hoffman, Arianna Huffington, president of The 
Huffington Post, Craigslist founder Craig Newmark, Facebook co-founder Chris 
Hughes and Twitter co-founder Ev Williams.

The event will also include the Activate Singapore Tech Talent day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/oct/15/activate-tech-talent-day-startup>
 - a one-day event and pitching competition for global and regional startups 
and a format which has run previously with great success at Activate Summits in 
London and New York. The winning startup will earn the right to present at the 
Activate Summit the next day alongside some of the world's leading names in 
media and tech, as well as receiving $50,000 SGD in funding from MediaGuru and 
Â£100,000 in advertising across the Guardian's global media and tech platform.

Announcing the expansion, Robin Hough, editor of the Guardian's Media and Tech 
Network, said: "The internet continues to bring the world closer together and 
at the Guardian we're committed to encouraging debate between diverse, global 
audiences in line with our open and digital-first strategies.

"We're delighted to be bringing the Guardian Activate Summit to Singapore and 
the wider Southeast Asia region where rapid growth in digital technologies is 
having a real impact in terms of innovation, and where individuals and 
organisations are able to effect positive change through these technologies. 
We're looking forward to engaging with, and providing a platform for more 
fascinating conversations about the influence of web technologies on the world, 
both at the event and online through the Activate platform."

Poonam Sharma, director of MediaGuru, said: "Activate is a global platform to 
showcase and talk about new technologies, innovation and thought leadership in 
the digital space. We decided to bring it to Singapore because, as the 
technology hub of Asia, innovation is very high on the agenda here.

"We strongly feel that in the given global technology landscape, Singapore's 
growth has been phenomenal and we see Activate becoming a landmark event in 
bringing the work and focus of Singapore in technology to a wider global 
audience. Activate will also offer great business opportunities to young 
Start-ups through its Tech Talent competition, which will celebrate the best 
applications of innovation and entrepreneurship to tackle global problems and 
stimulate global growth."

To find out more about Activate Singapore click here >> 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore>

To register your place at Activate Singapore click here >> 
<https://www.eventsmicrosite.com/theguardian/activatesingapore/>
 