
A diminutive but wise teacher of the Jedi arts, a bumbling French detective 
and a charismatic but controversial African American leader can now rest easy â€” 
the movies they appeared inhave been inducted into a prestigious list of 
"culturally significant" US films 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/empire-strikes-airplane-25-movies-65915>.

In its annual announcement, the US National Film Registry of the Library of 
Congress has named 25 movies which it considers ready to be added to its vault. 
This year's additions bring the list's total figure to 550 movies. The 
selection spans almost the entire history of Hollywood film-making, from 1891 
to 1996.

Among the new films are two George Lucas movies from very different stages of 
his career. 1980's Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back, which Lucas wrote but 
did not direct, joins his 15-minute student film Electronic Labyrinth: THX 1138 
4EB, made in 1967 at the University of Southern California, in the vaults. 
Blake Edwards, who died earlier this month, is honoured with the addition to 
the list of 1964's The Pink Panther, the first of his Inspector Clouseau films. 
Spike Lee finds his way into the library via Malcolm X, his 1992 biopic of the 
militant black leader.

Other films to make the registry include Robert Altman's 1971 naturalist 
"anti-western" McCabe and Mrs Miller, starring Warren Beatty and Julie 
Christie, and John Huston's Let There Be Light, a 58-minute 1946 documentary 
about the trauma sustained by American soldiers in the second world war. The 
film was commissioned by the US Army, but subsequently banned for more than 30 
years for fear it would damage recruitment drives for the armed forces.

The 1980 comedy Airplane! <https://www.theguardian.com/film/airplane>, 
starring the late Leslie Nielson, also made the list, as did Elia Kazan's first 
feature, A Tree Grows in Brooklyn, from 1945.

"The National Film Registry is a reminder to the nation that the preservation 
of our cinematic creativity must be a priority, because about half of the films 
produced before 1950 and as much as 90% of those made before 1920 have been 
lost to future generations," said the Librarian of Congress, James H Billington.

The most recent film to make the registry is Peter Hutton's Study of a River, 
from 1996. Far from being a blockbuster, it's a beguiling examination of the 
life of the Hudson river as seen through Hutton's camera lens.

For all the new additions, click here 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/empire-strikes-airplane-25-movies-65915?page=2>
. And for the full list,click here 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Film_Registry>.
 