
One hundred years after “the war to end all wars”, young British soldiers are 
still coming home from battlefields, just as their fathers and grandfathers 
did. Last week, the union jack was lowered for the last time at Camp Bastion, a 
desert settlement the size of Reading that has been HQ of UK operations in 
Afghanistan since 2006. Of the many thousands of troops who passed through Camp 
Bastion, 453 would die inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, with many more mutilated, 
injured and traumatised.

On Sunday, Remembrance Day, veterans of Britain’s fourth Afghan war, a 
conflict that according to a BBC poll  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-29784195>68% of Britons consider to have 
been “not worthwhile”, will salute the flag, stiffen to attention at the sound 
of the Last Post and remember the dead.

Like the veterans of Ypres, the Somme and El Alamein, these soldiers will 
spend a lifetime answering questions about their service in this foreign field.

What is it like to survive combat and return home ? What does it mean to put 
yourself in harm’s way serving Queen and country? Is fighting the Taliban 
different from fighting the Kaiser? What, ultimately, does it mean to be a 
soldier ?

These are among the issues that the former poet laureate, Andrew Motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion>, recently explored with some 
contemporary British soldiers serving with the 7th Armoured Brigade, the 
renowned military unit known as the Desert Rats. Having fought in Afghanistan, 
principally in Helmand province, as part of Operation Herrick 19, these 
soldiers have been coming home to their base in Germany throughout 2014, 
leaving the purple-brown landscape of Afghanistan for the green grass of 
Europe. Now they’re all back, and Motion has been turning their memories into 
free verse, “a kind of collaboration”, he says. (See below.)

Motion found an experience of ageless meaning. “Although I was only with them 
for a few days, it was extraordinarily intense and moving,” he told theObserver
. “Partly because the guys themselves were so impressive. And partly because I 
could (figuratively speaking) hear my father moving about in the basement.”

Like many baby boomers, Motion, a youthful 61, lives in the shadow of the 
second world war, still coming to terms with the wartime career of his father, 
Richard, who landed at Gold Beach on D-Day as a 20-year-old tank commander with 
the Essex Yeomanry. The landing was traumatic, but Captain Motion survived to 
fight his way through France and Germany until, in the spring of 1945, he found 
himself outside the gates of Belsen , one of the first to witness the horrific 
aftermath of the Holocaust. Through the accident of that war, the Desert Rats’ 
base at Bad Fallingbostel is scarcely 5km from Belsen.

Motion confesses he is obsessed by his father’s war. “All my early memories of 
him are in uniform,” he says. “I remember him talking about the smell of 
Belsen.” For the poet, Captain, later Colonel, Motion’s experience defined 
“what it meant to be a man/boy, and what it meant to be brave”. Now he has 
translated his visit to the base into a sequence of poems, calledComing Home.

The mission has also provided a rare insight into the cost of the military 
occupation of Afghanistan since 2001.

The mood in Bad Fallingbostel, is, he reports, what you might expect. “They’re 
relieved to be safely back and bloody pleased to be alive. Every one of them 
knew someone who was killed or blown up by an IED [improvised explosive 
device]. Suicide bombers and IEDs were the biggest threats to their safety.”

For the returning troops, Motion says, “the worst memories were of seeing 
children suffer, and of other innocent locals who got in the way, and of course 
of seeing allied troops injured or killed”. In one poem he refers to “a shower 
of Afghan fingers”, a good example of something he says he found quite often 
among the troops – the instinct to make something horrible into a black joke. 
“You could find the same thing in Homer.”

Soldiering is timeless and Motion’s response treads across scarred ground: the 
futility of war; the majesty of the battlefield; the preciousness of everyday 
life; the relief of taking a swim after combat in temperatures of 95F in full 
body armour; the urge to bear witness; and the eternal solace of comradeship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fandrew-motion-desert-rates-remembrance-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F8%2F1415453876649%2F8f2966e8-117b-48a7-b9fd-874df7927c70-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20poet%2C%20the%20soldiers%20and%20a%20unique%20portrait%20of%20war%20for%20these%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fandrew-motion-desert-rates-remembrance-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20poet%2C%20the%20soldiers%20and%20a%20unique%20portrait%20of%20war%20for%20these%20times&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fnov%2F09%2Fandrew-motion-desert-rates-remembrance-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F8%2F1415453876649%2F8f2966e8-117b-48a7-b9fd-874df7927c70-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Andrew Motion Photograph: Karen Robinson/for the Observer 
Motion reports that he did not find, and did not expect to find, another 
Wilfred Owen. He comments that, in a lethal combat zone such as Helmand, “you 
find that stiff upper lip has stiffened a good deal. That’s as it should be. 
You don’t want a lot of mincing poets going over the top.”

In conversation with the Desert Rats, he says, he was conscious “of quite a 
lot of stuff going unsaid. They don’t really have the language to deal with the 
bad stuff. Who does? In between the lines, I detected a strong intimation of 
repressed sorrow.” The regimental padre, David Anderson, talks about “a bow 
wave of trauma”.

At the same time, the men of 7th Armoured Brigade are fighters, proud of their 
regiment and its history. Motion again: “Monty [General Montgomery] himself 
wasn’t mentioned, but they were a band of brothers all right. When they 
reminisced about being in action, there was no doubt they were fighting first 
and foremost for one another.”

The Desert Rats, he says, were “all pretty clear about the history of their 
presence in Helmand”. They knew that “the wheel has turned here many times 
before”. They were, however, “convinced they had done good work”. For the 
British contingent, the retreat to base camp at Bad Fallingbostel was “not a 
defeat”. There was also, he says, “a widespread view that we were better at it 
[occupying Afghanistan] than the Russians”.

Motion’s inner dialogue with his father’s memory coloured his own mission to 
Germany, but he was conscious of the incongruity of his presence among the 
Desert Rats. “I was so much a child of my time that, when I was growing up, all 
I wanted to do was grow my hair, smoke weed, look like a girl, and be as 
unmilitary as possible.”

He admits that his views have changed with age. “All my interest in and 
respect for the army, which is now very great, started to appear when I was in 
my 40s, something to do with my changing feelings for my father, I suppose, 
thanks to a greater understanding of how the army had shaped him.”

Going to Bad Fallingbostel, he was pleased to find that in all his encounters 
“regardless of age and background, everyone knew about Sassoon and Wilfred Owen 
and had great admiration for them, because they felt spoken-for by their poems.”

Motion defined his own role, among the Desert Rats, as unegotistical. 
Privately, he wrestled with worries about “combat-voyeurism”, and decided he 
would listen to their witness and eliminate himself from the lines as much as 
possible, “concentrating on the soldiers themselves, and what they’d seen and 
felt and said. I wanted to write poetry in which my own ego hardly featured.”

Possibly the most moving poem in “Coming Home” is The Gardener, Motion’s 
rendering of a mother’s grief. Margaret Ivison lost her son Lieutenant Mark 
Ivison to a sniper in 2003. [see poem: The Gardener]. “In my imagination he is 
never dead”, says his mother, a line echoed in the poem. “I don’t want to die,” 
said her son, as he waited for the medevac helicopter.

Motion has written about war before. His last collection, The Customs House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/14/customs-house-andrew-motion-review>
, contains a sequence of poems called Laurels and Donkeys, which are about 
20th-century western wars, from the first world war to Iraq and Afghanistan, a 
body of work that will be recognised when he is awarded the 2014 Wilfred Owen 
prize on 12 November. “I’m pleased about this,” he says, “because my admiration 
for Owen amounts almost to reverence.”

What, finally, does he take away from his brush with life on the front line? 
“As a poet,” he reports, “it made me feel an unusual degree of responsibility 
to my subject – the pity of war, as Owen has it. As a Brit, it left me still 
wondering about the rights and wrongs of being there in the first place, but 
absolutely convinced that the soldiers themselves had done an amazingly good 
job in extremely difficult circumstances.

“And finally, as a man, it made me ask the questions I’ve felt as a shaping 
force all my life: questions about bravery, about selflessness, about 
capability, about the life of action as opposed to the life of thought. In the 
process, I think it brought to a kind of crisis in me lots of feelings I’ve 
always had about being the son of a soldier, but one who’s had the great good 
fortune to live in peace.”

Coming Home, by Andrew Motion, will be broadcast on BBC Radio 4 at 4.30pm on 
Remembrance Sunday.

War Debts (extracts)
by Lance Bombardier Stephen North


 You wonder how they miss you to be honest, throwing stuff over the walls. But 
they do miss you most of the time. One of my mates, he got hit, though, I say 
hit, by a shower of Afghan fingers. Suicide bomber, in the road outside. 
Normally the alarm gets you first but even then you’ll be wow, wow, something 
is real…

 Surreal if I’m honest with you. Surreal when I’m back at home.

The ease. The slow pace. 

In subway, for instance. Cucumbers. Tomatoes. You think: Get it done, so 
everyone can go! Just come on!

Then you leave and the road works are everywhere with nothing moving. And rain 
pattering down and clouds covering the stars.

 The war debts will come out then. You think: My weapon. Where is my weapon? 
And you look for it. You did everything with your weapon and urgh. You miss it. 
Nobody understands. You miss it. You went to the toilet with it. And the shower 
with it. You went running with it. You did everything with it. If you had a 
doss bag, you kept it close as you could, or in your doss bag sort of.

It’s trust, you see, you have to trust your weapon. It’s individual.

I’m Stephen North. Lance Bombardier Stephen North.

Lance Bombardier North served in Afghanistan from September 2013 to March 2014.

The Programme by Lance Corporal Ben Johnson


I’m an army brat. I was brought up to love the army. Basically I now do army 
intelligence work. I’m only 20.

It was difficult for mum to start with. Take good care of yourself she said; 
keep your head down; be a grey man.

But you can’t do that, no. You see it. You see it and you think it isn’t real, 
until you get smells and other things.

I miss the gym, did I mention the gym? I did the Insanity Training Programme 
and I loved that. I followed that through.

Lance Corporal Johnson was based in Kabul for six months.

One Tourniquet by Sergeant Vicky Clarke


It was a long time ago but I was there, a combat medical technician.

I saw children and IEDs which wasn’t nice at all. 

One boy: he had shorts and a dirty vest, he stood on a mine; he was conscious 
at first, screaming, and I thought

what a mess. 

All in bit of field.

None of the other kids cried, they’re quite sort of tough.

Very tough kids in fact.

Definitely.

At the time we were only issued one tourniquet each. Camp Phoenix was down the 
road and he went there.

A double amputee. But we heard later he survived. 

So yeah, brilliant.

Everything is hard. Everything they’ve got to do, everywhere they’ve got to 
go. Just hard.

I used to imagine little towns in the country nobody knew. 

Little towns nobody had touched. 

There would be people living there all the same.

Just living there in the vastness. 

Sergeant Clarke, a combat medicial technician, served at Camp Suter, Kabul, in 
2002, working in the hospital and as part of an ambulance crew.
 