
Today is the internet's 40th birthday. Well, not exactly the internet but 
Arpanet – the Pentagon-funded research project that is the predecessor to the 
internet. Forty years ago, a simple message "Lo" (it was supposed to be 
"Login", but the system crashed) was sent between two computers at two 
Californian research labs and a net was born. What happened next – the 
development of the now global internet, the web that you are reading this on – 
has had an impact on all of us. Last week, the Guardian published aninteractive 
people's history of the internet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/interactive/2009/oct/23/internet-arpanet> 
telling the story of how that happened and interviewing some of the people who 
made it so.

Charley Kline and Bill Duvall – who made that first connection between the 
University of California, Los Angeles and the Stanford Research Institute – are 
in there, as are pioneers of politics, social interaction and gaming online.

Kline admits the importance was not recognised at the time. "It was neat that 
it was working ... but nobody recognised that it was the beginning of 
something," he says – but what would develop from that first connection has had 
a huge influence on how we live today.

It is also worth remembering the perhaps unexpected nature of those who made 
this military-funded network. Oliver Burkeman spoke to Leonard Kleinrock, the 
UCLA professor who led the project, for a complementary piece on howthe 
internet changed the world for ever 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2009/oct/23/internet-40-history-arpanet>, 
noting that the Arpanet's development into what we have today was never 
inevitable.

It was a crucial idiosyncrasy of the Arpanet that its funding came from the 
American defence establishment – but that the millions ended up on university 
campuses, with researchers who embraced an anti-establishment ethic, and who in 
many cases were committedly leftwing; one computer scientist took great 
pleasure in wearing an anti-Vietnam badge to a briefing at the Pentagon. 
Instead of smothering their research in the utmost secrecy – as you might 
expect of a cold war project aimed at winning a technological battle against 
Moscow – they made public every step of their thinking, in documents known as
Requests For Comments <http://www.rfc-editor.org/>.

That thinking followed through and the internet – open both for people and 
machines thanks to the run-anywhere systems at its heart – would eventually win 
out over attempts in the 1980s to create more tightly controlled networks. It 
is also a spirit that informed Tim Berners-Lee's later World Wide Web (not the 
same as the internet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2009/oct/23/passnotes-the-internet>) when 
the Cern European particle physics laboratory released it royalty-free for 
anyone to use.

Lots more contributed to the internet we have today – bulletin boards, Usenet, 
dial-up modems, innovators and hobbyists outside the research labs – butArpanet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/arpanet> was the foundation stone and 
is worth remembering.
 