
The Maze Runner, the first instalment of Hollywood’s latest young adult 
science fiction saga, hastopped the US box office 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/box-office-maze-runner-crushes-734531> 
with a haul of $32.5m (£20m) in its first week of release.

The dystopian tale, which stars the New York-born actor Dylan O’Brien, along 
with Britain’s Will Poulter, Kaya Scodelario and Thomas Brodie-Sangster, 
centres on a group of teenage boys trapped in a giant labyrinth with no memory 
of how they got there. Threatened by mechanical creatures known as Grievers, 
they struggle to make sense of their predicament until the arrival of a 
mysterious girl.

The film’s success in a crowded marketplace for young adult fare has rapidly 
encouraged 20th Century Fox to green light a sequel, The Maze Runner: Scorch 
Trials, which isdue in September 2015 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/maze-runner-sequel-september-2015-1201310235/>
. The films are based on the trilogy of novels by James Dashner, the final 
instalment of which is entitled The Death Cure.

“It was a perfect storm,” Fox distribution chief Chris Aronson told the 
Hollywood Reporter. “We went after teenagers hard and did everything to 
eventise this film in a play period never tested before. We accomplished the 
task.”

Liam Neeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/liam-neeson>’s private-eye 
thriller, A Walk Among the Tombstones, based on the novel by Lawrence Block, 
claimed second place, taking $13.2m on its debut, while the comedy drama This 
Is Where I Leave You, fromDate Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/135147/date-night>’s Shawn Levy, bowed 
in one place behind on $11.9m. The top five was rounded off by last week’s No1, 
theIdris Elba <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> thriller No Good 
Deed <https://www.theguardian.com/film/no-good-deed>, which took $10.2m in its 
second week, and the family-friendly animated sequelDolphin Tale 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dolphin-tale-2>, which added $9m to its first 
week takings.

The only other new wide release (following a limited opening last week) was 
The Drop, an indie crime drama based on Dennis Lehane’s 2009 short story Animal 
Rescue, and featuringJames Gandolfini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-gandolfini> in one of his final 
roles. StarringTom Hardy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hardy> as a 
maudlin bar owner caught up in a robbery gone wrong, as well as Noomi Rapace 
and Matthias Schoenaerts, the well-received Toronto hit recouped another $4.2m 
in ninth place, and has now made $7.6m against a budget of $12.6m.

Elsewhere on the chart, superhero space opera Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy> hit a total of 
$313.7m in its eighth week, adding $5.2m to secure sixth spot and overtake 
Marvel Studios stablemateIron Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man-2> in the process. Meanwhile, former 
No1Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles> dropped to 
eighth, taking $2.7m in its sixth week of release.

North American top 10, 19-21 September 2014

1. The Maze Runner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-maze-runner> $32.5m

2. A Walk Among the Tombstones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-walk-among-the-tombstones> $13.1m

3. This is Where I Leave You $11.7m 

4. No Good Deed <https://www.theguardian.com/film/no-good-deed> $10.2m. Total: 
$40.1m

5. Dolphin Tale 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dolphin-tale-2> $9m. 
Total: $27.1m

6. Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy> $5.2m. Total: $313.7m

7. Let’s Be Cops. $2.7m. Total: $77.2m

8. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles> $2.6m. Total: 
$185m

9. The Drop <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-drop> $2.1m. Total: $7.7m

10. If I Stay $1.8m. Total: $47.7m

 