
If anything could match the joy of watching David Warner rattle off his most 
historically significant century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/david-warner-smashes-century-before-lunch-at-the-scg-third-test>
, it was the delight in Bill Lawry’s voice telling the story as it happened.

“Beautiful!” he roared when Warner lashed his first of a half-dozen boundaries 
to point. Then, “Oh, he is making this look easy, this is Test cricket!” when 
the next ball provoked the same treatment. Lawry’s elation was meshed with 
envy: he knows better than almost anyone on the planet that his old job is 
never meant to beeasy.

Australia in command of SCG Test after centuries to Warner and Renshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/australia-in-command-of-scg-test-after-centuries-to-warner-and-renshaw>
“Bang! Oh wonderful! Absolutely wonderful!” was his exclamation when the 
Matraville Mauler unfurled a cover drive from one knee in a pose reminiscent of 
pictures mocked up of yesterday’s champions, a couple of whom he would shortly 
join in the record books.

Whimsically, Lawry observed how must it be for people coming to the SCG on 
Tuesday for their first Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/03/australia-v-pakistan-third-test-day-one-live>
. How they may never see anything like this again. As Warner became only the 
fifth man in 2245 fixtures over 140 years to reach a century before lunch on 
day one, Lawry concluded that it was “a great moment for Test cricket”.

It really was. In this line of work, the temptation is to add mayonnaise to 
the good in order to pass it off as great.Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> lends itself to rubbish statistics 
that we’re all guilty of drawing upon. But this is not one. The mystique around 
centuries in a session is well established, but rarest of all if the first 
session of a Test.

Victor Trumper’s cricket life may be defined by the image of him driving so 
lavishly, but also for achieving the aforementioned feat against the English. 
Don Bradman’s 309 in a day at Leeds elevated him to superstar status at age 21, 
and began with a ton by lunch, too.

“No one could do this but him,” was the assessment of his former opening 
partner Chris Rogers. Maybe it was inevitable, despite the increased degree of 
difficulty as opening sessions have got shorter. Bradman faced 153 balls to 
lunch in 1930; there were 162 in total in the corresponding two hours today.

At Adelaide in 2014 Warner had 77 to lunch, but the interval was taken after 
24 overs. He was on 67 at the same ground two years earlier when 24 overs were 
completed. Mohammad Amir limping from the SCG with five minutes on the clock 
ensured only 27 would be available here.

Rogers and Lawry both pointed to the array of strokes that Warner can execute 
when conditions are notionally at their toughest, bowlers at their fittest. It 
doesn’t help when Warner has an expectation management problem. Never has a man 
made 144 from fewer balls and left the field as derided as he did in Melbourne 
last week.

It stands to reason that on his home ground he was ready to make a statement. 
Warner had made a century in a session before, in Perth when he was a brash 
basher, rocketing balls at will between cow corner and, well, cow corner. 
Tuesday was defined by placement through the posh side.

The crisp clip, the drive and the precise pull – knee in the air, of course – 
were all part of the ensemble, bisecting sweepers deployed far earlier than any 
captain wants. An uppercut was the response to short-pitched bowling, defense 
masked as attack by the tourists.

But he returned time and again to the offside force from the balls of his 
feet. It’s hardly a shot kids will dream of playing, but it is where Warner 
makes his money. In a competitive field, there was no better than the version 
of the stroke he played on 89; leaning, crunching and caressing all at the same 
time.

At the other end, Matt Renshaw’s time would come later. Unflustered, instead 
of trying to mimic his senior partner, Renshaw gave him time to relax, free of 
drama. Where the urging from the crowd was for the 20-year-old to take a single 
in the penultimate over before the break, he defended and left. Job done.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-rarest-of-all-david-warners-century-before-lunch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F655b54c21e194de8ffc4883449629bb0df091fde%2F0_17_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rarest%20of%20all%3A%20David%20Warner's%20century%20before%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-rarest-of-all-david-warners-century-before-lunch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rarest%20of%20all%3A%20David%20Warner%27s%20century%20before%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fthe-rarest-of-all-david-warners-century-before-lunch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F655b54c21e194de8ffc4883449629bb0df091fde%2F0_17_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Matt Renshaw was assessed for concussion after being struck by a bouncer but 
recovered to end the day unbeaten on 167 in only his fourth Test. Photograph: 
Rick Rycroft/AP 
Acutely aware of what Warner was on the cusp of achieving, the crowd roared 
“Twooooooooo!” as he whirred between the wickets to the first ball of the final 
over – sure enough, out towards point. Then “Staaaaaaay!” as they did precisely 
that rather than take on the arm, and potentially stall their mission two runs 
short.

Short memories as Australian selectors return to all-rounder obsession | Sam 
Perry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/short-memories-as-australian-selectors-return-to-all-rounder-obsession>
Three to get, the shot was replicated behind point and Renshaw again held up 
his end of the bargain when calling Warner through on the back of a misfield 
from Yasir Shah. Mouth wide open as Warner passed the umpire at the bowler’s 
end, he ran an entire extra pitch before launching into his well-worn 
celebration. A kiss of the badge, a wave of the bat towards his fallen mate 
above, before acknowledging the adoring crowd.

Sure, Pakistan had been poor. CricViz identified that only 2% of Imran’s 
deliveries and 1.5% of Wahab Riaz’s were hitting the stumps while Warner was at 
the crease. But it’s probably fair to assume that England didn’t bowl the house 
down to Bradman or Trumper.

The very idea of Warner as a Test opener required perseverance. He was a long 
time convincing the masses that he had the tools for the job. Now he’s the 
prototype for the modern man at the top of the list as much as Renshaw is for 
the conventional. Warner is living proof there is room for both, and on days 
like today inspiration for a host of others who may not quite fit.
 