
Welcome to the Armchair Olympian's diary, the definitive guide to the Games 
for those of you who have neither the time, inclination or permission to sit at 
home slouched in front of the telly all day, every day, soaking up London 2012 
in HD. If it makes you feel any better, I'm being paid to do it. Actually, that 
probably makes you feel worse, but it makes me feel better. Enough introduction 
– let the Games begin!

******

Seriously, let them, already. At 11am BBC1 is showing Cowboy Trap (Clive and 
the team visit Eltham, where a builder has run off with a client's money, 
leaving behind an unfinished extension), BBC2 has got an episode of In the 
Night Garden (the Tombliboos hear Igglepiggle's musical stepping stones) and 
BBC3 is, at this hour, nothing more than a throbbing logo.

*******

I know the Olympics haven't officially started, but we've already experienced 
both triumph and tragedy – a win for the GB women's football team, and a flag 
mix-up involving the one nation destined not to see the funny side – and I was 
led to believe I'd be spoilt for choice from now on. Instead my options appear 
to be A) highlights from yesterday's matches on Eurosport, or B) switching to 
Sky Sports News to watch a competitor explain archery (it is, as you might 
imagine, pretty self-explanatory).

********

12pm. At last, some live action: the first group match in the men's football 
is on the air. Under any other circumstances, were I to find myself watching 
Morocco play Honduras on Eurosport at midday on a sunny Thursday, I might have 
to have a stern word with myself about prioritising my remaining time on Earth. 
But this is different – this is the Olympics.

******

The BBC's coverage finally begins at 2.30pm, and almost immediately I have to 
go out. There's nothing a true Armchair Olympian dislikes more than having to 
leave one's armchair, but this just happened to be the day that the Olympic 
torch relay was to make its nearest pass to my house. When my grandchildren ask 
me where I was when Sir Bruce Forsyth briefly held the flame aloft outside the 
BBC Media Centre, I don't want to say I was 300 metres away watching Spain play 
Japan with the curtains drawn.

*********

In hindsight, I might have preferred the match. I caught only the briefest 
glimpse of Brucie, and also Pudsey - the injured bear, not the clever dog. In 
any case, I attended the event largely for historical reasons: the BBC Media 
Centre, you see, is on the site of the 1908 Olympic marathon finish line. It 
was here that the frontrunner, Dorando Pietri, fell over several times and was 
helped to his feet by well-meaning officials, earning him disqualification. It 
is therefore the spiritual home of Olympic incompetence. I crossed that line, 
and returned determined to try harder. Until tomorrow.

***********

Olympic quote of the day: "Neither team here will want to lose today." 
Incisive, hard-to-refute commentary from the Honduras-Morocco fixture. In the 
end neither did lose – it was a 2-2 draw.
 