
Australian cultural identity is balanced at the edge of a cliff.

This country’s scientific advancement, its artistic communities and the 
national institutions that curate its stories and make it possible to tell new 
ones are buckling under what can only be seen as ideologically driven federal 
government funding cuts.

The internationally lauded CSIRO is shedding hundreds of jobs, many in its 
climate science realm.

Last Friday the full legacy of the federal coalition government’s $300m-plus 
cuts to the arts sector since 2013 (including a net $73m to the Australia 
Council) became apparent when “OzCo” announced which (mostly) small to medium 
sized arts organisations had lost funding.

The net creative and human impact of this will be vast and catastrophic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/16/australia-council-cuts-theatre-companies-lament-dark-days-for-arts>
. It will cost hundreds, perhaps thousands, of livelihoods across the sectors. 
Arts administrators, writers, performers, visual artists, dancers, 
choreographers – many of whom already struggle to cobble together a living wage 
– are in personal crisis.

Meanwhile, after years of successive budget cuts, Australia’s leading national 
cultural institutions are also shedding dozens of staff and considering 
savings, including shorter opening hours and abandoning critical digitisation, 
to cope with another “efficiency dividend” (read funding attack to the tune of 
about $20m) in the last mid-year economic and fiscal outlook.

Australian election 2016: Turnbull asked about Dutton's claim 'illiterate' 
refugees would take jobs – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/18/australian-election-2016-peter-dutton-says-illiterate-refugees-will-take-australian-jobs-politics-live>
The emasculation of the arts sector and the attack on publicly funded 
scientific research that began under Tony Abbott’s administration has continued 
seamlessly under Malcolm Turnbull. While arts communities easily cast Abbott as 
a villainous Philistine and held out hope that his more urbane successor would 
put his money where his artistic patronage was, Turnbull has just been more of 
the same with nicer manners.

Unlike Abbott, Turnbull believes in the science of climate change and the 
virtue of investment in the arts – but does it matter if the outcome is the 
same? How does Australia really want to see itself, and be seen?

Since well before federation the Australian colonies exported their stories, 
culture, history and innovation, participating in world expositions from London 
in 1851 and Paris in 1855 to Chicago in 1893. The colonial cringe gave way to a 
20th century of international achievement, recognition and endeavour in 
research and artistic production that gathered pace (ironically perhaps) with 
the establishment of the Australia Council by the Liberal Holt government in 
1967.

Australia has a long tradition of bipartisan political support – demonstrated 
by funding commitments – for the ethos that a healthy creative sector, 
supported by government, is a vital sign of democracy and civilisation. The 
Australia Council has been critical to that. Funding for the arts has waxed and 
waned and been eroded by inflation, but fundamental support has remained 
largely consistent.

The virtue of OzCo’s funding of individuals, as well as medium-sized and large 
artistic entities, has been at once the sustainability of a broad arts sector 
that employs hundreds of thousands, and the encouragement of individual 
excellence. In literature alone, dozens of Australian writers who have made 
(and continue to make) national and international names for themselves would 
not have been able to without Australia Council financial support.

Adversity in artistic pursuit is nothing new. But there is now a pervading 
sense that first Abbott’s and now Turnbull’s governments are demonstrating open 
hostility towards the creative sector.

The national institutions (the Film and Sound Archive, the National Library of 
Australia, the National Museum, the Portrait Gallery, the Museum of Australian 
Democracy and the National Gallery)battle on, doing more with less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/feb/22/our-major-cultural-institutions-are-in-crisis-and-our-history-is-being-militarised>
, losing staff through redundancy and attrition, all the while nobly continuing 
to financially support individual artists through fellowships and stipends.

While devastating, the latest $20m or so cut in the midyear outlook is – like 
the attack on Australia Council funding and the recent budget “savings” in the 
arts more generally – small change for the government, considering its other 
priorities. Likereplacing submarines ($50bn) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/france-to-build-australias-new-submarine-fleet-as-50bn-contract-awarded>
 and imprisoning asylum seekers in offshore living hell ($1.2bn last year for 
Nauru and Manus alone 
<http://www.refugeeaction.org.au/?page_id=3447%E2%80%9D%20http://www.refugeeaction.org.au/?page_id=3447>
).

Arts workers should be angry about funding cuts – we can't work harder for less
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/13/the-arts-industry-has-the-right-to-be-angry-about-funding-cuts-it-cant-possibly-work-any-harder>
Government spending is a window into ideological priority. It tells us what 
governments choose to celebrate.

Right now, for example, the government is investing up to $600m of public and 
private money in the Anzac centenary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2015/oct/13/keeping-place-for-stolen-indigenous-remains-should-take-priority-over-anzac-centre>
. It includes some $100m on an “interpretative centre” in France, dedicated to 
Australian war dead who are already appropriately memorialised.

What a difference that money could make to the living.

The attacks on national institutions, arts and science makes for a holy 
trinity of cultural crises.

Australia’s strong reputation as a place that cultivates and nurtures artistic 
and knowledge culture stands at the edge of a precipice.

Will it stand or will it fall?
 