
Whenever ice comes it seems to change the world which makes it seem very 
powerful. Are there any good books about how ice changes things and in what way?

Ice, like snow, changes the look and feel of the world and creates new 
possibilities. Its sudden arrival, and its extraordinary formation and 
transparency, give it a magical aura. It also creates new dangers – terrible 
dangers which are particularly risky because the ice itself is so attractive. 
And that’s all in the real world.


In stories, ice is equally attractive and inspiring but its power to destroy 
is never far away; the very real jeopardy of ice is an excellent fictional 
tool. Children are always warned about NOT going on ice but sometimes ice can 
be the perfect way to enjoy something special.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fsnowzilla-best-icy-snow-books-for-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F112275dc9fc2d16780fc0a6f6233a52a5aaff810%2F0_0_976_1521%2F976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20books%20about%20snow%20and%20ice%20for%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fsnowzilla-best-icy-snow-books-for-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20books%20about%20snow%20and%20ice%20for%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fsnowzilla-best-icy-snow-books-for-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F112275dc9fc2d16780fc0a6f6233a52a5aaff810%2F0_0_976_1521%2F976.jpg>
That’s certainly the case in Philippa Pearce’s classic Tom’s Midnight Garden 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalogsearch/result/?q=Tom%E2%80%99s+Midnight+Garden&order=relevance&dir=desc>
. In it, Tom meets Hatty, a girl who lived in the same house but at a different 
time, and together the two skate from Cambridge to Ely, or Castleford as it is 
called in the novel. Philippa Pearce captures the magical “flying” sensation of 
skating and the curious, ethereal change that comes over the countryside when 
the water is frozen over and the river can be used as a path. Being on the ice 
places the two children in a world that doesn’t always exist; it’s a perfect 
kind of unreality and gives the episode a timeless quality, which is especially 
effective in this time-slip novel.

In Arthur Ransome’s Winter Holiday 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/winter-holiday-3.html> the ice is an equally 
tempting and positive proposition; and one the children are longing for. Dick 
and Dorethea are newcomers to the Lake District and novices to the kind of 
adventures that can take place in it. They meet the Swallows and Amazons for 
the first time, and hope that in the remaining week of their school holiday the 
tarn will freeze over enough to become load bearing. As it is, while the tarn 
crackles with a thin layer of ice, it isn’t enough to hold anyone’s weight – as 
Nancy and Peggy find to their cost when they step onto it and get their feet 
soaked. Luckily, the weather gets colder and the tarn does become safe enough 
to skate on. Dick turns out to be a terrific skater; the ice provides him with 
a place where he can suddenly feel totally equal to the Swallows and Amazons 
who, in turn, develop a new respect for him and Dorethea – and immediately 
recognise their legitimate claim to a place on the Polar expedition. As Nancy 
Blackett puts it bluntly, “You teach me how to twiddle round and go backwards 
and I’ll teach you signalling.” As the cold intensifies so the ice grows. Soon 
the whole lake is frozen and, where the children once sailed to their 
adventures, they now skate and drag a sledge loaded with everything they need. 
The ice turns them into polar explorers with a new set of challenges and 
opportunities. As in Tom’s Midnight Garden, the ice is a new territory in which 
familiar hierarchies are broken down.

The sheer fun of skating on provides the background for Katherine Holabird’s 
popular heroine Angelina Ballerina who has a happy time skating on a frozen 
pond inAngelina Ice Skates 
<http://www.scholastic.com/teachers/book/angelina-ice-skates#cart/cleanup> 
illustrated by Helen Craig. There is never any danger of the ice cracking; the 
only trouble comes from a pair of bully boys but Angelina soon gets them to 
join in the fun.

There’s a similarly joyful feeling about the skating in Tara Lazar and Troy 
Cummings’sLittle Red Gliding Hood 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/225737/little-red-gliding-hood-by-tara-lazar-illustrated-by-troy-cummings/9780385370066/>
 which gives a new take to a traditional tale when a little girl tries to find 
a new skating partner for a competition and picks on one with vey big eyes and 
very sharp teeth…

Nothing sinister happens on the ice in any of the books I’ve mentioned so far, 
but that is not always the case – in real life or fiction. Frequently, going on 
ice is an act of defiance or at least bravado so it is no surprise that it can 
be followed by terrible consequences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fsnowzilla-best-icy-snow-books-for-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbba57aa3e7ed482da3bc6808d93a74eff67a06a%2F0_0_634_1000%2F634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20books%20about%20snow%20and%20ice%20for%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fsnowzilla-best-icy-snow-books-for-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20books%20about%20snow%20and%20ice%20for%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fjan%2F25%2Fsnowzilla-best-icy-snow-books-for-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbba57aa3e7ed482da3bc6808d93a74eff67a06a%2F0_0_634_1000%2F634.jpg>
In Emma Carroll’s atmospheric Frost Hollow Hall 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/frost-hollow-hall.html>, Tilly is dared to go 
ice skating up at the big house. Frost Hollow Hall is rumoured to be haunted by 
the ghost of Kit Barrington, the son and heir, who died skating and Tilly has 
no desire to test the rumours to see if they are true. But she can’t resist 
Will’s dare. Setting off on the ice, all seems fine but, when the ice cracks, 
Tilly goes under and has a near-death experience from which she is miraculously 
saved. Who saves her? When Tilly sets out to find out who saved her she gets 
herself involved in a creepy and sad family drama about loss and forgiveness. 
Beyond individuals’ particular experiences, for whole communities, ice is 
typically seen as a sign of impending doom; a harbinger of a world coming 
brought to a temporary halt or even to an absolute end.

Susan Cooper’s evocative The Dark Is Rising  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dark-is-rising-2.html>sequence charts a 
battle between the forces of light and dark. In the second novel which gives 
the whole sequence its name, 11-year-old Will Stanton discovers that he is the 
last of the Old Ones. As such, he must find defeat the forces of the Dark by 
finding the Signs of Light. Everyone knows that the forces of Dark are growing 
because of the increasing cold. Will is particularly aware of this and he 
notices his parents becoming increasingly serious. “The news on the radio grew 
worse and worse as the cold gripped the country and one restriction followed 
another. In all records of temperature Britain had never been so cold; rivers 
that had never frozen before stood as solid ice, and every port on the entire 
coast was iced in. People could do little more than wait for the snow to stop; 
but still the snow fell.”

The grip of evil on CS Lewis’s Narnia 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/chronicles-of-narnia-265774.html> and Suzanne 
Collins’s Panem inThe Hunger Games 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hunger-games-8.html> are also both also made 
tangible by the ‘icy’ fingers which have engulfed the land. And nowhere is that 
more obvious than in Disney’s global brand musical Frozen which puts it right 
up there in the title! Adapted from Hans Christian Andersen’s The Snow Queen, 
in Frozen the power of the ice goes deeper even than stopping rivers flowing or 
trees blossoming; it goes right to the heart!

If you have great icy and snowy book recommendations let us know on Twitter 
@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> or by emailing 
childrens.books@theguardian.com and we’ll add your ideas to this blog. You can 
use the same email address to ASK the Book Doctor a books related question.
Emily Drabble (@EmilyDrabs) 
Of course I've got to add @kdbrundell <https://twitter.com/kdbrundell>'s The 
Wolf Wilder to this wonderful list of snow and ice books!@GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>
 <https://twitter.com/EmilyDrabs/status/691599687858659328> January 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/EmilyDrabs/status/691599687858659328> 
Paul, via email

Weirdstone of Brisingamen by Alan Garner – although not wintery throughout, 
the book’s third section takes place during ‘Fimbulwinter’.
Jo Clarke (@bookloverJo) 
Mustn't forget Pugs of the Frozen North by @philipreeve1 
<https://twitter.com/philipreeve1> @jabberworks 
<https://twitter.com/jabberworks> with 50 different types of snow love it ❄❄❄ 
https://t.co/1jKBaqlT0X <https://t.co/1jKBaqlT0X>
 <https://twitter.com/bookloverJo/status/691602553570725890> January 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bookloverJo/status/691602553570725890> Ellie Piper 
(@ElliePiperUK) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> No Moominland Midwinter??
 <https://twitter.com/ElliePiperUK/status/691603080836612096> January 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ElliePiperUK/status/691603080836612096> Rachel Maskelyne 
(@RachelMaskelyne) 
A Boy Called Christmas by @matthaig1 <https://twitter.com/matthaig1> features 
quite a bit of snow!@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>
 <https://twitter.com/RachelMaskelyne/status/691614017710854144> January 25, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/RachelMaskelyne/status/691614017710854144> Zoe Toft 
(@playbythebook) 
.@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> for a vintage snowy 
book, I've soft spot for The Story of the Snow Children by Sibylle von Olfers
https://t.co/tCGyVPYMEr <https://t.co/tCGyVPYMEr>
 <https://twitter.com/playbythebook/status/691636648153632769> January 25, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/playbythebook/status/691636648153632769> Karen Powell 
(@karenlpowell1) 
@GuardianBooks <https://twitter.com/GuardianBooks> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> 'Winter Holiday' a fave, Also 'White 
Boots', Noel Streatfield & 'The Wolves of Willoughby Chase' Joan Aiken
 <https://twitter.com/karenlpowell1/status/691647470271647746> January 25, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/karenlpowell1/status/691647470271647746> Jane Eagland 
(@jeeagland) 
.@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> The White Darkness 
@GMcCaughrean <https://twitter.com/GMcCaughrean> . Brilliant!
 <https://twitter.com/jeeagland/status/691660283790630913> January 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jeeagland/status/691660283790630913> Gill Lewis 
(@gill_lewis) 
@playbythebook <https://twitter.com/playbythebook> @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> @SamuelUsher 
<https://twitter.com/SamuelUsher> @dawnafinch <https://twitter.com/dawnafinch> 
have to add The Snow Merchant by@sam_gayton <https://twitter.com/sam_gayton>
 <https://twitter.com/gill_lewis/status/691906967988801538> January 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/gill_lewis/status/691906967988801538>  