
I am a hipster sympathiser. Even though it’s a word I can’t say out loud, I 
can only type. And then only if I la-la-la over the clicking of the keys. But I 
am pro-beard, pro-vintage cardies, pro-nail art with faces on, because I 
believe the hipster to be on the side of good. On the side of inclusiveness and 
outsiderness, and ethics, and “investing in the arts” and all of that sort of 
general nice-guy decency.

Except the hipster is no more. Despite reports in this very magazine that the 
hipster’s “flat white economy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/08/can-hipsters-save-the-world> 
is the future of British prosperity, its visual identity is floundering. As a 
word it has been swallowed by a stamp of a moustache, chewed up in its own 
teeth in a terrible accident of signifier/signified, and as a concept it has 
been destroyed by the brands that took this aesthetic mainstream. Hour by hour, 
the “hipster” fashion companies that have come to define it have declined ever 
further, another beanie unsold, another worn-in band T-shirt left another day. 
Urban Outfitters, with its stores like the set ofNew Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/dec/26/new-girl-box-set-review> 
and its clothes rails like the end of an Essex pool party, has seen sales fall 
steadily since 2011. American Apparel has lost so much money it hasn’t made a 
profit since 2009; last year it was nearly“delisted” from the New York Stock 
Exchange 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/sapna/american-apparel-might-get-delisted-from-the-new-york-stock%23.kq6qw3JZx#.wbyddBj6JL>
. And on an even more basic level, the clothes just no longer look… cool.

Those who have aligned themselves the tightest with this trend sound 
practically mournful when discussing it, in eulogies to lost youths, to 12in 
covers yet unframed. Others find it hard to get the facts out through their 
noisy glee. Of course, part of these brands’ decline is in their ubiquity, in 
the way they’ve made it too easy for us to pretend we crawled more than 50 good 
charity shops to get to one stone-washed jacket. But could it be simpler even 
than this? Simpler even than “fashion” or “marketing”. Simpler even than: “I’ve 
got enough swallows now, ta. All set for swallows.” Could it be that we’ve 
collectively decided we’re sick of their crap?

It was with Urban Outfitters’ third or fourth controversy – the women’s 
T-shirt that read “Eat Less” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/07/urban-outfitters-depression-shirt-controversy>
, maybe, or the time they ripped off a young jewellery designer’s collection, 
or their Navajo accessory line, including hip flask and knickers, or the 
pink-triangled tapestry the Anti-Defamation League claimed was “eerily 
reminiscent” of concentration camps, or the $100 T-shirt with a badge that 
looked quite a lot like the Star of David that Jews were forced to wear in Nazi 
Germany – that it became clear Urban Outfitters was thriving on the outrage. 
Was trading on its “edginess”.

Similarly, a few years ago the well-documented sleaze of American Apparel’s 
founderDov Charney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/jun/19/dov-charney-american-apparel>
 seemed to help the marketing of the brand. “Sex is inextricably linked to 
fashion and apparel,” said Charney. “And our clothing is connected to our 
sexual expression.” In their adverts, typically featuring girls bending over 
naked but for a pair of socks, they traded on their fair-labour practices, 
oblivious to claims that having a CEO who was said to have perpetuated a “reign 
of sexual terror” illustrated quite the opposite.

“I am a bit of a dirty guy,” Charney told a journalist in 2004, before 
masturbating in front of her, “but people like that right now.” Yeah, not any 
more, pal. Eleven years on, as labels and magazines refuse to work withTerry 
Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/17/terry-richardson-new-york-magazine-model>
(a hipster fashion brand all of his own) following his own misogyny and 
downfall, it is clear that people have changed their minds.Dov Charney was 
finally fired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/17/american-apparel-ceo-dov-charney-fired-fall-icon-sleaze>
 just before Christmas.

The hipster look is dying because of the failures of the fashion brands that 
supported it. It is dying because the things the companies do has crept too far 
from the lifestyle they sell. It is dying because, even in business, it is no 
longer acceptable to be a dick. This, too, I am pro.


Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk>. 
Follow Eva on Twitter@EvaWiseman <https://twitter.com/evawiseman>

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 