
Democratic Unionists took the decision to back the UK’s exit from the EU 
because we believed it was in the best interests of the UK as a whole. You can 
disagree with us, or regret the fact that we won, but it’s time now to move on. 
It is now essential that we all work together to get the best deal for the UK.

There are still too many people seeking to refight old battles. Then there are 
the fantasies that Brexit will be overturned,voiced most recently by that most 
imaginative of politicians, Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/28/tony-blair-remain-voters-to-mobilise-against-brexit>
. It won’t be.

Consider what upending those 17 million votes would mean – an anti-democratic 
poison the like of which our system has never seen. No responsible person can 
or should contemplate such a thing. If we do all work together, I am absolutely 
sure that we can get a sensible outcome for the nation. From aNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> perspective we have already 
had a good engagement with the government, and I am determined to make sure our 
interests are represented at the negotiating table.

Earlier this week, meeting with the prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/24/nicola-sturgeon-says-brexit-meeting-was-deeply-frustrating>
 as well as the leaders of the other devolved regions, I emphasised the need 
for the Northern Ireland executive to be fully represented in the negotiating 
process. That must mean nothing less than high-level and ongoing involvement in 
the process .

Nicola Sturgeon says Brexit meeting was 'deeply frustrating'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/24/nicola-sturgeon-says-brexit-meeting-was-deeply-frustrating>
Our key priorities include cross-border movement of people, goods and 
services; trading costs and business competitiveness; uncertainty on drawdown 
of EU funding; and support for our agri-food sector.

Clearly, just as the EU already does with its multiple land borders, I would 
expect Brussels to be sensible in its treatment of the Irish Republic border 
with the UK when we leave. Belfast, London and Dublin are all united in the 
view that the border must not become an impediment for us in terms of movement 
of people or goods. The UK government is also fully aware that there can be no 
question of hurdles being placed between NorthernIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> and our biggest market, which is 
the rest of the UK.

No one can plausibly deny that for each part of the UK, the most important 
trade (never mind social and cultural) relationships are those we have with the 
rest of the country. This is as true of us in Northern Ireland as it is in 
Scotland.

There is no evidence to support the case that either Scotland or Northern 
Ireland should stay in the EU “for the sake of” trade with the rest of the EU. 
The reality is that trade with the EU won’t stop when we’re out of it, any more 
than it does for those who have never been in it. Just like the US, China, and 
Australia, the Brexited UK will quite capably conduct trade with the EU.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fbritain-joined-eu-one-nation-thats-how-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5e0b7a09089540987a9402283aa358003e7f564%2F191_185_3689_2213%2F3689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain%20joined%20the%20EU%20as%20one%20nation%2C%20and%20that%E2%80%99s%20how%20we%E2%80%99ll%20leave%20%7C%20Arlene%20Foster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fbritain-joined-eu-one-nation-thats-how-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%20joined%20the%20EU%20as%20one%20nation%2C%20and%20that%E2%80%99s%20how%20we%E2%80%99ll%20leave%20%7C%20Arlene%20Foster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fbritain-joined-eu-one-nation-thats-how-leave%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5e0b7a09089540987a9402283aa358003e7f564%2F191_185_3689_2213%2F3689.jpg>
 ‘Whatever the outcome of the Brexit negotiations we must not allow it to 
divert and distract from the normal business of government.’ Deputy first 
minister of Northern Ireland Martin McGuinness and first minister of Northern 
Ireland Arlene Foster after their meeting with Theresa May. Photograph: Leon 
Neal/Getty Images 
Five simple principles will govern how I approach the negotiations. First, 
Brexit means Brexit, and that means the whole of the UK leaves the EU. We 
joined the EU together, we voted on Brexit together, we will leave the EU 
together. Second, the economic and social benefits for us in Northern 
Ireland from the UK are far more important than our relationship with the EU. 
Third, any deal should recognise the reality of Northern Ireland’s geography 
and of our history. Fourth, we will work with whomever we need to for the best 
deal for Northern Ireland at home and abroad.

Finally, whatever the outcome of the Brexit negotiations we must not allow it 
to divert and distract from the normal business of government, nor should it be 
used as a basis to reopen settled political agreements.

I don’t pretend that it will be all plain sailing, but there are real and 
exciting new prospects for the UK outside the EU. I can’t help but remember the 
disasters we were told would befall us by the same people moaning about Brexit 
when we made the so-called fatal error of not joining the euro.

I have confidence that Theresa May will be able to manage intra-UK relations 
while negotiating with details of our exit from the EU

No one in Northern Ireland can look at the Irish Republic and feel anything 
other than sympathy for what the EU has recently put it through. I say this 
not to knock the EU we’re leaving, or even to encourage others to do likewise. 
But I do hope Brexit will prove the shock that finally encourages reform and 
common sense in a system that for decades now has proven itself incapable of 
either.
 