
The Revenant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant>, Alejandro 
González Iñárritu’s Oscar-hunting epic, is a film that does many unique and 
wonderful things, but perhaps its greatest feat is how it manages to be 
simultaneously breathtaking and yawn-inducing.

Make no mistake: the film contains sensational moments. But at heart it’s a 
simple man-v-nature yarn that runs along much the same lines asTouching the Void
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/nov/21/sportandleisure>, All Is Lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/26/all-is-lost-review> or Gravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review>. The difference 
is that the latter three all had the good sense to appreciate that 
nerve-shredding intensity tends to sag at around the 100-minute mark. The 
Revenant obliges us to sit watching Leonardo DiCaprio’s beard accumulate frost 
– as fine a sight as that is – for over two and a half hours before the credits 
roll.

It is symptomatic of a trend. Only two of this year’s best-picture Oscar 
nominees come in at under two hours (the shortest,Brooklyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/05/brooklyn-review-saoirse-ronan-shines-in-nick-hornby-colm-toibin-drama>
, doing so by just eight minutes) – and yet 2016’s batch feels charitably short 
compared with recent others. Three years ago,Zero Dark Thirty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/24/zero-dark-thirty-review>, Lincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/24/lincoln-review>, Django Unchained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/17/django-unchained-review> and Les 
Misérables <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/10/miserables-review> 
were all shortlisted for the big prize, regardless of how many minds started 
wondering what’s for dinner while watching them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frevenant-hateful-eight-why-are-oscar-movies-so-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8eddc18b2a5424941422da31b4998673b40b94d%2F0_0_3504_2101%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20never-ending%20story%3A%20why%20are%20Oscar%20movies%20often%20so%20long%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frevenant-hateful-eight-why-are-oscar-movies-so-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20never-ending%20story%3A%20why%20are%20Oscar%20movies%20often%20so%20long%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frevenant-hateful-eight-why-are-oscar-movies-so-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8eddc18b2a5424941422da31b4998673b40b94d%2F0_0_3504_2101%2F3504.jpg>
 Bloated narrative … Samuel L Jackson and Walton Goggins in The Hateful Eight. 
Photograph: Allstar/The Weinstein Company 
Similarly, there’s a range of reasons why Quentin Tarantino’s The Hateful Eight
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/07/the-hateful-eight-review-tarantino-triumphs-with-a-western-of-wonder>
 isn’t on this year’s shortlist, but the film’s bloated indiscipline would be 
top of the pile, taking the basic setup of his pithy masterpiece Reservoir Dogs 
and spinning it out over three hours, six chapters and a self-admiring 
intermission.

But then the auteur’s vision has long since been the enemy of lean 
film-making. Sixty years ago, Akira Kurosawa was flicking V-signs at the notion 
of “90-minute magic” by doubling that figure and adding on another half-hour 
for good measure, withSeven Samurai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/14/my-favourite-film-seven-samurai>. 
And a quarter of a century after Michael Cimino unwittingly changed the course 
of cinema history with his 219-minute snore-festHeaven’s Gate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/04/heavens-gate-review>, Martin 
Scorsese was struggling desperately to whittleThe Wolf of Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/wolf-of-wall-street-review> down 
to less than three hours.

Scorsese’s repetitive debauchery-fest was fun, but like The Revenant and The 
Hateful Eight – and unlike, for instance,Boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/10/boyhood-review-richard-linklater-film>
 – it failed to realise that grandeur should be the byproduct of great 
film-making rather than an end in itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frevenant-hateful-eight-why-are-oscar-movies-so-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29b3c4994001fa7521490654cf7938d9f7797372%2F0_90_2834_1700%2F2834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20never-ending%20story%3A%20why%20are%20Oscar%20movies%20often%20so%20long%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frevenant-hateful-eight-why-are-oscar-movies-so-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20never-ending%20story%3A%20why%20are%20Oscar%20movies%20often%20so%20long%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frevenant-hateful-eight-why-are-oscar-movies-so-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29b3c4994001fa7521490654cf7938d9f7797372%2F0_90_2834_1700%2F2834.jpg>
 Simultaneously too long and not long enough … David Fincher’s Gone Girl, 
starring Rosamund Pike. Photograph: Allstar/New Regency Pictures 
At the other end of the spectrum to these needlessly drawn-out premise movies 
are films that are so jam-packed withstuff happening that they have no room to 
breathe. This is the main reasonSpectre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/21/spectre-review-james-bond-is-back-stylish-camp-and-sexily-pro-snowden>
 is making no waves during awards season, with Sam Mendes’ insatiable appetite 
for set pieces leaving the movie on the same overstuffed shelf as Christopher 
Nolan’sDark Knight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/14/the-dark-knight-my-most-overrated-film-christopher-nolan>
 series.

It’s a shelf well stocked with blockbusters from recent years: substitute “set 
pieces” for “indecipherable pseudoscience” and you’ve got the gaping pitfall 
that bothInterstellar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/05/interstellar-review-christopher-nolan-matthew-mcconaughey>
 and Ridley Scott’sPrometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/30/prometheus-review> tumbled down. 
David Fincher’sGone Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/02/gone-girl-review-david-fincher-pike-affleck>
 andDragon Tattoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/22/girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo-film-review>
 adaptations both tried in vain to cram a hefty novel’s worth of plot into 150 
minutes, the outcome in both cases being a movie that seemed way too long and 
not long enough.

Similar accusations can be levelled at Peter Jackson, whose nine-hour Hobbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/01/the-hobbit-the-battle-of-the-five-armies-review-film-peter-jackson>
 trilogy is a model of self-discipline compared with the 12 hours and six 
minutes that the extended editions of his Lord of the Rings films spent amid 
the CGI landscapes of Middle-earth. More recently, Zach Snyder’sMan of Steel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/13/man-of-steel-review> went on for 
two and a half hours, at least 90% of which was superheroes throwing each other 
through skyscrapers, all of it too noisy to even catch some sleep in.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frevenant-hateful-eight-why-are-oscar-movies-so-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2ff05948e1812ddec48b94e904ca8464d0d5606%2F178_59_3132_1879%2F3132.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20never-ending%20story%3A%20why%20are%20Oscar%20movies%20often%20so%20long%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frevenant-hateful-eight-why-are-oscar-movies-so-long%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20never-ending%20story%3A%20why%20are%20Oscar%20movies%20often%20so%20long%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Frevenant-hateful-eight-why-are-oscar-movies-so-long%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2ff05948e1812ddec48b94e904ca8464d0d5606%2F178_59_3132_1879%2F3132.jpg>
 Brilliantly succinct … Whiplash, with JK Simmons and Miles Teller. Photograph: 
Allstar/Blumhouse Productions 
But enough. The point is that some films warrant a lengthy running time. Many 
don’t. You often sense that their makers failed to see the wood for the trees 
in the first place, setting out to make an eye-popping enormo-movie and then 
filling in the blanks from there (here’s looking at you,James Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamescameron>). 

There is surely a large element here of big-name directors being granted free 
rein due to the guaranteed ticket sales they bring. That, plus the producers’ 
eternal fear of the trinket-dispensers paying their movie no heed if it doesn’t 
at least look like an epic (call it Dances With Wolves syndrome).

Either way, as anyone who’s sat through Exodus: Gods and Kings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/29/exodus-gods-and-kings-review-christian-bale-ridley-scott>
 will tell you, it’s a shame. Doubly so when some of the best films of recent 
times –Before Midnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/20/before-midnight-review>, Under 
the Skin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/13/under-the-skin-scarlett-johansson-peter-bradshaw>
,Inside Llewyn Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/23/inside-llewyn-davis-review>, 
Whiplash <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/whiplash-review> – 
worked so brilliantly precisely because of their succinctness.

Of course, none of those films, bar Whiplash, drew many hat-tips from the 
Academy. But there is hope: two years ago, Alfonso Cuarón’s Gravity, with its 
90-minute running time, proved that an epic film doesn’t have to be epically 
long. Gravity was economical film-making, economically fruitful (raking in more 
than $200m profit), and a hit with the judges too, hoovering up sevenOscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>.

It’s a model that plenty more should aspire to. As it is, too many directors 
are failing to recognise that aiming long isn’t the same as aiming high.
 