
On 25 January, the fifth anniversary of the Egyptian street uprising against 
Hosni Mubarak <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hosni-mubarak>, Giulio Regeni, 
a 28-year-old Italian student attached to Cambridge University – who had been 
living in Cairo to carry out research on local workers’ movements – left his 
home in the early evening in the Dokki neighbourhood, on the left bank of the 
Nile, to meet with a friend just four metro stops away. He never reached his 
destination.

On 3 February, Mr Regeni’s body was discovered in a ditch in a Cairo suburb, 
half-naked and showing signs of torture: multiple cigarette burns, bone 
fractures, his nails pulled out. Egyptian authorities have denied any 
involvement, and claimed they would cooperate with a team of Italian 
investigators in getting to the bottom of the crime. But Mr Regeni’s death has 
triggered a wave of protest in Italy and elsewhere. Many fear that those 
responsible for the murder will never be identified and brought to justice.

An international petition launched by Cambridge professors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/08/thousands-of-academics-demand-inquiry-into-cairo-death-of-giulio-regeni>
 has collected thousands of signatures among academics worldwide, calling on 
Egypt’s president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, to allow “an independent and impartial 
investigation into all instances of forced disappearances, cases of torture and 
deaths in detention” in recent months in Egypt. This mobilisation is a good 
thing – not only so that the truth behind the circumstances of Mr Regeni’s 
death can come out, but because this tragic case has only highlighted the need 
for a larger public outcry, as well as European diplomatic action over human 
rights abuses under Egypt’s new authoritarian system.

On the day Mr Regeni disappeared, Egyptian security forces had been carrying 
outa severe crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/24/state-repression-egypt-worst-weve-ever-seen-activist-hossam-bahgat>
 to prevent any public protest on the anniversary of the Tahrir Square 
uprising. There is as yet no clear proof that the young Italian fell victim to 
these measures, nor that he was arrested or placed in detention – but the 
traces of torture found on his body are reminiscent of the methods used in 
Egypt’s jails, and it is noteworthy that Mr Regeni had been vocal in denouncing 
the repressive policies of the Sisi regime, including in various publications. 
Mr Regeni’s friends have been pointing an accusing finger at the armed branch 
of Egypt’s interior ministry, the “National Security Agency”, which has a 
reputation for atrocities against detainees.

The fate of one Italian student, however tragic and shocking, should not blind 
anyone to the fact that the first victims of Egypt’s slide back to military 
dictatorship since Mr Sisi came to power on the back of the 2013 putsch, are 
Egyptians themselves – especially those who dare express any form of political 
opposition.

Since Egypt’s cooperation is being sought by western governments in the 
fight against terrorism, they have mostly opted to stay silent about the 
violence of repression in the country. That is a terrific mistake. Egypt’s 
currentspiral of abuse and autocracy 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/01/27/egypt-security-operations-inflame-rights-crisis>
 will ultimately only feed terrorism – not help defeat it.

Giulio Regeni was passionate about Arab culture and history, and he supported 
the democratic aspirations of 2011 that have certainly not gone away. His 
funeral will be held in Italy, in Fiumicello, on Friday. No effort must be 
spared in order to bring out the truth about his death – and all other forced 
disappearances inEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.
 