
Marriage is a public obsession hardly ever out of the news. The weddings of 
celebrities, and their divorces, are tabloid staples. Politicians and bishops 
urge it, supported by wider conservative and religious lobbies. The more that 
marriage seems to be in trouble as an institution, with smaller percentages 
entering and larger percentages leaving, the more intense becomes the brouhaha 
surrounding it.

It is regarded as a misfortune for an individual, especially for a woman, not 
to marry. Yet it is regarded as equally bad, if not worse, for an individual to 
indulge in too much marriage, whether in the form of repeated divorces and 
weddings, or bigamy. Failure to marry is punished in personal terms; excessive 
marriage is publicly punished in social, financial and even legal ways. This 
shows how entrenched is the traditional marital ideal of finding and faithfully 
adhering for life to one equally faithful member of the opposite sex.

These facts are illustrated by recent events. One is the conviction for bigamy 
of a Mormon in Utah, who might have to spend 25 years in prison because he has 
five wives and 25 children. Another is the difficulty experienced by Ireland's 
Taoiseach, Bertie Ahern, who lives with a woman other than his wife. He lately 
gave a reception for Ireland's newly appointed cardinal, a ticklish occasion 
for the adulterous prime minister. His partner's name appeared on the 
invitation, so the cardinal responded with an admonitory speech, saying that 
marriage is "the deep centre of human intimacy" and that "the whole future of 
society depends" on it. These overstatements come, note, from a professional 
bachelor officially ignorant about marital intimacy, who by his own definition 
contributes nothing to society's future.

In the US Bible Belt, divorce and cohabitation rates are rocketing, by as much 
as 200% over a decade ago. One sad tale explains: "In church they made me think 
the important thing was to get married and have children, then Christ would 
come," said one escapee. "I said yes to the first man who asked." The debate 
about marriage rests on a fundamental confusion. The word "marriage" has two 
quite different senses. One is the socio-legal institution, which in effect 
amounts to a tripartite contract between a man, a woman and the state. The 
other is the long-term committed relationship entered into voluntarily by 
people who, because of their affection for one another, wish to pool resources 
and share the joys and burdens of life.

In this latter sense, the number and sexes of the mutual parties is no part of 
the definition, which turns solely on concepts of affection, choice and 
sharing. In the socio-legal sense, considerations of the number and sexes of 
the parties are crucial, because it permits only one rigidly narrow view of 
what is acceptable, based on ancient religious views which do not reflect much 
about human reality or need.

Most people who wish to marry in the second sense assume they must do so by 
marrying in the first sense. To this mistake they add ignorance of history. The 
roots of socio-legal marriage lie in a profoundly sexist financial arrangement. 
Its originating aim was to constrain women's sexuality and fertility so that 
men could be sure they were bequeathing their property to their own offspring. 
In medieval Christianity, a marriage of convenience existed between religious 
views about sex and social views about wealth. When poorer classes also began 
to acquire property, the requirements for premarital female chastity, and legal 
forms of marriage to make descent and property traceable, were extended to them 
too - notably in 18th-century England, whose highly various marriage traditions 
were at last reduced by law to a single type.

These tendentious formalities are latecomers to the scene, but human intimacy 
is as ancient as life itself. Marriage as a mutuality of true minds and tender 
hearts, so long as it lasts, is the happiest of states, whatever the number and 
gender of the parties to it; and the only effect that marriage in the 
socio-legal sense has had on marriage in this deeper sense, is usually to spoil 
it.
 