
Saved <http://www.lyric.co.uk/whats-on/production/saved/>

Edward Bond <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/edwardbond>'s play caused a 
huge kerfuffle when first staged in 1965, largely because of a scene in which a 
baby is stoned to death in its pram. But why revive Saved today? Bond shows, 
with startling clarity, the consequence of creating a brutally materialist 
world that fails to nourish the hearts, minds or spirits of its disaffected 
young. It is a deeply prophetic play about the real source of our current 
discontents. Lyric Hammersmith <http://www.lyric.co.uk/>, London W6 (0871 2211 
729), 6 October to 5 November.

Bang Bang Bang <http://www.octagonbolton.co.uk/page/145/Bang-Bang-Bang/219>

Stella Feehily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2009/jul/16/young-female-playwright>
's provocative new play, based on close research, shows a seasoned aid worker 
and an idealistic young colleague setting out on a trip to the Democratic 
Republic of Congo. Julie Dray and Orla Fitzgerald star in a Max Stafford-Clark 
touring production that aims to explore the truth behind the public face of 
charities and NGOs.Octagon, Bolton <http://www.octagonbolton.co.uk/> (01204 
520661) 5-17 September.Royal Court Theatre Upstairs 
<http://royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/bang-bang-bang>, London SW1 (020-7565 
5000), 11 October to 5 November.

Inadmissible Evidence <http://www.donmarwarehouse.com/pl132.html>

John Osborne's bold 1964 play created a disintegrating solicitor-hero, Bill 
Maitland, once described as "a kind of Willy Loman in striped English serge". 
Douglas Hodge has a rare chance to relish Osborne's blistering rhetoric. Jamie 
Lloyd directs a production that should help rescue Osborne from undeserved 
neglect.Donmar Warehouse <http://www.donmarwarehouse.com/>, London WC2 (0844 
871 7624), 13 October to 26 November.

13 <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/66098/productions/13.html>

Mike Bartlett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/nov/08/mike-bartlett-royal-court-cock>
 returns with a work that promises not just singing pensioners and militant 
atheists but a vision of imminent apocalypse.Thea Sharrock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/theasharrock> directs what could well be 
the season's blockbuster.Olivier, London SE1  
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/1541/three-theatres/olivier-theatre.html> 
(020-7452 3000), from 18 October.

Hamlet <http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/hamlet>

First Michael Sheen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-sheen> plays 
the moody Dane. ThenThomas Ostermeier imports  
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=12501>from the Berlin 
Schaubühne <http://www.schaubuehne.de/> a shortened, racially revisionist 
production in which seven actors evoke the corrupt world of Shakespeare's 
Elsinore.Young Vic, London <http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/hamlet> SE1 
(020-7922 2922), 28 October to 21 January.Barbican, London EC2 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=12501> (020-7638 8891), 
30 November to 4 December.

Michael Billington

Going Dark <http://www.warwickartscentre.co.uk/events/theatre/going-dark>

How far is it possible to see? Where do we belong in the universe? Theatre 
companySound and Fury <http://www.soundandfury.org.uk/> follow up the hugely 
successfulKursk  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jun/09/kursk-young-vic>
by asking all the big questions in new piece of immersive theatre.Tour starts at
Warwick Arts Centre <http://www.warwickartscentre.co.uk/>, Coventry (02476 
524524), 27-29 October.

Lovesong <http://www.theatreroyal.com/prod-productions_details.asp?pid=1773>

All love comes to an end, but it doesn't stop us making the leap of faith. 
WriterAbi Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/abimorgan>, best known for 
TV shows such asThe Hour <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-hour>, 
returns to collaborate with physical theatre groupFrantic Assembly 
<http://www.franticassembly.co.uk/>, for whom she wrote Tiny Dynamite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/feb/14/theatre.artsfeatures>. Tour 
stars at the Drum, Plymouth <http://www.theatreroyal.com/> (01752 267222), 30 
September to 15 October.

Oh, the Humanity and Other Good Intentions 
<http://www.northernstage.co.uk/whats-on/oh-the-humanity-other-good-intentions>

Maverick New York playwright Will Eno considers what it means to be truly 
alive in an age of uncertainty. Part of a festival about the absurdity of life.
Northern Stage, Newcastle <http://www.northernstage.co.uk/> (0191-230 5151), 
9-24 September.

Lyn Gardner

'In one respect I understand the part much better'

Clarke Peters reveals what it's like to revist Othello after 25 years

'It's a huge challenge taking on Othello: in Shakespeare, when is it not? The 
first time I played the role was 25 years ago, and my perspective has changed 
enormously in that time. In one respect I understand the part much better, from 
the perspective of age and experience, relationships, love, loss of love – all 
of that. But also it's harder, because I'm more aware of what I think are the 
flaws in the play.

"Shakespeare was writing for a particular time and political context: although 
Othello is a general, there's still a sense that he's not able to stand up for 
himself, there's a kind of immaturity to him. There are racist things in the 
play, and now we're on the other side of slavery, it has a different meaning, 
even if that history still shadows all of us. We're constantly asking questions 
about that in rehearsals.

"But there's also such beauty in Shakespeare's language: music, poetry, love, 
pain, anguish, anger beyond belief. It gives you the full arc of human 
experience; each and every word is like a short story. And, apart from anything 
else, it's great to be acting with Dominic West again. Not a day goes by 
without someone in Sheffield coming up and saying The Wire was the greatest 
thing they've ever seen. Hopefully, some of the young people who loved the 
series will come to the theatre for the first time. It'll be worth it to hear 
Dominic doing Iago with a Yorkshire accent. It's in his bones. And easier than 
doing Baltimore."

Interview by Andrew Dickson
 