
After Damien G Walter owned up 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/jun/29/tolkien-lord-rings-fantasy-sci-fi>
 to it last week, I'm going to come out and say it, too: I am a fantasy reader. 
I grew up on Susan Cooper, Lloyd Alexander, Alan Garner, Diana Wynne Jones, 
Tamora Pierce and Ursula Le Guin. Then I lapsed for a while, until I fell in 
love with someone at university after we discovered a shared love of Douglas 
Hill, and he introduced me to the endless series of George RR Martin (great), 
Robin Hobb (loved her, especially Nighteyes the wolf), Stephen King's Dark 
Tower sequence (I liked it so much I bought them in hardback), Robert Jordan 
(tedious and confusing), Guy Gavriel Kay (brilliant), Stephen Donaldson, even 
the progressively crazier, more polemic, frankly dreadful Terry Goodkind. I 
ploughed through 12-book series – I like to know the ending – and yes, I have 
read thebizarro chicken sequence 
<http://www.whitescreenofdespair.blogspot.com/2009/06/evil-chickens.html> from 
Soul of the Fire.

But I have been feeling of late that my literary education in those authors 
(apart from Tolkien) who shaped the fantasy writers of today is sorely lacking. 
So, in the manner of Sam Jordison's manful slog throughthe Hugos 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/series/sam-jordison-hugo-award-winners,>, I'm 
going to tackle the winners of the British Fantasy awards, right fromthe 
beginning 
<http://http://www.britishfantasysociety.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=129&Itemid=63>
. (I chose the BFAs because they started in 1971, and theWorld Fantasy awards  
<http://www.worldfantasy.org/awards/>began four years later, but I may jump 
back and forth between the two prizes if one winner appears much more 
interesting than the other – suggestions welcome).

The BFAs were set up in honour of the recently deceased – and amazingly 
prolific –August Derleth <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/August_Derleth,>, at the 
prompting of Ramsey Campbell, and are voted for by members of the British 
Fantasy Society. The first – and second – winner of the best novel award was 
Michael Moorcock, with the first novel in his Corum trilogy, The Knight of the 
Swords, taking the 1972 prize, and then the third, The
King of the Swords, winning the following year. I know Moorcock is held in 
great esteem by many – his novel Mother London made the Guardian's1,000 novels 
to Read Before You Die 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/jan/23/bestbooks-fiction> list – but I've 
never read him or been particularly tempted to read him before, apart from a 
brief foray into Dorian Hawkmoon, because the concept of a brain-eating jewel 
made me laugh. He's alsoincredibly prolific 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bibliography_of_Michael_Moorcock>, and the Corum 
books don't seem to have stood the test of time as well as much of his writing: 
unlike others in his Eternal Champion titles – Elric and Hawkmoon, for example 
– they've fallenout of print. 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=nb_ss_b?url=search-alias%3Dstripbooks&field-keywords=michael+moorcock+knight+of+the+swords]>

The Knight of the Swords starts well. I am very taken with the introduction: 
"In those days there were oceans of light and cities in the skies and wild 
flying beasts of bronze. There were herds of crimson cattle that roared and 
were taller than castles. There were shrill, viridian things that haunted bleak 
rivers." I am keen to meet these giant cows and am disappointed to discover 
they play no part in the novel, which is a classic quest story, following the 
adventure of Corum, last of his kind (they're called the Vadagh, but are 
basically elves) as he attempts to revenge himself on the barbaric Mabden, or 
men, who wiped out his race.

So far so generic, and there's enough "dosts" and "thees" and "caparisoned for 
wars" to try my patience, as Moorcock goes for a heroic tone. Corum is captured 
by the Mabden, has his hand cut off and his eye put out, is rescued by an 
annoying Wookie-like creature, who tells him "me friend of you", and then meets 
a beautiful human female, Rhalina, who falls in love with him in a flash. 
"Please, Corum. I believe that I love you," she tells him after about a second, 
and "they sank, again, into the sheets, making gentle love, learning of one 
another as only those truly in love may." Yuck. Rhalina is actually the most 
irritating part of the book, always bowing her head to commands and standing 
out of the way of danger – give meAlanna, Knight of Trebond 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alanna_of_Trebond> any day.

But I think I'm being a little unfair. Yes, the quest story feels a bit 
hackneyed to me, but if you read Moorcock before the rest of the teaming reams 
of "inexperienced knight sets out on a mission to save the world" stories that 
followed, perhaps it wouldn't. And there are lots of good bits – Corum is given 
the hand and eye of two gods to replace his missing body parts, and the hand 
has a will of its own, sometimes leaping into action to kill off his friends, 
which I quite like. There's an excellent flying cat; I love the fact that 
Corum's quest brings him to this world for a bit in the third book; I enjoy 
Moorcock's idea of the different planes of existence; and there's a wonderfully 
surreal section when Corum travels to the lair of a god of chaos, who's so huge 
that humans scamper on him like lice. (Quick explanation: the forces of chaos 
and law are at war, Corum is on the side of law, the Mabden are on the side of 
chaos. Chaos initially sounded more fun, I thought, but we later learn it's 
actually not: if you support it, you turn into a weirdo half-animal thing and 
have to drink sour wine to cheer yourself up.)

When Moorcock's imagination really comes into play, this trilogy can be a 
fantastic read, providing the jarring faux-heroic language can be ignored (and 
his obsession with never saying a bad thing about his hero – there are lots of 
moments like this one, where a vaguely negative comment is quickly justified: 
"All through that morning Corum fought mechanically, though he fought well"). 
All three books in the trilogy are only 150-odd pages long, each one pitting 
Corum against a progressively more evil god of chaos, so I read the whole thing 
in one gulp. Although it was a relatively enjoyable, easy read, with deserts of 
blood and flying shark-things providing the leap into scary-weird that I 
require from my fantasy, I feel there must be much more to Moorcock or he 
wouldn't elicit such high praise ("He is the master storyteller of our time," 
says Angela Carter, who I love). Luckily – I hope – for me, there's much more 
of him to come in the BFAs, so perhaps I'll join his legions of adoring fans at 
a later date – if you've any thoughts about where might be better to start than 
Corum, they'd be very welcome.

Next: Poul Anderson's 1974 winner, Hrolf Kraki's Saga.
 