
Set in a dazzling, labyrinthine, mysterious circus, filled with contortionists 
and illusion, fire and ice, The Night Circus has been tipped in the US as the 
next Harry Potter. With the film company behindTwilight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/twilight> set to produce a movie version 
of the fin-de-siècle love story, its author, the debut novelistErin Morgenstern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/search/results?query=Erin+Morgenstern&searchBy=all>
, is suddenly a long way from the wannabe writer who received 30 rejections 
from agents before finding one.

The growing hype around the novel is "a bit of a whirlwind", Morgenstern 
admits. "The fact that people are already reading and loving something I wrote 
is still hard to believe." But the Salem, Massachusetts-based author is not 
sure about being bracketed with JK Rowling . "I find the comparison hugely 
flattering but not particularly apt, considering The Night Circus is an 
adult-market book and not a series. I think it has some flavours in common with 
Harry Potter, but I still don't think anything will recapture that 
sort of phenomenon."

Perhaps Jonathan Strange and Mr Norrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/oct/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
 might be a better comparison. "I do loveSusanna Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/author/susanna-clarke>, and there are 
also flavours of Shakespeare and Dickens and a smattering of Roald Dahl," says 
Morgenstern, a multimedia artist (she has spent "large amounts" of the last few 
years painting a black-and-white tarot deck) with a degree in theatre. "The 
circus turned up almost fully formed while I was working on a different novel. 
I didn't have a plan for that now-abandoned story, so when I started to get 
bored with it, I sent the characters to the circus."

Monochrome, smoky and sumptuous, her circus – Le Cirque des Rêves – is the 
setting for a decades-long duel between the young magicians Celia and Marco, 
who have been shaped since childhood for the competition by Celia's cruel 
father and Marco's sinister guardian. As the pair compete with ever-more 
elaborate creations – Marco's ice garden, full of frosted peonies; Celia's 
living carousel – they fall in love.

"I am a fan of magic and fantasy, particularly when it's grounded in reality," 
says Morgenstern. And the circus? "I'm actually not a huge circus fan in the 
traditional sense, but I like a lot of the circus trappings of striped tents 
and caramel," she says. "I lean more towards Cirque du Soleil than Barnum and 
Bailey."• The Night Circus by Erin Morgenstern will be published by Harvill 
Secker in September.
 