
Overview


By Gavin Weale, managing director Live Magazine SA <>

On the Indian Ocean coast of South Africa, 350 miles south-east of 
Johannesburg, Durban is a tourist destination that chimes with the subtropical 
overtures of Mozambique to the north: warm water, hot summers and a laid-back 
beachy ambience. Yet culturally it’s very much a South African city, albeit one 
often pigeonholed as the less sophisticated, beach-bum cousin to the tourist 
mecca of Cape Town.
Durban map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/travel_sa_durban/giv-27167UIpJBYyqKECO/>
The whole of KwaZulu-Natal province certainly has glorious beaches. You can 
surf your heart out along Durban’s Golden Mile – in water that won’t make your 
feet go numb within seconds, unlike the icy swells in Cape Town. But these 
days, beyond the sand and waves, the more comparisons that are made with its 
Western Cape sister city, the more substance Durban has.

It’s got a thriving craft food, beer and spirits scene, an internationally 
respectedannual film festival <http://www.durbanfilmfest.co.za/>, and a new 
homegrown musical movement (gqom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/22/gqom-house-dance-bhenga-julz-da-deejay>
 – pronounced qwom) that has one aim: getting people on the dance floor. So 
infectious is the lo-fi sound of Durban’s underground that arecent UK 
compilation of gqom tracks <https://gqomoh.bandcamp.com/album/gqom-oh-sampler> 
has made its way into the playlists of hip Westerners hungry for a different 
beat. There are also attempts at cutting-edge city renewal: with the 
development of theRivertown Precinct 
<http://www.property24.com/articles/durbans-exciting-new-development/20185>, 
Surf City is starting to rival Johannesburg’s urban regeneration thunder, too. 
Add in the steamy climate – with an average of 320 days’ sunshine a year – and 
it’s clear why some people are now looking east.

The city is well set up for large events, with many big international touring 
artists including it on their itineraries, along with major annual music awards 
such as theMTV Africa Music Awards <http://mama.mtv.com/> (the Mamas). The 
United Nations Climate Change Conference 
<http://unfccc.int/meetings/durban_nov_2011/meeting/6245.php> in 2011 put the 
city on the map for the international development community, while itsPlayhouse 
Company <http://playhousecompany.com/> and KwaZulu-Natal Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://kznphil.org.za/> add to Durban’s respectability.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0aed6e43599ce12bda2496f51038d9abde91c14%2F0_344_6016_3609%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0aed6e43599ce12bda2496f51038d9abde91c14%2F0_344_6016_3609%2F6016.jpg>
 Durban has a ‘laid-back beachy ambience’ 
Speak to Durbanites about their city and you get a distinct sense of 
polarisation. The lively harbour feels like the headiest cultural mix, with a 
downtown edge, but other worlds are not far away. Culturally, Durban still 
divides itself into pockets. Northern suburbs such as Umhlanga are fairly 
white, with sedate cafes and beachfront hotels; areas like Chatsworth, Phoenix 
and Tongaat will offer authentic curries and sari shops as part of a massive 
Indian community, dating from the British use of indentured labour from the 
subcontinent in the 19th century to work on sugar cane plantations; and vast – 
mainly black – townships like KwaMashu and Umlazi are often avoided by tourists 
who believe too much of the hype of the Western media. But downtown, the vibe 
feels more mixed and an adventurous explorer can sample all of these flavours – 
from some of the best curries outside the Indian subcontinent, to barbecued 
meat and house music in KwaMashu, and café culture or fine dining in the 
northern suburbs.

All of which might be a bit bewildering for a short stay. But Durbanites’ lack 
of pretension and dedication to lighting up the night means there’s always a 
party somewhere to even things out. As local gqom superstar DJ Target says: 
“People in Durban, they don’t want to sleep …”

Music and clubs

By Sandile Phakathi, aka DJ Target 
<https://www.facebook.com/U-Dj-Target-No-Ndile-393038620853466/>, whose  song 
Umthwalo Wami <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zXy4kp003-c>, with DJ Ndile,  
became a dance-floor anthem last summer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30b3cb5c558e938c676547d7e99b2427050e15d6%2F420_822_4906_2943%2F4906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30b3cb5c558e938c676547d7e99b2427050e15d6%2F420_822_4906_2943%2F4906.jpg>
 DJ Target (left) with DJ Ndile 
People in Durban love dancing, drinking and partying. They don’t like to 
sleep. We call the parties “morning bangs”.

I was a dancer, and used to dance to electro – I loved the fast-step music. I 
always wanted to make that sort of music, but mix it with South African house. 
I started to play in taverns and they used different words to describe it – but 
gqom (meaning “drum” in Zulu, “noise” in youth culture) – that was the name 
that people loved. Gqom is South African electro, fast music. When you’re 
playing it, people dance. And gqom is special to Durban.

The main club I play in is called Chill Action Bar Point 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Chill-Action-Bar-Point/375342022538995>, which 
is on Dr Pixley Kaseme Street, in the Belmont Shopping Arcade, right next to 
South Beach. Every weekend, people come in huge numbers. On its two dance 
floors people will be bouncing to gqom, but they also have slot machines for 
those feeling lucky – or tired.

There are good clubs all over the city, such as Club101 
<https://www.facebook.com/Club101.dbn/>, on Samora Machel St in Central, which 
is a favourite for gqom lovers, and where the dance floors are packed until 
dawn. Another in Central isHavana Music Lounge 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Havana-Music-Lounge-Durban/240340202653269>, on 
Monty Naicker Road, a small club that’s always full. During the day, it’s an 
upmarket bar where people can have a drink while listening to music, but at 
night it throws great parties.

Away from the city centre, there is Eyadini <http://eyadiniumlazi.co.za> in 
Umlazi township, which has cheap drinks and appeals to a mixed crowd, aged 
between 20 and 40, who party to DJs and bands in an open-air space. In my home 
town of KwaMashu, north of Durban, there’sEnhlanhleni Tavern 
<https://www.facebook.com/Enhlanhleni-Tavern-Vip-lounge-717604694959572/>, and 
in Inanda, a township in eastern KwaZulu-Natal,Under the Moon 
<https://www.facebook.com/Under-The-Moon-Exclusive-Lounge-331024767022382/> has 
regular DJs and a spacious outside dance floor. For people who follow a softer 
type of musicEgagasini <http://egagasini.co.za/> in South Beach plays deep 
house and R&B.

Each of these Durban hotspots has a different crowd, from a who’s who of 
Durban politicians and celebrities, to tourists wanting to experience the city 
like locals.

Food and drink


By Andrew Rall, master distiller and founder of Distillery 031 
<https://www.facebook.com/distillery031/>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd6bde01f116d3925da173926584e205a4247e62%2F0_406_6013_3610%2F6013.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd6bde01f116d3925da173926584e205a4247e62%2F0_406_6013_3610%2F6013.jpg>
 Andrew Rall 
The early mornings are the best time of day in Durban during the summer, and 
theCircus Circus <http://www.circuscircus.co.za/> beach cafe in Central (it has 
five branches in and around Durban), offers about as close as you can get to 
breakfast on the sand. Watch the sun rise and enjoy breakfast options from 
scrambled eggs to a full farmhouse breakfast for 64 rand (about £3).

Durban is rightly famous for its curries, and Little India 
<http://littleindiarestaurant.co.za/index.html> in Musgrave serves a wonderful 
selection. I particularly like the red and yellow potato curries on its veg 
mains menu for under £2, and traditional dishes such as breyani (biryani 
elsewhere), rogan josh and madras in a quintessentially Indian setting.Sunrise 
Chip ‘n Ranch 
<https://foursquare.com/v/sunrise-chip-n-ranch-johnnies/4badf108f964a52057743be3>
 (Cape Town branchon Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/Sunrise-chip-n-ranch-428674030530287/>) in Sparks 
Road is known locally as Johnnies and serves legendary roti rolls all night 
long.

For drinks, Panorama Bar at the luxurious Elangeni Hotel  
<https://www.tsogosun.com/southern-sun-elangeni-maharani/>is the best place to 
watch the surf while enjoying a sundowner, with great views of the Bay of 
Plenty. Simple but stylish Umhlanga (north Durban) venueLucky Shaker 
<https://www.facebook.com/luckyshakerdbn/> is the brainchild of renowned 
mixologistMichael Stephenson 
<http://theafricanbartender.blogspot.co.uk/2010/04/featured-bartender-michael-stephenson.html>
. His knowledge and passion for cocktails is unmatched, down to the ice cubes 
that he makes on site to achieve the perfect mix. Try his Nectar of the Gods – 
gin with fresh nectarine, raspberry liqueur, lychee and freshly pressed apple.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8581933426d9e59b28d96470f930c0497a03949%2F0_186_4895_2937%2F4895.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8581933426d9e59b28d96470f930c0497a03949%2F0_186_4895_2937%2F4895.jpg>
Opened to the public in November 2015, Distillery 031 
<https://www.facebook.com/distillery031> produces spirits made with local 
ingredients, including vodka, gin, cachaça and absinthe. Its selection of 
gourmet street food has a legion of loyal followers – signature dishes include 
a beef and oxtail burger with bacon and pineapple jam, lamb jalfrezi burger and 
truffled biltong mac’n’chini (its take on arancini rice balls)

Heading 14 miles into Durban’s western hinterland, next to Pinetown taxi rank 
isRainbow Restaurant <http://www.therainbow.co.za/>, an institution that has 
hosted top jazz artists for more than 20 years, and comes alive on Sundays with 
live jazz, flame-cooked fatty chicken and beers served by the quart.

Hlabisa Shisa Nyama 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Hlabisa-Shisanyama-and-Tavern/220819021319416> 
on Timoni Rd in KwaMashu is township-styleshisa nyama (which literally means 
“hot meat”). Buy your meat by the kilo from Hlabisa’s butchery and enjoy a cold 
beer while it is expertlybraai’d (barbecued). If you’re nervous about 
navigating KwaMashu township on your own, askStreet Scene Tours 
<http://streetscene.co.za/contact/> to take you there.

Arts and culture


By Justin McGee, photographer

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2352cb38b67144abd04f62246927363416d9ce9%2F552_962_5092_3054%2F5092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2352cb38b67144abd04f62246927363416d9ce9%2F552_962_5092_3054%2F5092.jpg>
 Justin McGee 
In terms of art, Durban is weird. It goes in cycles. It’s prolific and then 
there’s a downturn of two, three years before the next crop comes through, as 
artists rebel in small waves against the more commercial, mainstream side. 
There are often group shows atArtspace <http://artspacedurban.blogspot.co.uk/>, 
in a light industry zone in Windermere, two miles north of Central. It’s a 
cool, small gallery started 12 years ago by Karen and Claus Bradtke, that 
constantly has shows by new young artists.

The Bat Centre <http://www.batcentre.co.za/>, off the Victoria Embankment 
(Esplanade), has been going for 50 years – Hugo Bartel, an eccentric Austrian 
entrepreneur and adventurer, left millions of rand in his will to establish an 
arts trust. Its mission is “to celebrate the arts and culture of Durban, 
Kwa-Zulu Natal and South Africa by promoting local talent”, and to that end the 
centre teaches locals sculpture and painting, for example, as well putting on 
workshops that turn into exhibitions. Situated in the harbour, it’s a great 
place to view art and chill out.

I used to shoot digital collages 
<http://www.robinsprong.com/photography/justin-mcgee/> a few years ago, and I 
would create landscapes inspired by the beachfront, where I’ve lived for so 
long. The beachfront scenarios change. The actual Golden Mile, running from 
South Beach up to the Suncoast Casino towards the Moses Mabhida Stadium, is 
simple and chilled, but the further north you go, the more beautiful it gets. 
On the other side of the harbour, there’s the Bluff, where there are mangrove 
swamps.

There’s a lot of heritage in places like Tongaat – Indian communities that 
I’ve shot a lot. The expansive sugar cane fields there have created backgrounds 
for my collages. You can go through the fields and find communities living 
among the sugar cane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b375598ee851b7a0475531ba15879ad50187c3a%2F0_35_5375_3228%2F5375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b375598ee851b7a0475531ba15879ad50187c3a%2F0_35_5375_3228%2F5375.jpg>
 Sand installations at North Beach 
The North Beach sand installations 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-10646080> are really fun to view – from 
traditional massive sand castles to life-like rhinos and horses. But my 
favourite was a six-foot skeleton lounging on a couch. And if you’re into 
graffiti, the skate park at Bay of Plenty is cool. In Cape Town, street art is 
banned, but here in Durban, there are legal walls where people can paint 
without getting hassled.Street Scene Tours 
<http://streetscene.co.za/tours/kwazulu-natal-and-durban/durban-street-art-tour/>
 (£27pp for four-five hours including burger and beer) offers specific walks 
based on seeing urban art. They visit little-known urban graffiti galleries as 
well as more established graffiti hubs like the suburb of Glenwood and 
Rivertown Precinct, and tours feature artists such asMook Lion 
<http://10and5.com/2014/09/16/featured-street-art-and-mural-paintings-by-mook-lion/>
 andEwok <https://gangsofgraffiti.wordpress.com/category/ewok/>. You can also 
go to the townships and visit taverns and shacks which some of the local street 
artists have painted.

Fashion and shopping


By Sibu Msimang <https://www.facebook.com/sibu.msimang>, fashion designer

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ec3bda717c88c906c49951b32d6d7083492f456%2F0_358_5316_3189%2F5316.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ec3bda717c88c906c49951b32d6d7083492f456%2F0_358_5316_3189%2F5316.jpg>
 Sibu Msimang 
Compared with Johannesburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/11/alternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays>
, Durban is very relaxed, but it’s also a bit conservative. In Joburg it’s easy 
to sport, say, blue braids, which might be frowned upon in some areas here. But 
a group of young designers in Durban are into experimenting and challenging the 
conservative view. Top of the list to check out would be the boutiques at8 
Morrison Street <https://www.facebook.com/8MorrisonStreet/>, part of the urban 
regeneration project in the Rivertown Precinct, South Beach. They offer a wide 
variety of styles, from edgy streetwear bySpine <http://spinebtm.com/>, 
Swaggerwear <http://swaggerwear.co.za/designed-in-durban-2/> and Rooispace 
<https://www.facebook.com/RooiSpace-454518111401269/> to high-fashion pieces by 
young designers likeJacqui Emanuel 
<http://www.kznfc.co.za/DesignerDirectory/Designer/jacqui-emmanuel/260> and 
Brett Robson <http://brettrobson.com/>, who produces very interesting, funky 
clothing, and who blogs prolifically about fashion. As well as fashion outlets, 
8 Morrison Street also has really cool little galleries likeArtisan 
<https://www.facebook.com/ArtisanGalleryDurban/timeline> (Arts in South Africa 
Now) – which has local hand-painted fabrics, prints and ceramics – and decor 
shopMi Africa <https://www.facebook.com/miafricadecor/info?tab=overview>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce5d65d774329fd8fad0ff88048f063bb2294961%2F0_229_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce5d65d774329fd8fad0ff88048f063bb2294961%2F0_229_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Studios and boutiques at the Rivertown Precinct, Morrison Street. 
The Space Pavilion <http://www.thepav.co.za/store.htm?shopMGID=35442> in the 
suburb of Westville is great if you are looking for on-trend quality and South 
African-made clothing. You can find designers likeAmanda Laird Cherry 
<http://www.amandalairdcherry.com/>, whose style is classic with a twist, in an 
amazing array of fabrics.Colleen Eitzen <http://www.colleeneitzen.co.za/> 
produces pieces in which you can dress up or down depending on occasion or 
mood. My own clothing range is plus-sized ladies’ wear, because there is a 
market in Durban for women who want to look stylish but can only find 
conservative clothes in the shops. It’s very feminine – bold, ethnic prints 
given an update by pairing them with modern silhouettes and everyday patterns.
My studio <https://www.facebook.com/sibu.msimang> is on Matthews Meyiwa Rd in 
Morningside (three miles north of Central), in the middle of Durban’s trendiest 
area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c7db12c8acecc79cded66f3a73febb0c9f90a6a%2F56_264_5530_3317%2F5530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c7db12c8acecc79cded66f3a73febb0c9f90a6a%2F56_264_5530_3317%2F5530.jpg>
 Sibu Msimang is a big fan of Tempracha, a cool streetwear brand Photograph: 
©Siya Mkhasibe 
The I Heart Market <http://iheartmarket.blogspot.co.uk/> – a platform for 
local foodies and designers to showcase their products on the first Saturday of 
the month at the Moses Mabhida Stadium – offers a unique range of quality 
handmade African clothing and accessories. You’ll find the quirky, the edgy and 
more sophisticated items, including African beaded jewellery, handmade bags 
from recycled material, and sterling silver jewellery. There’s also a guy 
called Sanele Cele, and his very cool streetwear brand,Tempracha 
<http://www.tempracha.com/about-us-v1>. I love the way he’s not afraid to 
experiment with clothes. He’s one to watch, and has a studio on Umgeni Road in 
Morningside. For something vintage and unique, areas like Victoria Street in 
the CBD have the most gorgeous vintage clothing and coats sold on the street at 
bargain prices.

Beachside


By surfer Avuyile ‘Avo’ Ndamase <https://www.facebook.com/avuyile.a.ndamase>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cc51c6ea60fabe07608234a9f0f950b6e3e7b75%2F789_840_4653_2791%2F4653.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cc51c6ea60fabe07608234a9f0f950b6e3e7b75%2F789_840_4653_2791%2F4653.jpg>
 Avuyile ‘Avo’ Ndamase 
I’m from Port St John originally, in the Transkei, and this is my second year 
in Durban. I moved because of surfing: to try and get in the water more and get 
exposure. I surf all day pretty much, and the best surf in Durban for me is New 
Pier, which is next to South Beach. You can surf pretty much anywhere along the 
Golden Mile, but if the waves are really crazy, South Beach is the place to be. 
My friend and I also try and surf a lot of other spots outside the city – all 
the way down to places like Green Point (40 minutes’ drive south of Durban). 
But sometimes, you’ll go to Cave Rock, on the foreshore of Durban Bluff, and it 
will be absolutely cooking. February is the best time of the year for surfing 
in Durban, when the waves are absolutely pumping.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAcCxgnJNGnw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAcCxgnJNGnw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAcCxgnJNGnw&media=>
 Surfing at New Pier 
I’m always hanging out on the beach when I’m not surfing, usually by New Pier 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AcCxgnJNGnw>. It’s the way I live my life, and 
where I spend most of my time. The beach culture here is still very alive and 
that helps the lifesaving clubs, which run their own superb restaurants. The
Marine Surf Lifesaving Club <https://www.facebook.com/MarineSurfLifesavingClub/>
 at Addington beach is a friendly environment for visitors and cooks up some 
good food, and there’s alsoDurban Surf Lifesaving Club <http://www.dslc.co.za/> 
on North Beach. I like to grab a bite atAfro’s chicken shop 
<http://www.afroschicken.co.za/> on South Beach and Surf Riders Food Shack 
<http://www.food24.com/Restaurants-and-Bars/Restaurants/Surf-Riders-Food-shack-in-Durban-20150112>
, again on Addington, is a Durban promenade institution that serves breakfast, 
burgers and pizzas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8327d06e450eeede8298b3cf1c13051819e3d58d%2F77_242_5080_3048%2F5080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8327d06e450eeede8298b3cf1c13051819e3d58d%2F77_242_5080_3048%2F5080.jpg>
 Afro’s chicken shop. 
Surfboard makers are outstanding in Durban – this is where legends Max 
Whetteland <http://encyclopediaofsurfing.com/entries/wetteland-max> and Baron 
Stander <http://files.legendarysurfers.com/blog/2006/03/baron-stander-rip.html> 
began shapingSafari Surfboards 
<http://www.safarisurf.com/the-safari-story-our-history.php> in a small 
workshop in 1964. And the surf community mingles daily in and out of the water 
– guys likeSpider Murphy <http://www.dutchmann.co.za/spider.php>, Hugh Thomson 
<http://naturalcurve.co.za/index.php/shaper>, Graham Smith 
<http://grahamsmithboards.com/about/> and Kevin Colby 
<http://www.colbysurfboards.co.za/about-us/>. I’m not too brand loyal, but I 
get cool stuff from42 Surf Shop <http://www.42surf.com/> at the back of 
Victoria Park, andPiranha Surf Galleria 
<https://www.facebook.com/Pirana-Surf-Galleria-234806363236833/> in uShaka 
Centre, which stocks all the major brands. There are also guys likeOcean 
Ventures <http://www.oceanventures.co.za/>, at uShaka Marine World, for 
touristy activities in the water, like surfing lessons, stand-up paddleboarding 
and boat trips.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d78be950357f0ee9eb14cf9ae7246c9ed86a8b9%2F0_355_5268_3160%2F5268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d78be950357f0ee9eb14cf9ae7246c9ed86a8b9%2F0_355_5268_3160%2F5268.jpg>
 ‘You can surf anywhere along the Golden Mile’ 
When I’m not surfing I do a little bit of skateboarding. There’s a beach skate 
park on Snell Parade, the next beach up from North Beach, right on the 
promenade. That’s where everyone in Durban goes to skate.

Readers’ tips and Instagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/mar/03/instagram-snapshots-durban-through-the-eyes-of-locals>
 shots

Whale and dolphin watching
The coast just to the north of Durban, from Ballito 
<http://www.sa-venues.com/attractionskzn/ballito.php> to Shaka’s Rock 
<http://www.sa-venues.com/attractionskzn/shakas-rock.php> and further, offers 
nature lovers the most spectacular Indian Ocean experiences. If you visit in 
the colder months, August-October, you’ll be sure to spot whales and dolphins 
just off the shore. Visit theSalt Rock hotel <http://www.saltrockbeach.co.za/> 
for Sunday lunch, or oysters (no worries if you just pop up from the beach in a 
bikini/bathing suit). Further north, there is theSt Lucia river estuary 
<http://www.stluciasouthafrica.com/st-lucia-south-africa-estuary/> where one 
can see hippos and other amazing wildlife. I love this part of South Africa, 
lovely people, lovely climate – and affordable too.
ID6425306

Stuck in Durban and enjoying it
We are Canadian sailors onboard our yacht waiting here in Durban marina for 
good weather to sail to Cape Town. We have been exploring the Durban 
neighbourhoods by walking and taxi. Our first foray was to the Glenwood 
neighbourhood, for thePhansi Museum 
<http://www.southafrica.net/za/en/articles/entry/article-phansi-museum-durban-kwazulu-natal>
 with its huge collection of African arts and crafts at 500 Esther Roberts 
Road. Exceptional. We were guided through by the assistant curator. Then, down 
the hill to the artisanalGlenwood Bakery <http://www.glenwoodbakery.co.za/>, 
where we spotted theTartine Bakery (San Francisco) cookbook 
<http://www.chroniclebooks.com/titles/tartine.html> on their shelf. Devoured 
the best bread after a year of next to no bread while sailing the Indian Ocean. 
Next door we ate lunch at the Parc <http://www.parc-cafe.co.za/> cafe – 
wholesome, great coffee and iced rooibos tea. We walked further to Bulwer Road 
and explored theKZNSA gallery <http://www.kznsagallery.co.za/home.htm>. Ended 
the day at Checkers grocery store on Helen Josephs Road to buy fresh veggies 
and boerwors for supper on the boat. Another day we discovered the affordable
People Mover bus 
<http://www.durban.gov.za/City_Services/ethekwini_transport_authority/Pages/People_Mover.aspx>
 which we took to the shoreline where we walked a few miles along this 
outstanding people-watching beach. Another taxi took us to the Florida Road 
neighbourhood, in Windermere, to visit thetourist information centre 
<http://www.durbanexperience.co.za/What_To_Do/Pages/default.aspx> and the 
African Art Gallery <http://afriart.org.za/> just a few steps away. We had a 
tasty lunch at theSpiga Cafe <https://www.facebook.com/SpigaDurban/> before 
walking to the Windermere shopping centre to once again buy groceries for an 
onboard feast. Food is definitely the theme. We have also filled in our forced 
wait with a visit to thebotanical garden 
<http://www.durbanbotanicgardens.org.za/index.html> in Musgrave, a city guided 
walking tour, the hugeGateway Mall <http://www.gatewayworld.co.za/home> and of 
course, a visit to one of the city’s marine chandleries. The best thing has 
been finding neighbourhoods like Glenwood, sitting in cafes and watching Durban 
street life pass us by.
mccann09

Beach volleyball with the locals

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7cc76c3c525f98c2af0195cdde1f0e389953662%2F0_57_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7cc76c3c525f98c2af0195cdde1f0e389953662%2F0_57_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: Nadia Ahmed/GuardianWitness 
I worked in Durban for three months, and a colleague told me about a group of 
locals who play volleyball on the beach every Friday. A warm, welcoming group, 
who become lifelong friends. It would continue rain or sunshine. Everyone from 
any background was welcome. We would alll go for a drink to a local bar 
afterwards.
Nadia Ahmed

Grandma’s amazing voyage
A good few years ago, while talking to my wife’s grandma about her sea voyage 
to India from Liverpool in 1940, she mentioned that they had stopped in Durban. 
As we were trying to find out all about this amazing war-time odyssey, we asked 
her about her impressions of the places she had stopped off at. When it got to 
Durban, she paused for a moment, reflecting on her distant memories and said: 
“Durban … it had a lovely Woolworths!” Damning with faint praise or just 
comparing with something familiar? We shall never know.
phoneinsick

Ike’s bookshop and the Chairman venue

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37ad8b96fb5210c603f7844e2b26150d2b6ebf76%2F0_54_920_552%2F920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Durban%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Falternative-city-guide-durban-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37ad8b96fb5210c603f7844e2b26150d2b6ebf76%2F0_54_920_552%2F920.jpg>
 A band in full flow at the Chairman 
What a find this place was. Ike’s 
<http://www.abebooks.co.uk/ikes-books-and-collectables-durban/831893/sf> is an 
amazing second hand book shop at 48a Florida Road I found on my last trip to 
Durban. The interior is everything a second hand book shop should be – calm, 
atmospheric, and inspiring, making you want to grab books off the shelf and 
read them. The original owner was an anti-apartheid activist, and a local hero, 
with much of the shop dedicated to his story. The rest is given over to a vast 
collection of books. If you have an interest in Africana stuff, or African 
literature this is the place. Other shouts in Durban are theChairman 
<http://www.thechairmanlive.com/> (146 Mahatma Gandhi Rd), which has a great 
harbourside setting, for some jazz and drinks, andAfro’s 
<http://www.afroschicken.co.za/> on the beach front [see above] for chicken 
burgers.
OneEyedRat
 