
It’s a spring morning, and I’m watching a contemporary dance class at the 
Trinity Laban conservatoire <http://www.trinitylaban.ac.uk/> in Deptford, 
south-east London. The studio is large and airy, one of 13 such spaces in the 
building designed by the Swiss architectsHerzog & de Meuron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/may/23/herzog-de-meuron-next-trick>
, and the students, in their late teens and early 20s, watch as the teacher 
demonstrates the moves.

It’s a familiar scene to me. I trained as a dancer, and performed for 10 years 
before becoming a journalist. I’ve been in and out of studios like this for 
most of my life, and the teacher’s words “Pull up… Hold your backs… Feel the 
floor...” are the same as they always were. Except that in the 70s they were as 
often shouted as spoken. And if our limbs weren’t in the right place, teachers 
felt free to reposition them, sometimes forcibly. “You’re all gutless!” the 
school principal would snarl, as we balanced at the barre, legs quivering with 
strain.

Are British dancers really outclassed on the world stage?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2015/apr/13/are-british-dancers-outclassed-on-the-world-stage-akram-khan-hofesh-schechter-lloyd-newson>
Here, though, all is tranquil. Teachers don’t shout at students any more. But 
these are far from tranquil times in the British contemporary dance world. In 
April, a triumvirate of leading choreographers –Lloyd Newson, Akram Khan and 
Hofesh Shechter – issued a press release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2015/apr/13/are-british-dancers-outclassed-on-the-world-stage-akram-khan-hofesh-schechter-lloyd-newson>
 raising grave concerns about standards of training in the three main 
contemporary dance conservatoires. Specifically, Trinity Laban, Northern School 
of Contemporary Dance (NSCD) in Leeds, and London Contemporary Dance School 
(LCDS) in Euston. These publicly funded establishments, supposedly flagships of 
the government’sMusic and Dance Scheme <https://www.gov.uk/music-dance-scheme>, 
produce about 150 graduates a year. And, apparently, they were failing.

The choreographers announced that they were “increasingly dismayed by the 
declining standards” they witnessed when holding UK auditions. Newson, artistic 
director ofDV8 Physical Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/oct/21/dance>, said that he and his 
colleagues wanted to employ graduates from the conservatoires, but found that 
the students, more often than not, lacked “rigour, technique and performance 
skills”. In consequence, Newson said, he and his colleagues had to look 
overseas for dancers of the necessary calibre.

Step-by-step guide to dance: DV8 Physical Theatre
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/oct/21/dance> 
The choreographers’ statement, issued on the eve of the Dance UK conference 
<http://www.danceuk.org/conference/>, an annual industry get-together, proved 
incendiary. It overshadowed everything on the agenda, and there was heated 
discussion of the issue in the press and on social media. Opinion was sharply 
divided between those who praised the choreographers for speaking out, and 
those such as Neil Nisbet of the online dance magazine Article 19, who damns 
them as “incredibly arrogant”.Matthew Bourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/matthewbourne>, of male Swan Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/14/how-we-made-matthew-bourne-swan-lake>
 fame, defends the overall standard of UK-trained dancers, but admits that of 
the past hundred dancers he has employed, only five came from the contemporary 
dance conservatoires. The rest were trained at ballet or musical theatre 
schools, which produced “better all-round performers”.

Unsurprisingly, the principals of the three main schools were angered by the 
attack. “I’m open for discussion,” Veronica Lewis of LCDS tells me, “but I 
don’t want to be head-butted”. The furore, it rapidly became clear, was more 
than a disagreement about training methods. It was a no-holds-barred struggle 
for the soul of the art form.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fcontemporary-dance-debate-shechter-khan-newson-laban-students-training%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436360662210%2F3163b29d-4e19-4b56-9682-646c23f94353-1567x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20for%20the%20soul%20of%20British%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fcontemporary-dance-debate-shechter-khan-newson-laban-students-training%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20for%20the%20soul%20of%20British%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fcontemporary-dance-debate-shechter-khan-newson-laban-students-training%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436360662210%2F3163b29d-4e19-4b56-9682-646c23f94353-1567x2040.jpeg>
 ‘There’s a lack of theatrical skills; the schools don’t give them the tools’: 
Jasmin Vardimon. 
Australian-born Lloyd Newson, 58, has been making dance for three decades. 
He’s attracted to complex issues – social, sexual, political – and his 
unflinching approach has won him several awards and an OBE. He has spoken out, 
he says, because of “the continued lack of urgency in addressing and improving 
the quality of UK contemporary dancers … There’s a critical lack of body 
awareness.” His words are echoed by other senior practitioners.Jasmin Vardimon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/28/jasmin-vardimon-7734-review>, a 
director-choreographer known for her physical theatre productions, says that 
dancers leave the conservatoire schools unable to adapt and work in a 
multidisciplinary way. “There’s a lack of theatrical skills; the schools don’t 
give them the tools. They’re not versatile enough.”

“For me, it comes down to one word – rigour,” says Arthur Pita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/22/arthur-pita-dance-choreographer-edward-watson-wendy-whelan-interview>
, a choreographer whose productions include the award-winningThe Metamorphosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/25/jewels-metamorphosis-royal-ballet-review>
. “We’ll look in years to come and say: what happened? It all went flimsy.” 
Like Newson, Pita trained at LCDS. Looking back to his student days in the 90s, 
he remembers “classes driven by passion and intelligence. It was like being in 
church.”

It’s not like that any more, says a choreographer who recently visited LCDS to 
audition graduate-year students. “The attitude was so lackadaisical it was 
laughable. They looked like they couldn’t be arsed. And once the project was up 
and running there were constant problems with absenteeism. One student 
requested compassionate leave to recover from the emotional trauma of learning 
my work.” A guest teacher at LCDS, who has given professional classes all over 
the world, encountered similar attitudes. “The students don’t believe you when 
you say it’s not good enough. Don’t take on board how hard you have to 
concentrate in class. Don’t warm up. Don’t get that you shouldn’t have to tell 
them more than twice. They just don’t really listen.”

Arthur Pita: the David Lynch of dance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/22/arthur-pita-dance-choreographer-edward-watson-wendy-whelan-interview>
These are dismaying testimonies, and I was offered many others like them. But 
why would students submit themselves to such demanding and expensive training 
(three-year BA dance courses cost £27,000 in fees alone) if they lacked 
motivation? What was going wrong? ForIan Garside, a former Laban student 
<http://www.article19.co.uk/theshoutboard/ian_garside_uk_london_professi.php>, 
it was the teachers’ too-soft, hands-off approach. “As a dance student, you 
need a kick up the arse. And we didn’t get one. I felt I was never going to 
reach the heights I aspired to.”

A teacher who has worked at all three conservatoires tells me that the 
problems stem from the sidelining of demanding disciplines such as ballet, and 
the techniques evolved by Martha Graham, José Limón andMerce Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2014/jul/25/remembering-merce-cunningham-five-contemporary-dance-videos>
, in favour of exercises such as somatic release, which is as much a healing 
therapy as a performance discipline. “There’s a theory in contemporary dance 
that you can get away with it by ‘finding your own way’,” says Pita. “But deep 
down we know that’s wrong. The art form has got fragile. It needs muscle.”

While dance-specific, these lamentations have a familiar ring. They echo those 
concerning the death of grammar teaching in mainstream education, the neglect 
of drawing in art colleges, and the phasing-out of competitive sport in 
schools. According to this narrative, feelgood activity has displaced hard-won 
craft and skill. But the conservatoires, and others in the contemporary dance 
sphere, see things very differently.

Q&A: Wayne McGregor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/16/wayne-mcgregor-tree-of-codes-manchester-international-festival-mif>
They see a sector starved of funds and deeply divided. Its most visible stars 
are choreographers such as Newson, Khan, Shechter,Wayne McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/may/16/wayne-mcgregor-tree-of-codes-manchester-international-festival-mif>
 and others whose work is subsidised by Arts Council England, showcased at 
venues such as Sadler’s Wells, and toured internationally. Beneath the radar, 
however, there are myriad less celebrated practitioners. A vast cohort of 
performers and choreographers move from project to project, often working in an 
experimental vein, far from the leading dance houses. In its diversity, this 
alternative tendency is comparable to the indie music scene. A few 
practitioners work regularly enough to make a living, but most are forced to 
find alternative sources of income to survive. Wages are low – many dancers are 
prepared to work for nothing, rather than not at all – and every year new 
graduates and dancers from overseas swell an already overflowing pool.

With the gap widening between dance’s haves and have-nots, the sector has 
become damagingly polarised. Many feel that as increasingly deep cuts are 
imposed, the few are favoured at the expense of the many. The producerChantal 
Guevara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/oct/16/chantal-guevara-cloud-dance-festival>
 notes that while smaller-scale enterprises are starved of funds, “We’re 
inundated with Akram, Hofesh, etc. It’s a boys’ club.” This year, ACE awarded 
Newson, Khan and Shechter a total of £1.3m.

Charlie Ashwell, editor of online dance magazine BellyFlop 
<http://bellyflopmag.com/> and a working professional dancer, articulates the 
sense of grievance felt by many of her colleagues. “For too long a few have 
gained acclaim, money, runs at the National, MBEs, by treading the rest of us 
into the mud.” These privileged few, she continues, have colluded in dancers’ 
job insecurity, while practising “humiliation dressed up as character-building 
artistic process”. By referencing the audition process in their press release, 
the three choreographers touched a raw nerve. “It amazes me how little the 
ethics of auditions are called out,” says Ashwell. “Holding auditions asks 
dancers to give up their time and energy for free with absolutely nothing 
guaranteed in return. Auditions are always exploitative.”
 The new wave of dance: award-winning duo 70/30 Split. ‘There’s a hunger for 
small-scale, undefinable dance, DIY-style,’ says Sophie Unwin, left. 
Photograph: Emanuele Pecorari 
Whether you agree with Ashwell or not – and many in the contemporary dance 
world would contest her words – life for conservatoire graduates is desperately 
precarious. Most, given that the supply of contemporary dancers far outstrips 
demand, will have portfolio careers. At different times, they might find 
themselves performing, choreographing, producing, publicising, teaching, 
writing about dance or involved in dance therapy. As all three conservatoire 
principals emphasise, this expanded skill-set necessitates an updated schooling 
approach. “We’re not offering you a glittering five-year career before you 
retrain,” says Laban principal Anthony Bowne. “We’re offering you a lifetime 
career in dance.”

Almost all conservatoire graduates will have to start from scratch, assembling 
creative projects with like-minded colleagues, and competing for crumbs from 
the funding table. This can be daunting, but creating from scratch is what 
young British artists are good at.Matthew Bourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/matthewbourne> was a Laban graduate who 
launched his career by putting on small-scale shows with colleagues. None was a 
memorably brilliant dancer, but as a group they were bursting with 
inventiveness. Today, many conservatoire graduates would rather do their own 
thing than work for a big-name choreographer. As one puts it: “If I was a fine 
artist I wouldn’t want to do someone else’s painting, so why as a dancer would 
I want to do someone else’s dancing?”

Watching that Laban class, I realise how much has changed. There’s none of the 
blazing competitive tension that I remember from my own student days. There’s 
no sweat on the studio floor, and the students are all shapes and sizes. But as
Lydia Cottrell and Sophie Unwin of the performance duo 70/30 Split 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/07/2014-most-exciting-dance-moments>
 explain, the new wave of practitioners are not interested in dance based on 
virtuosity and technique. “There’s a hunger for small-scale, undefinable dance, 
DIY-style,” says Unwin. “It’s completely valid and more interesting.” Ordinary, 
imperfect civilian bodies, such as those of Unwin and Cottrell, are central to 
this new-wave vision, and appropriate to an interdisciplinary sphere in which 
boundaries between dance, theatre and other performance arts are dissolving, 
while whippet-thin, balletic physiques are associated with what they call 
“old-style contemporary dance”. The gulf between old and new, the pair say, has 
widened to the point where the two cultures find it hard to communicate with 
each other. As Guevara confirms: “Neither funders nor schools understand what 
contemporary dance is now.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fcontemporary-dance-debate-shechter-khan-newson-laban-students-training%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436361472013%2F202a48c6-0277-4075-b046-89f069e5e134-2060x1317.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20for%20the%20soul%20of%20British%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fcontemporary-dance-debate-shechter-khan-newson-laban-students-training%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20for%20the%20soul%20of%20British%20dance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F12%2Fcontemporary-dance-debate-shechter-khan-newson-laban-students-training%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436361472013%2F202a48c6-0277-4075-b046-89f069e5e134-2060x1317.jpeg>
 Antonia Grove and Theo Clinkard in This by New Art Club: ‘I don’t believe in 
auditions,’ says Clinkard. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Observer 
Even the hiring process is changing. “I don’t believe in auditions,” says Theo 
Clinkard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/12/theo-clinkard-ordinary-courage-review-nuanced-examination-loss>
, a popular new-wave choreographer. “I teach classes and workshops so I can 
meet people and see them dance in a non-competitive environment. [This] keeps 
me in touch, let’s me know which dancers are around and helps me find out what 
is moving them at any given point.” Clinkard is keen to do away with “the 
old-school dancer/maker hierarchy”, and says, with reference to Khan, Newson 
and Shechter: “I want to pull the rug from the power structures these chaps are 
clinging to.”

Personally, I’m torn. I get, completely, the notion of dance as a human-scale 
thing. As approachable and imperfect, rather than hyper-refined and “other”. 
But the trained dancer in me mourns the death of old-school rigour at the 
conservatoires. I remember the tough love offered by the LCDS teachers when 
Newson and Pita trained there, and the drained faces and sweat-drenched bodies 
of the students after a hard Graham class. Today, the training is infinitely 
broader, and the LCDS students learn, among other skills, how to write a 
business plan. On the day I visit, the final-year students are undergoing 
diversity training.

“We can’t turn the clock back to a time when we were fantastic for some 
students and others failed,” says Janet Smith, principal of NSCD in Leeds. “We 
have to ask: to what extent can we open up their full potential, and joining a 
traditional dance company is not necessarily the way.” The students at Laban 
appear to agree. As Bowne says: “Doing steps for Matthew Bourne doesn’t appeal 
to the majority of our graduates.”

Luke Jennings: 2014’s most exciting dance moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/07/2014-most-exciting-dance-moments>
Smith is right: you can’t turn the clock back. But the three choreographers 
are right, too: something fierce and vital has been lost, and this needs to be 
faced by the conservatoires, and addressed. More broadly, the opposing factions 
in British contemporary dance need to talk, to resist the temptation to turn on 
each other as funding cuts bite ever deeper, and to realise that their common 
enemy is the political mindset that views the arts as expendable.

For now, perhaps we have to accept that British contemporary dance is more 
likely to produce conceptual game-changers than elite dancers.

At Laban, class is over, and a group of final-year students are sitting in a 
patch of sunshine in the corridor, talking. They look thoughtful. Maybe it’s 
the start of something.
 