
Watership Down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/dec/19/comfort-reading-richard-adams-watership-down>
 was the first English book I read of my own accord. I was 16 and had only been 
learning English “since six years”, as I used to put it in my Germanic way back 
then. I still used to sit “in the bus”, “do mistakes” and “feel myself sorry” 
when I made them. YetRichard Adams’ rabbit odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/04/richard-adams-watership-down-interview>
 burrowed its way into my heart in the summer of 1997, and I still think of it 
as essential reading for anyone trying to understand this strange island tribe.

At first I made the mistake of trying to read the novel as another Animal Farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/sep/07/review-animal-farm-george-orwell>
, a political allegory about Europe in the 20th century. It almost works: a 
group of rabbits flee a collapsing state; they pass through a kind of Weimar 
Republic warren, blessed with a flowering art scene and a fateful decadence; 
then an authoritarian warren run by the fascistGeneral Woundwort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/11/baddies-in-books-general-woundwort-watership-down>
 forces them into a war which they win thanks to the cunning of leader Hazel, 
the bravery of Biggles-like officer Bigwig, and a resistance-fighter gull with 
a comical European accent.

Watership Down author Richard Adams: I just can’t do humans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/04/richard-adams-watership-down-interview>
I even misremembered the name of one of the does oppressed by Woundwort’s 
regime, Hyzenthlay, as “Heisenklee” and became convinced that it was a very 
clever compound of the names of painterPaul Klee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/klee> and physicist Werner Heisenberg 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Heisenberg>, two great minds 
discriminated against by the Nazis for their Jewish heritage or pro-Jewish 
sympathies. In hindsight, I may have had a little bit too much time on my hands 
that summer.

In fact, Watership Down is much more like A Clockwork Orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/13/100-best-novels-clockwork-orange-anthony-burgess>
: a book so confidently lodged in an alternative universe with its own rules 
and conventions that it even has its own language. Rabbits here don’t converse 
in grunts, snorts or howls, they speakLapine 
<http://watershipdown.wikia.com/wiki/Lapine_Glossary> – a distinctly 
human-sounding language reminiscent of Arabic.

Adams pretends to be our interpreter, painstakingly rendering Lapine concepts 
into English: the wordHlao, we are told, “means any small concavity in the 
grass where moisture may collect, eg the dimple formed by a dandelion or 
thistle-cup”.Tharn is the state of staring, glazed paralysis that comes over 
terrified rabbits.

The logic of Lapine is not human-down, but rabbit-up. Because a rabbit’s paw 
has only four claws, for example, they cannot count to five. Any number above 
four isHrair, meaning “a lot” or “a thousand”. Concepts of time are defined by 
the celestial bodies:fu Inlé means “after moonrise”. Any machine, whether car 
or tractor, is ahrududu.

Adams knew what anyone learning a language eventually realises: once you can 
instinctively swear in it, you’re cruising

When I mention Watership Down to English friends now, they mostly tell me how 
intensely they reacted to the1978 animated film adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/oct/30/watership-down-the-film-that-frightened-me-the-most>
: how it left them with nightmares of rabbits tearing each others’ throats out, 
or how much they cried in the scene with the Black Rabbit of Death and thatArt 
Garfunkel song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a502RejLz8s>. I got it again 
when I bought a new copy last week: “Really? It’s such a sad story,” said the 
woman behind the counter, as if I had just asked her to bludgeon a bunny with 
her scanner gun.

But I found Watership Down an encouraging book, uplifting even. When I started 
it, English was another form of Lapine to me: words like “watercress”, 
“bumblebee” or “culvert” were so alien, they may as well have been rabbit 
speak. The most cryptic passage in the book was a chunk of human dialogue 
rendered in Hampshire dialect: “’E won’t be n’ bloomin’ good t’ yer. You put 
’im in ’utch ’e’ll only die. You can’t keep woild rabbit.”

But the clever thing about Watership Down is that it it doesn’t just invent 
its own language, it also teaches the reader how language works. At first 
Lapine feels awkward. Yet by the end of the book the training wheels have 
slipped off, and you haven’t even noticed.

During the climax of the siege of Watership Down, Bigwig shouts “Silflay 
hraka, u embleer rah!” as he launches himself at the enemy. It’s the first time 
in the book Adams doesn’t provide a footnote, but careful readers can string 
together a translation:silflay means to feed, hraka are droppings, embleer is 
to stink like fox, andrah denotes a chieftain or leader. Adams knew what anyone 
learning a new language eventually realises: once you can instinctively swear 
in it, you’re cruising.

Migratory lives don’t suit rabbits, the book explains at one point: they are 
animals built for quick sprints not long marches. Language is like that too, in 
my experience: you can be fluent in more than one tongue at the same time, yet 
one of them needs to feel like a home. Watership Down made me believe I could 
migrate.
 