
Stirling prize <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/stirling-prize>

The award for the best building designed by a British architect has a crowded 
field. TheOlympic Velodrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/feb/22/olympic-2012-games-velodrome-open>
 is the odds-on favourite, but with aZaha Hadid school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/17/evelyn-grace-academy-review>
,and the Turner Contemporary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2011/apr/07/turner-contemporary-gallery-david-chipperfield-pictures>
in the running <http://www.odonnell-tuomey.ie/webpage/angael/angael.htm>, the 
race is not over yet.Announced 2 October.

OMA/Progress <http://www.barbican.org.uk/news/artformnews/art/oma-progress>

Established in 1975, Rem Koolhaas's Office of Metropolitan Architecture 
<http://www.oma.eu/index.php?Itemid=10&option=com_projects&view=overview> is 
one of the most challenging of all design practices. This is the first 
major show in Britain of the big themes that drive OMA, and the striking 
results: thePrada Foundation, Milan 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/03/23/magazine/23prada-t.html>; the CCTV building, 
Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/gallery/2011/apr/17/ten-best-tall-buildings#/?picture=373665932&index=9>
 andMaggie's Centre in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2010/may/06/maggies-centres-design-architects>
.Barbican <http://www.barbican.org.uk/>, London EC2, 6 October to 19 February.

Tel Aviv Museum of Art <http://www.tamuseum.com/>

This compelling new building walks a fine line between the museum's need for 
rectangular galleries and the challenge of a triangular site in the city 
centre. The result is a complex yet rational structure full of unexpected 
twists and turns, designed by the office ofPreston Scott Cohen 
<http://www.pscohen.com/>. Opens 2 November.

Pylon Design Competition

Pylons will be around for at least another generation. Shortlisted designs 
from thenational pylon competition <http://www.ribapylondesign.com/> held by 
the Department of Energy and Climate Change to find a new standard design will 
be revealed atan event at the V&A 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/whatson/event/1367/date/20110914/> as part of the London 
festival of design; the final judging takes place on 12 October.
 