
Anyone a little Olympicked out already? Feeling a creeping sense of fatigue, 
or a sneaking desire to see how things are going on Cash in the Attic? If so, 
you've come to the wrong place. I'm here all day, finger on the red button. The 
couch and I have become one.

*******

I come to in front of the sailing, and I'm forced to rely entirely on the 
commentary to tell who is and isn't doing well: from above, the boats look like 
so many flies arranged on a giant cowpat. It doesn't help that they're racing 
two classes at once – Laser and 49er – and switching between the two. And it 
especially doesn't help that I don't care.

*******

I'm afraid that over the course of three days, choice has bred in me a kind of 
recalcitrance. I baulk at the guidance offered by the BBC presenting team.

"Let's go over to the tennis now," says one. "No," I say. "Olympic tennis is 
just Wimbledon with a casual Fridays policy." I alight instead on the women's 
weightlifting.

*******

The main event, the clean and jerk, may sound like an item from the back page 
of a massage parlour menu, but 18-year-old Zoe Smith set a new British record – 
121kg – overtaking her rival, the German Christin Ulrich, who looks like Sharon 
off Eastenders and prefaces each lift with an unholy shriek. Sadly, "new 
British record" equates to "second place in group B". But good on her.

*******

It was inevitable, to the extent that I wondered why I didn't think of it: 
someone has begun tweeting in the guise of an unoccupied venue seat. "I feel so 
empty," tweeted @OlympicSeat on Sunday. "Maybe things would have been different 
had I been chosen for a different sport," it said on Monday. "Women's beach 
volleyball, for example." The Twitter account attracted 13,000 followers in its 
first 24 hours, which is going some.

*******

Worth a look, even if you don't understand one bit of it: equestrian 
cross-country. Riders tear through Greenwich Park, jumping over obstacles 
shaped like a narrow boat, a gypsy caravan, a chess set, a flower stall and the 
Tower of London. It's a like crazy golf for horses.

Picture of the day
 The Queen's Olympic opening ceremony stunt double, Gary ­Connery, poses in 
costume. Photograph: Twitter 

HM the Queen looking relaxed before her historic helicopter jump for the 
Olympic opening ceremony. Actually it's Gary Connery, professional stuntman and 
Elizabeth II lookalike. "I'd been for dress fittings on several occasions," he 
told the BBC Radio 4 Today programame. "I would imagine they probably pushed 
the boat out for the Queen's dress a bit more than they did for mine." He wears 
it well, though.

LingoWatch: Ben's Nevis

In keeping with the tradition that every British sporting hopeful must have 
his corresponding commemorative spectatorial promontory – in the manner of 
Henman's Hill, now Murray Mount – the slope overlooking the Olympic sailing 
course in Weymouth has been christened in honour of Ben Ainslie.

There's an as-yet-unnamed unnamed rise outside the Aquatic Centre, where 
non-ticketed diving fans gathered earlier to have their medal hopes dashed. 
Tom's Tumulus? Better suggestions gratefully received. Actually, it would 
probably be more difficult to think of a worse one.

Quote of the day

"It's a shame we can't just flick over and get a look at the red piste."

As uttered by a frustrated fencing commentator lamenting his inability to 
cover nail-biting match, while the cameras remained firmly trained on the blue 
piste, where technicians were busy re-wiring a competitor's malfunctioning 
robot costume. The latter, I can assure you, was infinitely more fascinating.
 