
There are many, perhaps countless, reasons to return to the director Ted 
Kotcheff’s 1971 masterpieceWake in Fright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/14/wake-in-fright-rewatching-australian-films>
, truly one of the greatest motion pictures ever made in Australia. Some 45 
years later it refuses to shrink into irrelevance, as if the film were some 
colossal plant still thriving in the desert.


Themes around drinking, gambling, suicidal ideation, homosexuality and the 
us-and-them divide between city and country (a particularly topical subject in 
the wake of Donald Trump’s election) imbue Wake in Fright with an urgency we 
must now assume will never go away.

You can’t even call it a period drama; too little has changed. The story, 
about a wisecracking schoolteacher psychologically pummelled by sun, beer and 
strangers (adapted from Kenneth Cook’s novel of the same name) is based in the 
middle of an arid, boiling hot nowhere. In the fictitious town of Bundanyabba 
(aka “the Yabba”) snooty John Grant (Gary Bond) sticks out like a sore thumb.

Wake in Fright to get TV treatment in two-part series for Network Ten
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/08/wake-in-fright-to-get-tv-treatment-in-two-part-series-for-network-ten>
Kotcheff, a Canadian who subsequently directed many other films, including 
First Blood and Weekend at Bernie’s, was also (and still is) an outsider to 
Australia. In a sense, while making the film, much of it shot in Broken Hill, 
he was a real-life version of the schoolteacher – albeit one who actually liked 
the locals.

The director, now 85 years old and in Australia next week for Monster Fest in 
Melbourne 
<https://www.monsterfest.com.au/monster-fest-2016-announces-keynote-speaker-ted-kotcheff-closing-film-greasy-strangler-passes-accreditation-open/>
, admires the hard-knuckle men he met. Particularly, he says, “their fortitude 
in the face of the most inhospitable circumstances in the world to work and 
live in. I loved their camaraderie. I loved their humour, their generosity and 
their support of each other. It was extraordinary.”

Wake in Fright marked the first big-screen performance from Jack Thompson and 
the last from Chips Rafferty, who was born in Broken Hill and died the year the 
film hit cinemas. Rafferty is unforgettable as the slightly menacing, 
pint-devouring sheriff who can barely conceal his contempt for Grant, the 
visiting Plato-reading intellectual.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56118568cae9831e21ebca6d39f71ef61fd2bcca%2F0_0_925_1280%2F925.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20making%20of%20Wake%20in%20Fright%3A%20'I%20wanted%20people%20to%20watch%20the%20film%20and%20be%20sweating'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20making%20of%20Wake%20in%20Fright%3A%20%27I%20wanted%20people%20to%20watch%20the%20film%20and%20be%20sweating%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56118568cae9831e21ebca6d39f71ef61fd2bcca%2F0_0_925_1280%2F925.jpg>
 Wake in Fright director Ted Kotcheff said he wanted to ‘recreate what I felt 
and saw – the heat, the sweat, the dust, the flies’. 
Rafferty’s career was forged in a string of famous performances (such as in 
The Overlanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/13/the-overlanders-rewatched-ealing-studios-produced-australian-western>
) inevitably casting him as the quintessential Aussie man’s-man (that baton was 
passed to Thompson, who has run with it ever since). And what’s more fair 
dinkum than practically inhaling beers?

“Chips had no uvula,” says Kotcheff, laughing. “You know what a uvula is? When 
you’re drinking you go (points to his throat) gulp gulp gulp. He had no uvula. 
So the beer was like, pouring straight down. There was no stop between the 
mouth and the stomach. No hesitation either. Gulp. It’s down.

“He drank a lot of beer in these scenes. A lot of beer. So I asked our prop 
man to stock up on non-alcoholic beer. On the very first day with Chips, he had 
a scene where he drank two pints in one take. He poured the first down then 
spat a bit out in disgust. He said, ‘Ted, what is this?’ I said ‘It’s 
non-alcoholic beer.’ He said ‘I can’t act with non-alcoholic beer. I need real 
beer.’”

The director did the maths. Rafferty needed to consume two pints of beer in 
one shot. Four or five takes were required of that shot, which meant eight or 
10 pints. Every other scene they filmed that day also involved drinking. 
Kotcheff estimated Rafferty would be required to down 30 pints.

When the director informed the actor of his calculations, reiterating his case 
for non-alcoholic beer, he received a stern rebuke: “You look after the 
directing, Ted, and I’ll look after the drinking.”

Kotcheff says the inimitable tippler “didn’t show even the slightest scintilla 
of inebriation. He never stumbled on a word or anything. It had no effect on 
him whatsoever. I kept saying, how the hell does he do that?”

A moment in the film that has elicited a similar question over the years 
(perhaps more “what the hell?” than “how the hell?”) is Wake in Fright’s 
kangaroo hunting sequence. In it, a group of rambunctious blokes, including 
John, get sloshed and go out shooting roos at night. The scene marks a crucial 
turning point for the protagonist, who breaks bad and embraces the yahoo 
(believes Kotcheff) inside all of us.

The director was a vegan back then and is vegetarian now. Adamant no animal 
should die for making a movie, but knowing the scene was fundamentally 
important, this left him in a quandary (computer-generated imagery, of course, 
was far off into the distance). Kotcheff decided to tag along with a group of 
hunters on their nightly routine, telling them he was making a documentary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc93506396670c1585d9ea32b4c4cdee7a8b214c5%2F0_724_1159_876%2F1159.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20making%20of%20Wake%20in%20Fright%3A%20'I%20wanted%20people%20to%20watch%20the%20film%20and%20be%20sweating'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20making%20of%20Wake%20in%20Fright%3A%20%27I%20wanted%20people%20to%20watch%20the%20film%20and%20be%20sweating%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fwake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc93506396670c1585d9ea32b4c4cdee7a8b214c5%2F0_724_1159_876%2F1159.jpg>
 Wake in Fright was set in the fictitious town of Bundanyabba, and filmed in 
Broken Hill. Photograph: Ted Kotcheff 
On the evening this stretch of jaw-dropping cinema was filmed, the hunters 
asked Kotcheff where he wanted the animals to be shot. If we shoot them in the 
kidney, a hunter explained, the roos drop dead on the spot. In the brain, they 
do a big leap and then die. In the heart, they take three hops and collapse. 
The director, mortified, informed them to just go about their business and 
pretend he wasn’t there.

“We started at 8 o’clock and it was just horrific,” he remembers. “There were 
16 of them. They shot the roos, skinned them, cut their heads off. I was up 
there beside the camera, on the back of the truck, next to a big light. 
Suddenly I heard a thump beside me. My British producer had fainted. He was so 
horrified he just collapsed.”

Wake in Fright: rewatching classic Australian films
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/14/wake-in-fright-rewatching-australian-films>
Wake in Fright made an indelible print on Australian culture. It did nothing 
shy of helping kick-start contemporary local cinema, a seminal production in 
what would later become known as theAustralian film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia> renaissance of the 1970s. Its 
themes are still pertinent, to say the least, to the Australian experience. And 
its thick, clammy, sun-kissed look set a visual template for countless 
subsequent films.

“I wanted to recreate what I felt and saw – the heat, the sweat, the dust, the 
flies,” says Kotcheff. “I said to the set designer and the costume designer, ‘I 
don’t want to see any cool colours. I don’t want to see blue or green. Ever. On 
anything. All I want is red, yellow, orange, burgundy and brown. All the hot 
colours. On costumes, sets, everything.’ I wanted people to watch the film and 
be unconsciously sweating.”

• Ted Kotcheff will appear at Monster Fest 2016 
<http://www.monsterfest.com.au/> in Melbourne, which runs from 24 November 
until 27 November
 