
Overview

By Nechama Brodie <https://twitter.com/brodiegal>, author of The Joburg Book 
<http://panmacmillan.co.za/catalogue/the-joburg-book/> (Pan Macmillan) 

Speculators have been predicting the death of Johannesburg ever since it was a 
dusty mining camp (which wasn’t actually all that long ago). In the aftermath 
of democracy, around 1994, white expats who had fled the central business 
district (the concentration of skyscrapers at the city’s heart, usually called 
the CBD), or even the country, shared emails depicting apocalyptic inner-city 
squalor and decay. But the city, which turns 130 this year, has, in many parts, 
successfully reconfigured itself as the Pan-African capital it was always 
destined to be.
Joburg map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/johannesburg/giv-27167zcLS5pcgM1m5/>
Of course, sometimes this bears a closer resemblance to the metropolises 
depicted in Neil Blomkamp’s District 9 or Lauren Beukes’ Zoo City, but that’s 
part of the appeal: Johannesburg is defiantly entropic. A century and a half 
ago, the city landscape would have been grassland; now it surrounds what is 
claimed to be theworld’s largest urban forest 
<https://africacheck.org/2013/05/28/the-joburger-who-went-up-a-tree-and-came-down-to-find-a-forest/>
 – terraforming so dramatic that new bird and bat species have migrated to its 
canopies.

In recent years, western tourists have also started to realise that Joburg has 
more to offer than just a well-placed airport with safari and beach transit 
lounges. Last year,Rough Guides listed Johannesburg as the number one city 
<http://www.roughguides.com/best-places/2015/top-10-cities/> (in the world) to 
visit. GQ magazine called it the “cool capital of the southern hemisphere 
<http://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/article/best-things-to-do-in-johannesburg-south-africa>
”, edging out Joburg’s scenic rival Cape Town.

Part of this is due to blogger- and Instagram-friendly urban regeneration 
projects, particularly the trending hubs of Braamfontein and Maboneng, but the 
energy of the city is just as sprawling as its geography. It’s a space that 
usually rewards curiosity and a spirit of adventure (ditch the bravado though, 
and listen to local advice). And, for first-time visitors, it’s important to 
get your bearings. Joburg, by area, is slightly larger than greater London; it 
can take hours to go from north to south, or east to west, and public transport 
is tricky. If you’re not a confident and assertive driver, use taxis for short 
trips.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5d82632ae051b06ed54273e5500c29bca5e7703%2F649_1105_3190_1914%2F3190.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5d82632ae051b06ed54273e5500c29bca5e7703%2F649_1105_3190_1914%2F3190.jpg>
 Fun hub … Braamfontein 
The city’s fast pace can often feel frenetic – it’s the residual buzz of 
commerce, offset by an established music, performance and fine art scene that’s 
one of the most exciting anywhere in the world. A great way to experience this, 
for novices and veterans alike, is on the monthlyFirst Thursday 
<http://www.first-thursdays.co.za/johannesburg/> events, where galleries and 
cultural attractions stay open into the evening, encouraging people to drive 
and even – shock – walk between venues.

There are still a handful of holdouts who complain that there’s “nothing to 
do” in Johannesburg. It was a whinge that prompted local journalist Laurice 
Taitz to starta blog of the same name <http://todoinjoburg.co.za/>; she now 
publishes the local edition of theIn Your Pocket 
<http://www.inyourpocket.com/johannesburg> guide, which is indispensable for 
updates on weekly events <https://twitter.com/johannesburgiyp> in and around 
the city. And our pick of local experts have more than a few places to 
recommend, too

Live music and clubs

By singer, composer and author Nakhane Touré 
<https://www.facebook.com/nakhanetoureofficial/>, whose EP The Laughing Son 
<https://itunes.apple.com/za/album/the-laughing-son-ep/id1054038177> and debut 
novelPiggy Boy Blues 
<http://www.jacana.co.za/downloads/submaterial/0.%202015/SUB_5/AIs/E1_Piggy_Boys_Blues_AI.pdf>
 (Jacana) are out now
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F568e5c045c95481d63f110d0fcdd899f78c7b61d%2F0_1634_2720_1632%2F2720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F568e5c045c95481d63f110d0fcdd899f78c7b61d%2F0_1634_2720_1632%2F2720.jpg>
 Nakhane Touré 
The Orbit <http://www.theorbit.co.za/> Jazz Lounge in Braamfontein is one of 
the few spaces almost exclusively devoted to live music, and the acoustics 
there are really good. Of course, jazz is seen as a little bit elitist, but get 
over it. There are two bars and two spaces, so if you don’t want to listen to 
music, from the likes ofSibongile Khumalo <http://www.sibongilekhumalo.co.za/> 
orCarlo Mombelli <http://www.carlomombelli.com/>, you can go downstairs and 
drink and have fun without distracting the musicians.

Nakhane Touré - Fog: New music from South Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/06/nakhane-tour-fog-new-music-from-south-africa>
I launched my album at the smaller Jazz Room at The Bassline 
<http://www.bassline.co.za/#welcome> in Newtown – there is also a larger 
concert venue that can take bigger crowds, but the sound doesn’t bleed much 
between the two. I like The Bassline because it has a rich history of 
showcasing forward-thinking black musicians such asSimphiwe Dana 
<https://www.facebook.com/SimphiweDanaOfficial/>, Thandiswa Mazwai 
<http://www.thandiswa.com/>, the late Busi Mhlongo … artists who were 
commercially and artistically successful. But it also has Ragga Nights (on 
Thursdays), and comedy nights. The people who run The Bassline have an astute 
understanding of the landscape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22950715a17bf2fefb437c7e69cc5a0a153fa56a%2F0_272_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22950715a17bf2fefb437c7e69cc5a0a153fa56a%2F0_272_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
 The crowd at Kitcheners changes character throughout the day 
Kitcheners <https://www.facebook.com/BarKitcheners> in Braamfontein is a 
different type of jol (a kind of South African equivalent for craic, among 
other things). The identity of Kitcheners is always changing. In the daytime, 
there are older people, ordering a drink at the bar at 11am. Then, around 5pm, 
you get the student crowd. They can be rowdy, but they spend lots of money and 
keep the economy going. They’re also passionate about music. I cannot explain 
how bad the sound is – bleeding, distorted – but when you start to play, people 
listen. Of course, they start the music quite late when people are already 
merry, and no one is concerned about sound, what they want is a performance. 
Every time I’ve played there, I’ve had a good show. I just hope nobody recorded 
it.
 Nakhane Touré’s Spotify playlist for Guardian Travel 
Monchichi <https://www.facebook.com/MonchhichiBar/> in Marshalltown is in a 
different part of downtown. It’s a very minimal space, all stone, with hanging 
lanterns, and if you don’t want to be inside there’s an outside space that 
isn’t on the road. It’s a good spot to catch local DJs. And we do have 
fantastic DJs – Miss Buttons is great. DJ Rambo (Tshepang Ramoba) is a 
world-class drummer and possibly an even better DJ. He’s great at reading a 
crowd and knows what to play and when to play it. He can mix kwaito and Donna 
Summer and Talking Heads, and it will all work.


If you want to buy music and vinyl, Aware Records <http://awareza.tumblr.com/> 
in Braamfontein has a vast selection.Recordmad <http://recordmad.co.za/> in 
Linden is also really good, and there’s WeHeartbeat at27 Boxes 
<http://www.27boxes.co.za/> in Melville. Tucked away in the Braamfontein Centre 
is another shop calledJust CDs <http://justcdmusic.co.za/> – if you’re looking 
for an obscure jazz album or a hard-to-find Busi Mhlongo, they’ll have it.

Fashion and shopping 

By fashion designer Maria McCloy <https://twitter.com/MariaPodesta>, owner of 
Maria McCloy Accessories <https://www.facebook.com/MariaMcCloyAccessories/>, at 
Work Shop Newtown <http://workshopnewtown.com/> (and Sundays at Maboneng’s 
Market on Main <http://marketonmain.co.za/>)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F490f50c368b65155bacdf5aff606534e2cc22cd7%2F0_887_2720_1632%2F2720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F490f50c368b65155bacdf5aff606534e2cc22cd7%2F0_887_2720_1632%2F2720.jpg>
 Maria McCloy 
Downtown Joburg is where I feed my creativity, my soul, and my heart. I can’t 
drive, and using public transport changes the way you experience the city: you 
see things differently in a taxi or a minibus, or on the train. I meet and find 
most of my suppliers on foot, and my makers are all over the place.

My necklaces are made in Soweto; my shoes by an old Italian guy in Jeppestown. 
I buy my cloth all over downtown. Although some people see it as all the same 
cloth, I work with many Pan-African cloths, from acid-etchedShweshwe 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shweshwe>, originally from Lesotho, to 
wax-prints associated with the rest of the continent. Ironically, almost all of 
these cloths and patterns started being made somewhere else, but now they’re 
part of our fabric.

Diagonal Street has the best variety of Shweshwe around, and you can also pick 
up beautiful Basotho blankets and visit the muthi (traditional medicine) shops– 
but you must have a proper look.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4d901cdd6d280aed742f3f4b2a5a14a5149d7a%2F0_215_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4d901cdd6d280aed742f3f4b2a5a14a5149d7a%2F0_215_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Hats on sale at Thesis. 
Mai Mai 
<http://joburg.org.za/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=308&Itemid=52> 
is my favourite market. It’s an amazing experience, and so funny because it’s 
just down the road from the more gentrified Maboneng precinct. They are worlds 
apart but just five minutes’ walk away. Mai Mai feels like going home to the 
village. People have lived and worked there for generations – Joburg’s history 
is embedded there, a unique mix of the traditional in an urban space. I go to 
buy Zulu, Tsonga and Shembe beadwork. Mai Mai is also known for traditional 
medicine, but if you’re going to do that I would recommend contacting the 
sangoma (traditional healer and diviner)Nokulinda Mkhize  
<https://www.facebook.com/ithongalove> through her Facebook page. You can find 
great contemporary urban streetwear at theDOPE store 
<https://www.facebook.com/DOPEstore/> on Commissioner Street and at Thesis 
<http://www.thesis.co.za/> in Mofolo Village in Soweto; both stock their own 
labels and other designers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feef09f59079899469987f9cfc88ef5f02c2ff18d%2F0_142_2915_2819%2F2915.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feef09f59079899469987f9cfc88ef5f02c2ff18d%2F0_142_2915_2819%2F2915.jpg>
 A design from Maxhosa by Laduma Ngxokolo, based in Newtown. Photograph: Maxhosa
The Rosebank precinct between Bath and Cradock avenues (consisting of the 
Rosebank Mall, The Zone, and The Firs) is also worth a visit. You can shop for 
popular South African labels such asButan <http://butanwear.com/> and Strussbob 
<http://www.strussbob.co.za/> and Head Honcho <http://headhoncho.co.za/> at the 
Shesha <https://www.facebook.com/SheshaItsaLifestyle> store. Burgundy Fly 
<http://burgundyfly.co.za/> stocks African-inspired women’s clothing. And then 
there are luxury labels such asThula Sindi <http://www.thulasindi.com/> and 
Naked Ape <http://nakedapestyle.co.za/> that would fit on any catwalk in the 
world. If you have money to spare, you must also visit fashion iconMarianne 
Fassler <http://leopardfrock.co.za/> at her house and creative workshop in 
nearby Saxonwold. She is a legend, and the space is a fantasy world of African 
awesomeness.

Work Shop Newtown <http://workshopnewtown.com/> is adjacent to the Newtown 
Junction Mall, whichis a lovely space with a lot of open areas, and feels as 
though it’s the right mix for an increasingly residential inner-city district. 
It stocks a mix of some of the best local South African fashion and accessory 
designers right now, includingHenriette Botha 
<http://henriette-botha.myshopify.com/> and Pichulik <http://www.pichulik.com/>,
MAXHOSA <http://www.maxhosa.co.za/> by Laduma Ngxokolo, and Jacques van der 
Watt’s labelBlack Coffee <http://www.blackcoffee.co.za/>. 

Where to eat

By Andrea Burgener, owner of The Leopard <http://leopardfoodcompany.com/> 
restaurant in Melville and author of cookbookLampedusa Pie 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Lampedusa-Pie-Andrea-Burgener/dp/1920434453/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1454004743&sr=8-1&keywords=lampedusa+pie>
 (Pan Macmillan)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28ab827cf6789812af3fbf2a91060631ac547e82%2F0_202_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28ab827cf6789812af3fbf2a91060631ac547e82%2F0_202_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
 Andrea Burgener 
If you want to eat well in Johannesburg, you have to know that there is no 
food scene as there is in Cape Town. It is and always has been a city of 
immigrants. In Joburg, people cook for their own communities, outside of what 
is trendy or fashionable. That’s not to say the food is “authentic”; that’s not 
what this city is about.

King Arabic Sandwiches 
<https://www.zomato.com/johannesburg/king-arabic-sandwiches-mayfair> in Mayfair 
is owned by a Palestinian family from Gaza. It is like the food you can find in 
Ottolenghi’s cookery books, but from the other side. It’s best to call ahead 
and place a special order, like maqlubah (an upside-down rice dish), or one of 
its eggplant dishes. King Arabic also makes beautiful flatbreads, and baklava 
and date biscuits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffee8a5becd02d864f7edafdf1e93808c25f716a%2F0_60_3512_2108%2F3512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffee8a5becd02d864f7edafdf1e93808c25f716a%2F0_60_3512_2108%2F3512.jpg>
 Kismayo 
A few blocks away is a Somali restaurant, Kismayo 
<http://www.inyourpocket.com/johannesburg/Kismayo_133229v>, which makes the 
best biryani-style dish I have ever had in my life. It also makes spaghetti – a 
legacy of Italian colonisation – and introduces it to guests as if they’ve 
never seen pasta before. Visitors should try the Doolshe sponge cake, which has 
the added flavour of cardamom.

There are many wonderful places to eat in Fordsburg and Mayfair, but they are 
predominantly Indian and Muslim neighbourhoods and you shouldn’t try and go 
there during Friday prayers: the area tends to shut down from around noon, 
until the late afternoon.Eastern Temptations <http://easterntemptations.co.za/> 
in Emmarentia is a little bit of Fordsburg in the suburbs with a growing Indian 
population. You can buy many types of rice and every kind of dhal. And it 
stocks the most beautiful dates from the Free State.

Slightly east of the city centre is the African Food Market 
<http://www.eatout.co.za/venue/yeoville-food-market/> in Yeoville, where you 
will find normal vegetables, but also traders from Cameroon, Ghana and Congo, 
selling cassava, dried shrimp, dendê oil and so on. I love speaking to the 
women there about their food – you can see that food is maybe the only 
connection they have left. They are keen to tell you everything about how to 
cook it. At the back of the market there must be about 30 fantastic tailors, 
who will sell you amazing fabric or make you an outfit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c413172b34853c07f9345568193ba64b303049f%2F0_0_750_738%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c413172b34853c07f9345568193ba64b303049f%2F0_0_750_738%2F750.jpg>
 Traders from as far as Ghana and Congo sell dishes at the African Food Market 
In the southern suburbs of Johannesburg, you can get excellent Portuguese 
food, which is really Mozambican-Portuguese.A palhota 
<http://www.eatout.co.za/review/a-palhota-the-hut-ab-62089/> in Rosettenville 
serves Mozambican specialties such as spinach with peanuts, matapa (crab cooked 
in coconut), and whole-baked fish. You should phone in advance, to book and see 
what is available, particularly on weekends.

I think food shows us how closely connected all our immigration stories are. 
In the gentrified area of Maboneng, there is theChe Argentine Grill 
<https://www.facebook.com/Che-Argentine-Grill-820920301309810/>, opened by an 
Argentinian and a Uruguayan, which serves fantastic empanadas and makes its own
chouriço, all using free-range meats (a rarity in this city). In Newtown there 
is a real gelato factory,La Cremosa <http://www.gelatolacremosa.com/#aboutPage>
, started by two Italians who moved to Johannesburg from Rome and decided to 
live here and continue their family tradition of making ice-cream; I love the 
less-creamy gelato style, and they really do it properly. The flavours are 
amazing.

Heritage and culture

By archaeologist, historian, inner-city activist and tour guide Jo Buitendach, 
founder of thePast Experiences <http://pastexperiences.co.za/> walking tour 
company
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb765a5a8a6f1f029b81c75470b8589db46211e4%2F0_272_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb765a5a8a6f1f029b81c75470b8589db46211e4%2F0_272_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
 Jo Buitendach 
The nice thing about Joburg is that there are places that offer a soft 
landing, which let people experience the city in a way that won’t freak them 
out. Braamfontein is not as upmarket as Maboneng, but it also features nice 
markets and coffee shops. These neighbourhoods are far from being truly 
representative of the city, however. When people say things like “no one goes 
into the CBD anymore”, you have to ask: “What about all the people who live 
there?” The magic of Joburg is in those areas.

One of the ways to connect to and explore these “other” spaces is through 
public art. There are large and small art installations across the inner city. 
I really like thestatue of Albertina and Walter Sisulu 
<http://www.joburg.org.za/index.php?option=com_content&id=4470> in 
Ferreirasdorp, because one of my passions is political history. I also like the 
fact that a woman is being represented. InErnest Oppenheimer Park 
<http://www.joburg.org.za/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=6516&catid=88&Itemid=266>
 is a set of benches that say “Nothing is impossible.”

Graffiti artists also tend to like the parts of the city that I like. The 
hipster areas get a lot of the nice stuff, but that is mostly legal or 
commissioned work. For me the best graffiti is in Jeppestown, or in Newtown 
under the highway, or near Mai Mai. Joburg is becoming a big graffiti 
destination – artists come from all over the world.Shepard Fairey 
<https://obeygiant.com/johannesburg-nelson-mandela-mural-completed/> made a 
large mural in Braamfontein but he also put up OBEY faces in other parts of the 
city, working with local artists. My favourite artists areMars 
<https://www.facebook.com/marsgraffiti/>, Bias 
<http://www.graffitisouthafrica.com/categories/_artist-bias/>, Rasty 
<https://www.facebook.com/rasty.knayles> and Tapz.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2432d8bdf15e53b340285ad530b4529fffadcc8%2F0_272_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2432d8bdf15e53b340285ad530b4529fffadcc8%2F0_272_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
 Bikes and grafitti in Newtown 
There is older graffiti, too, at the bottom of Constitution Hill 
<https://www.constitutionhill.org.za/>: a one-time Boer fort, and former prison 
complex, now a heritage site and the home of South Africa’s constitutional 
court. I always start at the ramparts, so you get a view over the city. Then I 
visit the Native Prison – where Mahatma Gandhi was a prisoner in 1906, and 
Nelson Mandela, briefly, in 1962 – and the Women’s Gaol, each of which is 
within the Old Fort. The actual court itself is also worth going to look at, 
and is home to a major public art collection.

Liliesleaf farm <http://www.liliesleaf.co.za/> is one of my favourite sites in 
the city – even though it’s not quite in the city. This was once the 
operational centre of the anti-apartheid struggle and was where many ANC 
leaders lived under cover in the early 1960s. It was raided by security forces 
in 1963, an event that led to the Rivonia Treason Trial (where Nelson Mandela 
was one of those sentenced to life imprisonment). Although the scope of 
Liliesleaf is not as broad as that of theApartheid  
<http://www.apartheidmuseum.org/>Museum <http://www.apartheidmuseum.org/>, the 
site, the restoration and the storytelling is extremely well done.

Another museum that is often overlooked is the Workers’ Museum 
<http://joburg.org.za/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=248&Itemid=51&limitstart=3>
 in Newtown; again, it tells a story of migrant labour, of compound systems, 
simply and well. When I tell people that compounds are still functioning in 
Joburg, they’re always so surprised. But it is real, and it’s still happening.

The arts and creative scenes

By poet, actress, TV presenter and producer Lebogang Mashile 
<http://www.lebo-mashile.co.za/index.php/about>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0eca29206d34a029bad03428402fed2d6ee6d6%2F0_767_2720_1632%2F2720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b0eca29206d34a029bad03428402fed2d6ee6d6%2F0_767_2720_1632%2F2720.jpg>
 Lebogang Mashile 
The Market Theatre <http://markettheatre.co.za/> is a Joburg institution. It’s 
an incredible space with so much history, and a great entry point into Newtown. 
Across Mary Fitzgerald Square is a really cool dance hub, made up ofVuyani Dance
 <http://www.vuyani.co.za/>, and the Dance Factory 
<http://www.gauteng.net/attractions/entry/dance_factory>, and Moving Into Dance 
<http://www.midance.co.za/>, where you can take your kid for dance classes on 
weekends, or benefit from being taught by some of the best dancers in the 
country in the evenings. At the nearbyBag Factory 
<http://www.bagfactoryart.org.za/> you can meet some of the country’s best 
visual artists, and you can buy direct from them. It’s not sanitised like a 
gallery; you can see as they are producing their works. You experience the 
process, not just the product.

The Soweto Theatre <http://www.sowetotheatre.com/> is another amazing venue, 
beautifully designed, and it’s a stone’s throw from theJabulani Mall 
<http://www.jabulanimall.co.za/>. A lot of people are shocked when they hear 
Soweto has a mall! It’s also close to historic sites such as Morris Isaacson 
High School (one of the schools where the June 1976 protests started), and just 
going there is a good way to explore and see the multiple worlds and extremes 
of Soweto. This theatre is also much more of a community space, and you will 
see visitors from old-age homes, or children taking drama classes.Word N Sound 
<https://wordnsound.wordpress.com/> has had some of its biggest spoken word 
festivals here.

The Wits Art Museum <https://www.wits.ac.za/wam/> (Wam) in Braamfontein has 
been constructed in what, when I was a student, used to be a dead space. Now 
it’s vibrant, beautiful and inhabited. It has live performances, installations, 
exhibitions of visual art, talks, lectures, and even monthly “family 
walkabouts” and activities for parents with small children. It gives life to 
the university in a way because it allows the world to access the “city” of the 
academy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67864198b2a60a27e632a205e2335ec415d9d789%2F0_0_4021_2680%2F4021.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67864198b2a60a27e632a205e2335ec415d9d789%2F0_0_4021_2680%2F4021.jpg>
 Wam rap … the Wits Art Museum, known as Wam 
I think it’s worth exploring the leafy central northern suburbs for contrast. 
Tyrone Avenue in Parkview is one of the few spaces not in the inner city where 
people walk around, and there is a small shop there calledArt Africa 
<http://www.joburgtourism.com/things-to-do/shopping/collectibles/johannesburg-city/art-africa-JSSHP501>
 that sells objects from all over the African continent: Ethiopian Coptic 
crosses, masks, prints, beadwork, upcycled chandeliers … It’s a great, quirky 
space and perfect for gifts.

As an interesting juxtaposition, King Kong 
<https://www.facebook.com/KingKongJozi/> (on the Troyeville border) is in an 
old industrial space. It’s a nightclub-performance-hang-out space built in a 
studio in a massive loft. It has the most incredible views of the city by day – 
and by night. It’s a space local artists have created for themselves, and for 
the community in that area; it’s not a place where people are bussed in and 
bussed out. There are movies, poetry readings, fashion, food, book launches and 
bad-ass parties.

Readers’ tips and Instagram shots

There’s no better guide to a city than word-of-mouth recommendations: from 
people who live there and people who have visited. We asked our readers to share
Instagram pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/11/instagram-snapshots-johannesburg-through-the-eyes-of-locals>
 <https://www.instagram.com/explore/tags/guardianjoburg/>and their favourite 
experiences in Johannesburg. These are just a few,with more here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/11/johannesburg-south-africa-readers-travel-tips>
.

Boutique hostel with fascinating history
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10074528e8972f478c874f589b86deb2cec27f12%2F0_110_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10074528e8972f478c874f589b86deb2cec27f12%2F0_110_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Curiocity … with a pack 
Curiocity Backpackers <http://www.curiocitybackpackers.com/> is an incredible 
boutique hostel in Maboneng. It used to be the premises of Pacific Press, which 
published a rebel publication, Black Sash, during the apartheid era. It’s 
rumoured that Nelson Mandela and Desmond Tutu sought refuge in the building on 
a number of occasions so, as you can imagine, it has an amazing atmosphere. 
It’s operated by a very young, talented photographer calledBheki Dube 
<http://www.inyourpocket.com/johannesburg/15-Minutes-with-Bheki-Dube_73894f> 
and his influence is everywhere – the hostel décor is fantastic – think 
industrial-chic warehouse apartment with lots of quirky touches. The hostel 
organises regular events including walking tours, bike excursions and community 
volunteering projects to really encourage guests to get under the skin of this 
amazing city.
lucymellor100

Where football stars are born: Diepkloof (Soweto)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff3e750378e121c2860f283661148a3a222f797b%2F0_29_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff3e750378e121c2860f283661148a3a222f797b%2F0_29_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 A football pitch in Diepkloof. Photograph: Guardian Witness 
Diepkloof in Soweto has consistently produced world-class soccer players, from 
Kaizer Chief and national team star Jimmy Tau to Lucas Radebe, who played for 
Leeds United during the late 1990s and before that Kaizer Chiefs. This is the – 
very dusty – field that most have had to go for their dreams. It is next to a 
school andkota (street food sellers) hang out just across the road. The 
atmosphere is epic and, if you want to explore and enjoy the township soccer 
atmosphere, make your way to DK.
Matla Seetelo

Indie bliss and urban regen at 44 Stanley
Hit Joburg (or Jozi as it’s known by some) and you’ll be experiencing an 
African world city in the raw. My advice is to embrace the urban regeneration 
spots that sit around Braamfontein on the edge of the city centre – the 
guidebooks can talk about Constitution Hill and the rest but after you’ve done 
that, head down to44 Stanley <http://www.44stanley.co.za/beeryard.html> for a 
beer or a bite to eat. This buzzy complex with art studios and the like exudes 
character and I enjoyed a drink in the olive tree’d garden and a glass of 
pinotage in one of the great little restaurants inside this urban oasis. Urban 
regen in Jozi should be supported, so get out of the northern suburbs and into 
town if you can – there’s so much more to see.
nickjhilton

Joburg Red Bus
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4b5c8d0ed2c32f2b7022c3c1a65ee895715140%2F92_0_833_500%2F833.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4b5c8d0ed2c32f2b7022c3c1a65ee895715140%2F92_0_833_500%2F833.jpg>
The red sightseeing bus <https://www.citysightseeing.co.za/johannesburg> is a 
good way to get around Johannesburg. What you should do though is see which 
other places you want to visit that are within 5km of the stops, to make the 
most of the ride as a form of transport because the city doesn’t have proper 
public transportation. Apart from that, make sure you stop at the Apartheid 
Museum, andNeighbourgoods Market 
<http://www.neighbourgoodsmarket.co.za/johannesburg> – great food, and cheap; 
well if you’re British.
nafisaakabor

The largest mural painting in South Africa
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef511f288628fd096dba9e15b5875715dd1ab17e%2F0_340_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-18%23img-18&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef511f288628fd096dba9e15b5875715dd1ab17e%2F0_340_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Painted cooling towers on the decommissioned Orlando Power Station, now a 300 
meter bungee jump. Photograph: Alamy 
During the apartheid era, the Orlando power station 
<http://landlopers.com/2014/04/13/orlando-towers> towers in Soweto used to work 
as a coal-burning plant for electricity that supplied the northern suburbs of 
Johannesburg, while local residents remained without electricity. The only 
“benefit” to the Sowetans was the polluted air. After years of neglect, they 
have been transformed into an entertainment area: bungee jumping and a 
restaurant, and they also serve as giant billboards, one specifically with 
artistic murals encompassing the lifestyle in Soweto and its people.
Ebony Walden

Provocative theatre
The POPArt Theatre <https://popartcentre.co.za/> in Maboneng’s Fox Street 
features an array of quirky (and equally quirkily titled) plays and theatrical 
events. It’s small, intimate and relaxed. Don’t expect plush velvet seats; do 
expect provocative mise en scène and action.
JeanetteSerdyn

Johannesburg Apartheid Museum
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feffd00dc590a39a6dd8ac796811b0ac9b994fdc3%2F0_345_5097_3059%2F5097.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Johannesburg%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Falternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-19%23img-19&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feffd00dc590a39a6dd8ac796811b0ac9b994fdc3%2F0_345_5097_3059%2F5097.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
I love museums and I am yet to find a better curated museum than the Jam 
<http://www.apartheidmuseum.org/>. Visitors begin their navigation by being 
allocated a race card and this determines your experience in the first part of 
the exhibition. The museum then goes chronologically through the history of 
South Africa, starting with our ancient cave dwelling ancestors and culminating 
in the democratic republic. It is a superb museum dealing with the issue of 
apartheid in a sensitive yet educational way. There is a life-size solitary 
cell that you can enter. I often time myself but rarely last longer than a 
minute. You can also enter a riot van to see the brutality of the apartheid 
police. The latter parts are triumphant and celebrate the ending of this awful 
regime. I often take friends to Soweto afterwards to visitNelson Mandela’s old 
house <http://www.mandelahouse.co.za/>, or to wander the streets. Discussions 
turn to politics but also to the music filling the streets and where to eat 
authenticpap or ngqush.
shupiwe

Newtown: site of activists past and present
Activism, like social and economic turbulence, is not at all a thing of South 
Africa’s past. Regularly I’m distracted from my work by the unmistakable sounds 
of an approaching demonstration. Luthuli House (the ANC headquarters), Beyers 
Naude Square, the Chamber of Mines or any of the provincial government 
buildings in the area are popular destinations for demonstrations of all sizes: 
I’ve seen groups of 25 people as well as a march by 50,000 Economic Freedom 
Fighters. With its street vendors and shops trading shoes and spices mixed with 
bank employees and lawyers on their way to the Magistrate Court, the area 
already lends itself to engagement with people from all walks of South African 
life. Talking to demonstrators has brought me an even better understanding of 
the issues in the country and a renewed awe for the passion and humanity.
Josine Overdevest
 