
Design

Les Mason: Solo, in Melbourne


Ever downed a can of Solo lemonade and wondered who designed that yellow and 
black packaging? The answer: Les Mason, the father of Australian graphic design.

The California-born designer spent his early years on the US west coast before 
settling in Melbourne. In the 1960s, advertising agencies and printing 
companies made decisions on packaging design and branding. Mason revolutionised 
this by establishing graphic design as a profession in its own right, which 
worked at the heart of this process.

He was one of the first designers to set up a graphic design studio in 
Melbourne, and included photography, typography and modern art influences such 
as Dada and surrealism into his designs. Now the National Gallery of Victoria’s 
Design Studio opens with a retrospective of his work.

• Les Mason: Solo is at the NGV 
<https://www.ngv.vic.gov.au/exhibition/les-mason/> until 21 February 

Comedy

Carl Barron’s Drinking with a Fork, in Darwin
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F520ed1c9b16fcec98fdf458f1e6c8a83dd7edfad%2F0_360_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%20five%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week%3A%20Les%20Mason%2C%20Carl%20Barron%2C%20Future%20Classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%20five%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week%3A%20Les%20Mason%2C%20Carl%20Barron%2C%20Future%20Classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F520ed1c9b16fcec98fdf458f1e6c8a83dd7edfad%2F0_360_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 Carl Barron will perform his standup show, Drinking with a Fork, in Darwin. 
Photograph: Monica Renaud 
Carl Barron made his film debut this year in the romantic comedy Manny Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/12/manny-lewis-review-carl-barron-swaps-standup-for-phone-sex-romantic-comedy>
, playing a celebrity standup on the brink of a lucrative contract (while all 
he really wants is a good woman). Touché!

Now he’s back on tour around the nation, hitting up Darwin with his particular 
mix of observational-style humour, wordplay – and guitar. The son of a 
Queensland sheep shearer, Barron has been making Australians laugh since 1993. 
The Melbourne InternationalComedy <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/comedy> 
festival regular also routinely appears on TV, from Rove to Thank God You’re 
Here and Good News Week, and will be back blending structure with chance, or as 
he calls it, drinking with a fork.

• Carl Barron is at the Darwin Entertainment Centre 
<http://www.yourcentre.com.au/#!/event_book_now/692/> from 9– 14 November

Music

Future Classic x Museum of Contemporary Art, in Sydney
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb26d50933a28e4c864e23d0469a7518b734e308%2F0_0_3247_1951%2F3247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%20five%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week%3A%20Les%20Mason%2C%20Carl%20Barron%2C%20Future%20Classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%20five%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week%3A%20Les%20Mason%2C%20Carl%20Barron%2C%20Future%20Classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb26d50933a28e4c864e23d0469a7518b734e308%2F0_0_3247_1951%2F3247.jpg>
 The Future Classic and Museum of Contemporary Arts summer program begins. 
Photograph: Museum of Contemporary Art Australia 
Does the ubiquitous x in art, music and fashion events represent a new era of 
art based on creative collaboration? The Australian music labelFuture Classic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/may/29/future-classic-at-10-from-flume-to-faker-the-aussie-label-that-could>
 has teamed up with Sydney’s Museum of Contemporary Art for the second time to 
present a summer concert series. In the past decade the dance-pop label has 
introduced a new style of Australian music to the world, launching the likes of 
Chet Faker and Flume to the international stage.

The gallery’s sculpture terrace will host a selection of international and 
local electronic talent, withKenton Slash Demon 
<https://soundcloud.com/futureclassic/kenton-slash-demon-harpe> and Melbourne’s 
Harvey Sutherland <https://soundcloud.com/harvey-sutherland> opening the series 
on 15 November. The museum will extend opening hours exclusively for ticket 
holders, in a nod to New York’s MoMA’s Warm Up sessions, where Future Classic 
curated sellout shows this year.

• FC x MCA opens at the Museum of Contemporary Art 
<http://tickets.mca.com.au/?Event=57230> on 15 November

Theatre

Time Capsule, in Brisbane
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41edb19f7a3dde9b7292b691beb8e9b8d4eb5d5e%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%20five%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week%3A%20Les%20Mason%2C%20Carl%20Barron%2C%20Future%20Classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%20five%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week%3A%20Les%20Mason%2C%20Carl%20Barron%2C%20Future%20Classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41edb19f7a3dde9b7292b691beb8e9b8d4eb5d5e%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Seeing Place perform Time Capsule in Brisbane. Photograph: Kate Shearer Arts 
Brisbane site-specific theatre company Seeing Place debuts a very different 
theatrical experience. Based on the time capsule buried by Brisbane’s city 
fathers at the launch of the 1969 Sundale shopping centre, Time Capsule is an 
audio tour performance that begins at Southport library and moves into 
Southport central.

Sundale was the first large-scale shopping centre in Australia and, in that 
original time capsule, the men buried greetings to the people of the future: 
newspapers and predictions of what life would be like in the year 2000. No one 
would have known the shopping centre would be a distant memory by the time Y2K 
clocked over.

Audience members will be given a Wi-Fi headset and guided to a series of empty 
shops, where the physical theatre meets recorded memory. The performance has 
been built on 60 hours of interviews with local residents about their memories 
of the mall.

• Time Capsule starts at Southport library 
<http://www.trybooking.com/Booking/BookingEventSummary.aspx?eid=161042> and 
runs until 14 November

History

Life Interrupted: Gallipoli moments, in Canberra
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3267624ba53aa1261643b26742e51b4b4f38631e%2F0_0_3543_2124%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20top%20five%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week%3A%20Les%20Mason%2C%20Carl%20Barron%2C%20Future%20Classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20top%20five%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week%3A%20Les%20Mason%2C%20Carl%20Barron%2C%20Future%20Classic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fnov%2F09%2Fthe-top-five-things-to-do-this-week-les-mason-carl-barron-future-classic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3267624ba53aa1261643b26742e51b4b4f38631e%2F0_0_3543_2124%2F3543.jpg>
 An image from the Life Interrupted: Gallipoli Moments exhibition at the 
National Archives of Australia in Canberra. Photograph: National Archives of 
Australia 
As Australians commemorate Remembrance Day this week, it’s also your last 
chance to catch the Life Interrupted exhibition at the National Archives of 
Australia.

The exhibition features personal diaries, service records and photographs from 
the Canberra archives and the State Library of New South Wales digitised and 
restored for the first world war and second world war centenaries.

More than 100 years ago, teachers, farmers, clerks, architects and 
newlygraduated students paused their lives to board ships in soldiers’, 
doctors’ and nurses’ uniforms. While their story has been told by historians 
and journalists, these servicemen’s diaries tell their personal stories: from 
the excitement of enlistment, to the monotony of the trenches, the taste of 
tinned vegetables and the exhilaration and horror of the battlefield.

• Life Interrupted: Gallipoli Moments is at the National Archives of Australia 
<http://www.naa.gov.au/visit-us/exhibitions/life-interrupted/> until 15 November
 