
Blair, Boris, Benn and Thatcher: the politicians in leading fringe roles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/14/edinburgh-fringe-festival-politicians-boris-johnson>
Comedy

Boris: World King

If Tom Cranshaw’s satirical stage play about BoJo felt significant when it was 
first performed in Edinburgh in 2015, it feels nigh-on essential at this year’s 
festival, especially as Cranshaw has given it a post-Brexit buff and polish, 
making Johnson more monstrous than ever.
It’s on at the Pleasance Dome until 29 August 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/boris-world-king>.

Amy Schumer

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-ten-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F716b2f81de4693875610ce15d8610b5fdc30ab01%2F0_827_7184_4310%2F7184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ten%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-ten-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ten%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-ten-best-things-to-do-this-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F716b2f81de4693875610ce15d8610b5fdc30ab01%2F0_827_7184_4310%2F7184.jpg>
 Amy Schumer Photograph: Pal Hansen for the Observer 
Amy Schumer <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> has rarely 
encountered a cultural medium that she hasn’t conquered, from sketch comedy 
with her series Inside Amy Schumer to film with her romcom-skewering 
Trainwreck. She’s also just released a collection of essays, The Girl With The 
Lower Back Tattoo. But it’s on stage where Schumer’s brand of abrasive, 
feminist-tinged comedy really shines. Her UK and Ireland standup tour kicks off 
in Dublin this week. Ticket infohere <http://www.amyschumer.com/tour>.

Quincy Jones: 'I told Michael Jackson he was weird'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/22/quincy-jones-michael-jackson-thriller-producer-interview>
Music

Quincy Jones Prom

The man who made Michael Jackson appears at this orchestral celebration of his 
work onMonday night at the Royal Albert Hall 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/proms/proms-2016/prom-49-metropole-orkest-plays-quincy-jones/>
, surely the only time you could call the Proms “groovy”. Conductor Jules 
Buckley and his Metropole Orkest are the ones providing the tribute.

Exhibition

Constellations

What connects Cindy Sherman to Grayson Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry>? Did Marcel Duchamp 
beget Rachel Whiteread? This exhibition, currently showing at Tate Liverpool, 
illustrates artistic lineage via word clouds placing “trigger artists” at the 
heart of their thematic fields. It’s a neat presentational conceit, one that 
effectively frames an impressive assortment of modern art from the likes of 
Hepworth, Beuys, Blake, Ligon, César and many more.

Fanzines: A Cut-And-Paste Revolution

Before blogs and social media platforms, there were fanzines. It’s easy to 
scoff at the now-primitive idea of young idealists putting together their own 
DIY magazines. But this was how ground-level expression used to work. This free 
Barbican library exhibition – which coincides neatly with 2016’s Punk London 
festival – explores the best of these cut-and-paste personal manifestos, which 
range from sci-fi screeds to riot grrrl polemics. Includes the renowned likes 
of Mark Perry’s Sniffin’ Glue among numerous less feted but equally 
revolutionary bedroom missives.Continues until 30 August. 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/library/event-detail.asp?ID=19990>

Film

The Childhood of a Leader review – stunning origins story for a future fascist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/18/the-childhood-of-a-leader-review-brady-corbet>
The Childhood Of A Leader

Backed up a by a booming orchestral score from Scott Walker, Brady Corbet’s 
film is never less than arresting. Set in Paris during the drafting of the 
Treaty of Versailles, it depicts the formative years of a future fascist with 
grim authenticity, and boasts a stunning payoff. It’s in cinemas now.

TV

The Circuit
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-ten-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89db8b094f7c1b0115c2a1a450da11c43e06c019%2F114_29_3326_1996%2F3326.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ten%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-ten-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ten%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-ten-best-things-to-do-this-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89db8b094f7c1b0115c2a1a450da11c43e06c019%2F114_29_3326_1996%2F3326.jpg>
 Adeel Akhtar, Nicola Walker, Eva Birthistle and Desiree Akhavan in The Circuit 
Photograph: Channel 4 
The omens for this comedy pilot look promising. It’s created by Sharon Horgan 
and Dennis Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/14/pulling-writers-sharon-horgan-dennis-kelly-reunite-new-comedy>
, reuniting for the first time since their BBC3 comedyPulling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/may/16/pulling-sharon-horgan-dennis-kelly>
. Its stars include Adeel Akhtar (from Kelly’s other series, Utopia) and Nicola 
Walker (from gloomy but excellent drama Unforgotten), and its premise – a 
couple attend the worst dinner party ever – has tons of anarchic potential. 
Catch it on Thursday at 10pm on Channel 4.

Festivals

FrightFest

The horror film festival has been terrifying attendees for 16 years and shows 
no sign of slowing. This year sees FrightFest move from the West End to 
Shepherd’s Bush, where you’ll catch the UK premieres of South Korean zombie 
movie hit Train To Busan, the excellently titled southern-gothic revenge 
thriller My Father, Die, and the world premiere of hyper-violent scythe slasher 
The Windmill Massacre. Meanwhile, those who like their horror a little more 
camp would do well to catch Austrian blood-curdler Attack Of The 
Lederhosen-zombies. The whole thing kicks off on Thursday. Ticket availability
here <http://www.frightfest.co.uk>.

Manchester Pride
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-ten-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2492edb47c16cdb4747fc23994c81800423f1b7b%2F0_0_2473_1484%2F2473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ten%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-ten-best-things-to-do-this-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ten%20best%E2%80%A6%20things%20to%20do%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-ten-best-things-to-do-this-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2492edb47c16cdb4747fc23994c81800423f1b7b%2F0_0_2473_1484%2F2473.jpg>
 Manchester Pride Photograph: Goodman/LNP/Rex 
Among the many reasons to head to Pride, one isn’t always the music lineup. 
But Manchester’s offering (from Friday to 29 Aug) makes like a mini-Lovebox, 
with poplings such as Shura, MNEK and X Factor’s Seann Miley Moore joining 
greats Will Young and – returning after her 2014 appearance and now with the 
addendum “The Voice Of M-People” – Heather Small. As if we’d forgetMoving On Up 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oqwborlxOwo>.

Books

How Seinfeld's funniest moments came to life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/11/how-seinfelds-funniest-moments-came-to-life-the-junior-mint-the-chinese-restaurant-the-contest>
Seinfeldia

With it’s “no hugging, no learning” mantra, Seinfeld nudged the formerly cosy 
US sitcom into bold new territory. TV historian Jennifer Armstrong’s book, 
subtitled How A Show About Nothing Changed Everything, offers an engrossing 
deep dive into more of what made Jerry Seinfeld and Larry David’s series so 
groundbreaking and – perhaps most importantly – funny.
 