
This year marks the 50th anniversary of Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>, the human-rights 
campaigning organisation founded after the English lawyer Peter Benenson wrote 
an impassioned article in theObserver, entitled "The Forgotten Prisoners", 
highlighting the plight of people around the world who had been jailed for 
peacefully expressing their views.

Published in 1961, it provoked a flood of responses from Observer readers. 
Within weeks Benenson's 'Appeal for Amnesty' had marshalled groups in several 
countries to examine human rights abuses.

Since then, Amnesty has secured the release of thousands of prisoners of 
conscience. Four shared their stories in theObserver earlier this year - to 
read more, click here. 
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/03/amnesty-political-prisoners) In 
celebration of five decades of courageous and tireless campaigning by Amnesty 
International, theObserver and the Guardian have started a new online series. 
Every month we will publish news of an individual or group of people whose 
lives and liberty are imminently threatened.

Amnesty issues this information, called an "urgent action", to encourage 
people around the world to send letters and emails to government leaders with 
the power to intervene, or to sign petitions calling for change. It typically 
does this when it finds evidence that people have been imprisoned for 
exercising the right to protest, denied a fair trial in court, forcibly evicted 
from their homes or been discriminated against because of their sex, race or 
ethnicity, in the hope of stopping such human-rights abuses.
 