
Last week the Daily Mail reported 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2311432/MMR-boycott-left-2m-children-risk-measles-Doctors-say-outbreak-Wales-spread-London.html>
 that 2 million children risked catching measles as a result of the MMR scare. 
It is a scare that the paper knows all about, having been in the forefront of 
running a series of articles over the years that urged parents to beware of the 
multiple vaccination and its supposed links to autism.

The Mail's headlines speak for themselves: "MMR killed my daughter"; "MMR 
fears gain support"; "New evidence 'shows MMR link to autism'"; "MMR safe? 
Baloney. This is one scandal that's getting worse"; "Scientists fear MMR link 
to autism"; "Why I wouldn't give my baby theMMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> jab". This is but a small proportion 
of the negative articles published by the paper.

But the Mail, though the most forceful and repetitive of newspapers, was 
certainly not alone in the media in making too much of the opinions advanced in 
1998 by the now discreditedAndrew Wakefield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, the doctor whose 
research led to fears about a link with autism.

Editors were able to have a sense of confidence about his credibility because 
his views were based on a research paper (now retracted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/feb/02/lancet-retracts-mmr-paper>) 
carried in the Lancet, one of the most respected of the medical journals that 
publish peer-reviewed articles.

There were plenty of anti-MMR stories in the Daily Express, the Sun, the Daily 
Telegraph and elsewhere, including regional papers, such as the South Wales 
Evening Post, which is based in Swansea, where the latest measles outbreak has 
occurred.

Part of the reason was a conviction that the medical authorities, which were 
advocating MMR, might be wrong. And those authorities were, of course, linked 
to the government. It was abundantly clear that the rightwing press's 
championing of Wakefield was based on its hostility towards Tony Blair's Labour 
government. There was an unsavoury attempt to press the prime minister into 
saying whether or not he had allowed his son, Leo, to have the vaccine, which 
he refused to do, arguing that it was a private family matter.

A 2003 paper 
<http://www.esrc.ac.uk/_images/towards_a_better_map_tcm8-13558.pdf> by the 
Economic and Social Research Council found that, in the period between January 
and September 2002, 32% of all the stories about the MMR scare mentioned Leo 
Blair.

It was not until 2004, following an investigation by reporter Brian Deer in 
the Sunday Times <http://briandeer.com/mmr/st-mmr-reports.htm>, that the Lancet 
admitted Wakefield's research was flawed.

Even so, newspapers continued to give his views credence by carrying stories 
suggesting there was a link between the MMR vaccine and autism. It's fair to 
say that the readers of all newspapers, including those who read the Guardian, 
were exercised by the media mood music.

In July 2007, when Wakefield was facing a General Medical Council hearing, the 
Observer ran an article headlined: "New health fears over big surge in autism". 
It also carried an interview with Wakefield – referring to him as the doctor at 
the heart of the autism row – in which he maintained he had "told the truth".

Two weeks ago, the Independent ran a front-page story 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/health-news/balderdash--experts-damning-verdict-on-the-latest-claims-of-discredited-mmr-scaremonger-andrew-wakefield-8570594.html>
 headlined: "MMR scare doctor: this outbreak proves I was right". In response 
to a storm of protest, its editor, Chris Blackhurst, said the paper should have 
made clear its contempt for Wakefield. It showed that the public had, at last, 
turned against the doctor – and the media that give him disproportionate 
coverage.
 