
In Vain

Sixty this year, Georg Friedrich Haas 
<http://www.therestisnoise.com/2010/11/georg-friedrich-haas.html> is a senior 
figure in contemporary music across Europe, though so far his music remains 
little known to audiences on this side of the channel. But now In Vain, one of 
his most admired scores, which has been described as one of the most important 
composed in Europe so far in this century, gets its first British performances 
with the London Sinfonietta, conducted by André de Ridder. An hour-long piece 
for 24 instruments,In Vain was composed in 2000 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9PtJH63D0YY> as a reaction to the success of 
the far right in the Austrian elections of the previous year. Haas's score 
includes detailed instructions for lighting the performing space, so that the 
audience listens sometimes with the hall lit normally, sometimes in total 
darkness, while the music commutes between passages in normal tuning and those 
in microtones. It is all-embracing and totally absorbing.Town Hall, 
Huddersfield, 16 November,hcmf.co.uk <>; Queen Elizabeth Hall, London, 6 
December,southbankcentre.co.uk <>

The Tudors

Three of Donizetti's rarely staged historical operas, Anna Bolena, Maria 
Stuarda and Roberto Devereux, give an English slant to Welsh National Opera's 
autumn tour <http://www.wno.org.uk/thetudors>. Director Alessandro Talevi and 
conductor Daniele Rustioni are responsible for two of the shows; Rudolf Frey 
and Graeme Jenkins take over for the other.Millennium Centre, Cardiff, 7 
September to 6 October,wno.org.uk <>, then touring until 29 November to 
Swansea, Oxford, Liverpool, Bristol, Birmingham, Llandudno and Southampton.

Orchestra Mozart <http://www.orchestramozart.com/>

Claudio Abbado brings his hand-picked chamber orchestra to London for the 
first time. He conducts the first concert himself – all Beethoven, with the
great Martha Argerich 
<http://www.deutschegrammophon.com/gb/artist/argerich/biography> as soloist – 
and passes the baton to the rapidly rising Diego Matheuz for the second, a 
programme of Mozart and Beethoven.Royal Festival Hall, London, 1 and 3 October, 
southbankcentre.co.uk <>

Les Vêpres Siciliennes

The Royal Opera marks the Verdi bicentenary with its first-ever production of 
his neglected French-language score from the 1850s. It's also the first 
opportunity for British audiences to sample the work of much-hyped director 
Stefan Herheim, and Antonio Pappano conducts a cast led by Marina Poplavskaya, 
Bryan Hymel and Erwin Schrott.Royal Opera House, London, 17 October to 11 
November,roh.org.uk <>

Britten Centenary Weekend 
<http://www.brittenaldeburgh.co.uk/whats-on/event/centenary-weekend>

The centrepiece of the Britten centenary celebrations comes on the weekend of 
his 100th birthday itself, in the wonderful concert hall that was his own 
creation. Oliver Knussen kicks it off with the BBC Symphony Orchestra in a 
programme that includes Britten's Spring Symphony and Cantata Academica, and 
the premiere of a commission from Ryan Wigglesworth.Snape Maltings, Aldeburgh, 
22-24 November, brittenaldeburgh.co.uk <>
 