
There's an Ayn Rand revival <http://www.newsweek.com/id/219001> in America 
these days. Sales of her booksAtlas Shrugged 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atlas_Shrugged> and The Fountainhead 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Fountainhead> have skyrocketed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/mar/10/ayn-rand-atlas-shrugged> in the 
past year, along with the number of Rand-themed articles in mainstream 
publications.

This is due to our government's "force the frugal to subsidise the prodigal" 
bailout schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/oct/15/wall-street-bank-shares>. 
When you face higher taxes and a larger national debt to bail out rich idiots 
who make more money in a day than you do all year, it's easy to think: "Know 
what I'd love to read right now? A thousand small-print pages ranting against 
looters."

And thus you add Atlas and Fountainhead to your personal library. (Rand's 
first novel,We The Living <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/We_the_Living>, gets 
far less attention. Were it as well-known as the other two, she wouldn't have 
quite the callous reputation she does now.)

Rand had a sharp eye for the evils of policies valuing the collective over 
individual rights 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v27/n23/jenny-turner/as-astonishing-as-elvis>. One of the 
best scenes in Atlas describes a factory that decides to operate on the 
communist principle "From each according to his abilities, to each according to 
his needs". People are rewarded not for how well they work but how needy they 
claim to be, and the "abilities" and "needs" of any individual are determined 
by majority vote. Those deemed most able are forced to work the hardest, and 
you can't get anything as simple as new underwear without convincing the 
factory council that your old ones need to be replaced.

But for all Rand's genius at illustrating problems, her solutions, like her 
sex scenes, would be cataclysmic in real life. No mere human could meet the 
standards of a Randian hero. They're motivated purely by logic and cool reason, 
free of the petty emotions others strive to overcome. And they take "mind over 
matter" to impossible extremes.John Galt 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Galt> remains nonchalant even while being 
tortured, and when the torture machine breaks down he calmly tells its 
operators how to fix it. Randian heroes can will away the need for food and 
sleep, too.

Rand tried applying rational principles to things that aren't rational at all, 
including musical and artistic tastes. She deemed her own likes and dislikes 
for painters, composers and writers the only opinions a rational person could 
hold. In Fountainhead she spent many pages hammering home the point: "People 
who enjoy old-fashioned architectural flourishes, like Greek columns, are 
freedom-crushing haters of the human spirit." (Ironically, the functional 
modern architecture she espoused in their stead looks pretty much like the 
modernist style embraced by the Soviets.)

Rational Randian architecture is still better than rational Randian sex. The 
infamous "rape scenes" of her novels actually fall into the "rough but 
consensual" category, but Rand's heroines like it a lot rougher than most women 
do. No one scene is all too bad, but taken in their entirety you wonder why 
Rand felt a rational woman couldn't lay off the creepy vibe and try plain 
vanilla sex once in awhile.

A little spice is often nice, but there's nothing rational about drinking a 
wholeTabasco <http://www.tabasco.com/> bottle. And the "woman subdued by strong 
man" meme Rand espoused in her books ran completely counter to her own life, 
where she alternated between terrorising her meek husband and the male acolytes 
she bedded.

Still, for all the darkly unreasonable expectations in Rand's novels, 
America's resurgence of interest in them might be our best chance yet to get 
off the dangerous anti-liberty track we're on now, and abandon the poisonous 
notion that the best way to resolve a financial crisis is to reward the people 
who caused it. Or maybe my cautious optimism is the most darkly unreasonable 
expectation of all.
 