
Liverpool Biennial <http://www.biennial.com/>

The latest Liverpool Biennial, titled The Unexpected Guest, explores the 
underwhelming theme of hospitality. It's a city-wide catch-all including 242 
artists in 27 locations: rude words byGilbert & George 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gilbertandgeorge>, Mona Hatoum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/dec/12/mona-hatoum-interview> in 
the Cunard Building, the sci-fi work of Anthony McCall and thebrilliantly 
voyeuristic photographs of Kohei Yoshiyuki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/gallery/2007/oct/18/art.photography>. Various 
venues, Liverpool, 15 September to 25 November.biennial.com 
<http://www.biennial.com/> 



Everything Was Moving: Photography from the 60s and 70s 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/artgallery/event-detail.asp?ID=13613>

More than 400 works by 12 photographers from around the world, including the 
incomparableWilliam Eggleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/william-eggleston>, Boris Mikhailov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/feb/15/boris-mikhailov-best-shot-photography>
, Raghubir Singh and Sigmar Polke. What thesubversive German painter Polke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jun/16/sigmar-polke-sorry-i-missed-you>
 is doing here is a tantalising mystery, in a show that deals with politics, 
wars, colonial misadventures and photography's coming of age.Barbican, London, 
13 September to 13 January 2013.barbican.org.uk <http://www.barbican.org.uk/>

Thomas Schütte: Faces and Figures 
<http://www.serpentinegallery.org/2011/03/thomas_schutte.html>

Schütte <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/nov/08/art> is one of 
the best sculptors alive, whether building architectural models, making 
gorgeous, grotesque ceramics, iron and steel women, orevil and benign figures 
<http://www.artlyst.com/img/articles/3342.jpg>. He's also a terrific 
watercolourist and draughtsman.Serpentine Gallery, London, 25 September to 18 
November.serpentinegallery.org <http://www.serpentinegallery.org/> 



Frieze London art fair <http://friezelondon.com/>

Always interesting, always mad, Frieze brings together commercial galleries, 
specially commissioned projects <http://friezefoundation.org/commissions/>, 
films and talks, rich fanatics and star-spotting crowds. A great opportunity to 
love and hate art – or be alarmed and entertained by an art-world stratosphere 
that lives in a financial bubble, while another struggles to keep afloat.
Regent's Park, London, 11 to 14 October.friezelondon.com 
<http://friezelondon.com/>



Jim Shaw: The Rinse Cycle 
<http://www.balticmill.com/whats-on/exhibitions/detail/jim-shaw>

LA artist Jim Shaw is best known in the UK for his hilarious, abject and 
sometimes inspired paintings found in thrift stores. His investigations of 
popular (and unpopular) culture span all media: painting, music, video and 
performance. This survey show should be a treat.Baltic Centre for Contemporary 
Art, Gateshead, 9 November to 17 February 2013.balticmill.com 
<http://www.balticmill.com/> 
 