
For right-on folk, the portrayal of a fictional version of the Bullingdon Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/may/09/oxbridgeandelitism.highereducation>
 in Laura Wade’s Posh was one of the highlights of 2010. The play provided a 
timely indictment of the “arrogant posh boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/apr/23/cameron-posh-boy-best-conservatives-can-do>
” who were about to add Downing Street to the pinnacles they already commanded. 
A transfer to the big screen could have been expected to adorn thisRoyal Court 
tract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/apr/16/posh-royal-court-billington?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 with a welcome wodge of gloss and panache.The Riot Club 
<http://www.tiff.net/festivals/thefestival/programmes/galapresentations/the-riot-club>
 does this in spades; the effect, however, is to torpedo its message.

As the Guardian’s film editor, Catherine Shoard, noted in Toronto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/06/the-riot-club-review-bullingdon>, 
Lone Scherfig’s film glamorises the iniquity it purports to condemn. The Riot 
boys are nasty but beautiful and exuberant; the proles are worthy but lumpen, 
in both body and spirit. The gilded hero’s choice of an apparently fairly 
unremarkable state-educated sweetheart is as incomprehensible to the audience 
as it is to his peers. To keep us on side, the Riot Club’s misdeeds are made 
much uglier thanthe Bullingdon’s pranks 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2407406/Move-Boris--Bullingdon-Club-2013.html>
; even so, they fail to inspire the revulsion that’s required.

Of course, when it comes to glorifying mischief, cinema has form. In Annie Hall
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall>, it’s the Wicked Queen who wins 
the Woody Allen character’s heart, not Snow White. From the Joker and Clyde 
Barrow to Michael Corleone and Bellatrix Lestrange, bad hats have been 
similarly celebrated. Yet these were merely villains of fancy. Our real-life 
lordly oppressors, installed by prerogative and sustained through 
back-scratching, are nowadays ceaselessly reviled; surely they ought to have 
proved a somewhat harder sell. Why haven’t they?

One of the film’s haughty protagonists implies a possible answer. He tells a 
pleb he happens to be bullying: “You’d like to be me but unfortunately for you, 
you can’t.” If we really wish we could be Riot Clubbers ourselves, a sneaking 
regard for the elect is only to be expected. Since there seems to be plenty of 
fun to be had, perhaps some of us do nurse such a hankering. Nonetheless, 
plenty of us clearly don’t. A more alarming possibility therefore presents 
itself. Maybe ourruling class <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-12282505> 
enjoys unexpectedly widespread, if unspoken, approbation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Friot-club-clip-posh-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F9%2F1410255816106%2FThe-Riot-Club-trailer-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Riot%20Club%3A%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20from%20the%20film%20adapted%20from%20the%20hit%20play%20Posh%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Friot-club-clip-posh-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Riot%20Club%3A%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20from%20the%20film%20adapted%20from%20the%20hit%20play%20Posh%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Friot-club-clip-posh-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F9%2F1410255816106%2FThe-Riot-Club-trailer-017.jpg>
 The Riot Club 
There’s something unconvincing about the loathing we profess for it. Nepotism 
provokes no real howls of outrage even in the media, where it flaunts itself
undisguised on screen 
<http://www.shoutingatco.ws/2011/03/01/the-kids-arent-alright-nepotism-in-the-modern-media/>
 and in credits and bylines. We still allow internships to be auctioned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/may/22/nick-clegg-westminster-school-internships-auction>
 for charity at the festivities of the hyper-privileged. Even the Labour party 
is now parachuting its grandees’exclusively-educated princelings 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2014/06/what-labour-s-red-princes-tell-us-about-britain>
 into its safe seats. And what will we do? Vote for them.

Acceptance of the prevailing hegemony is not obviously foolish. Elites of one 
kind or another have prevailed in most forms of human society. They haven’t all 
been well-behaved or satisfactorily selected; however, if those controlling 
your destiny are those best equipped for the task, you might reasonably 
overlook both fits of depravity and a lack of legitimacy.

There’s an awful possibility that our own betters really are better than us. 
After all, University Challenge has to require Oxbridge to field just one ofits 
constituent colleges <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mKJLqpQAF-8> against any 
lesser seat of learning, just to give the latter a chance. Even with this 
handicap,Oxbridge has won half of the contests 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/3X85m5KVcbfPz95Pxb1Cvmc/university-challenge-former-champions>
 of the Jeremy Paxman era. The Riot Club acknowledges this inconvenient 
reality, equipping its brutish reprobates with superhuman intellectual skills.

The prowess of our ruling class need hardly surprise us. Private education of 
the kind enjoyed by the likes of Balls, Blair and Harman just as much as Clegg, 
Osborne and Cameron must instil something, or parents wouldn’t pay for it. 
What’s more, environmental influences such as schooling may not be the only 
drivers of superiority. If other attributes are heritable, those that beget 
success may also have a genetic component.

Studies have long suggested that about three-quarters of IQ differences 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/07/23/magazine/23wwln_idealab.html?ei=5090&en=2c93740d624fe47f&ex=1311307200&partner=rssuserland&emc=rss&pagewanted=all&_r=0>
 between individuals are down to heredity.Recent research has suggested 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC17595/> that inherited advantage 
may be enhanced by a prosperous home environment. Among the privileged, nature 
and nurture may therefore be conspiring to promote intellectual pre-eminence. 
What goes for intelligence could go equally for application, confidence and 
aspiration.

Perhaps you beg to differ: as far as you’re concerned, our swaggering masters 
are in no way born to rule. They arrive at the top by accident of birth and 
stay there only because their old-boy networks exclude those lower born who 
should rightfully usurp them. You consider the idea that you might admire these 
people entirely absurd.

Maybe, but that doesn’t mean you cannot still connive at their ascendancy. 
Those who decry privilege most loudly appear slow to follow up on their gripe. 
Among progressive causes, social mobility ranks low: no one seems to be 
demanding that private schools be abolished. Quotas are urged for women in high 
places, but not for the working class.

In fact, an entitled, self-perpetuating elite can be embraced even by those of 
us who deplore it. It gives us something to moan about and people we can blame 
for everything of which we disapprove. Its existence provides cover for our own 
failure to make more of ourselves. Its stubborn persistence is useful proof of 
the irredeemability of a corrupt system. If this elite talks posh and behaves 
badly, so much the better. It’s that much easier to revile it.

Cinema has an aristocracy of its own. The Riot Club stars Max Irons. That 
surname ring a bell? Yes, he’s Jeremy’s son. His mother is Tony award nominee 
Sinéad Cusack, whose own father was Cyril Cusack, yet another big-screen 
luminary. Max (born Maximilian Paul Diarmuid) attended theDragon School 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/jan/27/publicschools.schools>, Oxford, as 
did Tom Hiddleston, Emma Watson and Hugh Laurie. After that it was Bryanston, 
whose alumni include Freddie Fox, son of Edward Fox. Freddie is a close chum of 
Max’s, and he’s also – would you have guessed it? – in The Riot Club. Young Max 
wasexpelled from Bryanston 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/features/max-irons-work-with-my-father-thats-worst-my-nightmare-8660464.html>
, but fortunately that was to prove no bar to progress in his case.

In this film, Irons turns in a perfectly adequate performance. For all we 
know, others, less favoured, might have done better. But which of us cares 
about that? Good on yer, lad.

• Read more from our series the Bigger Picture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/bigger-picture>
 