
“Dogs look up to you, cats look down on you. Give me a pig. He looks you in 
the eye and treats you as an equal.”


It’s doubtful if the NSW premier, Mike Baird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mike-baird>, heeded Winston 
Churchill’s advice as he went through the torment of changing policy on 
greyhound racing and the protection of dogs from those owners and breeders who 
are cruel and unscrupulous.

It would be unwise for a dog, or anyone else, to look up to a politician. 
Cats, on the other hand, need no help because they are so manipulative that 
they would soon have Baird around their tiny paws, as do the National party and 
a few radio bloviators.

Pigs, along with race horses and much of the pet breeding industry, have been 
left out of the equation – as if we needed reminding that the backflip on 
greyhound racing was little more than a rescue mission for cockies corner in 
the NSW parliament and its plodding leader, Troy Grant.

After the greyhound experience, it’s unlikely that stopping the slaughter of 
racehorses, pigs, lambs, moo-cows and the live export trade will happen any 
time soon.

“I got it wrong. The cabinet got it wrong. The government got it wrong,” the 
premier said in his mea culpa. Maybe, he had broadcasterAlan Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> running in a permanent loop in 
his brain, for Jones had been basing up his listeners with the intelligence 
that Baird was wrong, wrong, wrong.

Greyhound racing ban overturned: animal welfare groups blast Mike Baird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/greyhound-racing-ban-overturned-animal-welfare-groups-blast-mike-baird>
The broadcaster, in his trademark self-basting manner, paraded his part in 
getting the premier to switch teams. He was looking very pleased with himself 
in an ABC interview, following amuch publicised fish and salad meal 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-11/alan-jones-mike-baird-had-dinner-before-greyhound-ban-backflip/7922406>
 with Baird at his Toaster bachelor pad.


“I told him what I thought and it was up to him to determine what he was going 
to do about what I thought.”

His power of persuasion is amazing, even if the argument is over-egged: “You 
can overplay this animal welfare thing. At the end of the day there are people 
here who are being driven to penury and to suicide, and when I explained that 
to him he understood.”

You might think this was the car industry being closed down, such was the 
horrendous level of social and economic disturbance.

If you consider that Jones’ audience comprises the rusted-on souls from 
Struggle Street, then he’s preaching to the already converted. To that extent 
he’s not changing anyone’s mind because they all at home in their slippers, 
nodding in tune to Alan’s wisdom.

Conceivably, if the premier had stuck with the ban, in time the self-appointed 
friends of battlers would have dried up and soon unearthed a new project to 
excite their faux class warfare, and the National party would have returned to 
its eternal slumber.

Arguably the original decision to close down the greyhound racing industry was 
evidence based while the decision to reverse that policy was merely politically 
based.


Mike Baird confirms backflip on greyhound racing ban in NSW
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/mike-baird-confirms-backflip-on-greyhound-racing-ban-in-nsw>
Even so, Greyhound Racing NSW disputes some of the evidence 
<https://www.greyhoundracinginquiry.justice.nsw.gov.au/> presented by the 
McHugh special commission and says it wasn’t given an opportunity to be 
sufficiently heard.

That’s not to forget there remain concerns about animal cruelty. On the day 
Baird threw the policy into reverse, it emerged that Chad Achurch, a bikie gang 
member and trainer with a lengthy criminal record,was in court on a 
live-baiting charge. 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/greyhound-trainer-charged-with-live-baiting-as-baird-backs-down-on-industry-ban-20161010-grz6yq.html>

Indeed, the relationship between greyhound racing and bikie gangs is an issue 
that has been insufficiently explored throughout this entire opera – reports of 
mass graves for greyhounds and vets giving graphic accounts of animal cruelty, 
including one of an owner-trainer yanking the tail off a live dog, are enough 
for us to handle.

Crikey reported that the greyhound racing lobby celebrated the policy reversal 
with threats against witnesses <http:// 
https://www.crikey.com.au/2016/10/11/greyhound-group-threatens-inquiry-witnesses/>
. An outfit called National Greyhound Racing United posted a message on 
Facebook saying: “We will enjoy this victory, then we will turn out attention 
to those that made submissions in the McHugh report, their crime will not go 
unpunished.”

Once more GRNSW has been invited by the government into the last chance 
saloon, where it has been already drinking for years.

Michael McHugh’s special commission itself was a response to a Four Corners 
program on training greyhounds with live baits 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2015/02/16/4178920.htm>. It is not the 
first time a government has swung into action with alacrity in response to 
shocking revelations.

John Howard turned into action-man in 2007 after the release of a report 
co-authored by Patricia Anderson and the former Northern Territory DPP Rex 
Wild, called “Little Children are Sacred 
<http://www.inquirysaac.nt.gov.au/pdf/bipacsa_final_report.pdf>”, which 
provided shocking details of the sexual abuse and neglect of Indigenous 
children.


The NT National Emergency Response was the result, sometimes known as the 
Intervention – a package of welfare and law enforcement measures, supplemented 
by military involvement. It implemented only two out of 97 recommendations from 
Wild and Anderson’s report and at the time was criticised for lack of 
consultation and being a hurried flourish with the pending 2007 election firmly 
in the frame. At least, though, there was compelling evidence as the basis for 
the Canberra intervention.

Tony Abbott says Turnbull 'panicked' in calling NT abuse royal commission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/tony-abbott-says-turnbull-panicked-in-calling-nt-abuse-royal-commission>
Similarly, the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, wasted no time in 
establishing a royal commission into the Four Corners report on thetreatment of 
young people at the Don Dale detention centre 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-07-25/four-corners-evidence-of-kids-tear-gas-in-don-dale-prison/7656128>
 - another area of neglect by the NT government. At least there may be an 
evidence-based policy outcome.

Howard, again, instigated strict gun control measures in response to the Port 
Arthur shootings. It was a case of act now, get the evidence later – but only 
gun nuts were complaining. Interestingly, in that case, Howard kept his 
pig-shooting rural rump inside the tent.

Barry O’Farrell in NSW introduced the pubs lockout regime 
<http://www.premier.nsw.gov.au/sites/default/files/LOCKOUTS%20&%20MANDATORY%20MINIMUMS%20TO%20BE%20INTRODUCED%20TO%20TACKLE%20DRUG%20AND%20ALCOHOL%20VIOLENCE.pdf>
 after two young men died from violent assaults on the streets of Kings Cross.

The evidence as to whether it has worked and the extent to which changes were 
needed came later inIan Callinan’s liquor law review 
<http://www.liquorlawreview.justice.nsw.gov.au/>. Maybe backflip is the wrong 
word – what about “policy evolution”? Stand by for some policy evolution on the 
lockouts and associated micro laws about shots after midnights and bottle shop 
closing times.

Careful consultation and gathering of facts is not invariably the preferred 
option for politicians when creating policy. Sometimes a backflip – or indeed 
evolution – is required, even when there is strong supportive evidence; other 
times we find a gritty determination to stay the course.

As that wizard of opportunism, Howard, observed: a backflip is not necessarily 
a bad thing, it just depends if you land where the public wants you to land.

Politicians have got to choose their backflips/evolutions carefully. Former 
prime minster Tony Abbott’s performance was predictably gauche when he went 
back on promises not to cut funding of the public broadcasters, and to health 
and education.

He landed on his head, as did Kevin Rudd when he abandoned the “greatest moral 
issue of our time” as the polls shrank.

Baird has landed just as awkwardly. 
 