
It's six in the evening in the medieval hilltop town of Castellabate and the 
winding lanes echo with the sound of sneezing, spluttering and a worrying 
hacking cough.

The priest at Santa Maria Assunta church is determined to deliver his sermon - 
broadcast over a loudspeaker, so even the teenagers sulking in the square don't 
miss out - though I think he'd have been better advised to stay in bed with a 
Lemsip.

Perched nearly 300m above sea level, overlooking Italy's Cilento coast, 
Castellabate is incredibly atmospheric, despite the unusual soundtrack. It's 
dominated by a 12th-century castle, once used as a retreat from Saracen raids.

I climb steep stairways, disappear down dark alleys, re-emerge into pretty 
piazzas where flat-capped men play dominoes outside tiny bars, and gawp at the 
sight of the cliffs tumbling into the sea far below.

Just two hours south of the bustling chaos of Naples, the Cilento region is 
one of the most remote parts of Campania. Instead of turning right off the A3 
and heading to the undeniably beautiful but often crowded and pricey Amalfi 
coast, I'd continued on past Salerno, leaving better-known resorts behind.

Much of the area is covered by the Cilento national park - the second largest 
in Italy - and it boasts 100km of coastline and a wild, mountainous interior 
sprinkled with historic villages still wedded to a traditional way of life.

This is where ordinary Neapolitans escape to in the summer and is still 
largely off the tourist radar, granted little more than a passing mention in 
most guidebooks.

A zigzagging road takes me down from Castellabate to the coastal village of 
Santa Maria di Castellabate, where the evening passeggiata is in full swing, 
with young and old strolling along the seafront. At the heart of the historic 
centre is a sandy beach, surrounded by noble palazzi and fishermen's houses.

There's a somewhat genteel ambience about the place, and the village still has 
its very own prince in residence, I discover - Angelo di Belmonte who lives in 
the 17th-century Palazzo Belmonte (part of which is now a luxury hotel).

I sit outside Caf√© Gioia and ask the waitress for the orange-coloured 
aperitivo that everyone seems to be drinking and am introduced to "spritz", a 
delicious concoction of Aperol and prosecco. As the sun melts into the sea, I 
move next door to Per Bacco restaurant and feast on fried fresh anchovies with 
bread, olives and tomatoes (a Cilento special) and linguine with baby squid and 
broad beans.

Follow the coast south from here and you'll discover a mix of sandy bays, 
rocky coves and imposing cliffs, dotted with fishing villages and tiny holiday 
resorts. Acciaroli was a favourite of Hemingway, who came here in 1952 after 
he'd finished writing "The Old Man and the Sea", spending hours in the 
cafe-bars along the seaside promenade.

Tiny Marina di Pisciotta is famous for keeping centuries-old fishing 
techniques alive, using the moon and the stars to determine where the anchovies 
will surface. Visitors can go out with the fishermen at night and then dine 
with them on the catch, dressed simply in extra virgin olive oil and lemon (the 
fish, not the tourists).

I try to convince Franco to let me join a trip that evening, but the weather 
is not good yet for tourists, he says, and tells me to come back in a month 
when the sea is calmer.

I spend the night in the lovely Hotel L'Approdo, right on the water's edge at 
San Marco di Castellabate, Santa Maria's smaller neighbour. From here you can 
walk the picturesque coastal path along Cape Licosa, follow a donkey track 
through pine forests to the top of Mount Licosa for wonderful views, or take a 
boat to a tiny island that's inhabited by lizards. This is a land of myth and 
legend and it's said that the area's named after the siren Leucosia who came 
here to die, heart-broken after she failed to lure Odysseus and his crew ashore 
with her singing.

Legend also holds that Palinuro, about an hour further south along the coast, 
was named after the helmsman of the Aeneid, who fell overboard close to the 
coast. It's one of the larger, most popular seaside resorts, but the real 
attraction is the rugged coastline riddled with sea caves and cliffs reaching 
200m, topped with watchtowers and a lighthouse.

I take a boat trip around the shore, stopping in caves along the way - the 
water in the blue grotto is a dazzling aquamarine, the result of sunlight from 
an underground passage, while the blood grotto glows with red algae, and a hawk 
flies out of the darkness, narrowly missing our heads.

Our guide tells us to use "very, very imagination" to see shapes in the 
stalagmites and stalactites, from dolphins to monks, but you really don't need 
any imagination to appreciate the beauty of the place.

Cape Palurino offers wonderful terrain for hiking, cycling or riding and I 
decide to explore a bit more on horseback. Antonio speaks little English, and 
our teenage companion doesn't seem to speak at all as we cross rivers, follow 
paths through forests and come out into clearings with incredible views.

After I've told Antonio for the umpteenth time that it's "bella", nodding out 
to sea, I'm beginning to bore myself and shut up so we can enjoy the panorama 
in peace.

You could spend your days clinging to the coast, swimming in some of the 
clearest water I've ever seen, dining at lovely waterfront restaurants and 
wandering round charming fishing villages, but even those only vaguely 
interested in history shouldn't miss out on Cilento's impressive historic sites.

Top of the list is ancient Paestum (originally Poseidonia), with some of the 
best-preserved Greek temples in Europe. After driving across the Piana del Sele 
- a vast plain south of Salerno where the buffalos that produce the region's 
delicious mozzarella graze - the sudden appearance of the soaring 
honey-coloured monuments comes as something of a surprise.

Paestum was founded by the Greeks in the 7th century BC and colonised by the 
Romans in 273 BC; malaria and Saracen raids left the town almost deserted by 
the 9th century - only to be "rediscovered" amid the thick forest in the 18th. 
Writers, poets and artists from Goethe to Shelley flocked here for inspiration. 
"Inexpressibly grand," concluded Shelley.

Further down the coast, the archaeological site of Veila is worth a stop, 
though these ruins of the Hellenistic town of Elea, founded in 540 BC, are much 
less intact. It was an important port, home to one of the greatest philosophy 
schools in the Greek world and a holiday resort for wealthy Romans - Horace 
being among those who came on the advice of his doctor.

But for more recent history, the Certosa di San Lorenzo, a sprawling monastery 
to the northeast in Padula can't fail to impress. Begun in the 14th century, 
but finished only 500 years later and used as a prisoner of war camp in the 
second world war, you can wander the huge central quadrangle and check out 
frescoed chapels, the colourfully tiled kitchen and beautiful library.

For anyone who enjoys more quirky sightseeing, though, I'd recommend a look in 
at the Joe Petrosino museum, in the house where the local hero was born in 1860.

After emigrating to New York as a child, Petrosino became the first Italian 
officer in the NYPD, and made it his goal to defeat the mafia, but was killed 
on a trip to Palermo to investigate its links with the Chicago "Black Hand" in 
1909.

The uniformed guide, Pina, proudly shows me touching displays, from 
black-and-white photos of his childhood to newspaper reports of his murder.

Besides the coast and scattered historic attractions, the wild interior is 
Cilento's trump card. Few roads wind across the rocky mountains, a rail route 
cuts through the region but doesn't stop, and the isolation has left the 
gorgeous countryside unspoilt and local traditions preserved.

I turn inland from Palinuro, and follow the course of a river, with the sheer 
sides of Devil's Gorge soaring above. The ruins of the medieval village of San 
Severino appear, perched perilously on the mountainside.

Home to 11,000 people in its heyday, the last inhabitants left here in the 
Sixties to move to Centola, lower down the mountain, abandoning the village to 
the elements and a profusion of wild flowers.

A cathedral, split in half, clings to the rocks, and you can see into houses, 
beams collapsed and poppies growing on the floor. I wander the ghost town 
alone, ring the bell outside the church and wish I were a Romantic poet 
(Shelley would've had something suitable to say, I'm sure).

A little further on, at Oasi Morigerati, a WWF site, I follow pretty paths 
through the forest leading down to a huge cave, where an underground river 
roars to the surface. I dare myself to walk further and further inside as the 
walls close in and the sound of water deafens in the darkness.

If you're keen on caves, some of the most stunning examples in Europe can be 
found in Cilento, up in the north - the vast complex at Castelcivita and Angel 
Caves at Pertosa, where you're taken by boat on a subterranean river past 
strange natural sculptures.

Compared with the coast, there are few places to stay inland, but Agriturismo 
Le Favate, a 400-year-old farmhouse hidden in the countryside near Ceraso, is a 
real find.

Increasingly narrow roads snake through olive groves and over streams and I'm 
held up at Terradura by a procession for the Festa San Michele Arcangelo, with 
the priest parading the honoured statue around the tiny hamlet, followed by the 
villagers and a brass band.

Le Favate's setting on a 100-hectare farm is idyllic - a bride and groom are 
having their wedding photos taken when I arrive, even though they married 
elsewhere. It's an agriturismo of the purest kind: everything served here is 
produced on the farm, including the wine, olive oil and cheese.

In the evenings owner Elvira Licusati prepares traditional delights such as 
cavatelli pasta with beans or buffalo - less fatty than beef - grilled with 
tomato and rocket, followed by fresh fruit from figs to cherries.

It's the sort of place you'd never want to leave - but her guests do venture 
out, Elvira tells me, walking the 4km down to the beach at Ascea, exploring the 
historic sites nearby or hiking in the surrounding mountains.

I could linger all day by the pool, with the sea in the distance and just the 
sound of birdsong in the air, but have to go further on around the coast to my 
final destination, the 13th-century town of Maratea. Though not strictly part 
of Cilento (it actually falls into neighbouring Basilicata), if you're in the 
area it'd be a shame to miss it.

After Bussentino the coastline becomes ever more dramatic, the road falling 
away into the sea and you know you're nearly there when you spot a giant marble 
statue of Christ the Redeemer, high on the mountainside, his back symbolically 
to the Golfo di Policastro and arms outstretched to the interior (unlike his 
Rio doppelganger).

Maratea itself is a tangle of alleys and squares, with a generous 44 churches 
for its 5,000 inhabitants. I'm staying in the Locanda delle Donne Monache, a 
converted 18th-century convent in the historic centre. It's a charming place.

My flower-filled balcony gives on to the old town, from the terrace and pool 
you can see Christ on the hillside, there's an eccentric collection of modern 
art, a fantastic restaurant (the cake with a melted ricotta cheese and red 
fruit centre is divine) and at night it all sparkles with candlelight.

It's so incredibly romantic I'm tempted to propose to the waiter. At dusk I 
wander back down through the village to a viewpoint over the sea and sit 
staring as the scene changes from shimmering silver-blue to burning red. A 
group of villagers has gathered to exchange gossip and an old man wanders up to 
me and hands me a white fig.

"Bella," he nods, smiling out to the ocean. "Bella," I simply have to agree.

‚Ä¢ Jane Dunford travelled with Sunvil. For details, see below.

The 60-second guide to the Cilento coast

Getting there

The nearest airport is Naples; easyJet (easyjet.com <http://www.easyjet.com>) 
flies from Gatwick, Stansted and Liverpool while Thomsonfly (thomson.com 
<http://www.thomson.com>) flies from Belfast, Birmingham, Bristol, Newcastle, 
Manchester, East Midlands, Gatwick and Glasgow. A good train service runs along 
the coast. Seetrenitalia.com <http://www.trenitalia.com>.

Where to stay

The Palazzo Belmonte (00 39 0974 960211; palazzobelmonte.com 
<http://www.palazzobelmonte.com>) is an elegant country-house hotel by the sea, 
five minutes' stroll away from the picturesque village of Santa Maria di 
Castellabate. Doubles from ‚Ç¨186, B&B. For something simpler, the Agriturismo 
Sant'Agata (00 39 0974 931716;agriturismosantagata.it 
<http://www.agriturismosantagata.it>) offers farmhouse accommodation perched 
above the town of Palinuro, with impressive sea views. La Fattoria (00 39 0974 
971020;lafattoriadelcilento.com <http://www.lafattoriadelcilento.com>) is 
another agriturismo in the heart of the Cilento national park, with nine 
comfortable rooms, a good-sized pool walks from the door and bike hire. Doubles 
from ‚Ç¨70 B&B.

Where to eat

La Taverna del Pescatore (00 39 0974 968 293) in Santa Maria di Castellabate 
does fantastic seafood - if you're feeling brave try the spaghetti with raw sea 
urchins. Maratea has a clutch of excellent restaurants; a long-established 
favourite is La Taverna Rovita (00 39 0973 876588), which serves up Lucanian 
specialities such as game, local salamis and spicy fried calamari. Perennially 
popular, it's essential to book.

U'Zifaro (00 39 0974 986397) is perfectly situated in a former boathouse on 
the esplanade at Scario and serves up zingy puttanesca with fresh pasta and 
excellent local wines.

Packages

Sunvil (020 8758 4722; sunvil.co.uk <http://www.sunvil.co.uk>) offers a 
seven-night stay in the Cilento region from ¬£747 (two sharing). The price 
includes three nights with breakfast at Hotel L'Approdo in San Marco di 
Castellabate, one night's half-board at Hotel La Conchiglia, Palinuro, and 
three nights with breakfast at La Locanda delle Donne Monache in Maratea as 
well as return flights from Gatwick and car hire.
 