
Waken the nation 
To a new dawn,
Shake your bonds,
Seek your goal
Find your way.

That’s from The Australia Day Song, a ditty written by Peter Jennings and 
launched by Sir Mark Oliphant in 1977 in a (fruitless) attempt “to stir 
apathetic Australians” to take an interest in Australia Day.

Lee Lin Chin promises to rescue expats from lambless Australia Day in new ad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/10/lee-lin-chin-promises-to-rescue-expats-from-lambless-australia-day-in-new-ad>
It’s a long way from Jennings’s dinky tune (intended, according to the 
Canberra Times to “awaken dozing patriots”) to the full throttle jingoism 
unleashed by the mostrecent Australia Day lamb advertisement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/10/lee-lin-chin-promises-to-rescue-expats-from-lambless-australia-day-in-new-ad>
. In the new commercial, SBS personality Lee Lin Chin plays the head of 
Operation Boomerang, a commando-style body ready to use military force to 
ensure our holidays are spent in a manner deemed appropriate by Meat and 
Livestock Australia.

The ad’s drawn heat for a variety of reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/11/operation-boomerang-lamb-ad-insults-indigenous-people-say-critics>
: in particular, Twitter’s been aghast at Chin’s embrace of “love it or leave 
it” patriotism, a sentiment many see as incompatible with SBS’s 
multiculturalism.

Actually, though, the whole campaign provides a neat illustration of how 
endlessly protean nationalism can be.

For, of course, contrary to what the nation’s butchers might have you think, 
there’s no long tradition of Australians eating lamb (a dish associated with 
northern Europe, the Mediterranean, North Africa, the Middle East, Central 
Asia, Mexico, the Indian subcontinent and just about everywhere else) on 
Australia Day … for the simple reason that, until very recently, most 
Australians ignored Australia Day altogether.

Throughout the 1970s and 80s, Australia Day was simply a non-starter, so much 
so that politicians and pundits regularly pleaded with the public to take some 
interest in the occasion.

Persons who sing Advance Australia Day are the darling dodoes of our time
Manning Clark 
In 1973, immigration minister Al Grassby complained that “the poor observance 
of Australia Day insulted rather than exulted the nation”, so much so that he 
threatened to cancel it.

“If there is not sufficient interest in our national day,” he warned, “it 
would be better for Australia if it was not held at all as a public holiday.”

He had good reason for concern. In 1975, a study showed that only a minority 
of local government areas in Australia observed the day in any way at all and 
that “in most areas it was totally ignored”.

A few years later, the Victorian premier Dick Hamer said Australians were 
“apathetic” and “lazy” in celebrating Australia Day, and cared only about 
having a holiday; in 1980, the historian Manning Clark (himself an avowed 
nationalist) explained that “Australia Day has never caught the public 
imagination” and “persons who sing Advance Australia Day are the darling dodoes 
of our time”.

The largely unsuccessful campaign to popularise Australia Day became even more 
urgent in the 1980s, not least because of the looming 200th anniversary of 
white settlement. When the Australian Bicentennial Authority was established in 
1980, its general manager explained, rather mournfully, that among the many 
problems confronting Australians was “a lack of national pride”.

But, as the historian Mark McKenna says, the millions of taxpayer dollars 
pumped into bicentenary events could not overcome the central contradiction of 
Australia Day: namely, that since 1937, Aboriginal people had marked 26 January 
as a Day of Mourning or – in more recent times – as Invasion Day. The 
anniversary of settlement was also the anniversary of dispossession, an 
inconvenient fact that rendered the bicentennial celebrations politically 
ticklish for their boosters.

Even coining a slogan for the occasion proved awkward, with the organisers 
switching from the bullish “Australian Achievement” to the more conciliatory 
“Living Together” and, eventually, to the entirely inane “Celebration of a 
Nation”, a catchphrase accompanied by a jingle of stupefying banality (“the 
celebration of a nation/ give us a hand/ celebration of a nation/ let’s make it 
grand!”).

Despite these contortions, on 19 January 1988, the Sydney Morning Herald 
admitted that “scarcely a day of the Bicentenary has passed when issues 
involving Aborigines and their ‘Year of Mourning’ protests have not featured 
prominently”. Not surprisingly, many Indigenous activists declared the whole 
year to be a festival of white self-love – it was, they said, a veritable 
“Masturbation of a Nation” (“give us a hand!”).

The seeming impossibility of salvaging Australia Day led many nationalists to 
pin their commemorative hopes on the always more popular Anzac Day. “Throughout 
the 1980s,” writes McKenna, “as Australia Day became a lightning rod for 
historical and political disputes,Anzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day> came to be seen as a less 
complicated and less divisive alternative.”

As early as 1967, Murdoch’s Australian newspaper noted the “crippling 
artificiality” of Australia Day and contrasted it with the Anzac celebration, 
which, it said, “expresses, as no other day or symbol can, something that we 
understand and nobody else can”.

In 1981, the same paper asked bluntly: “[Should we] give up trying to make 
Australia Day our national day in favour of Anzac Day?”

Yet Anzac Day had problems of its own.

In 1966, 20 women from the anti-war group Save Our Sons stood in front of the 
Melbourne Shrine of Remembrance on Anzac Day holding posies inscribed with the 
slogan: “Honour the dead with peace.” After police were summoned, the women 
were told they could lay their wreaths – but only if they removed all reference 
to “peace”.

Not surprisingly, the growth of a campaign dedicated to peace in Vietnam 
corresponded with a decline in enthusiasm for an anniversary in which peace was 
considered offensive.

In 1969, the Age reported that Anzac Day had met with a “cool reception” with 
observers almost outnumbering participants; young people in particular were 
“noticeably sparse”. In 1973, the ALP national conference even discussed the 
desirability of replacing the Anzac ceremony with a “Day of Peace”.

In 1981, a group called Women Against Rape attempted to march in Canberra on 
Anzac Day to highlight the consequence of war for women. In response, Sir 
William Keys, the Returned and Services League (RSL) national president, 
denounced “feminist group[s] whose ultimate purpose was to bring changes into 
Australia’s social and political systems by debasing and degrading its great 
traditions”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthe-real-problem-is-not-the-lamb-ad-but-the-militarisation-of-australian-nationalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa88644e44f832afd0bb944fc40e5401471cf123b%2F0_0_2208_1325%2F2208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20real%20problem%20is%20not%20the%20lamb%20ad%20but%20the%20militarisation%20of%20Australian%20nationalism%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthe-real-problem-is-not-the-lamb-ad-but-the-militarisation-of-australian-nationalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20real%20problem%20is%20not%20the%20lamb%20ad%20but%20the%20militarisation%20of%20Australian%20nationalism%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthe-real-problem-is-not-the-lamb-ad-but-the-militarisation-of-australian-nationalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa88644e44f832afd0bb944fc40e5401471cf123b%2F0_0_2208_1325%2F2208.jpg>
 Members of the crowd reject a request by Big Day Out organisers to not wear or 
display the Australian flag during the Big Day Out music festival in 2007. 
Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
Keys’s identification of Anzac Day with opposition to social change was widely 
held. In 1982, Bruce Ruxton from the Victorian RSL called the police on members 
of the Gay Ex-Servicemen’s Association as they sought to lay a wreath.

“I don’t mind poofters on the march,” he said, “but they must march with their 
units. We didn’t want them to lay a wreath because we didn’t want to have 
anything to do with them. We certainly don’t recognise them and they are just 
another start to the denigration of Anzac Day.”

The following year, demonstrations by a feminist group called Women Against 
Anzac Day saw 168 women arrested in Sydney alone. Protests continued until 
1987, and many commentators suggested that Anzac Day was in the process of 
dying out.

Of course, they were entirely wrong.

Historians argue about how exactly to explain the growth of Anzac Day from the 
late 1980s onward. In part, the Anzac resurgence corresponds, as historian Ken 
Inglis says, with the death of everyone who actually fought in the first world 
war, since the disappearance of that generation allowed the celebration to be 
entirely reshaped. Equally, it’s no coincidence the popularity of Anzac grew as 
the left went into crisis with the fall of the Soviet Union.

Most of all, though, the modern Anzac Day reflects the renewal of Australian 
militarism.

In 1990, Bob Hawke became the first modern prime minister to attend the dawn 
service at Anzac Cove. The next year, he committed Australian forces to the 
first Gulf war, proving that the use of military power could be politically 
palatable again, despite the Vietnam debacle.

With the breaking of that taboo, a trickle turned into a flood.

Since the invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, war has become Australia’s natural 
state: military personnel have, after all, engaged in some sort of armed 
conflict during the vast majority of that time. We’ve become increasingly 
accustomed to conflict (albeit fought at a safe distance), to politicians 
garbing themselves in khaki and posing with tanks and military jets, and to 
Anzac Day as a turbocharged celebration of militarised patriotism.

Indeed, Anzac hasn’t been “revived” so much as totally reshaped, since the 
modern commemoration bears almost no relationship to the ceremonies held in the 
first half of the 20th century. In the Howard era, newspaper editorials 
discussed Anzac as a day that “salutes the country itself”, a time when 
Australians “celebrate” their “founding generation”. As McKenna says:

Never before had Anzac been seen as a day of ‘celebration’ … Far from a 
resurgence of ‘the Anzac tradition’, Howard was using Anzac Day as a vehicle 
for national self-congratulation.

Rather than Anzac Day replacing Australia Day (as the Australian and others 
had suggested), Australia Day has been Anzacised, reconstructed along the 
militaristic lines of 25 April.

The timid little event that Grassby plaintively urged people to notice has 
morphed into a festival of flag capes and boozy chest thumping – as Big Day Out 
promoter Ken West discovered in 2007. Disgusted by the prevalence of flags at 
the event in 2006 (only a month after the Cronulla riot), he tried to 
discourage music lovers from bringing them.

“The Australian flag was being used as gang colours. It was racism disguised 
as patriotism and I’m not going to tolerate it,” West said – but, then, after a 
huge outcry, he backed down.

“We think we’re pretty good and we are,” explained John Howard in his 
Australia Day address that year.

Labor traditionally gives its nationalism a slightly different tinge to that 
favoured by the conservatives.

For Anzac Day and Australia Day, Howard and Abbott emphasised an Anglo 
iconography of bronzed diggers and Don Bradman and Hills Hoists, whereas the 
Labor PMs stressed Indigenous rock paintings and ethnically diverse children. 
Nevertheless, the new Australian militarism has been an entirely bipartisan 
affair, with Kevin Rudd and Julia Gillard pursuing the pointless war in 
Afghanistan with quite as much enthusiasm as Howard.

You can see the differences in those lamb commercials.

'Operation Boomerang' lamb ad insults Indigenous people, say critics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/11/operation-boomerang-lamb-ad-insults-indigenous-people-say-critics>
An earlier iteration featured football footballer Sam Kekovich attacking those 
who refused to eat lamb as “unAustralian” before shouting:

The soap-avoiding, pot-smoking vegetarians may disagree with me, but they can 
get stuffed. They know the way to the airport.

It’s a parody of Liberal-style nationalism with Kekovich ironically 
channelling the old-fashioned bluster of an RSL reactionary.

As the media site Mumbrella explains 
<http://mumbrella.com.au/lee-lin-chin-australia-day-lamb-lambassador-operation-boomerang-stephen-moore-fitzy-wippa-338819>
:

The recruitment of Lee to the role … addresses criticism the lamb marketer 
faced last year with some claiming the ads were too “whitebread” and dominated 
by males.

Accordingly, her ad instead captures the spirit of Labor’s version of the new 
nationalism, with its evocation of high-tech terror raids and coercive jingoism 
presided over by a feisty woman of Asian descent.

Just as the new, militarised Anzac Day entirely ignored the politics of the 
first world war, the new, militarised Australia Day simply steamrolls over the 
response of Indigenous people to their dispossession: presumably, they too can 
“get stuffed”.

Should we care about a stupid meat commercial? No, not especially. 

In fact, Lee Lin Chin’s participation in the lamb campaign illustrates the 
limits of the left’s increasing preoccupation with symbolism and representation.
Meat <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/meat> and Livestock Australia 
didn’t create the new nationalism and neither did Chin. A country consistently 
engaged in armed conflict for close to 15 years will inevitably develop a 
belligerently jingoistic culture – and there’s no necessary incompatibility 
between that and the kind of official multiculturalism championed by SBS.

To put it another way, you don’t end militarised nationalism by getting 
different people on TV. You end it by stopping the wars.
 