
A 21-year-old man walked into a school in Trollhättan in western Sweden on 
Thursday. He was wearing a helmet, a Star Wars mask and wielded a sword.A 
teacher, a pupil and the man with the sword were left dead after a rampage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/22/pupils-wounded-in-sword-attack-at-swedish-school>
. Swedish police said thatthe suspect, named as Anton Lundin Pettersson, had 
“racist motives” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/23/sweden-school-attack-police-investigate-racist-motive-for-double>
.

In 2011 I came face to face with Anders Behring Breivik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik> on Utøya island in 
Norway as he carried out his atrocious massacre. He pointed his gun and fired 
at me but missed. I survived and later testified against him in court. What 
we’re now seeing in Sweden resonates heavily with me. In moving on from the 
Breivik trauma, and since becoming involved in working against violent 
extremism, I have come to understand violent extremists as individuals capable 
of change.

In the wake of the Oregon school shooting  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/01/oregon-umpqua-community-college-shooting>
and other massacres in the US, the question arises as to what drives such 
perpetrators – usually young, white men – to carry out acts that seem 
unfathomable to most of us. This is all the more pertinent in Sweden, where the 
last school attack took place in 1961. But the reality is that violence can be 
rationalised and carried out by an entirely ordinary person, living in ordinary 
circumstances in a relatively peaceful Scandinavian country. In 2011 this was 
underlined by Breivik’s act of terror in Norway. He was laterruled by a 
Norwegian court to be entirely sane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/24/breivik-verdict-sane-21-years>.

The tragic school attack in Sweden fits an American pattern | Andrew Brown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/22/school-attack-sweden-murderer-loner-racism>
The idea that violence can be rationalised by seemingly ordinary individuals 
might leave us scared and hopeless. But if people don’t need to be deeply 
mentally disturbed to contemplate horrific acts, then we can at least reach 
them. There will be opportunities to change their minds, influence their 
behaviour, alter their decision-making process.

In seeking an understanding of what drove Pettersson, some have turned to 
reports that he “liked” YouTube videos by neo-fascist bloggers and videos 
glorifying Nazis. He is also said to have followed online content demeaning 
women, the religious and the overweight. Through studies of the suspect’s 
online life, we get an impression of a young, angry man, whose hatreds fed his 
own feelings of supremacy.

It is likely that Pettersson was influenced by other school shootings inspired 
by hate. But his act of violence also appears to have been motivated by a 
highly personalised worldview that was different from that of school shooters
Chris Harper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/02/chris-harper-mercer-first-details-emerge-of-oregon-college-killer>
 and the Sandy Hook elementary school killer,Adam Lanza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/25/sandy-hook-shooter-adam-lanza-report>
. The Swede was seemingly not a far-right ideologue like Breivik orDylann Roof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/20/dylann-roof-fbi-website-manifesto-charleston-shooting>
, the Charleston gunman, but perhaps somebody who decided he had to act out 
against one of his many enemies in order to feel powerful.

We know “normal” people can be drawn to extremism and violence, but also that 
normal people can help bring others out of extremism. One example is Arno 
Michaelis, a former neo-Nazi who was deeply involved in the white power 
movement, and who was first shaken from those views by a black woman at a 
McDonald’s cash register who met his hatred with unconditional kindness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Ftrollhattan-killer-extremist-anders-behring-breivik%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0372e983bf275ac68f960666908dee2c6527a522%2F0_0_4685_3179%2F4685.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Trollh%C3%A4ttan%20killer%20didn%E2%80%99t%20become%20an%20extremist%20overnight.%20Somebody%20could%20have%20stopped%20him%20%7C%20Bj%C3%B8rn%20Ihler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Ftrollhattan-killer-extremist-anders-behring-breivik%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Trollh%C3%A4ttan%20killer%20didn%E2%80%99t%20become%20an%20extremist%20overnight.%20Somebody%20could%20have%20stopped%20him%20%7C%20Bj%C3%B8rn%20Ihler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Ftrollhattan-killer-extremist-anders-behring-breivik%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0372e983bf275ac68f960666908dee2c6527a522%2F0_0_4685_3179%2F4685.jpg>
 People stand by candles and flowers outside the Kronan school in Trollhättan. 
Photograph: Jonathan Nackstrand/AFP/Getty Images 
Another example is the late Johnny Lee Clary, a former Ku Klux Klan leader. 
Clary was invited on to Oklahoma radio to debate with Rev Wade Watts of the 
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People; he abused Watts and 
attempted to intimidate him.Clary explained later in a YouTube video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4NW3RLnXmTY> how a black man’s kindness and 
forgiveness defeated his hate. Pettersson “liked” this video two years ago.

How could someone approve of this video and still go on to become a murderer 
motivated by the kind of hate Clary deplored in it? Would watching such 
testimony make an extremist think twice about carrying out an attack?

Sweden's liberal reputation tarnished as race attacks rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/01/swedens-liberal-reputation-tarnished-as-race-attacks-rise>
We’re missing a trick when it comes to those carrying out violent acts. 
Communities touched by violence have an understandable and overwhelming 
tendency to scrutinise the ways in which extremists, both those we consider 
“disturbed” and those we consider “ordinary”, are lured into violence. But 
rather than trying to pathologise the individual or the process that led him 
there, we should shift the focus instead towards what opportunities are 
available to us to prevent him resorting to violence in the first place.

In a young extremist’s daily life, in their school, among their family or 
friends, were there openings, moments when they could have been led to change?

Hateful people have the ability to take charge of their own lives. If we deny 
this is possible, we stop it from happening. If we see violence as contagious, 
we can view Pettersson’s act as the latest in an epidemic of young men who are 
not necessarily deeply disturbed, but rationalise their own violence and are 
inspired by others across the world. But if we did more to anticipate and 
intervene before such individuals erupt, then there is potential to stop 
ordinary people from becoming murderers.

Rather than looking for the moment they “snapped”, we should be looking for 
the missed opportunities in the ways our societies handle them: the many 
moments when we could have changed their perceptions and steered them away from 
violence. We need to ensure that similar opportunities aren’t missed with 
others.

 * This discussion in premoderated  