
Overview


By Gavin Weale, managing director Live Magazine SA <http://livemag.co.za/>

It’s awkward. A city stuck between one disturbing past, two names, and several 
diverse and conflicting identities. It’s the city named after an Afrikaner folk 
hero and founded on the principle that God had granted the land to the Boers. 
But change is afoot as Pretoria exorcises past demons and begins to develop its 
own contemporary identity. Today, it’s the stronghold of ANC administration, 
populated by well-to-do black bureaucrats, a city of leafy boulevards traversed 
by foreign diplomats and their families.
Pretoria map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/travel_map_pretoria/giv-2716716130Sa6XD9c/>
In a country swept forward by attempts at transformation, the capital could 
have been a candidate for being left in the Highveld dust. The city’s name was 
approved to change to Tshwane in 2005, but with the matter still under review, 
the old seat of apartheid power is still known as Pretoria. Modern developments 
such as Freedom Park are reconciling the ghosts of the past.


Calmer but slightly balmier than its conjoined-twin city Johannesburg, in 
spring it reveals itself with a fierce burst of breathtaking purple jacaranda. 
In the centre, grand buildings line historic Church Square, with its statue of 
late 19th-century Boer leader Paul Kruger, while, to the south, the Voortrekker 
monument watches over a diverse population in constant flux. The city centre’s 
architecture gives a sense of history that will be familiar to a European 
visitor, and walking the inner metropole is an ideal way to soak up this 
vantage point of history.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc61e6f428e5c767497e4faf0183828524fc19b49%2F238_1245_7328_4396%2F7328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc61e6f428e5c767497e4faf0183828524fc19b49%2F238_1245_7328_4396%2F7328.jpg>
 Embrace the capital … the statue of Nelson Mandela outside the Union 
Buildings, which houses South Africa’s government 
A large student population means the CBD (central business district) has a 
hubbub of rowdy bars serving garish shots in the colours of the national flag: 
head for the joints around Hatfield Square. To balance out the rugby and 
testosterone, Pretoria also attracts ambitious and politically active young 
people from all over the country, and a characterful multicultural scene is 
bubbling up. In particular, fashion mavericks such as theSocial Market 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheSocialMarketPretoria/> have captured an 
avant-garde slice of contemporary urban South Africa, with happenings that even 
Johannesburg’s archest trendies doff their fedoras at. SM’s regular markets on 
the first Sunday of each month at the Mushroom Lounge (Francis Baard St, 
Sunnyside) are worth building a city break around.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9962d5bc92ec6804f5f0a10040cebe7b188450bb%2F0_377_5601_3360%2F5601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9962d5bc92ec6804f5f0a10040cebe7b188450bb%2F0_377_5601_3360%2F5601.jpg>
 A beer stall at the Social Market 
Visitors can use Pretoria as a staging post for trips out to the breathtaking 
wilderness of the provinces of Mpumalanga and Limpopo, or the pretty hills of
Magaliesburg <http://www.magaliesburg.co.za/> and Hartbeespoort 
<http://www.sa-venues.com/things-to-do/northwest/region/hartbeespoort-dam/> to 
the west. But for an adventure closer by, get a solid local connection to help 
you seek out some proper township funk and DJ Spoko’s Pretoria-grown “bacardi” 
style of house music (see below). Activating those friends-of-friends will get 
you out there, beyond your comfort zone, and a Sunday afternoon jam in
Atteridgeville <http://showme.co.za/pretoria/tourism/tourism-in-atteridgeville/>
 township will reveal the real beating pulse of South African culture.

Music and clubs


By DJ and producer Spoko
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f97c140aa13034b01f9d9e5200b474419653e28%2F0_390_5794_3476%2F5794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f97c140aa13034b01f9d9e5200b474419653e28%2F0_390_5794_3476%2F5794.jpg>
 DJ Spoko (centre). 
I started off playing music at a shebeen in Atteridgeville. We used to do 
these random street bashes where we closed the street and put the tent up. 
Three- and four-day bashes. My sound is bacardi – I call it noisy music, or 
“destruction”.

To experience bacardi music, I would take people to where we do this thing 
each and every Sunday. It happens from 6pm on Sundays and Mondays. It goes to 
different places with the tent and the DJs, so it moves around Atteridgeville. 
We play bacardi all the way.
 DJ and producer Spoko’s mix for Guardian Travel 
The party is called Dispin – it means to “spin”. I don’t play there any more – 
I’ve left it for young DJs to promote themselves. Young, up-and-coming DJs who 
play the style that I play – they are like my students. The artists to watch 
out for are two boys who call themselvesMaben10 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SHnrzNxIZLA>, and there’s also Cool Candy – 
but the list is long. These are the guys who used to chill with me and I used 
to teach them the 1-2-3. During the week, Atteridgeville is slow, but on Friday 
you can go to theVintage Corner <http://www.facebook.com/vintagecornersa/>, a 
very nice pub that plays house music and R&B. It’s a legit club where you can 
go and chill.

In the city, everything starts happening on Friday in Sunnyside, the party 
strip where there’s clubs likeTimes 4 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Club-Times-4/301802789890487>, a place that has 
major dance-offs, andHouse 22 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/House-22-Pta/383085878396865>, a basic joint 
that is the mecca of deep house music in Pretoria, with some of the biggest DJs 
playing, like Vinny Da Vinci, Christos, Glen Lewis, Julian Gomez. And they say 
our music is too noisy!

Taliban Pub <https://www.facebook.com/TALIBAN-GARANKUWA-281373532856/> is 
where big house artists play, local and international … like Black Coffee, one 
of Africa’s most influential DJs and producers, and house legend Alton Miller 
from the US. It’s in Ga-Rankuwa, a little way out of the city, but has a young 
and mixed crowd. It’s a big club that’s grown out of someone’s back yard, and 
also puts on live music by the likes of Nathi Mankayi.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzjS0HsZfmu4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzjS0HsZfmu4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzjS0HsZfmu4&media=>
There’s also a big event, the Annual Cooler Boxing Day 
<https://www.facebook.com/Annualcoolerboxingday/> that happens every 26 
December in Atteridgeville. It’s a huge outdoor festival held at theLucas 
“Masterpieces” Moripe stadium 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Lucas-Masterpiece-Moripe-Stadium/385407718196122>
 that 10,000 people partied at last year. It goes on until late with many 
different artists, including underground jazz, and bacardi DJs. Last year, they 
had South African rapperK.O 
<https://www.facebook.com/KO-Teargas-136506996422041/timeline> and Heavy K 
<https://www.facebook.com/Heavy-K-Drumboss-158396957600648/> playing.”

Eating and drinking


By Khanya Mzongwana, AKA Yulu Ishii, founder of the Off the Wall Pop-Up 
Restaurant 
<https://www.facebook.com/Off-The-Wall-Pop-Up-Restaurant-807114719306860/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda087bfd59ee8463c5b30d693331fcaaf8a71e10%2F943_570_5031_3018%2F5031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda087bfd59ee8463c5b30d693331fcaaf8a71e10%2F943_570_5031_3018%2F5031.jpg>
 Khanya Mzongwana 
A lot of the most innovative and interesting places to eat in Pretoria are 
actually in the suburbs. A great place to start, where you can get a great beer 
as well as top food, isCapital Craft Beer Academy 
<http://www.capitalcraft.co.za/> in the eastern suburb of Lynnwood. It serves 
unbelievably good ribs and has 216 beers in its artisanal selection. Another 
place that has recently opened up in the same neighbourhood isForkies 
<https://www.facebook.com/forkiesrealfood> – a cute spot located next door to 
the biggest hipster bar in town,Lucky Rodrigo <http://www.luckyrodrigo.co.za/>, 
which serves an unspeakably delicious brisket calzone. I also really loveBurger 
Bistro <https://www.facebook.com/BurgerBistro> and Grounded at Echo 
<http://groundedat.co.za/>, both in the northern suburb of Villeria. The latter 
is part of the Echo Youth Development scheme, a non-profit organisation that 
supports vulnerable youth in South Africa.Grounded at Echo 
<http://groundedat.co.za/> is a gorgeous coffee shop with arguably the best 
coffee and certainly the best pistachio cake in the city. It’s a lovely 
community-based, family-owned business and the perfect creative workspace.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12e81ba57e72c35a6fdc50518f576ec29ec60ec4%2F0_63_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12e81ba57e72c35a6fdc50518f576ec29ec60ec4%2F0_63_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 The Off the Wall Pop-Up Restaurant. Photograph: Facebook 
Off The Wall Pop-Up Restaurant 
<https://www.facebook.com/Off-The-Wall-Pop-Up-Restaurant-807114719306860/> is a 
project my partnerSakhile Ndlazi 
<https://www.mixcloud.com/sakhile-ndlazi/dj-bubbles-organik-soul-meets-homekooking-live-at-lucky-bean/>
 and I started up in June 2014, where we occupy alternative food spaces (like 
Grounded at Echo,Pure Cafe <http://purecafe.co.za/> in Colbyn, +27 Cafe 
<https://www.facebook.com/27-Cafe-122100734517765/> in Hatfield and Poolside 
<https://www.facebook.com/poolsidemaboneng/> in the Maboneng Precinct, 
Johannesburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/11/alternative-city-guide-johannesburg-south-africa-holidays>
). I prepare dinner and he curates the sound waves for the evening. It’s a 
really cosy affair – we do it once a month and seat 50 people, basing each 
occasion around a different cuisine. Our next pop-up will be showcasing Asian 
street food.

Fermier <http://www.fermierrestaurant.com/> has just opened its doors in the 
leafy eastern suburb of the Willows and offers seasonal, responsibly sourced 
food. It’s a really exciting venture, particularly because it’s a sustainable 
restaurant and pretty much everything is grown and reared on the property, from 
fish to vegetables. It serves an excellent seven-course menu for R450 (about 
£20), which is good value considering the quality of ingredients and 
presentation, ambience and knock-out flavour combinations. On thecurrent menu 
<http://www.fermierrestaurant.com/menu/>, which will be changed seasonally, the 
duck rillette is exquisite, as well as the bream served with roast lime, 
edamame beans and olives. This place is an absolute must-visit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff0f4899a76360187ed0e3f992d75ee4d1406ba1%2F0_39_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff0f4899a76360187ed0e3f992d75ee4d1406ba1%2F0_39_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Burger Bistro. Photograph: Facebook 
Thirty minutes’ drive out of Pretoria to the east is the old diamond mining 
town of Cullinan. Here you’ll find a restaurant calledAlbizia 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Albizia-Restaurant-Cullinan/214778228547397>, 
where a culinary artist,Lientjie Wessels 
<https://www.facebook.com/lientjie.wessels>, serves a fantastic multi-course 
lunch on the porch of the home she shares with her husband Robert. Surrounded 
by the beautiful landscapes of the De Tweedespruit valley,Albizia 
<http://www.eatout.co.za/venue/albizia/> stands on its own, literally and 
figuratively. Wessels has a diverse, well-travelled palate with a great knack 
for flavours and she has a very personal approach to dining and serving each 
course. And the easy-going and homely farm atmosphere is great for a break from 
the city.

Arts and culture


By Pieter Mathews, architect and convenor of Cool Capital Biennale 
<http://www.coolcapital.co.za/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b34e508f5e2f53832f530b4f1b023a76aa02d62%2F0_374_5547_3327%2F5547.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b34e508f5e2f53832f530b4f1b023a76aa02d62%2F0_374_5547_3327%2F5547.jpg>
 Pieter Mathews at the Old Synagogue 
The 80km Tshwane Rapid Transport <http://www.tshwanetransit.net/> bus system 
(also called the A Re Yeng) has site-specific artwork at its stations, 
including the traditional Ndebele patterns ofEster Mahlangu 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Esther_Mahlangu>; Diane Victor’s The History 
Column, comprised of mosaic portraits of resistance heroes such as Nana Sita; 
andBanele Khoza’s The Steel Tree 
<http://art.co.za/news/pretorias-art-legacy.php>, which pays homage to 
Pretoria’s iconic jacaranda trees. The art is presented on 11-metre totem 
poles, and makes up a huge urban art collection. Apart from their artistic 
merits they are also very useful to visitors for orientation purposes.

The Old Synagogue is where the Rivonia Trial 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rivonia_Trial> was held (between 1963 and 1964, 
10 leaders of the African National Congress, including Nelson Mandela and 
Walter Sisulu were tried for acts of sabotage designed to overthrow the 
apartheid government). My firm designed and constructed aMemory Box 
<http://www.artefacts.co.za/main/Buildings/bldgframes.php?bldgid=12480> bus 
station at the synagogue, acting as a convergence point for the history of 
South Africa. The glass exterior reflects the image of the Old Synagogue back 
to the viewer. There are otherMemory Box 
<http://stop-over.co.za/image-of-rich-heritage-reflected-in-modern-bus-station/>
 stations – all part of the A Re Yeng system – that were specifically designed 
for sensitive historical precincts. At the synagogue we did not want to compete 
with the ornate architecture of the historic building and opted for a simple 
box with viewing panes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53d8ddf4c69a81e6e74e1fe0257e789f67820982%2F1000_81_6809_4087%2F6809.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53d8ddf4c69a81e6e74e1fe0257e789f67820982%2F1000_81_6809_4087%2F6809.jpg>
 The Old Synagogue 
Paul Kruger <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Kruger> gave land to the 
Jewish community, and they built these Byzantine onion domes close to Church 
Square where the Palace of Justice is. We used to call it Victorian 
architecture, but it should be called eclecticWilhelmiens 
<http://www.culturalheritageconnections.org/wiki/New_Ground-breaking_Book_on_Shared_Dutch_-_South_African_Built_Heritage>
, because it has a more Dutch feel.

There’s a website called dutchfootsteps.com <> that you can use as a good 
reference for a walk. At the Palace of Justicethe holding cells where Nelson 
Mandela was held can still be viewed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/18/nelson-mandela-rivonia-speech-anniversary-graffiti>
, and theFreedom Charter <http://www.anc.org.za/show.php?id=72>, which came 
into being in 1955, was handwritten in the cell below.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2592e2855331ea739b32d59a8f76f2882ecc96fb%2F0_0_5385_3233%2F5385.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2592e2855331ea739b32d59a8f76f2882ecc96fb%2F0_0_5385_3233%2F5385.jpg>
 The Palace of Justice 
There’s the perception that downtown is dangerous, but if you’re smart and 
don’t look like a tourist, it’s adventurous! There are free walking tours 
organised by021central <http://012central.co.za/> with in-depth information on 
some of the amazing architecture of historic buildings and, where possible, 
access is given to some of the rooftops to get a birds-eye view of the city. A 
lot of the buildings from the late-modernism period during apartheid were 
inspired by Oscar Niemeyer, the Brazilian communist architect, which seems 
somewhat ironic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F311fe19b9af4452e93641f96d7a1735a19bddd0f%2F0_403_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F311fe19b9af4452e93641f96d7a1735a19bddd0f%2F0_403_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 The One Brother and the Dark Cloud by Angus Taylor (see below) on the corner 
of Eastwood and Park Street, Sunnyside Photograph: Siya Mkhasibe 
If you like contemporary architecture, visit Freedom Park 
<http://www.freedompark.co.za/>, next to the Voortrekker Monument 
<http://www.vtm.org.za/>, a massive structure built in commemoration of the 
eponymous Afrikaners who left the Cape between 1835 and 1854 to settle inland. 
For theCool Capital Biennale <http://www.coolcapital.co.za/>, the management 
allowed us to light the monument up in pink.

A good outing is to Marabastad 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marabastad,_Pretoria>, in west Pretoria, which 
has a very rich history. The area is much like District Six (in Cape Town) and 
Sophiatown (Johannesburg), whose inhabitants were also forcefully relocated to 
single-race townships under the Group Areas Act. Marabastad’s black inhabitants 
were forced to settle in Atteridgeville in 1945, the coloured residents in 
Eersterus in 1963, and the Indian residents in Laudium (1968). Unlike other 
neighbourhoods where forced removals took place, the buildings were not 
bulldozed. The landmarks include a mosque and a Hindu temple, so it’s quite 
diverse. You get the experience of Hindu tailors, taxi ranks, and muti 
(traditional medicine) shops. It’s a very underrated place.

Fashion and shopping

By Yoliswa XO <https://www.instagram.com/yoliswa_xo/?hl=en>, stylist and 
blogger
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a1d2eca0921d782c401560c70eeac6aa22eb92d%2F0_105_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a1d2eca0921d782c401560c70eeac6aa22eb92d%2F0_105_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Yoliswa Xo. Photograph: PR/Instagram 
The style scene in Pretoria is beginning to find its own voice, and we’re 
definitely not just echoing what’s happening in Johannesburg any longer. 
Trendsetters take vintage pieces and give them a fresh look. Vintage clothing 
is relatively cheap in Pretoria and people can source their clothes easily at 
open markets – that’s why it’s so popular.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd69665051628a8c38da8598beff7f9264453c8b%2F783_656_4896_2937%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd69665051628a8c38da8598beff7f9264453c8b%2F783_656_4896_2937%2F4896.jpg>
 Markets and pop-ups are helping drive fashion trends in Pretoria 
 There’s a really good pop-up vintage market at +27 Cafe 
<https://www.facebook.com/27-Cafe-122100734517765/>, which happens once a 
month; and then there are the flea markets around theState Theater 
<http://showme.co.za/pretoria/events-entertainment/the-south-african-state-theatre/>
 in the CBD. TheMarabastad market 
<http://www.pretoria-south-africa.com/marabastad-malls-and-shopping-centres.html>
 is also excellent if you’re looking for deals and aren’t afraid to be in the 
edgier side of town. You can get food and fresh produce from street vendors, 
and second-hand clothes too. One of the best charity shops specialising in 
second-hand clothing at super low prices isSungardens Hospice Charity Shop 
<https://www.facebook.com/sungardenshospicecharityshops/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F699cc984902d92b6d873fde2b49e4940c0542f23%2F0_63_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F699cc984902d92b6d873fde2b49e4940c0542f23%2F0_63_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Indie and boho … We Wear Gems Photograph: Facebook 
At the higher end, Mick Owen <https://www.facebook.com/mickowen27/?pnref=lhc> 
is a Pretoria-based designer who is making waves in the industry, and has 
showcased his women’s “athleisure” and minimal colourful cuts at various South 
African Fashion Weeks in the past few years.We Wear Gems 
<http://www.weweargems.co.za/collections/gemstones> by Dhrital Kalan, from 
Laudium, is an indie-boho jewellery line – chokers, bracelets, septums, bindis 
– with Indian, gypsy and vintage influences that I’m obsessed with.Cop Capital 
<http://www.copcapital.co.za/> is a brilliant sneaker and concept store that 
also stocks South African street apparel like2Bop <http://www.twobop.co.za/> and
Sol-Sol <http://sol-solmenswear.com> and 32 Clothing 
<http://www.32clothing.co.za/>.


A really good starting point to find out what’s happening on the party scene 
or in the arts in Pretoria is the blogDrop Your Drink 
<http://drop-your-drink.com>. Also check out Thithi Nteta’s blog TeeTee is With 
Me <http://www.teeteeiswithme.com/>.

Outdoors


By Angus Taylor <http://www.angustaylor.co.za/>, sculptor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7de89ea58cb62935f1be5ae4b54384267f899e0d%2F0_405_6016_3609%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7de89ea58cb62935f1be5ae4b54384267f899e0d%2F0_405_6016_3609%2F6016.jpg>
 Angus Taylor 
Pretoria is a bit of an oasis – it’s lush and green in the summer rainy 
season, but with a lot of sunshine. We’re at a high altitude (1,339 metres – 
just a couple of metres lower than Ben Nevis) with some hills, but the terrain 
is fairly flat and there are no large peaks. This makes it ideal formountain 
biking – the fastest growing sport in South Africa 
<http://showme.co.za/pretoria/lifestyle/pretoria-cycling-and-mountain-biking/>. 
The best place for an introductory ride is around theVoortrekker Monument 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voortrekker_Monument> – there’s a 12km route 
with spectacular views across the savannah bush veld. There are places that 
offer a whole mountain biking experience with bikes for hire included in the 
price.

In the valley below Pretoria, 5km to the south, is the Groenkloof nature 
reserve <http://www.gauteng.net/attractions/groenkloof_nature_reserve/>, which 
offers even themost novice biker 
<http://www.mtbroutes.co.za/groenkloof-nature-reserve-mtb-trail-closest-citytown-pretoria.html>
 the opportunity to ride between kudu, giraffe, zebra, and blesbok. Atop the 
Salvokop Hill, opposite, isFreedom Park <http://www.freedompark.co.za/>, 
containing a series of memorial sites constructed in a brutalist architectural 
style by the late Jeremy Rose and others. The structures were built in response 
to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and are linked by themes of freedom 
and human rights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d5e2bc44d40a9daa4febc27a93aabbd344dd907%2F0_0_5419_3252%2F5419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20alternative%20city%20guide%20to%20Pretoria%2C%20South%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Falternative-city-guide-pretoria-south-africa-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d5e2bc44d40a9daa4febc27a93aabbd344dd907%2F0_0_5419_3252%2F5419.jpg>
 Voortrekker Monument. Photograph: Getty Images 
Twelve miles north of Pretoria is a dedicated mountain bike park, Buffelsdrift 
MTB <http://buffelsdriftmtb.co.za/>, inside a nature reserve with routes 
ranging from 7km to 40km through bush veld. All have wonderful panoramic views 
and the chance to view zebra, kudu and impala among other wildlife. Daily entry 
is R40 (about £2).

The Nirox Sculpture Park, Cradle of Humankind 
<http://www.southafrica.net/za/en/articles/entry/article-nirox-sculpture-park> 
– which features my sculpture, Layers of Being, a giant kneeling figure made of 
rammed earth – is a network of limestone caves in which have been found several 
fossils of plants, animals and hominids. It is in a very beautiful setting, an 
hour’s drive to the south-west of the city. Visitors can admire a great 
diversity of sculptures and installations as they stroll through hills and 
grassy valleys on beautifully kept pathways meandering between streams and 
dams. There is ample room between permanent artworks by the likes ofRichard Long
 <http://www.richardlong.org/>, Willem Boshoff <http://www.willemboshoff.com/>, 
Caroline Bittermann <http://www.caro-bittermann.eu/> and Valerio Berruti 
<http://www.valerioberruti.com/?lang=en> that give the viewer opportunity to 
cleanse their palate before the next visual experience.

I sometimes go for an early morning walk at the Mongena game lodge 
<http://www.mongena.co.za/> (pictured below) in Dinokeng game reserve 
<http://www.dinokengreserve.co.za/>, 30 minutes’ drive to the north of 
Pretoria. The big five can be seen here, as well as a great number of bird 
species. Personally, I am quite content with just the aromatic flora and the 
beautiful trees – tambotie, combretums, and my favourite: thewitgat (in 
Afrikaans),mohlôpi (in Sotho), or boscia albitrunca. The animals are a bonus.

Readers’ tips and Instagram shots
 A view at Mongena game lodge in Dinokeng reserve. 
Pretoria National Botanical Gardens <http://www.sanbi.org/gardens/pretoria> 
Just three miles from the centre to the east, these gardens make a lovely day 
out. There are restaurants and picnic areas. A paved nature trail gives access 
to the fascinating natural vegetation on the ridge, which boasts a diversity of 
indigenous fauna and flora. Fifty hectares of the total area is devoted to 
developed garden, using almost exclusively South African plants. Nearly all of 
the flowering plant species can be seen, including 50% of the country’s tree 
species, making the gardens a botanical tapestry. There are savanna and forest 
biomes for visitors to spend time in. Different themed gardens are continuously 
being developed. And adult admission is just R26 (£1.20).
ID3294767

Eastwoods Tavern, near Loftus Versveld 
<http://www.dining-out.co.za/md/Eastwoods-Tavern-Arcadia/2820>
Outside seating, great grills, also meat to buy to braai (BBQ) yourself later. 
I recommend the massive T-bone steak with chunky chips (ask them to wrap up the 
bones for your dog), or their chickensosaties (skewers).
ID3294767

News Cafe, Hatfield <http://www.newscafe.co.za/>
Great cafe for breakfast, lunch, coffee and cake. Their lemon meringue pie is 
to die for!
ID3294767
 