
Robert Frank: The Americans
 Strange and surprising … Frank’s The Americans. Photograph: Steidl 
In 2009, I went to see the retrospective of the US photographer Robert Frank  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/nov/07/robert-frank-americans-photography-influence-shadows>
at the National Gallery in Washington, DC. It was the first time I had seen his 
series of photographs The Americans, and I was struck by the poignant images of 
American landscapes and faces. The work felt very familiar but also strange and 
surprising: he was turning a mirror on the everyday and uncovering details we’d 
never noticed. There is theatrical energy in those photographs, as if they were 
film stills – some deeper narrative lurking behind each picture. The National 
had been holed up for more than a year at that point, recording our fifth album,
High Violet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/06/national-high-violet-cd-review>; 
seeing The Americans was important for me as a reference to the songs we were 
writing. I’d been listening to Matt Berninger’s new lyrics for months and 
somehow seeing Frank’s work brought the album more into focus. I asked Matt the 
next day if he’d been thinking about those pictures at all in his writing, but 
like me, he’d never seen them before.


Charles Olson: Maximus to Gloucester 
<http://www.zinzin.com/observations/2012/maximus-to-gloucester-letter-27-withheld-by-charles-olson/>

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgAYxpSjkyAg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgAYxpSjkyAg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgAYxpSjkyAg&media=>
The poet Charles Olson <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/176950> was the 
last president of Black Mountain College, the influentialexperimental 
art-college <http://www.theartstory.org/school-black-mountain-college.htm> in 
North Carolina that ran from 1933-57. His peers includedJohn Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-cage>, Merce Cunningham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mercecunningham>, Buckminster Fuller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/jul/04/buckminster-fuller-architecture-design>
, and Franz Kline, to name just a few. By all accounts Olson was a bear of man, 
6ft 8in tall withbushy eyebrows 
<http://www.goodreads.com/photo/author/10332.Charles_Olson>. His lectures were 
said to run all through the night. Last year I was on my own little pilgrimage 
to visit Black Mountain, the inspiration behind ourBlack Mountain Songs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g5Mrsblu8Iw> for the Brooklyn Youth Chorus, 
and I met the now 90-year old man who had bought the college from Olson in the 
early 50s. (The site has since been home to a Baptist boys’ summer camp,Camp 
Rockmont <http://www.rockmont.com/>.) He described stumbling upon this little 
creative refuge in the mountains, where the student-run classes would be 
considered progressive even today, but were almost unimaginable in the early 
50s in the American south. I spoke with him on the back porch of the old dining 
hall, which overlooks a stream that runs down through a rhododendron-covered 
ravine to the quietly still Lake Eden. The whole valley is a deep, verdant 
green, nestled into stunning smoky mountains on all sides.

Even though the college is long gone, the place made me nostalgic. I’d spent 
my childhood in these same mountains with my brother, Aaron. We learned to play 
guitar at a nearby boys’ camp where we spent several summers. Despite the fact 
that virtually every important figure of the 20th-century US avant-garde passed 
through Black Mountain (includingRobert Rauschenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/feb/09/robert-rauschenberg-love-loss-jammers>
,Cy Twombly <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/cy-twombly>, Philip Guston
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2004/jan/11/art>, Willem de Kooning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/nov/21/willem-dekooning-mylifeinart-art>
, Ruth Asawa,Robert Creeley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/apr/05/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
), after visiting the place I felt sure that what made it so exceptional, and 
what defined the place even more than its extraordinary inhabitants, was the 
landscape itself. Those mountains, the water and the air. It’s an idea that 
comes up again and again for artists in the US. The geography that inspired 
Olson the most, outside of Black Mountain, was his home town of Gloucester, 
Massachusetts. In Olson’s poem Maximus to Gloucester – which I set to music in 
our Black Mountain Songs – he writes:

... An American
is a complex of occasions,
themselves a geometry
of spatial nature.
I have this sense,
that I am one
with my skin
Plus this—plus this:
that forever the geography
which leans in
on me I compel
backwards I compel Gloucester
to yield, to
change
Polis
is this

Tim Hecker’s An Imaginary Country and John Cage’s Imaginary Landscape 
<http://johncage.org/pp/John-Cage-Work-Detail.cfm?work_ID=104>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHuXxwXWPz2Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHuXxwXWPz2Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHuXxwXWPz2Y&media=>
The title of Tim Hecker’s fifth album references John Cage’s series of 
compositions from 1939, Imaginary Landscape 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imaginary_Landscape>. Cage’s pieces were inspired 
by technology and his vision of the future, and called for percussion 
instruments as well as phonographs and amplifiers; his 1939 work is often cited 
as one of the first examples of the electro-acoustic music (he called for 
various recordings to be played during the piece, including his own, 
foreshadowing sampling long before it became common practice). Tim Hecker’s 
album is a beautiful ambient-electronic record which more directly references 
the North American landscape (Hecker is a Canadian living in Los Angeles). I 
will sometimes listen to the album while working on my own music. I would 
describe it as orchestral, even though there are no orchestras: the scope and 
colour of his writing is as rich as any large-scale composition. Cage and 
Hecker share a knack for challenging preconceptions of composition and of what 
music can be. Both feature inBlack Mountain Songs 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=17774>, for which Hecker 
and I collaborated on setting a text byMC Richards, 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M._C._Richards> another important teacher at 
Black Mountain. John Cage’s music, meanwhile, begins the show, and his words 
are heard (either sung or spoken) throughout.

Round Up: Sufjan Stevens
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF35l_SROX7I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF35l_SROX7I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF35l_SROX7I&media=>
A few years ago, my friend Sufjan shared with me some film footage he’d been 
working on about a rodeo in Pendleton, Oregon. The slow-moving images of bull- 
and bronco-riding, along with stunning portraits of the cowboys, would become 
the basis of an hour-long film and score called Round Up, which has its UK 
premiere at Mountains and Waves on 9 May 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=17769>. Sufjan is one of 
the greatest musicians of our generation, and the music he lets out into the 
world is but a tiny fraction of the huge body of work he is constantly making. 
He is also a beautiful storyteller, who haslong been interested in the American 
landscape, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=426jqFZa99Y> and the narrative that 
is told in different places through history and folklore. Round Up is a 
beautiful cinematic documentation of the American rodeo tradition, and is also 
in some ways a visual companion to the intensely personal songs of Sufjan’s new 
album,Carrie and Lowell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dsGODTySH0E&list=PL67VKSNJdY_XBvoFECHFKyesxnDhTVM8N>
. Its score is written for Yarn/Wire, an amazing two-piano, double-percussion 
quartet from Brooklyn.

Jack Kerouac: Big Sur

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fthe-national-bryce-dessner-american-landscape-mountains-and-waves-barbican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430916171308%2Ff3f9850d-a114-4bf9-ace6-424b93d00dc4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20National's%20Bryce%20Dessner%20on%20the%20American%20landscapes%20that%20inspire%20him&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fthe-national-bryce-dessner-american-landscape-mountains-and-waves-barbican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20National%27s%20Bryce%20Dessner%20on%20the%20American%20landscapes%20that%20inspire%20him&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F07%2Fthe-national-bryce-dessner-american-landscape-mountains-and-waves-barbican%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F6%2F1430916171308%2Ff3f9850d-a114-4bf9-ace6-424b93d00dc4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 California State Route 1 winds along the Big Sur coastline. Photograph: Alamy 
Kerouac’s <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac> Big Sur was written 
a few years after On the Road, as he was losing his mind and dying from 
alcoholism. The book reads like a memoir and tells the story of his idyllic but 
troubled visit to a friend’s cabin in Big Sur, the extraordinarily beautiful 
enclave on the California coast that has been home to many artists (Henry Miller
 
<http://store.henrymiller.org/index.php?main_page=product_info&cPath=65&products_id=183%22>
 famously lived out his last years there). The writing veers in and out of 
simple daily observations of his surroundings and alcohol-induced 
hallucinations and delirium. A contemporary of Olson’s, Kerouac is one of the 
best-known artists of a visionary generation. The Black Mountain poets and the 
Beats shared an innovative approach to language and form. I have regularly 
sought inspiration from this period of American literature: several years ago 
when I was composing my first orchestral piece, I happened to be reading 
Kerouac’s novel. His language and the sweeping narrative of the book felt 
orchestral to me (he even references Stravinsky and Beethoven). Big Sur 
inspired me to writeSt Carolyn by the Sea 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=54P9qkfYcWY> for orchestra and two electric 
guitars – the title is an image taken from the book.

John Luther Adams: Become Ocean <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dGva1NVWRXk>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYc-ocuXw8Ls&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYc-ocuXw8Ls>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYc-ocuXw8Ls&media=>
John Luther Adams’s Become Ocean exists in a long tradition of music inspired 
by water and the ocean. From Handel’s Water Music to Debussy’s La Mer to 
Berio’s Wasserklavier, composers have sought inspiration for their music from 
the sea. Become Ocean,which won a Pulitzer prize for music in 2014, 
<http://www.pulitzer.org/citation/2014-Music> is significant for the way it 
transforms the sound of the orchestra into something completely oceanic. While 
most of Adams’s compositions use wide sonic palettes and take inspiration from 
nature, Become Ocean takes this even further, as the orchestra morphs into a 
heaving wall of sound that is analogous to the power of the ocean.

Around the time of its premiere with the Seattle Symphony, Richard Parry 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Reed_Parry> and I had begun work on 
another piece of sea-inspired music,Wave Movements 
<http://www.brittensinfonia.com/concerts/events/view/mountains-and-waves-wave-movements>
, for string orchestra and percussion. The music we composed is timed to wave 
patterns in the ocean and accompanies slow-moving film of the sea by the 
Japanese photographer Hiroshi Sugimoto (hisSeascape 
<http://tripoligallery.vaesite.net/__data/3b239672912be612b8e09b9def6f2d08.jpg> 
photographs are another great example of work inspired by the sea). Wave 
Movements has its world premiere on10 May with Clark Rundell and Britten 
Sinfonia at the Barbican 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?id=17777>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_nwesLVd4Wc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_nwesLVd4Wc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_nwesLVd4Wc&media=>
• The Mountains and Waves concert series is 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/series.asp?id=1479> at the Barbican on 9 and 
10 May 2015. <http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/series.asp?id=1479>
 