
The Guardian Sustainable Business Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gsb-awards> launch today for 
2013. From today, nominations are invited from all UK businesses who can 
demonstrate an innovative approach to addressing sustainability issues and are 
at the forefront of instigating change in their sector.

Now in its third year, these are the only national newspaper awards that focus 
on recognising the innovation and impact in communicating sustainability, 
engaging with employees to make sustainability relevant for them and the wider 
society. The awards also champion an organisation's commitment to the 
fundamental issues relating to sustainability - the environment, energy, 
recycling and the industrial supply chain - and, for the first time this year, 
they recognise the achievements of consultants.

John Sauven, executive director, Greenpeace, said: "Running a business that 
doesn't harm wildlife, injure or maim people and can still make a profit 
shouldn't be that difficult. But it does require businesses to look at more 
than short-term profit and loss accounts.

"Winners of the Guardian Sustainable Business Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gsb-awards> are challenging 
and changing the business model in the light of climate change and wider 
environmental stress. And recognition of their success is key.

"These awards are an important way of showing that even when the going gets 
tough, there are businesses out there that don't abandon their values."

Jo Confino, executive editor at the Guardian and chair of the Guardian 
Sustainable Business, said: "The Guardian Sustainable Business Awards are a 
fantastic opportunity for businesses - big or small - to show how they are 
transitioning to more sustainable models. For the 2013 awards, we want to see 
entries from organisations that demonstrate innovation and impact, going beyond 
what is standard practice to showing the way business of the future should be 
done."

Past winners of the awards have included leisurewear brand Puma who last year 
won the biodiversity category and the overall prize for their Environmental 
Profit & Loss Account initiative. The Co-operative Group won the communicating 
sustainability category for their Join The Revolution campaign and sustainable 
carpet tile manufacturer Interface for their Go Beyond project.

All winners and shortlisted entries will be published on the Guardian 
Sustainable Business network in the Best Practice Exchange as a resource of 
leading practice in business sustainability. They will also be collated in the 
Guardian Sustainable Business ebook â€“ Inspiring Progress in Sustainable 
Business - which will be a collection of cutting edge initiatives from leaders 
in corporate sustainability. The ebook is available to members of the network 
as well as all entrants of the awards.

The categories for 2013 awards are:

Communicating sustainability (sponsored by Getty Images)
This is an award for consumer facing businesses. Highlighting cross-platform 
campaigns that have made an impact, campaigns that have taken sustainability to 
the masses, secured strong response and made a big difference.

Engaging employees
This award is for projects that seek to embed sustainable thinking into 
company culture and recognises initiatives that have demonstrably enabled the 
people who don't have 'sustainability' in their job title to buy-in and act.

Society
This award will go to a business that delivers products and services in ways 
that take full account of their responsibility to the communities they touch.

Work
Fostering health, happiness and a positive working environment is part of 
being a responsible business. This award will go to an organisation that goes 
beyond standard benefits to support employees and ensure their health and 
happiness.

Biodiversity
In the long-term there is a clear link between protecting biodiversity and 
business success. This award is for business initiatives that take the long 
view on ecosystem services.

Supply chain
This award is for initiatives that seek to embed a respect for human, economic 
and environmental rights across a business or product's supply chain.

Carbon
Reducing carbon intensity is vital and this award is for corporate initiatives 
that take a holistic approach to measuring, managing and reducing scope 1, 2 
and 3 emissions.

Collaboration
This award will got to a project that breaks down traditional barriers and 
sees several partners working together towards a goal that delivers truly 
sustainable outcomes.

Waste and recycling
Shifting how business thinks about waste is vital. This award is for projects 
or products that are at the leading-edge of approaches to waste.

Water
An award for pioneering projects that demonstrate a dedicated approach to 
water stewardship and holistic management of corporate water risk.

Energy
Projects that lead the way in corporate energy management, going beyond 
standard practice to radically reduce consumption and stimulate energy 
independence.

Built environment (sponsored by AECOM)
This award is for innovative projects that adopt a sensitive approach to the 
impact buildings have on people and the environment.

Consultancy of the year
Judges will reward a consultancy that has delivered multiple outstanding 
projects that have enabled clients to drive innovation and impact in their 
sustainability initiatives.

Sustainable business leader of the year (sponsored by URS)
An award voted for by Guardian Sustainable Business readers to reward a 
business leader who has shown dedication and bravery in progressing the 
sustainable business agenda, both within their own organisation and in the 
sector as a whole.

The deadline for entries is Friday 8 February 2013. To enter the Guardian 
Sustainable Business Awards visit:theguardian.com/gsbawards <>

-ends-

Notes to editors:

The principal partner for the Guardian Sustainable Business Awards is URS. To 
find out about them visit:www.ursglobal.com <>. 

About the Guardian Sustainable Business network
The Guardian Sustainable Business Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sustainable-business> is a community-focused 
site, that brings together leading-edge comment, analysis and insight on the 
role business plays in society. It collates expert opinion, features blogs from 
leading sustainability experts and showcases best practice in corporate 
sustainability.

Further information:

For those wanting enter and want to know more, visit the Guardian Sustainable 
Business Awards FAQs:http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/awards-faqs
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/awards-faqs> 
For journalists with an enquiry contact: Christine Crowther, Guardian News & 
Media press office 020 3353 2219

 