
We don't yet know how Tony Blair will spend his last day in office, but Alison 
Jackson's scenario would be the most rewarding. 'He'll be ripping out all the 
hard drives from the Downing Street computers and smashing them up with 
Alastair in the garden.' Because Jackson is a fantasist who makes things 
happen, this act - set to the Stranglers' 'No More Heroes' - will be the 
closing sequence to Blaired Vision, her forthcoming Channel 4 film about a 
decade of malfeasance at Number 10. Her film lasts under an hour, but could 
have been two. 'Huge amounts we had to leave out,' Jackson says over black 
coffee at the Charlotte Street Hotel, her final edit just complete. 'So much 
extraordinary footage, so much scandal.'

Her final choice is cynical and compelling, and includes several items one 
doesn't regularly see on terrestrial television: the Blairs having sex, the 
Queen calling her Prime Minister 'a creep', ministers running from the law on 
Clapham Common, Cherie receiving an enema. Towards the end we see Blair 
rehearsing his handover speech in front of a mirror. 'I may have been wrong,' 
he says. 'Speed it up. I-may-have-been-wrong, Imayhavebeenwrong.'

Jackson has made one previous film on Blair, reinventing his days as a 
proto-rockstar. But her new work is more elaborate, combining genuine news 
footage, a selection of talking heads (Boris Johnson, Greg Dyke, Lauren Booth) 
and her own fantasy recreations in grainy film and low light. With the aid of a 
casting director she has found a top-notch Queen and John Prescott, a passable 
Alastair Campbell ('He's got the bullying right'), a pliable Cherie Blair (with 
what Campbell refers to in the film as her 'clown-mouth'), but her Gordon Brown 
is a disaster. 'I've been looking for a good Gordon for 10 years,' she sighs, 
'but it's almost impossible.'

Her film is carried by the actor John Brolly, with whom she's been working for 
six years. When she began she remembers six decent Blair impersonators, one of 
whom was a porn star, and she tried them out from all directions. She saw 
something in Brolly the others lacked, but it's still quite a process: 'If I 
shoot him in the wrong way he looks nothing like Blair. He needs a wig and a 
prosthetic nose and eye pads, and he has to do everything at a particular angle 
with the right light.'

She claims that her Robin Cook is equally impressive at a distance, but he 
suffered at the hands of good taste. 'We thought about the scandal with his 
secretary, and we shot it and it was very rude as he gave her dictation, but in 
the end we decided that as he was dead it was not appropriate.'

The natural successor to Spitting Image, Jackson hit upon the idea of using 
lookalikes for political ends while a mature photography student at the Royal 
College of Art in the late 1990s. Her images of Princess Diana and Dodi 
al-Fayed gloating over their mixed-race child caused useful outrage, but it 
took a few years for Jane Root at BBC2 and Schweppes to realise her potential. 
For Jackson had a revealing take on celebrity: at once entranced and repulsed 
by it, she set out to make real what took place only in our fearful 
imaginations: a preening Beckham admiring his tattoos, a slutty Camilla 
flashing her knickers, the Queen using a cash machine, Sven in Union Jack 
underpants. She calls it 'depicting our suspicions'.

Much of it is convincing, but there are hints that the impact of her work is 
wearing thin. Confoundingly, her subjects increasingly play out their own 
private situations in public, not least Jackson's latest photographic subjects, 
Kate Moss and Paris Hilton. 'The real archive material,' she says, 'often looks 
like it's fake.' On Wikipedia, the frequently generous online database, her 
entry reads as if it has been written by someone she has personally humiliated: 
'Jackson has sought to establish a reputation in the USA and recently depicted 
President Bush and Tony Blair lookalikes in a series of unflattering scenes, 
but this has not been reported to provide a vehicle to revitalise what many now 
perceive to be a fast fading career.'

On the contrary, business is booming. Jackson is developing a new series for 
American television, and is finishing a book for Taschen with some 300 magical 
images. Pressed about the most outrageous, the fantasist is cagey. 'Tom 
Cruise,' she says finally. 'And Scientology. And his baby.'

Â· Blaired Vision is on C4 on 26 June
 