
The BBC is like the Greeks’ Hydra: vast and many headed. The same organisation 
that made Sherlock frittered away £100m on a failed IT initiative; it runs five 
orchestras, the Today programme and the World Service; it inexplicably buys – 
and then sells for a much smaller sum – the Lonely Planet guides. While Kenneth 
Clark was pacing the streets of Italian hill towns, filming Civilisation for 
BBC2, Jimmy Savile was presenting Top of the Pops on BBC1, and Stuart Hall was 
informing, entertaining and abusing in the north of England. Whatever qualities 
it has, it often seems to embody the opposite, too. For most of us, there are 
parts of theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> we couldn’t live 
without, much of it that we enjoy, vast acreages that we take for granted, and 
characteristics that we find irritating, infuriating – or even loathsome.

Some of the most outspoken critiques of the BBC come from within it. One cold 
sunny morning I visited Jeremy Paxman in his flat in west London. As he padded 
around filling the cafetière, he railed against the BBC’s “closed corporate 
culture”. He said: “It is smug. I love the BBC in many ways, but at the same 
time it has made me loathe aspects of it, and that’s a very odd state of 
affairs. When I see people being given £1m merely for walking out of the door, 
when I see £100m being blown on that DMI [digital media initiative] thing, a 
stupid technical initiative like that, I start wondering: how much longer are 
we going to test the public’s patience?”

On another occasion a prominent broadcaster railed passionately to me against 
the “corruption” of BBC management, who had “helped themselves” (he was 
referring to the severance payments made to executives such as former deputy 
director general Mark Byford’s payoff of £949,000). “The BBC’s greatest enemy,” 
he said, “is itself. They are handing people ammunition.”

It has been observed that the closer one gets to the centre of the citadel of 
the BBC the easier it is to dislike aspects of it. According to Lord Burns, the 
chairman of Channel 4: “I love the BBC. My life without it would be” – he 
pauses, and says with great emphasis – “terrible. But it is not an organisation 
that does very much to help itself: there is a strange situation where people 
love what the BBC does but the closer they get to the BBC the less attractive a 
place it seems.”

Paxman, like many, also believes that the BBC is too big. “There’s a pile of 
stuff on the BBC I can’t stand. My idea of hell is going down in one of the 
lifts in that ghastly new building [New Broadcasting House] in a lift which has 
Radio 1Xtra plumbed into it. I don’t quite understand why the BBC does Radio 
1Xtra, I don’t really understand why it does Radio 1. Clearly, you can meet 
those needs commercially … the BBC has got an unfortunate history of never 
seeing an area of broadcasting, or increasingly a web presence, without feeling 
the need to get into it itself.”

He went on: “There’s no argument that the BBC distorts the marketplace in 
online [news]. Hugely distorts the marketplace. And one understands of course 
that the Mail and the Murdoch empire dislike a commercial rival which they are 
obliged to compete with on unfair terms. And I don’t think that has been really 
sufficiently grasped at a senior level. It just happened, in the same way as 
has the proliferation of extra television channels, the proliferation of extra 
radio channels – and, going further back, the move into local radio. These 
things just happened because the BBC is institutionally unable to countenance 
something without wanting to have it for itself … I don’t tar Tony [Hall] with 
this because he hasn’t been there long enough, but the great smell that comes 
off those pay-off scandals – and I think they are scandals – is of an 
organisation which became complacent, preoccupied with the conditions of its 
senior staff, at the expense of a strategic vision.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397571264856%2Ff4496742-eb0d-49cb-b9ea-23a7a716a0c6-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20BBC%3A%20there%20to%20inform%2C%20educate%2C%20provoke%20and%20enrage%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20BBC%3A%20there%20to%20inform%2C%20educate%2C%20provoke%20and%20enrage%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397571264856%2Ff4496742-eb0d-49cb-b9ea-23a7a716a0c6-1020x612.jpeg>
 Jeremy Paxman: believes the BBC has got too big. Photograph: Phil Fisk/BBC 
These are strong words from a star BBC presenter; though you might say that 
one of the BBC’s strengths is that it tends to tolerate disobliging views from 
at least its starriest staff, and that a healthy culture of self-analysis – 
from John Humphrys deposing his own boss, the then director general George 
Entwistle, on the Today programme, to the gentle self-satire of the comedy 
drama W1A – is a sign of an evolved and mature institution. (Although 
self-satire might also be seen as a rather clever, very British way of defusing 
real criticism.)

Why do passions run so high?

Outside the BBC, however, lie more consistent and committed opponents of the 
corporation, many of whom husband their hatred of the BBC with the kind of 
single-minded tenacity that makes Paxman’s outburst of frustration seem 
mild-mannered. What makes passions against the BBC run so high? What fuels a 
loathing that seems for some to become almost a monomania?

One of the most prominent critics of the BBC is the Daily Mail, which rages 
almost daily at the corporation, while simultaneously running avalanches of 
articles devoted to the clothing, diets and love affairs of the stars employed 
by it. Paul Dacre, the paper’s editor, politely declined to be interviewed but 
sent instead a copy of his 2007 Cudlipp lecture, which, he said, still 
accurately represents his views on the BBC.

It makes for arresting reading. He begins with the traditional Daily Mail 
claim that the BBC is too big (the Mail has pretty consistently since the 1920s 
set itself against the monopolistic nature of corporation, on principle and for 
reasons of commercial anxiety). From there, he quickly moves on to argue that 
the corporation exerts a kind of “cultural Marxism”. This, he says, attempts to 
undermine “the values of conservatism, with a small ‘c’, which, I would argue, 
just happen to be the values held by millions of Britons”. He picks out for 
special mention what he sees as the BBC’s pig-headedly liberal stance on 
immigration and Europe.

The corporation, he says, though it “glories in being open-minded, is, in 
fact, a closed thought system operating a kind of Orwellian Newspeak … this, I 
would argue, is perverting political discourse and disenfranchising countless 
millions who don’t subscribe to the BBC’s world view.” Thus, he argues, the BBC 
is responsible for “the current apathy over politics”. Even the 
greenish-centrist stance projected at the time of the lecture by David Cameron 
is, argues Dacre, a result of a kind of emasculation wrought by the BBC – a 
“blood sacrifice to the BBC God”.

The words “world view” are key. The Daily Mail’s own world view (and, to be 
fair, that of all newspapers, to a greater or lesser extent) is a fabrication, 
a jigsawing-together of structural templates, stock narratives and character 
types. If one were looking for the most successful and internally consistent 
“closed thought system” in the British media landscape, one would have to turn 
to the Mail.
 Paul Dacre: accuses the BBC of 'cultural Marxism'. Photograph: Suzanne 
Plunkett/Reuters 
Dacre also claims in the lecture that he would “die in a ditch defending the 
BBC as a great civilising force” and would “pay the licence fee just for Radio 
4”. For the fact is that few principled BBC critics curse the corporation 
entirely out of existence. (Direct commercial rivals may be another thing: Sir 
Christopher Bland, former chairman of the BBC and of BT, is not alone in 
believing that Rupert Murdoch “would be the happiest man in the world if the 
BBC were abolished, or even better, if he were allowed to buy it”. Quentin 
Letts, the Daily Mail columnist, whose articles have occasionally boiled over 
with fury about the BBC, has, paradoxically, applied to be its director 
general, twice; for he loves what the BBC in his view ought to be.

Was he serious? Well yes, up to a point. “I was so angry,” he told me. “I saw 
all these bloody careerist lefties prospering at the Beeb, and I thought, ‘Why 
should they have it? I mean some of those people are as nuttily left-wing as I 
am nuttily right-wing, and yet they all get bloody top executive jobs, and not 
a sniff of a rightie.” He smiled. There was something immensely disarming about 
his candour. “I knew I didn’t have a chance but I thought well I’ll try and 
make the point … complete failure!”

Margaret Thatcher, of course, looms large in the story of the BBC, as the 
avenging fury of the private sector, under whose premiership the door was 
opened to Murdoch’s Sky, and in whose later, hawkish cabinets were those who 
would have seen the BBC privatised. She herself, according to her biographer 
Charles Moore, the former editor of the Telegraph, lacked the appetite to raze 
it. She disapproved of the licence fee in particular as a regressive tax, and 
the BBC in general as, in Moore’s words, “left-wing, monopolistic, anti-her”. 
She listened to the Today programme; Denis paced the ramparts to tell her how 
awful the rest of the BBC was. But as for destroying the BBC, Moore said: “I 
think if you look at it politically it just probably wasn’t worth the effort. 
It was useful politically to keep on attacking it, to take the wind out of its 
sails and make it try to examine itself and get a bit frightened.”

I met Moore in a formal members’ club in the City, all wood-panelling and 
discreetly attentive service. I had asked him to tell me about his time as a 
licence fee “martyr”. Softly and precisely spoken, he described his antipathy 
towards the licence fee, comparing it to “the tithes that the Church of England 
used to live off. Very much the same argument was advanced for them, which is 
that we are doing God’s work – which is basically what the BBC says; it has 
broadly the same role in society. We’re doing God’s work, and so you’ve got to 
pay for it. And as with the licence fee so with the tithes. They (a) bore 
heavily on the people financially, and (b) they were being made to pay for 
beliefs that they didn’t necessarily share. So they were keeping Archdeacon 
Grantly in a style to which he was accustomed, even if they were dissenters or 
atheists.”

Moore reached the end of his tether, he said, in 2008 when Jonathan Ross and 
Russell Brand left messages on actor Andrew Sachs’s answering machine, joking 
that Brand had, in Ross’s words “fucked your granddaughter”. “I thought that 
this was an absolutely classic example of the sort of arrogance of power that 
organisations like the BBC get, where they think they can do what the hell they 
like. It seemed to me to be the BBC’s credit crunch, the equivalent of the 
Royal Bank of Scotland, and for quite a similar reason: hubris. And I thought 
it was disgusting, a remarkably disgusting thing to do by Ross and Brand 
personally, but in a way even more disgusting that the BBC thought they should 
run it.” Moore particularly disliked that the whole thing was cloaked in 
humour. “How did a public service organisation think that its highest paid 
person should be a sort of foul-mouthed comedian, and how could they think that 
they should pay him so much?” (Ross’s contract was reportedly worth £6m). Moore 
decided not to pay his licence fee until both had left the BBC; eventually he 
made a court appearance. “I was hoping for more publicity on the day, but then 
Gordon Brown called the election.” He laughed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397572244300%2F79e0595a-8ad8-4b64-bdc6-a302dd5c0842-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20BBC%3A%20there%20to%20inform%2C%20educate%2C%20provoke%20and%20enrage%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20BBC%3A%20there%20to%20inform%2C%20educate%2C%20provoke%20and%20enrage%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397572244300%2F79e0595a-8ad8-4b64-bdc6-a302dd5c0842-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Russell Brand-Jonathan Ross scandal was the result of BBC 'hubris', claims 
Charles Moore. Photograph: Enterprise News and Pictures/BBC 
I thought about Moore’s remarks about Thatcher’s tactical abrading of the BBC 
when I met Rob Wilson, the Conservative MP for Reading East, who, in his 
single-minded pursuit of the organisation, has made a modest name for himself. 
We met in the canteen at Portcullis House, he – thickset and square-jawed – 
making a curiously Dickensian-looking couple with his tall, lanky, earnest 
researcher, who wore dark-rimmed hipster spectacles and took notes of our 
conversation. Between October 2012 and March 2014 the BBC Trust received 33 
letters or emails from Wilson; the DG received 34 – or so I discovered by 
putting in my own freedom of information request. (“God knows what the cost of 
it is; and each one provides a kind of rent-a-quote for the Times or the Sun or 
whatever,” said the BBC’s chair, Lord Patten, of the correspondence. “It’s 
quite astonishing.”) I wondered privately what Wilson’s constituents made of 
it. “They pretty much all deal with what I would regard as significant issues 
in the public interest,” he said. Was the BBC a route to a certain kind of 
fame? “It’s certainly not about self-promotion, because there are lots of ways 
you can do that as an MP, and I wouldn’t say the BBC is necessarily the easiest 
way to do that. But I mean if you’ve got strong opinions, why shouldn’t you 
write to the BBC Trust?” Wilson has become the “go-to” MP for journalists 
seeking a swift anti-BBC quote – though he says he turns down 50% of requests 
for interviews.

The BBC has enormous culture problems, argued Wilson. “You could draw 
comparisons with the NHS, because the NHS has similar problems. Management 
don’t like criticism, staff don’t feel they can speak, change is very difficult 
to move through the organisation … the BBC has to make a decision about what it 
wants to be in the future, and with charter renewal coming up this is a good 
opportunity to do so. But the idea that it can just go on and on and on growing 
and stuffing people’s wallets full of money at senior level is just not on. It 
just can’t continue.” Wilson’s analogy with the NHS began to trouble me: I 
wondered whether there was a tactic at work: not to demand anything so radical 
as the eradication of either the health service or of the BBC, but to undermine 
them so that public trust might be gradually blunted. Towards the end of our 
interview, Ed Vaizey, the culture minister, appeared. He asked me jovially: 
“What are you doing talking to this right-wing loony?”

'Pride and frustration'

David Elstein, a veteran broadcaster who began his career at the BBC and now, 
in his late 60s, is a vocal critic of the licence fee, is a more complex 
figure. He believes the whole BBC structure is perverse; and its domination of 
news coverage simply bad for democracy. The BBC principle of universality – 
that it provides something for everyone, and everyone pays the same – is a 
false goal, he thinks, a “fraudulent piece of rhetoric” that operates simply in 
order to justify the licence fee. A smaller licence fee to fund a central 
corpus of freely available public-service broadcasting would be fairer, he 
believes, with subscription funding the rest and acting as an incentive to make 
better programmes – more like the Netflix remake of House of Cards, or indeed 
the BBC’s own The Fall, and less like Sherlock, which he regards as “hugely 
overpraised: juvenile and dismissive of the audience”.

The BBC, he said, caused him to feel a mixture of “pride and frustration”. 
Pride because it is a bastion of Britishness at its best. Frustration that, 
despite its huge level of funding, it falls short of his expectations. “I think 
the BBC is a fantastic institution, right up there with, you know, the 
monarchy, parliament; it’s less than 100 years old and we have a collective 
identification with it. But on the other hand I feel frustration that it 
doesn’t do better with such a powerful position. It does a lot of mediocre 
programming. Not bad programming, just mediocre programming.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397572423906%2Fc5228cc5-0b6d-4d96-8621-8239d664da04-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20BBC%3A%20there%20to%20inform%2C%20educate%2C%20provoke%20and%20enrage%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20BBC%3A%20there%20to%20inform%2C%20educate%2C%20provoke%20and%20enrage%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397572423906%2Fc5228cc5-0b6d-4d96-8621-8239d664da04-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sherlock: 'hugely overpraised', claims David Elstein. Photograph: BBC 
Elstein is nothing if not a formidable mind. His parents, both brought to 
Britain from Poland as orphans by the Rothschild Foundation, ran a ladies’ 
outfitter’s in Golders Green. A scholarship boy, he emerged from Cambridge 
University at 19 with a double first in history and, in 1964, went straight to 
the BBC as a trainee. He later worked on Panorama and the Money Programme, and 
moved to senior positions at Thames, LWT and later, Sky, as well as working in 
independent production. He also applied for the director generalship of the BBC 
in 1999, though he didn’t get a final-round interview. But most of his first 
year at the BBC was spent on attachment to the newly founded centre for 
cultural studies at Birmingham University, where sociologists Richard Hoggart 
and Stuart Hall were doing pioneering work. Hoggart had recently sat on the 
Pilkington Committee on the future of broadcasting, which had tightened 
regulation of commercial TV and paved the way for BBC2 and colour. This was a 
formative experience: Elstein wrote a paper on the effects of mass media and a 
mini-thesis on public-service broadcasting “which did not entirely please 
Richard”. Elstein found the Pilkington view “oppressively paternalistic”.

Elstein’s view that subscription should gradually take over from the licence 
fee was first aired in the 1980s. He is viewed in the industry by some as a 
prophet, by others as a broken record, harping on about his pet theories. There 
is perhaps something of a Cassandra about him. “People occasionally mock me and 
say: ‘David, it’s only been 30 years since you started this debate. How does it 
feel not to have succeeded so far?’ … there’s a whole parade of BBC executives, 
media academics and newspaper columnists who hold the licence fee as a kind of 
article of faith … it’s become almost more important than the BBC itself, or 
public service broadcasting itself, and I just feel mildly bewildered by it. 
It’s just a funding mechanism, it has no moral significance.” Politically, he 
describes himself as a “radical centrist”, and says that he has voted for 
everyone from the Communists to the Conservatives, via the SDP. According to 
Lord Burns: “I think that in the long term he is probably right about some 
things. David’s problem, though, is that the way he puts his arguments is not 
designed to build an alliance.” Another broadcasting veteran said: “He actually 
makes it quite difficult to agree with him: it doesn’t matter how far you go 
towards him, he will always move himself so that he’s at a more extreme 
position.”

Such heterodox thinking is as old as the BBC. Captain Peter P Eckersley was 
one of the most significant figures in the early history of British 
broadcasting. A cousin of Aldous Huxley, he had a chequered career that saw him 
resign from Reith’s morally unbending corporation in 1929 after it became clear 
he was having an affair with Dorothy Clark, the estranged wife of BBC conductor 
and programme organiser Edward Clark. After Dolly, whom he married, met Hitler 
through Unity Mitford, he became entangled with Oswald Mosley’s fascists, and 
was an enthusiastic pre-war tourist to Germany. By the time war broke out the 
couple had separated, she to work in the Reich’s English-language propaganda 
broadcasting,where she recruited William Joyce, the fascist known as Lord 
Haw-Haw; he, tarnished by his wife’s Nazism and his own dubious loyalties, to 
be turned down for war work.

In the years before the first world war young Peter was a schoolboy at Bedales 
(cold baths, wholesome food and adolescents “completely unaware of the world’s 
unreason”). He was also a wireless enthusiast: in 1906 he and a friend set up 
what they called Wavy Lodge in the school grounds – an old henhouse with 
benches for experiments to test the relative merits of different aerials. They 
would relay the results of cricket matches from distant grounds, using a mobile 
transmitter carried about on a soapbox fitted with pram wheels. A decade later, 
he was a wireless equipment officer in the Royal Flying Corps, where the 
possibilities of the thermionic valve – which “has the power to shrink the 
world to the compass of a living room” – were being explored. He was standing 
next to Major CE Prince, a Marconi engineer since 1907, when Prince became the 
first person to speak by radio to an aeroplane pilot in flight. (“Hello, Ferdy. 
If you can hear me now it will be the first time speech has ever been 
communicated to an aeroplane in flight. Dip if you are hearing me.”)
 Peter Eckersley with BBC staff including William Reith and Joseph Gainsford 
outside No 2 Savoy Hill about 1924. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
After the war Eckersley joined Prince at Marconi at Writtle, near Chelmsford, 
Essex. There he continued to research wireless equipment for aircraft. The 
young engineers also built a transmitter and made experimental broadcasts to 
amateur wireless enthusiasts, tech savvy young members of the Radio Society of 
Great Britain who had assembled their own equipment. They played gramophone 
records; Nellie Melba came and sang into a microphone one day, a sensational 
event, sponsored by the Daily Mail, heard as far afield as Paris. “More and 
more people became interested in the possession of an apparatus which, 
fantastically, picked music out of the air,” he recalled.

The Writtle engineers broadcast from a hut in a field for half an hour a week 
on Wednesday evenings. One evening Eckersley went out for a pub supper before 
coming in to broadcast. He took charge of the microphone suitably fortified. “A 
certain ebullience, which often overcomes me when I have an audience, prompted 
a less formal attitude towards the microphone than was customary,” he 
remembered. “I failed to play all the records … and I went on talking and 
talking.” Head office was “shocked by my frivolity” but 50 or more postcards of 
admiration from listeners came in. Another step in the history of broadcasting: 
it could be funny, it could be made delightful by a clever man larking about; 
it could be a carrier of wit and humour. “It was all rather fun. Doubtless at 
times I was horrible facetious, but I did try to be friendly and talk with, 
rather than at, my listeners.”

'Pompously self-conscious'

Eckersley joined the BBC in 1923, its chief and only engineer. His first job 
was to build a London transmitter: he chose his spot by climbing to the roof of 
Marconi House on Kingsway, surveying the skyline, and then setting off to find 
the chimney of a distant electricity generating station in Marylebone. Six and 
a half years later, he had a team of almost 400. But his views were out of 
joint with Reithian ideology. The idea of the BBC as a great public 
institution, its values enshrined as national virtues, was regarded as bunkum 
by Eckersley: “Commercial broadcasting would undoubtedly have been instituted 
in Britain” had it not been for a shortage of wavelength, with space reserved 
for military use and a fear of the “chaos of the ether”, numerous stations 
interfering with each other, that prevailed in the US. The early ruling to 
avoid advertising “was only made to save trouble … if the number of listeners 
had been small, and the funds to run the service therefore inadequate, the 
[BBC] would no doubt have forgotten the sociological issue and saved itself a 
lot of money by getting advertisers to put on programmes … I have often thought 
that if there had been a world shortage of celluloid, as there is a shortage of 
wireless channels, we might even now be suffering the soporific of a 
nationalised cinema.”

He wrote of his old employer in terms that might have its current critics 
nodding in a agreement. The BBC, he wrote, “is such a feeble thing compared 
with what it might be. It is a great bore, dull and hackneyed and pompously 
self-conscious … issues are dodged which even a commercial press has no fear to 
expose. The BBC stands, either remote and dictatorial or pawky, oblivious of 
opportunity, hopeless in its timidity.”

The strength of his views was, no doubt, fuelled by his falling-out with 
Reith, and his subsequent adventures outside the BBC, building stations in 
continental Europe to beam offshore commercial radio into the UK. Seen through 
Eckersley’s eyes, the BBC looks as odd as would a British Publishing 
Corporation, producing the bulk of the nation’s books; or, as he suggested, a 
nationalised cinema industry. The corporation’s defenders could cogently argue 
that whatever its inherent oddnesses, whatever the historical particularities 
that operated at its founding, the BBC happens to work; has sinuously bent to 
accommodate the times; has proved itself time and again as the greatest 
cultural organisation our nation has known; has inserted itself into the very 
DNA of Britishness. But none the less, Eckersley reminds us that had the 
delicate mechanisms of history been only minutely adjusted, British 
broadcasting could have looked very different.

The licence fee itself was perfectly naturally referred to as a “subscription” 
in the early days, not so different from the £10 per month we might now pay for 
Netflix. Wireless owners paid their 10 shillings in return for a broadcasting 
service; it was only later that it began to morph into something tantamount to 
a household tax, with citizens in practice assumed to have a television unless 
they can show the authorities otherwise. The earliest parliamentary committee 
on broadcasting, the Sykes Committee of 1923, rejected funding the BBC from 
general taxation precisely on the grounds that not everyone used the service. 
“If practically every taxpayer were a ‘listener’ there might be no injustice in 
meeting the cost of broadcasting out of taxation. But it would not, we 
consider, be right that the general body of taxpayers should be required to pay 
for the daily service which only those possessing wireless sets can enjoy.” The 
licence fee, with its connection direct to the BBC’s users, is now frequently 
held up as a guarantor of the BBC’s independence from government; Sykes makes 
clear that is not how it began.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397573138512%2Fa9a00a0d-3a24-4754-bc84-203ce01e4fcc-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20BBC%3A%20there%20to%20inform%2C%20educate%2C%20provoke%20and%20enrage%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20BBC%3A%20there%20to%20inform%2C%20educate%2C%20provoke%20and%20enrage%3F%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2014%2Fapr%2F16%2Fthe-bbc-there-to-inform-educate-provoke-and-enrage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F15%2F1397573138512%2Fa9a00a0d-3a24-4754-bc84-203ce01e4fcc-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sir William Beveridge: recommended in 1951 that the BBC's monopoly should 
continue. Photograph: The Guardian 
In 1951 the Beveridge parliamentary committee on broadcasting made its report. 
The great subject was whether the BBC’s monopoly should continue. The BBC put 
forward evidence “with the greatest earnestness” that it was “vital to the 
public interest that the monopoly of both sound and television broadcasting 
should be preserved”. So long as broadcasting was conducted by “a single 
instrument, that organisation will be free … to discharge all the 
responsibilities to the community that broadcasting involves”. If not, “the 
good, in the long run, will inescapably be driven out by the bad … it would be 
the lower forms of mass appetite which would more and more be catered for in 
programmes”.

Beveridge accepted the BBC’s case. The monopoly of the BBC should continue, he 
concluded. One lone voice on the committee disagreed: Selwyn Lloyd, a 
Conservative MP who was to become foreign secretary, produced a minority 
report. “While acknowledging gladly the great gifts and high principles of 
those in authority at Broadcasting House,” he wrote, “I cannot agree that it is 
in the public interest that all this actual and potential influence should be 
vested in a public or private monopoly.” He warned of “overstaffing, 
centralisation and bureaucracy”, of “complacency and rigidity”; of the 
potential for “abuse of power”.

History took the side of the lone voice. After the breaking of the monopoly, 
the barbarians did not sack the city; the BBC’s fears were unrealised. The 
striking fact, though, is how difficult – perhaps impossible – it has always 
been for the BBC to argue against the interests of its own institutional power 
base rather than, strictly speaking, for the interests of audiences, or 
disinterestedly for the cause of public service broadcasting. In an era when 
high-­quality broadcasters are proliferating (every cultural organisation, 
every university, is now a broadcaster of public-service material), it may need 
to hone its arguments with more care: the institutional reputation of the BBC 
is not such, at the moment, to guarantee it the undimmed acceptance of its 
public.

On the other hand, for as long as we love what the BBC does, it has a powerful 
safeguard. The licence fee may be a regressive tax, and there may be dissenters 
and evaders, but there is no large-scale organised resistance – to the 
bafflement, one senses, of some on the right. John Whittingdale, the 
Conservative MP who chairs the culture select committee, and who holds 
free-market-inflected views on the BBC, was, in another life, Thatcher’s 
political secretary. When we met at Portcullis House, he reminisced about 
another, unhappier adventure with a poll tax. “I was in Downing Street as they 
rampaged up and down Whitehall throwing petrol bombs and attacking policemen 
when they were rioting against the poll tax. And it had a means-tested element, 
you know. You only paid 20% if you were on a very low income.” He added, 
seeming mildly incredulous that no petrol bombs are thrown in protest against 
the BBC’s funding regime: “The licence fee – it doesn’t matter if you haven’t 
got two halfpennies to rub together, you still pay £145.50.” Most of us do so 
uncomplainingly, even gladly. For now.

• This article was amended on 16 April 2014 to correct the spelling of Radio 
1Xtra. It was further amended on 17 April 2014 to remove a suggestion that 
Russell Brand and Jonathan Ross left messages on Andrew Sachs's answering 
machine "live on air" (in fact they left the messages in a pre-recorded segment 
of Brand's Radio 2 show), and to change the word "diffusing" to "defusing".

• Part one:  <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/15/bbc-origins-future>
What can the origins of the BBC tell us about its future? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/15/bbc-origins-future>
 