
Carly Fiorina, former California GOP senate challenger to Barbara Boxer, 
emerged at the Conservative Political Action Conference here as the speaker 
most willing to engage the Republicans' persistent problems with appealing to 
women. Well, after she spent the first half of her speech denying climate 
change. Priorities!

Fiorina didn't offer a solution, but she did offer some great slogans: "I am a 
proud pro-life woman. ... I believe science is proving us right everyday!" 
(Hey, don't knock junk science until you've tried it, right?) She also echoed a 
feminist line when she said, "All issues are women's issues."

I like that line. I've used it myself 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/id/52215272/#.UxzCHeddUzU>. But, to judge by the 
speakers at CPAC this weekend, what she means is, "There's a woman's angle to 
every issue." You know, ladies care about health care because we have babies! 
(Especially when we don't have a choice.) Women care about guns because how 
else will wedefend 
<http://danaloeschradio.com/gun-control-the-real-war-on-women/> ourselves! (I 
fear for the woman who told the audience that she sleeps with a "loaded gun 
next to my bed and I've never felt safer".)

But when feminists talk about every issue being a women's issue, we're not 
talking about finding a way to make a specific policy agenda appeal to women. 
What most feminists mean by that is "There's a larger economic or policy angle 
to every issue dismissed as 'women's'."

The leaders of the GOP just can't comprehend that women's circumstances – 
decades of discrimination against them – might mean that policies, or the lack 
of policies, which seem perfectly fair to "everyone else" (white men, 
basically) have a different impact on them.

Gender is not allowed to be a special category, right next to race and 
sexuality, when it comes to constructing policy.Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> only matters in how you sell a 
policy, not in how it actually plays out.

And the women at CPAC <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cpac>? They're so 
invested in being ladies, they don't even talk like women. They can't admit 
that they're denied anything, so they can't ask anything.

This attitude emerged the most awkwardly during the panel "Why conservatism is 
right for women", which might have been better cast as "why women are right for 
conservatism". The arguments weren't about what the GOP has to offer women so 
much as what stereotypically feminine traits should make them conservative.

There were some important truths ("Guess what, there is a wage gap!") and 
honest pleas (asking "white men" to stay in the background during debates about 
birth control), but orthodoxy hobbled innovation. When talk turned to 
recruiting female candidates, one of the panelists asserted that women don't 
run for Republican office because they are "doing other things of value". I 
would have loved to have heard what those "other things of value" are, because 
there's nothing about GOP policies to make me think they value anything a woman 
can do more than having children.

Fiorina spoke on the last day of the conference. She, like many of the 
main-stage speakers at the event, was introduced as a possible presidential 
candidate. ("Wouldn't it be interesting if she took on another woman in 2016?") 
Like every other female main stage speaker at the event, she did not crack the 
top 10 vote-gettersin the actual CPAC presidential straw poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/09/cpac-2014-rand-paul-2016-straw-poll>
.

Of course, there were several female speakers the GOP probably wouldn't want 
on that poll, stunt candidates and pranksters whose presence would undermine 
the ginger steps toward seriousness that CPAC has lately taken.Michele Bachmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michele-bachmann>. Ann Coulter. Sarah 
Palin.

They are, arguably, the GOP's most recognizable women. And the Conservative 
Political Action Conference needed them here to sell tickets and generate 
excitement. But their presence at the tail end of the event, shoe-horned in 
after all the more legitimate candidates had spoken, exemplifies the corner the 
GOP has backed itself into when it comes to gender.The public knows how out of 
touch this party is 
<http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2014/02/07/cnn-poll-majority-say-gop-out-of-touch-with-women/>
, and it is undeniably true: the women the GOP has elevated to the marquee are 
the ones they are least likely to have or want on a ticket.
 