
With The Revenant, Alejandro González Iñárritu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu> goes Terrence 
Malick – not that he needed much encouragement – for an extraordinarily 
handsome study of a human encounter with nature at its rawest: both gruesomely 
bloody and crystalline in its beauty. Iñárritu and Malick now share the same 
cinematographer, the multi-Oscar-winning Emmanuel “Chivo” Lubezki, and no doubt 
Malick’s influence is being felt in The Revenant’s more rapturous, visionary 
sequences. But there’s a focus, and narrative ambition, that is thoroughly 
Iñárritu-esque (if that is a word) and which pitches The Revenant ahead of 
Malick’s recent experiments in thought-synthesis.


Extreme weight loss and tooth extraction: when method acting goes too far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jul/29/extreme-weight-loss-when-method-acting-goes-too-far>
The Revenant is adapted from a novel by Michael Punke, which itself draws on 
the real life activities of an Irish-descended fur trapper called Hugh Glass, 
whose survival after a bear attack in the early 19th century in what became the 
Dakota Territory is the stuff of western legend. Iñárritu, working with his 
customarily confident visual panache, ensures his film breaks free from the 
written page; if nothing else,The Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant> is a consummately cinematic 
experience, which moves from paranoid nature trek to ordeal survivalism with 
plangent grace. Could Malick have pulled off the spectacular set piece of the 
Native American attack that becomes the trigger of subsequent events? Would he 
have even wanted to? And the now-notorious bear-maul scene – with those 
baffling suggestions of ursine rape – is in fact a bone-crunchingly effective 
effects sequence that wouldn’t be out of place in a more straightforward horror 
film.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fthe-revenant-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791360720%2FKP_1372117_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fthe-revenant-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fthe-revenant-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791360720%2FKP_1372117_crop_640x360.jpg>
The Revenant video review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/15/the-revenant-video-review> 
But perhaps The Revenant’s most important achievement is that it may – finally 
– have givenLeonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> the weighty, grown-up role 
he’s clearly been hankering after for at least a decade. Hampered by his 
boyish, beardless pretty-boy looks, he’s never managed to distil the gravitas 
that ought to accompany his ascension to the heady heights of the Hollywood 
upper-A-list. Slathered with prosthetics, he looked ridiculous as J Edgar 
Hoover. He was great in Wolf of Wall Street, but the role was an overgrown 
manchild. The Great Gatsby was too shiny and poppy to add much heft to his 
persona. But The Revenant, which called for him to wear several yards of beard, 
disembowel a bison, and crawl wearily through miles of ice fields, has surely 
done the trick. Thanks to Iñárritu, DiCaprio became the man to beat at the 
Oscars, and ended up taking home the best actor award.

 * The 50 best films of 2016 in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-full-list> 