
Remembering Marge

NBA commissioner Adam Silver took decisive action on Tuesday, announcing that 
Donald Sterling would be banned for life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/28/donald-sterling-racism-la-clippers-owner>
 from the league.The Clippers owner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/29/nba-la-clippers-donald-sterling-lifetime-ban-racist-comments>
 was exposed by the website TMZ after it posted taped phone conversations with 
V Stiviano during which the owner made what were just his latest racist remarks 
about African Americans and Hispanics. The 80-year-old billionaire's words 
caused anear universal backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/29/nba-la-clippers-donald-sterling-lifetime-ban-racist-commentshttp://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/29/nba-la-clippers-donald-sterling-lifetime-ban-racist-comments>
 and propelled Silver to act firmly and swiftly, serving as a reminder of what 
Major League Baseball failed to accomplish back in 1992 when news of Marge 
Schott’s racial transgressions became public.


Schott purchased the Cincinnati Reds in 1984 for $11m, becoming the only woman 
to buy an MLB team. With her St Bernard Schottziealways in tow 
<http://img.ccrd.clearchannel.com/media/mlib/613/2013/08/default/marge_schott_0_1376566269.jpg>
, Schott was seen as eccentric and at times endearing, but also miserly and 
extremely difficult to work with. She fired her general manager just a few 
seasons removed from helping to build a World Series winning ballclub, while 
renowned manager Lou Piniella turned down an extension to stay in Cincy, such 
was the headache of being entrenched inside the Schott organization. She 
obviously knew little about baseball, responding "Who's he?" to questions 
regarding players such as Barry Bonds and Don Baylor, according to reports at 
the time. All of these traits, positive and negative, were rendered meaningless 
after allegations of racism and anti-semitism began in 1992.

While being quizzed about the minuscule minority presence in her front office 
of over 40 people, Schott said: "Look on the field; you see black players for 
the Reds. They're part of the organization, too." Schott was also accused of 
slurring black players such as Dave Parker and Eric Davis, while reports of her 
use of "nigger" surfaced in a documentation attached to a lawsuit filed against 
her by a former employee.

Jews were later slandered, with the former Red owner telling the New York Times
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1992/11/29/sports/baseball-marge-schott-baseball-s-big-red-headache.html?src=pm&pagewanted=1>
: "Hitler was good in the beginning, but he went too far." When questioned in 
relation to the lawsuit about whether or not owning a Nazi armband made her 
anti-semitic, she responded with, "No, they are not smarter than us, just 
sharper." Schott was also careless with her language in regard to Japanese 
people. Other reports had Scott uttering the words "million-dollar niggers" and 
"money-grubbing Jews". Not to mention this gem:

I'd rather have a trained monkey working for me than a nigger.

While this sort of behavior would seem less than ideal, Silver's pacy justice 
was nowhere to be found in the twisted 1990s world of Major League Baseball.
Hall-of-famer Hank Aaron 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1993/02/05/opinion/winking-at-baseball-s-racism.html>, 
an African American, called for her to be suspended, and she was, but not for 
life. Her initial infractions cost her a fine, a year of not being able to work 
with her GM and some sort of sensitivity training. She could continue to take 
care of almost all of the other business of running an MLB franchise, and was 
allowed to attend games.

Unlike the way the NBA dealt with Sterling, MLB's clumsy handling of the 
Schott situation allowed it to drag on for several more ugly seasons. In 1996 
she received an additional two-year ban for further remarks.

At the time of her statements, baseball was without a commissioner, with then 
Milwaukee Brewers owner, Bud Selig, carrying out a search for the oustedFay 
Vincent's 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/sportsnow/la-sp-sn-fay-vincent-donald-sterling-marge-schott-20140428,0,2453095.story#axzz30QyJbIbY>
 replacement, a job that eventually became his. That is surely one reason why 
Schott was not dealt with in an efficient and harsh manner. And of course, 
there was no Facebook, Twitter or other social media to publicise the snowball 
of anger that led to Donald Sterling's swift lifetime ban just days after news 
of his latest cultural insensitivity emerged.

Or, perhaps a dusty old group of baseball owners just preferred to take it 
easy on another owner and look the other way. That's just a theory of course, 
but it may be worth mentioning that a similar stance helped give birth to a 
Steroid Era, one that began to take over the game right around that time.

The end of a less than Amazin' era?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-nbas-swift-ousting-of-donald-sterling-is-the-anti-marge-schott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F1%2F1398912493506%2F7790ea86-5b29-47ef-b180-9b1d21fa14bc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20NBA's%20swift%20ousting%20of%20Donald%20Sterling%20is%20the%20anti-Marge%20Schott&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-nbas-swift-ousting-of-donald-sterling-is-the-anti-marge-schott%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20NBA%27s%20swift%20ousting%20of%20Donald%20Sterling%20is%20the%20anti-Marge%20Schott&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-nbas-swift-ousting-of-donald-sterling-is-the-anti-marge-schott%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F1%2F1398912493506%2F7790ea86-5b29-47ef-b180-9b1d21fa14bc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Mets have had plenty to smile about lately, but the fans need a bit of 
warming up after years of abuse. Photograph: Mike Stobe/Getty Images 
Mets fans have put up with unprecedented circumstances over the previous five 
years. They’ve seen their ballclub get wrapped up in a global ponzi scheme, 
their payroll slide to thelower echelons of Major League Baseball, 
<http://espn.go.com/mlb/team/salaries/_/name/nym/new-york-mets> their ownership 
publicly criticize their franchise players 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2011/05/30/110530fa_fact_toobin?currentPage=all>
 in fancy magazines, endured a series of less than forthcoming statements from 
that ownership about the team's financial situation, and all of this while 
being forced to watch (whoever can be bothered to turn up) insufferableplay 
inside a stadium <http://www.stadiumpage.com/newmets/Citi_011709_0.jpg> that’s a
monument to a franchise that plays in another city 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/78/Ebbets1913OpeningDay.jpg>. 

There’s a ton more where that came from (and I can’t possibly list all of it 
here), including the fact that the team has continuously played better on the 
road than at home over a period of several seasons, their superstar pitcher 
Matt Harvey is out for 2014 
<http://espn.go.com/new-york/mlb/story/_/id/10822696/matt-harvey-new-york-mets-deletes-twitter-account-controversial-tweet>
 thanks to Tommy John elbow surgery, their underperforming but well-liked and 
potentially powerful hitting first baseman, Ike Davis, was treated like a such 
a leper by the front office that when he was finally traded the team could only 
garner a six-pack ofbubblicious 
<http://www.marieclaire.com/cm/marieclaire/images/gum.jpg> as compensation, 
and, on bring your dog night, those who brought their furry friends to the 
mostly empty ballpark were made to buy fido their very own ticket.

All of this adds up. The New York Times recently released a map of baseball 
fandom 
<http://wpossidento.files.wordpress.com/2014/04/nytimes_map_of_baseball_nation_600x380.jpg>
 in the United States based on Facebooks “likes”, and as it happens, there are 
no zip codes in this country that can claim to be Mets territory, with New York 
being solidly Yankee. The Mets' field has been especially morgue-like this 
season, even if the average home attendance has risen slightly in 2014 (doggies 
in the seats).


Desperate for any kind of attention, the Mets “marketing department” got on 
its hands and knees andconstructed a letter from 1969 and 1986 Mets 
<http://hardballtalk.nbcsports.com/2014/04/30/the-mets-want-true-new-yorkers-to-sign-an-open-letter-of-support/mets-open-letter/>
, both World Series-winning teams, asking fans for their support under the 
guise of being a “true New Yorker”, talk about tugging at emotional 
heartstrings. This in the very same week that it was revealed that Paul 
DePodesta, the team's vice-president of player development and amateur 
scouting, allegedly said three years ago :“I’m tired of hearing about the ‘86 
Mets.” That statement apparently caused friction between team alumni and 
management, but regardless, several of the 86ers signed the letter, including 
the beloved Keith Hernandez and Ron Darling, both of whom happen to work for 
SNY, the network which broadcasts most of New York's games, and is partially 
owned by, you guessed it, the Mets.


Despite the seemingly endless stream of negativity surrounding the franchise, 
it’s important to understand that before this unfathomable stretch of torture 
came to dominate their psyche, fans of the franchise were actually quite a 
positive group, one that reveled in sudden bursts of miracles and magic, of 
which there was just enough to make the stretches of losing tolerable. That 
optimism has been deadened by managements poising of the pot, but somewhat 
amazingly, it’s not permanent, and there are signs of a rising.


The team, widely expected to struggle, is winning, regularly, and their 15 
wins in April mark their most victories to open a season since 2007. 
Considering the makeup of the roster, it’s hard to believe that the Mets boast 
a recordthat puts them in the top quarter of the National League  
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/NYM/2014.shtml>despite significant 
offensive shortcomings. Their big off-season signing, ex-Yankee outfielder 
Curtis Granderson, is hitting well below .200, their highly touted rookie 
catcher Travis d’Arnaud is also “hitting below the interstate”, slugging third 
baseman David Wright has just one home run and another new acquisition, 
outfielder Chris Young, has spent most of the April injured.

Yet they find a way to win, and it mostly happens because of pitching and 
defense. They’ve committed the second fewest errors in the National League, 
while the pitching has come around in the past two weeks. The Mets team ERA is 
2.57 in that period, as the starters, including the unheralded rotation of 
Dillon Gee, Jon Neise, Bartolo Colon, Zack Wheeler and Jenrry Mejia have kept 
their low scoring team in the game, while the bullpen, which had blown up 
earlier in April, has recovered well despite Jose Valverde being lifted as 
closer in favor of Kyle Farnsworth. Of course, we’ve seen this show before – in 
recent seasons, the Mets have made a habit of solid starts before faulting in 
the second half of the season. For now however, what’s left of their fan base 
are enjoying a rare burst of sunshine.

Not so ancient Mariner returns to the Bronx

It was a sight many Yankees fans thought they would never see: their franchise 
second baseman taking his position on the diamond in New York, while wearing 
the colors of another franchise. On a rainy Tuesday evening in the Bronx, 
Robinson Cano came to the plate as an opponent for the first time in his decade 
long career,hearing the expected boos 
<http://msn.foxsports.com/mlb/story/robinson-cano-helps-seattle-mariners-win-in-his-return-to-yankee-stadium-042914>
 from the few fans who braved the frigid conditions. After fleeing town this 
past winter aftersigning a 10-year $240m contract with Seattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/06/robinson-cano-jayz-yankees-mariners-240-million>
, Cano is slowly fading from fan's memories, mostly thanks to a reasonably fast 
start and big contributions from offseason acquisitions including Masahiro 
Tanaka, Jacoby Ellsbury, Carlos Beltran and Brian McCann. Still, there were a 
small minority of fans in the bleachers who chose to salute their former 
all-star standout – something of a rarity in New York sports.

Before his first at-bat, Cano saluted his good friend, pitcher CC Sabathia, 
whom he was facing, and Yankees manager Joe Girardi in the dugout. He struck 
out, and went 1-5 on the evening – a tough night for Cano, even if hisMariners 
did win the series opener 6-3 
<http://www.foxnews.com/sports/2014/04/30/rounding-third-cano-gets-last-laugh-in-return-to-bronx/>
. As for the hostile crowd, well, Cano was well equipped to face the Yankee 
Stadium music after receiving some boo training courtesy of NBC’s Tonight Show.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0b9rOji_PWY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0b9rOji_PWY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0b9rOji_PWY&media=>
 NBC's Tonight Show 
No dodging 10,000

The Dodgers joined an elite club on Wednesday, with the franchise racking up 
its 10,000th victory 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgersnow/la-sp-dn-dodgers-twins-10000-victories-20140430,0,1812947.story#axzz30QyJbIbY>
 by beating the Twins 6-4, on yet another frigid night in Minneapolis. The win 
meant that the team which began life back in Brooklyn in 1890 had reached a 
milestone that only four other ballclubs can claim. According to the Elias 
Sports Bureau, the other teams to reach the win mark are, somewhat 
surprisingly, the Braves, which also played in Boston and Milwaukee before 
heading to Atlanta in 1966, the Giants, who were born in New York and headed 
west with Brooklyn after the 1957 season, and the Cubs – a team known as the 
lovable losers.

Chicago are the only member of the group to win all of their games while 
residents of a single city. More surprises: the New York Yankees, winners of 27 
World Series titles, have yet to win 10,000 games. However, there's a 
reasonable explanation. The National League dates back to 1876, while the AL 
began in 1901. The Dodgers have certainly won a lot of games but they've 
dropped their share as well, losing 9,082 games along the way.The Phillies 
became the first North American franchise to lose 10,000 games 
<http://sports.espn.go.com/espn/wire?id=2937948>, claiming the dubious honor 
back in July of 2007.

Meanwhile, the reigning NL Cy Young Award winner, Clayton Kershaw is closer to 
returning from his first career stint on the disabled list 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/news/kershaw-pitches-5-innings-rehab-012436064--mlb.html;_ylt=A0LEVyKj0WFT7UgA4ZtXNyoA;_ylu=X3oDMTB0Yjkwb3VoBHNlYwNzYwRjb2xvA2JmMQR2dGlkA1ZJUDM3MF8x>
 after throwing five innings during a rehab outing for the Dodgers Double-A 
Chattanooga Lookouts.Kershaw 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/k/kershcl01.shtml> strained his back 
some time after making his season debut in Sydney, Australia, landing the 
southpaw on the DL. After throwing 86 pitches and striking out nine batters, 
Kershaw could be on his way back to the big club to join the starting rotation.

Bracing for life without Bryce

You couldn't blame the Washington Nationals for feeling a bit snakebitten, 
losing two cornerstones to thumb injuries over the previous two weeks.Ryan 
Zimmerman 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/nationals-journal/wp/2014/04/23/rehab-updates-on-ryan-zimmerman-scott-hairston/>
, their oft injured third baseman went down on 12 April after diving back into 
second base on a pickoff attempt, and Bryce Harper, shortly after being yanked 
for not hustling in a game by his new manager Matt Williams, hustled too much, 
tearing a ligament in his left thumb aftersliding head first into first on 
Friday 
<http://www.prosportsdaily.com/Headlines/ExternalArticle?articleId=302691> (I'm 
not going to mention just how dumb this is again). Anyway, Harper gave the 
thumbs up after he underwent surgery on Tuesday to repair the damage. If you 
don't believe me, see below.
Bryce Harper (@Bharper3407) 
On the road to recovery..Everything went great and I'll be back soon! Thank 
you to all the fans for the support!pic.twitter.com/66Wn7sxHQ9 
<http://t.co/66Wn7sxHQ9>
 <https://twitter.com/Bharper3407/statuses/461222853652664320> April 29, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Bharper3407/statuses/461222853652664320> 
Now the Nats will have to make due with a seriously impaired lineup for some 
time, a stretch that could see the Braves inflict further pain on their rivals 
in the National League East. Atlanta have raced off to a 17-9 start, ignoring 
the loss ofseveral key pitchers to serious injury 
<http://atlanta.braves.mlb.com/news/article.jsp?ymd=20140323&content_id=69959956&vkey=pr_atl&c_id=atl>
, while riding the bats of Freddie Freeman and Justin Upton, who were both 
hitting .330 heading into Wednesday, combining for 13 home runs. It's early, 
but Atlanta look like a runaway train, while Washington, a team built to win 
now may have to look elsewhere to find help. Unfortunately for the Nats, the 
two remaining major free agents,Stephen Drew and Kendrys Morales,  
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24543569/nationals-have-options-to-replace-harper-of-sidelined-until-july>
both play positions that don't need filling in DC. The Nationals may have 
little choice but to lean on Nate McLouth, a former Pirates, Braves and Orioles 
outfielder, for whom they dropped $10.75m on over two years this past offseason 
for in for situations such as these - so far he's hitting .111.

MLB standings <http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/>
 