
The virus that first emerged in Denmark in 2005, after the newspaper 
Jyllands-Posten printed cartoons of Muhammad, is still working its toxic way 
through our lives, as yesterday’s deaths inDallas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dallas> demonstrate. Misguided and often 
violent protests over the Jyllands-Posten series of drawings led to attacks on 
embassies, the persecution of Christians, trade boycotts and a number of deaths 
in Muslim countries. Years later the cartoonists who were published at that 
time in the paper still need police protection. Many of the cartoonists who 
published similar cartoons in January this year in Charlie Hebdo, sadly, no 
longer need that kind of protection, because they are dead.

The attack on the magazine’s offices in January this year was followed by a 
great outpouring of emotion, in France and other western countries, by people 
who wanted to make a public stand against censorship by murder, and against the 
perverted idea that, in the modern world, respect for a religion can be 
enforced by the threat of death. Just over a month later a gunman in Copenhagen 
killed one person and injured three at a debate on free speech at which a well 
known Swedish conceptual artist was due to appear. The debate supposedly 
concerned what limits there might arguably be on freedom of speech and artistic 
expression. No matter: they were shot at anyway.

What happened in Dallas, where two men were killed yesterday  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2015/may/04/two-gunmen-shot-dead-in-texas-outside-muhammad-cartoon-exhibition-rolling-coverage>
outside a meeting hall where a “draw the prophet Muhammad” contest was being 
held, is not yet entirely clear, but it undoubtedly belongs in the same dismal 
sequence. It seems as if the conjunction of cartoons and Islam is becoming 
routinely lethal.

It is a conjunction that attracts to the flame two dangerous types. One, 
seeking to respond to what they understand as an insult to Islam, sees it as 
justified and appropriate to kill the offenders. The other, seeking to teach 
Muslims that their religion deserves no special status or protection or even 
that their religion is uniquely dangerous, wants to ram home that message in 
the crudest way. That may have been the case in Dallas, as it was a few years 
ago when a deranged pastor in Florida proposed to burn the Qur’an: he still 
fulminates away and is proposingto stand for president 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/238203-koran-burning-pastor-running-for-president>
 in 2016. There is obviously no equation between murderers, whether or not they 
believe they have been divinely appointed, and the eccentrics and bigots who 
want to put Islam in the dock. The second do not normally kill,Anders Breivik 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=anders+breivik&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8&gfe_rd=cr&ei=SoxHVarqKY398we6tIHYAQ>
 being a terrible exception. But what they both do makes it harder to break the 
chain of violent consequences.

They also make it harder to examine the important issues that should be under 
discussion. The dispute among writers and other intellectuals about the award 
for free speech which Pen America will on Tuesday give to Charlie Hebdo is an 
example of how muddled the debate has become. The more than 200 Pen members who 
have withdrawn from the ceremony on the grounds that the magazineunfairly 
picked on French Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/28/i-admire-charlie-hebdos-courage-but-it-does-not-deserve-a-pen-award>
, a disadvantaged minority in their view, have missed the point.

The award is for maintaining the right of free speech in the face of threats 
to life and limb. It is not about the content of every skit, report and 
cartoon. Some, and not only among the relatively small number concerningIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, were no doubt unfair. Satire draws 
attention to defects or stupidities by exaggerating them, transposing them into 
startling contexts or turning them upside down. It can itself be defective and 
stupid but does not prosper when it is consistently so.

There are unavoidable areas of friction in western societies between different 
religions and between religions and the secular world view, which is now the 
default position of the majority, including many Christians. They are not 
easily negotiated. Civility should be the rule in most circumstances, but 
civility can all too easily be cast aside. The danger in such a difficult 
situation is that speech and expression become a power struggle, in which one 
side attempts to curtail freedom by intimidation or worse. That must be 
opposed, and that is why the award to Charlie Hebdo is justified. It is a 
statement of principle that needed to be made and it is right that it has been 
made.
 