
America’s burgeoning opiate problem <http://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/epidemic/>
 is a tragedy, but it shouldn’t come as a surprise: it stretches back to the 
arrival of the Mayflower in 1620.

Among the Pilgrims was physician Samuel Fuller, and in his kit bag he likely 
carried 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=dZvar-YPOM0C&lpg=PA36&dq=american%20colonies%2017th%20century%20laudanum&pg=PA36#v=onepage&q=american%20colonies%2017th%20century%20laudanum&f=false>
 an early form of laudanum, the opium/alcohol tincture first created by famed 
chemistParacelsus <https://www.nlm.nih.gov/hmd/pdf/paracelsus.pdf>.

Like other opiates, laudanum is derived from the opium poppy (the “joy plant 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1992/03/05/garden/growing.html>” as the Sumerians 
called it 5,000 years ago). Like all opiates, it was an effective pain killer, 
an anti-diarrheal and a soporific. In the rough frontier of early America, 
opiates helped ease the pain brought on by such ailments as smallpox, cholera 
and dysentery.

By the American Revolution, opium was a common medical tool. Thomas Jefferson, 
thoughgenerally skeptical of the medical treatments 
<https://www.monticello.org/site/research-and-collections/medicine> of his day, 
turned to laudanum in his later years to help ease his chronic diarrhea – an 
affliction that probably helpedkill him 
<https://www.monticello.org/site/research-and-collections/jeffersons-cause-death>
.

He felt so much better on the drug that he wrote to a friend 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=p075piZ8_ykC&lpg=PA35&ots=4sa6Dknoj2&dq=%22that%20with%20care%20and%20laudanum%20I%20may%20consider%20myself%20in%20what%20is%20to%20be%20my%20habitual%20state.%22&pg=PA35#v=onepage&q&f=false>
, “with care and laudanum I may consider myself in what is to be my habitual 
state.” Jefferson’s use of the word “habitual” is telling. He ultimately grew 
his ownpoppies on his Monticello estate 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=TX7HtV5NvkIC&lpg=PA72&dq=jefferson%20poppies%20monticello&pg=PA72#v=onepage&q&f=false>
.

By the middle of the 19th century, recreational opiate use was becoming more 
common. The scaremongering press condemned Chinese opium dens, playing up the 
drug’s immigrant associations and planting the idea thatChinese men were using 
opium to lure white women into having sex <https://youtu.be/lmsWlPx027M>.

Most Americans didn’t need an opium den to get their fix, though. By then, 
opiates were the main ingredient in everything from teething powders to
analgesics for menstrual cramps <http://19thct.com/2008/03/02/laudanum/>. 
Patent medicines – so-called because they often contained secret “patented” 
ingredients – flooded the market. Some served a useful purpose, but they also 
became easy methods to get high.

One famous product was Mrs Winslow’s Soothing Syrup 
<http://thequackdoctor.com/index.php/mrs-winslows-soothing-syrup/>, a morphine 
and alcohol concoction that was marketed to parents of fussy children as a 
“perfectly harmless and pleasant” way to produce a “natural quiet sleep, by 
relieving the child from pain”. After the civil war, even more potent drugs 
entered the market, including the opiate heroin (introduced by Bayer 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/yes-bayer-promoted-heroin-for-children-here-are-the-ads-that-prove-it-2011-11>
 around the same time as aspirin) and the stimulant cocaine, which was used in 
everything from cough syrups to Coca-Cola (despite the company’sstringent 
denials 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/05/22/original_coca_cola_had_a_very_small_amount_of_cocaine_partner/>
).

Opium imports hit their peak in the 1890s 
<https://faculty.unlv.edu/mccorkle/www/Opium,%20Cocaine%20and%20Marijuana%20in%20American%20History.pdf>
, right around the rise of the temperance movement, perhaps because of the 
demonization of alcohol, or perhaps because opiate use waseasier to hide. 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20080822032249/http://www.nida.nih.gov/PDF/DARHW/033-052_Kandall.pdf>

This was the status quo until 1906, when the federal government under Teddy 
Roosevelt stepped in with its landmark Pure Food and Drug Act, which required 
any “dangerous” or “addictive” drugs to appear on the label of products. Three 
years later, the Smoking Opium Exclusion Act – America’s first stab at drug 
prohibition – banned the importation of opiates that were to be used purely for 
recreational use, though it’s unclear if this was really a measure to curb drug 
use orsimply anti-Chinese legislation 
<http://www.counterpunch.org/2009/02/06/the-opium-exclusion-act-of-1909/>.

The next big drug law came in 1914, when the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act 
<http://www.drugpolicy.org/blog/today-100th-anniversary-harrison-narcotics-tax-act>
 both created afederal registry 
<http://www.druglibrary.org/schaffer/history/e1910/harrisonact.htm> of “every 
person who produces, imports, manufactures, compounds, deals in, dispenses, 
distributes, or gives away opium or coca leaves or any compound, manufacture, 
salt, derivative, or preparation thereof”, and levied taxes on them.

While physicians were supposedly excluded if the drugs were deemed medically 
necessary, the law severely limited the ability of doctors to prescribe 
opiates. The act singled out addiction as amoral failing, not a medical disease 
<http://law.jrank.org/pages/1028/Drugs-Crime-Behavioral-Aspects-Harrison-Act-1914.html>
, which made it nearly impossible for physicians to treat anyone with an opiate 
dependence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Flong-opiate-use-history-america-latest-epidemic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F563c4bcf340607f404c261e71d533e171e6c93a6%2F0_18_2657_1594%2F2657.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20strange%20history%20of%20opiates%20in%20America%3A%20from%20morphine%20for%20kids%20to%20heroin%20for%20soldiers%20%7C%20James%20Nevius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Flong-opiate-use-history-america-latest-epidemic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20strange%20history%20of%20opiates%20in%20America%3A%20from%20morphine%20for%20kids%20to%20heroin%20for%20soldiers%20%7C%20James%20Nevius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Flong-opiate-use-history-america-latest-epidemic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F563c4bcf340607f404c261e71d533e171e6c93a6%2F0_18_2657_1594%2F2657.jpg>
 Photograph: Corbis 
Drugs became a matter of law enforcement, not public health. That still holds 
a century later. Attempts by doctors to change the public conversation made 
little headway, and those who continued to prescribe opiates to addictsas part 
of treatment programs were jailed 
<https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/249/96/case.html>. Drug use 
<http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa-157.html> further spiked when alcohol was 
banned by the passage of the 18th amendment in 1919.

When prohibition was overturned by the 21st amendment in 1933, the cocktail 
culture that had been created in speakeasies across the nation made drinking 
more socially acceptable than it ever had been. As heroin had been banned in 
the interim, this only further served to stigmatize recreational opiate users, 
who were marginalized as junkies.

After the second world war, opioids – synthetic opiates – began to enter the 
market in greater numbers, including drugs formulated using Hydrocodone (later 
popularized in the 1970s as the narcotic in Vicodin) and Oxycodone (the opiate 
best known today as an ingredient in Oxycontin). Many doctors – knowing the 
risks of addiction and dependence – embraced a sort of “opiophobia 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14650454>”, which caused them to shy away 
from prescribing pain pills frequently.

The increase in recreational drug use in the 1960s 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=PzEALp45b8YC&lpg=PA69&dq=increase%20recreational%20drug%20use%201960s&pg=PA69#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 – including a spike in heroin use by soldiers in Vietnam – gave rise to both 
the Controlled Substances Act in 1970 and the Drug Enforcement Agency in 1973, 
both of which were designed to limit access to opiates. However, as doctors 
became increasingly convinced that they were under-treating pain – and new 
opioids entered the market – prescriptions for painkillers took off.

It’s no coincidence that this move was heavily endorsed by pharmaceutical 
companies, which hadhelped fund the studies 
<http://theincidentaleconomist.com/wordpress/opioid-use-and-policy-in-the-us-a-history/>
 that showed that doctors were under-prescribing pain medications. Meanwhile, 
pharmaceutical reps aggressively lobbied physicians on the value of their 
pills, and as Dr Celine Goundernoted in the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/who-is-responsible-for-the-pain-pill-epidemic>
: “By 2010, the United States, with about five per cent of the world’s 
population, was consuming ninety-nine per cent of the world’s hydrocodone”.

Today, there are medical answers to opiate addiction, but until America stops 
stigmatizing drug users as degenerates, those answers aren’t doing much good. 
Regulatory hurdles prevent many physicians from being able toprescribe 
buprenorphine 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2016/02/11/waiting-lists-grow-for-medicine-to-fight-opioid-addiction>
, a medicine shown to effectively treat opioid dependence.

And the DEA has done little to stem heroin in the United States. Since heroin 
is cheaper than prescription opiates 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/08/29/health/gupta-unintended-consequences/>, it is 
all too easy to switch from a legal prescription to illegal street drugs. On 10 
March, the Senate passed amajor drug treatment and prevention bill 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/11/us/politics/senate-drug-abuse-bill.html?_r=0>
; the question remains whether it will make it into law and, if so, if it will 
do any good.

Tomorrow, 44 more Americans will die from prescription painkillers, according 
to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. And if history is any 
indication, attempting to legislate an illness away will do little other than 
force addicts to search for yet another way to find their fix.
 