
I always relish the moment a new season of The Apprentice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/apprentice> approaches. It means I 
can put a cast-iron slot in my diary when I will not be watching television. 
For Alan Sugar’s show is now about as close to business reality asFawlty Towers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/24/readers-suggest-the-10-best-fawlty-towers-moments>
 is to the modern hotel trade. I don’t mind that it has become a parallel 
universe in which a bunch of high-camp, power-dressing capitalists shout at 
hapless middle-management types. I do mind that a child might watch this 
compulsorily manic spectacle and think it’s something like the world of work.

New contestant Joey Valente 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/1hbSS3NkT8G3BD5ZZgkCRRF/joseph-valente>
, a plumber from Peterborough, tells us in his audition clip: “I imagine myself 
being a millionaire, because if Richard Branson can do it, if Donald Trump can 
do it, if the guy from Facebook can do it, then I can do it. They’ve got 
nothing special about them that I don’t possess.”

I know we are meant to laugh – and cruelly – at the candidates, not with them, 
but after I watched Joey’s preview pitch (his hero is Hugh Hefner), I wasn’t 
laughing at all.

I don’t know how to put this kindly, but “the guy from Facebook” whose name 
Joey can’t remember (Mark Zuckerberg) is a billionaire because he runs a 
company that is based on defensible intellectual property – a computer 
programme he wrote himself. Zuckerberg has built on his first-mover advantage 
in social media to amass 1.2 billion customers in just 10 years.

You can ask what it was about Zuckerberg’s management style that built the 
company from scratch to a valuation of $250bn, but it’s the wrong question. 
Other companies dressed down, provided beer and pizza and hung around the gates 
of Stanford University trying to recruit software engineers as they came out.

The reason why Facebook, with 10,000 employees, is worth more than Walmart, 
with 2 million, is technology. It is a tech company. It has carved out a 
position in its field so dominant that it was able to spend $1bn buyingInstagram
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>, $2bn on Oculus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/live/2015/jun/11/liveblog-facebook-oculus-vr-rift-e3>
 and $19bn onWhatsApp <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp>.

For The Apprentice <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/apprentice> to 
have relevance to the billionaire aspirations of its participants, the most 
realistic challenge to set them would be to take down Facebook. To design, 
implement and manage a strategy to create an alternative social media network; 
force regulators to dismantle Facebook or open up its markets; or indeed invent 
– through sheer innovative brilliance – a new technology that turns Facebook 
into the new MySpace.

Instead, the series begins with the hopefuls trying to sell fish fingers, 
door-to-door, from a tray.

Looking and sounding like a prat is exactly the opposite of what drives market 
share
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXY8aOXVLkNw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXY8aOXVLkNw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXY8aOXVLkNw&media=>
You could argue the skills that Alan Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/alan-sugar> is trying to inculcate are further 
down the value chain. In the depths of the giant tech empires – Apple, Google, 
Facebook and their ilk – are thousands of people who started out as junior 
sales managers or marketing specialists.

The problem is, apart from generic management and negotiation skills, tech 
business people have to understand the technology roadmap. Not just of their 
own company and its rivals, but of the massive ecosystem of tech businesses 
that most viewers of The Apprentice have never heard of.

If you work for Apple’s iPhone business, you have to understand where mobile 
networks make their money, what drives revenue and what doesn’t. You have to 
wake up every day knowing that everybody can eat everybody else’s lunch, and 
that “innovate or die” does not mean thinking of a cheesy name for a team, but 
thinking of ways to recruit and retain artificial intelligence graduates from 
the top universities. It is one of the great ironies of popular culture that, 
at the very moment a new industrial revolution based on networks started, 
dinosaurs from the century of hierarchy and control were given charge of the 
most popular business TV franchise on earth.

The point about industrial revolutions is that they make the hierarchies and 
illusions of the old society obsolete – and so quickly that, while the 
first-movers can become billionaires, those who misread the new technology can 
be serial failures.

Sugar launched the Amstrad computer as a low-cost alternative to the IBM and 
Mac versions, on the assumption that computers would only ever be used as word 
processors. It made money, but was a dead end. He launched a gaming console 
that bombed in the face of Nintendo, an early “personal digital assistant” 
complete with stylus, which also bombed, and a hybrid email-plus-telephone 
device which disappeared without trace.

Sugar was a decent, if controversial, owner of Tottenham Hotspur, just as 
Karren Brady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/07/karren-brady-interview-no-desire-to-become-an-mp>
, his co-star, has managed to run two mid-table football clubs and wingman 
Claude Littner worked for Sugar both at Amstrad and Spurs.

If you choose to operate in the analogue business world, where all costs are 
squeezed and where the sharp suit and confident manner matter more than problem 
solving, that’s fine. We need plumbers, nail salon owners and, indeed, blonde 
divas of all genders from across lower management to learn how to work in teams.

But that’s not the world that is emerging.

If I could get my hands on the apprentices, I would first teach them to write 
code. Next, to attend a hacker convention, where their suits and abrasive 
manner would be ridiculed until both were abandoned. Next, to a hedge fund, 
where they would be asked to design an algorithm for arbitraging various 
commodities markets. Next, to a customer-centred business or charity, where 
they would learn that looking and sounding like a prat is exactly the opposite 
of what drives market share.

And I would make the jeopardy real. On being sacked, you would get to trundle 
your suitcase into a Job Centre Plus, where – after a short lecture about 
flexible labour markets – Iain Duncan Smith’s people would set you to work 
cleaning drains for minimum wage. Forever.

Because the lionisation of pinstriped hubris and the stigmatisation of 
economic failure go together. Benefit porn and “hapless aspirational fool” 
shows have become the mirror television holds up to society. Both seem utterly 
distorted.

• Paul Mason is economics editor of Channel 4 News. @paulmasonnews 
<https://twitter.com/paulmasonnews>
 