
Remember that beautiful young Irishman holding Bob Hoskins at gunpoint in the 
memorable abduction at the end ofThe Long Good Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/17/long-good-friday-crime>? Thought 
you might. Well, after Remington Steele, James Bond thrice, The Matador and 
Mamma Mia!, it turns out that Pierce Brosnan – ridiculously well-preserved or 
otherwise – is, withThe November Man, finally old enough to admit that he’s old.

Because it’s OK to be old these days. Liam Neeson already proved, with the 
Taken movies, Non-Stop and A Walk Among The Tombstones, that turning 60 is 
suddenly no longer entirely incompatible with kicking a thousand acres of ass 
and notching up astonishing body counts with maximum ammo expenditure. The 
lesson has been well and quickly learned, particularly by theRed 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rMCh4etBbkU> franchise, in which almost every 
actor qualifies for an OAP bus pass, and chief among whose pleasures is the 
opportunity to watch Dame Helen Mirren behind the sights of some mega machine 
gun, or knocking sense into a dozen whippersnappers with a few well-placed 
elbow-jabs, head-butts and groin-stompings. Meanwhile, The Expendables is an 
old folks’ franchise for clapped-out action-heroes, and is perfectly proud to 
advertise itself as such.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-SwW8CnNMrc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-SwW8CnNMrc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-SwW8CnNMrc&media=>
Brosnan’s The November Man is a little late to the party, but at least it 
didn’t fall asleep on the bus ride over. Brosnan has been toying with the 
subjects of age and decrepitude for a while. In 2005’sThe Matador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/feb/11/culture.features> he was a 
drunken, well-past-it hitman, though the wrinkles and crows-feet were already 
tightening in 1999’sThe Thomas Crown Affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,75030,00.html>
. Here, in a plot reminiscent of The Mechanic or Spy Story, he’s a retired CIA 
agent at war with his whelp of a former protege (Luke Bracey). Of course, the 
years don’t hold him back one bit. He might as well be Remington Steele all 
over again.

I’m half encouraged that studios are finally catering to older audiences, 
while proving that older actors can still draw in the kids. But it’s not that 
brave, really: the baby boomers, the largest generational bulge of the last 
century, are of Geritol and Depends vintage now. They need to be entertained, 
they still go to the movies, and besides, they’re the only people left with any 
money.

Forty years ago, there were lots of old and oldish people in the movies but 
they didn’t pretend to be young and indestructible, because where’s the drama 
in that?The Wild Bunch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jwE3TfJUB48> and Pat 
Garrett And Billy The Kid <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a-e47wAkg9g> 
pondered the onset, not of old age, but of absolute obsolescence and 
irrelevance, and thought death perhaps preferable. No such doubt or 
introspection attends their unkillable, bulletproof successors because the 
movies don’t bother with things like impending death, doubt and introspection 
any more. Body counts and ticket-sales, that’s it.

The November Man is out on Friday
 