
Of all the appalling injustices exacted by the Golden Globe nominations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/golden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations>
 earlier this week (wot, no Kate Beckinsale?! Aaron Taylor-Johnson for 
Nocturnal Animals not Michael Shannon?!) the lack of nominations for Arrival 
seemed among the most baffling. Granted the two it did pick up were in the 
areas in which Denis Villeneuve’s cerebral sci-fi shines the brightest: Amy 
Adams’s leading role, plus the score. But still. Really no recognition for Eric 
Heisserer’s extraordinary screenplay (adapted fromTed Chiang’s Story of Your 
Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/apr/24/featuresreviews.guardianreview23>
)? The direction? Or just for being a damn fine drama?


Arrival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arrival> is a movie for which 
prejudices about the genre, or qualms about the premise (Adams is a linguist 
who translates for newly landed aliens), might have had you lowering your 
expectations. You come out with mind blown, nails absent and tissue supply 
severely depleted. Yes, it’s set among space beasties, but it is a movie 
absolutely about the human condition, about how we choose who to love and how 
to love them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Famy-adams-arrival-jeremy-renner-alien-communication-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Adams%3A%20'Having%20a%20child%20helps%20you%20understand%20communication'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Famy-adams-arrival-jeremy-renner-alien-communication-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Adams%3A%20%27Having%20a%20child%20helps%20you%20understand%20communication%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Famy-adams-arrival-jeremy-renner-alien-communication-video-interview&media=>
Amy Adams: ‘Having a child helps you understand communication’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/09/amy-adams-arrival-jeremy-renner-alien-communication-video-interview>
It is a thriller featuring helicopters and Forest Whitaker shouting, but it is 
never ever dumb, only gripping. And it is by far the most thoughtful release 
this year. It informs and explores ideas subconsciously common to us all about 
our interplay with language, and the past and the future. In what it suggests 
about how we experience time in a much more non-linear fashion than most 
conventional narratives, it is, I think, overwhelming. We are stuck in shuffle, 
says Heisserer, we do not pass through forever in the present.

Everyone, everything seems elevated by a movie about which there is something 
intangible, miraculous. Even Jeremy Renner seems much less slappable than usual 
(though concerns about the ethics and plausibility of the actions of his 
character in the final reel do persist). Best of all is that sound design 
(never words I thought I’d write):Jóhann Jóhannsson’s alarming brass and booms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/26/arrival-johann-johannsson-soundtrack-oscar-nominated>
 that herald the arrival of the spaceships and, best of all, the Max Richter 
piece,On the Nature of Daylight <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rVN1B-tUpgs>, 
which bookends the film. The whole amounts to something transcendent; something 
to reignite your excitement for cinema, for life.

• More best films of 2016 in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/29/the-50-best-uk-films-of-2016-full-list>
 