
When Netflix announced in 2014 it was heading to Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/03/netflix-australia-launch-24-march-house-of-cards-frozen-new-zealand-china>
, viewers got very excited and the local industry responded quickly.

Sensing a mass abandonment of its expensive cable offerings with their lock-in 
contracts, pay TV platformFoxtel dropped the price of its entry package to $25 
a month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/sep/04/foxtel-halves-price-basic-pay-tv-package>
 andtwo local Netflix competitors popped up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/15/presto-tv-foxtel-pre-emptive-strike-against-netflix-stan>
.


A population starved of streaming services was at last able to choose between 
providers to supplement their sometimes dire free-to-air viewing without paying 
thousands of dollars in fees and installing cables and satellite dishes.


Suddenly you could sign up for a one-month free trial and binge watch the Emmy 
award-winning series House of Cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/jul/18/emmys-nominations-netflix-house-of-cards>
. At the momentNetflix is attracting new subscribers with The Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/31/netflix-glittering-crown-bbc-dull-launch-tv>
, one of the many original series it produces.


Stan and Presto arrived to join the existing operator Quickflix, which started 
in 2011, evolving from a DVD company to a streaming service.


Local media players teamed up to provide alternatives to Netflix: Stan is a 
Nine and Fairfax joint-venture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/26/fairfax-and-nines-streaming-service-stan-launches-ahead-of-netflix-arrival>
 and Presto was a joint offering from Seven and Foxtel.

10 of the best pay-TV shows 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=e75062d6-79ad-437f-a09f-2c24731dcd9d>
Two years on and the landscape looks quite different. About 5 million 
Australians now have access toNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> but Presto has failed to fire and 
is now on its last legs. The Seven-Foxtel joint venture is winding down in 
January and existing Presto customers – there are only 143,000 subscribers – 
will transfer over to Foxtel Play.

For fans of reality TV there is a bespoke streaming service called Hayu, which 
offers all theKeeping Up with the Kardashians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/27/kim-kardashian-filming-tv-show-again-after-paris-robbery-says-network>
, The Real Housewives, Million Dollar Listing and Top Chef franchises you could 
want for just $5.99 a month. This is a good option if you’re paying for Foxtel 
just so you can have your reality TV fix.


Stan – which has an impressive cache of Australian content including classic 
movies such asWake in Fright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/17/wake-in-fright-director-ted-kotcheff>
 andThe Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/apr/04/the-castle-rewatching-classic-australian-films>
 – has more than double the number of subscribers of Presto and has reached the 
half a million mark. It is of course dwarfed in turn by Netflix.


What was the best hour of television ever?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2016/sep/19/best-hour-television-ever-game-of-thrones-emmys-six-shows>
The arrival of Netflix has helped the take-up of Stan as many have both 
services. At about $10 each a month they are affordable for a lot of people.


According to research from Roy Morgan, the combined reach of subscription 
video on demand has now surpassed that of Foxtel’s linear pay TV service.


The same research also found that half of all Australians aged 14 or over now 
had access to one or more types of paid TV services in their home: subscription 
video on demand (SVOD), pay TV (linear, broadcast Foxtel channels), and 
internet protocol television (IPTV – Fetch TV andFoxtel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/foxtel> through Telstra’s T-Box).

Since Netflix arrived not only has there been a meteoric rise in the number of 
people taking up streaming services but Foxtel’s traditional business has grown 
too, on average at 100,000 a quarter, according to Roy Morgan.

In December Foxtel Play drops from $25 to $10 a month for a single tier, 
making it the cheapest ever Foxtel offering, while the traditional cable and 
satellite pay TV service will be available for the starting price of $26 a 
month and come with the IQ3 set top box which allows you to pause and rewind 
live TV. The top of the range subscription with access to all the channels is 
$130 a month.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fthe-ultimate-catch-up-a-complete-guide-to-pay-tv-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff921a63fc1c8c420df780dcf51628dfc7fa74d2c%2F0_0_1919_1077%2F1919.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20ultimate%20catch-up%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20pay%20TV%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fthe-ultimate-catch-up-a-complete-guide-to-pay-tv-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20ultimate%20catch-up%3A%20a%20complete%20guide%20to%20pay%20TV%20in%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fthe-ultimate-catch-up-a-complete-guide-to-pay-tv-in-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff921a63fc1c8c420df780dcf51628dfc7fa74d2c%2F0_0_1919_1077%2F1919.png>
 You Can’t Ask That, a new ABC series in which the public poses anonymous 
questions to minority groups, transferred from iView to broadcast TV. 
Photograph: ABC 
Sport and old films are a major driver of Foxtel subscriptions. But you will 
still pay a premium if you are a sports fan: on Foxtel Play you have to buy a 
starter pack first for $25 a month, then add sport for another $25 a month on 
top of that. So even if you only watch sport you have to pay $50 a month. This 
will improve somewhat in December, when the price for a starter pack drops to 
$10 a month.

Meanwhile, the fourth-generation Apple TV includes all the Australian catch-up 
TV apps, as well as Netflix and Stan, so there is no need to stream from your 
device if you have an Apple TV.

The Castle: rewatching classic Australian films
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/apr/04/the-castle-rewatching-classic-australian-films>
Dan Barrett, the content director of the Televised Revolution blog, says 
Australians have been quick to get on the streaming bandwagon.

“Consumers have been quick to jump onto these video services in Australia, 
echoing the broader digital disruption trends we’re seeing affecting other 
media like newspapers and magazines,” Barrett says. “What’s really exciting for 
viewers is that this disruption has offered a lot more content than was 
previously available, with a lot of shows fast-tracked.”

Broadcast television has also lifted its game, with mixed results. Catch-up TV 
and live streaming apps from the free-to-air networks have vastly improved this 
year, with SBS on Demand and ABC.

“I think Australia has been very well served with a number of good generalised 
entertainment services, but I think what we’re asking for now is a few more 
niche services like anime and foreign language programs, lifestyle, old movies 
and old television series,” Barrett says. “The challenge for Foxtel is being 
able to provide a high quality service at a price that makes sense in a 
lower-cost Netflix environment.”

But before we write off linear broadcast TV entirely it’s worth remembering 
that it still accounts for 86.4% of all television viewing and reaches more 
than 16 million Australians every day.

Pay TV and streaming options in Australia 

Foxtel

Cost: Packages start at $26 a month 
<https://www.foxtel.com.au/get/tv-combos.html> and you add tiers according to 
taste after that. While the top of the range offering, the Platinum HD package 
with the IQ3, costs $135 a month, Foxtel has dropped its prices across the 
board considerably this year to compete with the proliferation of streaming 
services.

How to get it: You will need a Foxtel technician to install an IQ3 set top box 
and connect it to your TV for a $100 fee. There is a cheaper self-install 
option.

What’s on: The basic package gives you access to 40 channels plus the handy 
set top box which is great for controlling what you watch by recording 
favourite shows and rewinding and pausing. With the Platinum HD package you get 
access to 101 channels, many in high definition.

Amazon to stream The Grand Tour in 200 countries and territories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/16/amazon-stream-the-grand-tour-200-countries-december>
Australian content/original content? Plenty, including news, and award-winning 
drama such as The Kettering Incident and A Place to Call Home.

Critical verdict: The longest running pay TV option is a good service if you 
have kids and love sport. You also get to watch more than 1,000 movies 
uninterrupted by ads. If you want the convenience of a Foxtel set top box which 
provides high-resolution pictures which are not reliant on your broadband 
service Foxtel is a good option. With an IQ3 you can pause and rewind TV, 
record free-to-air shows and go back to the start of a live show. But Foxtel 
has an installation cost, contracts and cancellation fees if you exit early.

Foxtel Play

Cost: Now starts at $25 a month. From December a Foxtel Play subscription will 
be available from $10 a month; after that each tier costs $10 (kids), $15 
(drama) or $25 (sport).

How to get it: It is a “bring your own device” style of service, so no 
Foxtel-provided set-top box or technician installation. Customers can access it 
via their own device (select games consoles, select smart TVs, PC/ Mac) and 
customers get access to Foxtel Go as part of their subscription at no extra 
charge. Foxtel Go allows customers to take their content with them to stream 
via select tablet devices and smartphones.

What’s on: Movies, TV shows, news and live sport. Programming is available 
both live and on demand.

Australian content/original content? Original and Australian content including 
Wentworth and Secret City.

Critical verdict: Better value than Foxtel but still far more expensive than 
Netflix or Stan and if you build a substantial package you’ll be paying almost 
as much as for cable but without the bells and whistles of a set top box.

Netflix

Cost: There are three subscription plans available. The basic plan costs $8.99 
a month, the standard plan costs $11.99 a month (which allows you to stream 
from two devices at the same time) and the premium plan costs $14.99 a month 
(allows you to stream from four devices at the same time). The standard and 
premium plans allow you to stream in HD.

Wolf Creek TV series review – Mick Taylor meets his match in outback slasher 
spin-off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/13/wolf-creek-tv-series-review-mick-taylor-outback-slasher>
How to get it: Watched instantly from any internet connected device that 
offers the Netflix app, such as a smart TV, game console, streaming player, 
phone or tablet. You can also watch on your computer. Internet-connected 
devices compatible with Netflix include Apple iPad and iPhones, Samsung Galaxy 
tablets and mobile phones, Apple TV, Chromecast, PS3, PS4 and Xbox.

What’s on: Thousands of movies and TV shows across many genres. Among the 
highlights: Homeland, How I Met Your Mother, American Horror Story, Brooklyn 
Nine Nine, Peaky Blinders, Shameless.

Australian content/original content? Lots of original content. No original 
Australian content as yet but some repeats. Australian talent features across 
the board in original content from the likes of Orange Is the New Black to 
Jessica Jones.

Critical verdict: Netflix is the king of streaming with exclusive original 
content such as The Crown and is bargain at less than $10 a month and no 
lock-in contract. Is a wonderful alternative to stale free-to-air TV series 
such as The Block and My Kitchen Rules.

Hayu

Cost: $5.99 a month in Australia, beginning with a free one-month trial.

How to get it: Available in Australia on mobile, tablet and laptop at 
hayu.com. The service is also available to Foxtel subscribers, or packages that 
include the channel E! EntertainmentTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>, at hayu.com/foxtel. Streaming 
to TVs will soon be accessible from the Apple TV App Store.

Content: All reality TV. The majority of US shows debut on the service the 
same day as their US launch. More than 3,000 episodes are available.

Australian content/original content? No, most content is from the US.

Critical verdict: For reality TV super-fans only. But if you love the 
Kardashians it’s a small price to pay.

No Activity: Patrick Brammall and Darren Gilshenan deliver Australian farce at 
its finest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/no-activity-patrick-brammall-and-darren-gilshenan-deliver-australian-farce-at-its-finest>
Stan

Cost: $10 a month, one free month trial.


How to get it: Available via Apple TV, game console or mobile device.

Content: From Nine, Viacom (Nickelodeon and MTV), Showtime, World Movies and 
ABC.

Australian content/original content? Original content includes Logie-award 
winning Australian comedyNo Activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/no-activity-patrick-brammall-and-darren-gilshenan-deliver-australian-farce-at-its-finest>
 and critically acclaimedWolf Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/13/wolf-creek-tv-series-review-mick-taylor-outback-slasher>
.

Critical verdict: Excellent local service with a lot of Australian content 
which is worth a second look. Stan also just added the entire catalogue of 
Seinfeld which is worth the price alone. In tandem with Netflix, Stan is all 
you need.


Apple TV

Cost: If you use it to access your SVOD services such as Netflix, Foxtel Play 
and Hayu you just pay the monthly fee for them. But if you access the iTunes 
library you have to pay to buy or rent each movie: $3.49 for an episode of 
Keeping up with the Kardashians; $4.99 for old movies such as East of Eden and 
up to $6.99 for a latest release.

How to get it: The latest Apple TV (4th generation), which is Siri-enabled, 
will set you back $239 for 32GB or $299 for 64GB.


What’s on: The fourth-generation Apple TVs have SVOD, films on demand plus all 
the free-to-air TV apps on board: ABC iview, 9NOW, SBS On Demand, PLUS7 and Ten 
Play.

Critical verdict: A brilliant tool you can’t do without (once you’ve got it) 
but go easy on the purchase of movies from iTunes or it will cost you a fortune.



 