
One may as well begin with the 15-year-old reader: at a single-sex, 
military-flavoured boarding school; parents divorced (father an army officer, 
mother a book-reading German); fascinated by politics; priggish; barely spoken 
to a girl; glorying in his most recent birthday coinciding with England winning 
the World Cup; glorying too in never again having to set foot in a science lab; 
given Howards End to read by a nice, shy English teacher.

Reading it had all the force and shock of revelation, making sense of the 
world just at the moment I was most susceptible to having the big picture 
explained to me. That explanation – or the part that got through to me – was 
essentially binary. On the one hand there were life’s Schlegels: cultured, 
searching for truth, believing in the supremacy of personal relationships. On 
the other hand there were life’s Wilcoxes: people of prose not poetry, deeply 
pragmatic, living by a code of “telegrams and anger”. Looking around at my 
fellow pupils, at my teachers, at my family, it all made compelling sense – 
whereas EM Forster’s supreme, transcending message of “only connect” had little 
impact by comparison.

Perhaps the rest would have followed anyway, but now I had my founding text. 
Over the next few years I became friends with boys far more creative and 
imaginative than me; made the usual progression from the Beatles to Dylan via 
Donovan; listened religiously each Sunday afternoon to John Peel’s Top Gear; 
co-founded the Wellington College Progressive Music Society (I know, I know); 
and developed a deep, atavistic loathing for the philistine rugby culture that 
dominated the school.

Then came the 1970s and the outside world. At Oxford, I would still have 
considered myself a fully signed-up Schlegel, but by the mid-1970s, beginning 
to make my way in London as a historian, liberalism was no longer enough. It 
had been a solemn moment when in 1973, just after leaving university, one of my 
best friends had handed me a copy ofLouis Althusser’s For Marx 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/For_Marx>; and not long afterwards, writing what 
became my first book, an explicitly socialist study of the Victorian working 
class that had no truck with reformist verities or achievements, the shadow 
over my shoulder belonged not to Forster but toEP Thompson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E._P._Thompson>, with Eric Hobsbawm 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eric_Hobsbawm> lurking just behind.

Yet in the event, Howards End was about to change my life for a second time. 
In 1978, approaching my late 20s, I was in a state of confusion: anxious to 
find a new direction as a historian, keen to get stuck into something big and 
try to make it my own, but wholly unclear about what it should be. Eventually, 
the subject into which I decided to parachute as a complete outsider was the 
City of London. Forster’s novel was not my only literary inspiration – there 
was alsoPooter the City clerk <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Pooter>, 
the ghastly Rex Mottram inBrideshead Revisited 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brideshead_Revisited>, George Gissing’s 
<http://www.victorianweb.org/authors/gissing/bio.html> The Whirlpool – but it 
loomed the largest. Not just stolid Henry Wilcox himself (whose Imperial and 
West African Rubber Company, full of “ledgers and polished counters and brass 
bars”, is near St Paul’s Cathedral), but its powerful sense of the phenomenon 
of the Edwardian City (epitome of the new, money-oriented cosmopolitanism 
Forster so loathed).

Over the next two decades I immersed myself in the Square Mile, an immersion 
that culminated in a four-volume history of the City during the 19th and 20th 
centuries. It came to represent my belated attempt to take on board “only 
connect”: to a greater or lesser extent I remained critical throughout of the 
City and its inhabitants; but I also realised (thanks in part also to John 
Galsworthy and hisForsytes <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Forsyte_Saga>) 
that those practical men were flesh-and-blood humans whom I needed to portray 
in as three-dimensional a way as possible.

In the volume covering the City’s golden years of 1890-1914, my nod of homage 
was to have the opening five words the same as in Howards End. And when in 2001 
the final volume was published and I was invited by a journalist to a “lunch 
with” interview, my choice of restaurant was easy. “Saddle of mutton,” says 
Henry authoritatively, as he orders for Margaret Schlegel and himself at 
Simpson’s in the Strand.

I am now in my 60s. It is almost half a century since I first read Howards 
End, and there is a larger, more important sense in which Forster still matters 
to me. It may sound akin to Basil Fawlty and a degree in the bleedin’ obvious, 
but I find myself becoming ever more aware that it is intolerance – religious, 
nationalist, ethnic – that is the worst evil and does the most damage. 
Tolerance is the ultimate lesson of not only Howards End but also, I have come 
to believe, of all great novels, which uniquely among the art forms have the 
ability to get inside other people’s heads. Thehistorical novelist Richard 
Hughes <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Hughes_%28writer%29> once remarked 
that Hitler would not have been Hitler if he had read novels.

Honesty compels me to finish with a quasi-Forsterian anecdote. One Wednesday 
evening in the early 1970s, the BBC was showing a dramatisation of Howards End. 
A handful of students were watching it in the television room at my Oxford 
college, and there was about a quarter of an hour to go when a larger cohort of 
students marched in demanding to watch the football on ITV. Numbers and might 
carried the day; the defeated handful left in high dudgeon.

Reader, I was one of the invaders, and I have often wondered since whether it 
takes a Wilcox to understand a Wilcox.
 