
On the evening of 3 October, the New York attorney Stanley Cohen got a phone 
call about Peter Kassig, the young American aid worker held hostage by Islamic 
State (Isis). The callers were Palestinians from the Sabra and Shatila refugee 
camp in Lebanon who knew Kassig, and they were “very upset”, Cohen recalled. 
They had just seen the footage ofAlan Henning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/03/alan-henning-isis-syria-video-murder>
, a British hostage, being beheaded. At the end of the video, when the masked 
terrorist who has been dubbed “Jihadi John” paraded another hostage before the 
camera, they recognised their friend Peter.

Kassig had done relief and medical work in Sabra and Shatila, and even helped 
raise money for the refugees, before he was kidnapped in October 2013. “He’s a 
good guy,” the callers told Cohen. Given the pace of previous Isis executions – 
roughly once a fortnight since August – they feared Kassig might have only two 
weeks left to live. They were desperate to save him, and thought that Cohen 
would have contacts among militants in the region who could lobby for Kassig’s 
release.

Cohen is one of America’s most controversial lawyers: he has spent the past 
three decades defending clients that others found indefensible:Weather 
Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/sep/21/londonfilmfestival2003.londonfilmfestival>
 radicals,Black Bloc 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/apr/01/anarchists-anti-cuts-march> 
anarchists, Hamas operatives. (“The entire Hamas leadership,” Cohen says, “are 
friends of mine and have been for years.”) Cohen was the defence lawyer for 
Osama bin Laden’s son-in-law,Suleiman Abu Ghaith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/26/osama-bin-laden-son-in-law-found-guilty>
 – the highest-ranking al-Qaida figure to face trial in a US federal court 
since the 9/11 attacks – who was sentenced to life in prison in September.

Without giving it much thought, Cohen let the callers down gently: he had 
never dealt with Isis before, and there wasn’t much he could do for Kassig. 
Besides, he had other things on his mind. After pleading guilty to failing to 
file tax returns and obstructing the US Internal Revenue Service, Cohen is 
going to prison next month to serve an 18-month sentence. He believes that the 
IRS has been hounding him – “for seven solid years” – because of his 
controversial clients. “It never fucking ends,” he said. “$600,000 in legal 
fees … $100,000 in accounting fees, rumours, subpoenas, interrogatories.” In 
April, he decided to plead guilty to put a stop to it all. “I finally made the 
decision,” he said, “I’ll go to jail and do [legal] work for prisoners. I don’t 
give a shit.”

A few days later, as he returned from court to the plant-filled loft in 
Manhattan’s East Village that serves as his home and office, Cohen got another 
phone call. It was his old friend John Penley – a photojournalist, activist and 
navy veteran, who sometimes worked with the group Veterans for Peace. “From 
nowhere,” Cohen recalled, “he says, ‘Would you make a public statement on 
behalf of Peter Kassig?’” Penley later explained that he had reached out to 
Cohen because Kassig was a fellow veteran – he served as an army ranger in Iraq 
in 2007 but was later given a medical discharge – and Penley thought “there was 
a chance to save his life”.

To Cohen, it seemed like fate. “Here’s two calls within a week,” he said. He 
told Penley he would see what he could do, and asked his assistant to compile a 
dossier on Kassig, which included an interview he’d given to Time magazine 
before his capture, about his humanitarian work with Syrian refugees. As he 
leafed through the documents, Cohen saw something of himself – and the young 
activists he’d defended over the years – in Kassig. “I was thinking, if I was 
25 or 26 in this day and age, I’d be in refugee camps in the Middle East,” 
Cohen recalled. “And that might easily be me as a hostage.”

But what really spurred Cohen into action was a letter Kassig had written to 
his parents in Indiana while in captivity, which they had released to the media 
a few days earlier. (Kassig’s parents chose not to comment on this story.) In 
the weeks to come, as Cohen flew to Kuwait and then Jordan in an audacious bid 
to negotiate Kassig’s release, he thought often of the letter’s heartbreaking 
final paragraph:

I wish this paper would go on forever and never run out and I could just keep 
talking to you. Just know I’m with you. Every stream, every lake, every field 
and river. In the woods and in the hills, in all the places you showed me. I 
love you.

“I read those words and I started to well up,” Cohen said. That’s when he 
picked up the phone, called his best jihadist contact, and launched an 
improbable series of back-channel talks – reported here for the first time – in 
which Cohen, with the encouragement of the FBI, persuaded senior clerics and 
former fighters aligned with al-Qaida to open negotiations with Isis in an 
attempt to save the life of an American hostage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2Fsecret-talks-save-peter-kassig-isis-hostage-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F17%2F1418836222165%2Fcrop_KP-56415_640_1.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Revealed%3A%20the%20secret%20talks%20to%20save%20Isis%20hostage%20Peter%20Kassig%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2Fsecret-talks-save-peter-kassig-isis-hostage-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Revealed%3A%20the%20secret%20talks%20to%20save%20Isis%20hostage%20Peter%20Kassig%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2Fsecret-talks-save-peter-kassig-isis-hostage-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F17%2F1418836222165%2Fcrop_KP-56415_640_1.jpeg>
 Revealed: the secret talks to save Isis hostage Peter Kassig. Video by 
Laurence Topham, Phoebe Greenwood, Alex Purcell, Shiv Malik and Mustafa Khalili 
* * *

The man Cohen called was a Kuwaiti member of al-Qaida, a veteran of the 
Afghanistan war and former Guantánamo detainee, who had helped him contact 
senior al-Qaida figures when he was building the case for the defence in the 
trial of Bin Laden’s son-in-law, Abu Ghaith. In the process, the two had become 
“very close”, Cohen said. (For security reasons, the Guardian is not disclosing 
his identity.) Cohen and his translator came to refer to the Kuwaiti as “Food”, 
because whenever they met him, dishes piled with steaming meat, lobster, 
grilled fish, and shrimp were served.

Cohen has spent a lifetime negotiating on high-profile cases, but the 
operation to free Kassig was something new for him. When Cohen deals with the 
US government in the courtroom or phones upHezbollah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hezbollah>, there is always a clear process. 
Even if the clock is ticking, as in a death row case, “you know if this person 
says this is the deal, that’s the deal”, he said. With Isis, Cohen didn’t even 
know where to begin. All he knew was that he had to create a channel to the 
group’s leadership.

On the phone, “Food” told Cohen he had recently been involved in successful 
hostage negotiations with the second largest Islamist rebel group in Syria, the 
al-Nusra Front. In September, he had helped secure the unilateral release of45 
Fijian UN peacekeepers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/11/jabhat-al-nusra-releases-hostages-fijian-syria>
 who had been captured in the Golan Heights two weeks earlier. Cohen asked Food 
what he thought about Kassig’s situation. The reply was terse: “He’s gonna die.”

At this point, Cohen tentatively laid out his plan. The US wasn’t going to pay 
a ransom or agree to a prisoner swap, and they weren’t going to stop bombing 
Isis, as Jihadi John demanded. But maybe there was another way of persuading 
them to release the American. Instead of trading lives for money, Cohen 
suggested that Isis could dedicate Kassig’s release to Muslim political 
prisoners around the world, including those in Guantánamo. “You make political 
gestures that are more powerful than six million dollars,” Cohen explained. 
Food, who was no fan of Isis, paused, and then said he liked the plan but that 
he would have to consult a few people about it. The next day, he rang Cohen and 
said: “We’d like to save this guy.”

The “we” referred to a loose collective of Food’s allies in Kuwait – which 
included a few fellow ex-mujahideen fighters, but also some academics, doctors, 
and Salafist clerics, at least one of whom is named as a terrorist on a US 
sanctions list. Cohen described them as “older guys who’ve been around” – 
veterans of al-Qaida and Afghanistan, whose strategic outlook had evolved over 
time. Though they despised the west, they’d come to appreciate what could be 
achieved through politics rather than violence, Cohen said. They made decisions 
by consensus, and according to Cohen, always framed discussions in terms of “we 
have met, we’ve collectively decided certain things, we’ve got to get back to 
people; folks are of the opinion, people believe.” Cohen called them “the Food 
group”.

The Food group hated Isis, which they believed was harming Islam and helping 
justify foreign interventions by the US and its client states – Jordan, Saudi 
Arabia, Egypt. They also cared about Kassig’s fate. He converted to Islam and 
had taken the name Abdul-Rahman during his year in captivity. This, they 
thought, made the idea of executing him particularly heinous. But despite these 
profound disagreements with Isis, they had strong ties to the group and with 
one Isis “cabinet member” in particular. They were Cohen’s only route to Kassig.

Food told Cohen that he couldn’t conduct complex talks over the phone. Cohen 
would have to fly to Kuwait. Cohen agreed, but before he hung up, he asked Food 
one last question – the same question he’d ask almost every day for the next 
five weeks: “Is Kassig still alive?”

“I checked on it,” Food replied. “He’s alive.”

* * *


Now that he had opened a possible channel to Isis, Cohen knew he would have to 
bring US officials on side. He foresaw a point sooner or later when he might 
need officials to help him clear potential diplomatic roadblocks. He was also 
concerned that without official sanction, he might be arrested. But reaching 
out to the US government was a big step for Cohen – he said it was the first 
time he’d ever felt “on the same page” as his lifelong antagonists. He quickly 
contacted a US official he thought he could trust, a federal prosecutor who 
Cohen had battled in court but come to respect. “I think he’s got a pretty good 
idea of who I am, why I am,” Cohen recalled. “I basically told him everything.” 
That included, with Food’s permission, revealing who he had been communicating 
with.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418918384498%2F587b97e9-90ae-49e3-b0d9-b9bb8fc59cd6-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418918384498%2F587b97e9-90ae-49e3-b0d9-b9bb8fc59cd6-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Stanley Cohen, lawyer, in his New York City apartment. Photograph: Tim Knox 
The two lawyers knew that they needed to act quickly – it had already been a 
week since Isis had released footage of Alan Henning’s execution. On 10 
October, just hours after they had first spoken, the prosecutor put Cohen in 
touch with an FBI counterterrorism official at the Washington field office, 
which deals with international hostage rescue. (The FBI has requested that the 
Guardian not identify the official, who we will call “Mike” – not his real 
name.) Cohen had dealt with a lot of FBI agents over the years, but he found 
that he liked Mike. Although Cohen saw Mike as a “true believer” – an American 
patriot – he said the FBI agent understood that it was sometimes necessary to 
talk with the most hated of enemies.

Between 10 and 12 October, the three engaged in a rapid series of conference 
calls – Cohen at his home, the FBI official in Washington, and the federal 
prosecutor at his offices. Together they went through the tentative proposal 
for Kassig’s unilateral release and hammered out the terms of engagement. Mike 
repeatedly reminded Cohen that he would be travelling as a private citizen and 
was not at liberty to promise anything from the US in return for Kassig’s 
freedom. In turn, Cohen explained that the last thing he wanted to be was a 
representative of the US government. He would work transparently, Cohen said, 
but he would not be monitored and refused in advance to give debriefings on his 
contacts. His job, he said, was to feel the situation out, “build bridges” and 
put a process together to reach Kassig’s captors.

Cohen’s other demands were simple. First, he needed a translator. The 
government officials were happy for him to use Marwan Abdel-Rahman, a 
court-certified Arabic translator who had worked with Cohen before. 
(Abdel-Rahman kept notes during the process, and spoke to the Guardian 
extensively about the events recounted in this article.) Second, Cohen needed 
the FBI to pick up the tab for hotels and flights. That was it, he says. 
“[There was] no debate – [it was like] ‘what are you talking about, $20,000 to 
save someone’s life?’”. The Guardian has seen receipts and forms filed by Cohen 
and sent to the FBI totalling $24,239.

Not everyone was happy that Cohen – who had just pleaded guilty to a felony – 
would be leading US efforts to free Kassig. But the US didn’t have many back 
channels with Isis that they could exploit in situations like these. “There was 
apparently some white boy from Princeton – I assume from the State Department 
or Department of Justice – who quipped, ‘We’re sending a Jewish anarchist 
lawyer who represents Hamas to the Middle East to negotiate with Isis and 
al-Qaida over Kassig?’,” Cohen says. “And apparently some serious true believer 
responded, ‘Who the fuck else would we send?’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1418989517875%2Fc615a5aa-9539-448e-8451-2ee3565d8457-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1418989517875%2Fc615a5aa-9539-448e-8451-2ee3565d8457-2060x1236.jpeg>
Cohen had his allies in place. Four days after the phone call from Penley, on 
the evening of Monday 13 October, he and Abdel-Rahman were boarding a Kuwait 
Airways flight out of JFK.


* * *

When Cohen and Abdel-Rahman arrived in Kuwait, they didn’t know what they’d be 
dealing with. All they had was a commitment that Kassig would remain alive 
while Cohen was still engaged on the ground. “They [Isis] want a discussion,” 
Food had told him. On 15 October, Cohen checked into the Jumeirah hotel – a 
place he prefers to most Kuwaiti hotels because he feels safe there. Most of 
the clientele are Arabs and the perimeter is well guarded. “It’s not,” he says, 
“the kind of place you’re going to disappear from.”

Over the next two days, Food took the lead, helping to organise meetings in 
Cohen’s hotel room, the dining area, and at people’s houses. Cohen met a number 
of al-Qaida veterans and radical clerics. In these meetings, they ate a lot of 
food, drank a lot of coffee, and talked politics. The conversation would often 
drift; Cohen occasionally caught Abdel-Rahman rolling his eyes as clerics 
droned on for hours about seemingly irrelevant topics, such as the failure of 
Nasserite movements in the Middle East. But this is the nature of negotiation, 
says Cohen. “I may have to spend four hours talking about abstract issues until 
I get to that one important sentence.” On more than one occasion, Cohen said he 
had to drag conversations back to Kassig.

On 17 October, Food told Cohen that after speaking to an Isis cabinet member 
and various warlords on the ground, he and his associates in Kuwait had decided 
that the only way to save Kassig was to reach out to Isis’s chief scholar, a 
30-year-old Bahraini called Turki al-Binali. The young cleric was the only 
person who could stay Jihadi John’s knife with a single edict. And the only way 
to get to Binali was through his former teacher, the Jordanian Abu Muhammad 
al-Maqdisi, who may be the world’s most revered living jihadi scholar. Maqdisi 
and Binali had fallen out over Isis’s theological legitimacy. If Cohen was 
going to save Kassig, he realised this dispute would have to be resolved as 
well.

Maqdisi is a slightly rumpled, middle-aged theologian, but his religious 
fatwas have influenced a generation of jihadis around the world, who have 
seized upon his writings as a theological justification for violence. One of 
Maqdisi’s most famous acolytes wasAbu Musab al-Zarqawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jun/09/guardianobituaries.alqaida>, who, 
as leader of al-Qaida in Iraq, carried out a notoriously bloody campaign of 
beheadings and bombings that targeted hotels, UN offices and Shia holy places. 
After Zarqawi was killed by a US airstrike in 2006, his group evolved into the 
Islamic State in Iraq, and then Isis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F17%2F1418831822672%2F0f8a94b2-4b02-4444-a094-b194da029600-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F17%2F1418831822672%2F0f8a94b2-4b02-4444-a094-b194da029600-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Radical Muslim cleric Abu Qatada (right) listens to Islamist scholar Abu 
Muhammad al-Maqdisi during a celebration after his release from prison on 24 
September. Photograph: Majed Jaber/Reuters 
But even before the creation of Isis, Maqdisi was horrified by Zarqawi’s 
actions, particularly the casual slaughter of lay Shia. He believed Zarqawi had 
misinterpreted his teachings. This division between soldiers and scholars – 
between those who write the books and those who fire the bullets – has never 
raged so violently within the Salafist jihadi movement as it does today. This 
July, Maqdisi described Isis as “deviant” and rejected the legitimacy of the 
caliphate. He’s been supported by a friend who is another big player in this 
ideological conflict,Abu Qatada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>, 
a Palestinian Jordanian who lived in London for 20 years until the UK 
government finally managed to deport him to Jordan last year to face charges 
for plotting terror attacks on Americans and Israelis in Jordan in 1998 and 
1999.

Like Maqdisi, Abu Qatada despises Isis. Speaking to a major western news 
outlet for the first time since hisacquittal on terrorism charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/abu-qatada-cleared-terror-charges-jordan-court>
 in Jordan this summer, he told the Guardian: “What these people don’t 
understand is that I’ve been in this area [the Salafist sphere] for over 30 
years. Our role, as Salafists … is to ignite the revolution and create the 
conditions to bring down the dictatorial regimes and then let others who are 
more qualified to take over power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1418989349702%2Ff7ce0376-0269-439b-ab82-87c718b1bdd2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1418989349702%2Ff7ce0376-0269-439b-ab82-87c718b1bdd2-2060x1236.jpeg>
“We, the Salafists, cannot rule,” he continued. “We cannot run governments. We 
can’t even run a nursery school, let alone a caliphate. For Isis to claim that 
they are a state is a tall order, in fact they are a bunch of thugs and 
gangsters and have no religious credentials, none whatsoever.”

To outsiders, these arguments between al-Qaida and Isis may appear to be a 
mere fratricidal conflict over the finer points of the same hideous ideology. 
However, Maqdisi and Abu Qatada’s criticisms of Isis have sparked a deep crisis 
of confidence within the organisation. Isis might be the world’s richest and 
most dangerous jihadist group, but for a theocratic movement, not having enough 
religious legitimacy is a serious problem.

In response, Isis has engaged in a covert mission to buy up religious loyalty. 
Over the summer, members of Isis quietly approached influential radical clerics 
around the Arabic-speaking world, offering to help them relocate their families 
to Syria, and promising gifts and large sums of cash. Information about this 
scheme first appeared several weeks ago on the anonymous twitter account
@wikibaghdady <https://twitter.com/wikibaghdady>, which purports to leak 
insider information about Isis. Since then, the Guardian has corroborated the 
story.

The outreach plan is understood to be the brainchild of Maqdisi’s former 
pupil, Binali. The cleric, who has his own English language Facebook page, was 
reported to have warned Isis’s leadership council that if it didn’t secure the 
support of influential religious figures, the caliphate’s survival would be at 
risk. Two of the five scholars understood to have been offered the most 
generous “packages” were Maqdisi andAbu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>.

When Cohen told Mike about his travel plans, the FBI official was surprised. 
“He said ‘Maqdisi is going to meet with you?’” Cohen recalled. “I said ‘Yeah, 
he’s waiting for me.’ He said ‘Go’.”

* * *


On 18 October, Cohen and Abdel-Rahman flew from Kuwait to Jordan, and checked 
into the Four Seasons hotel in Amman. Two days later, they finally met Maqdisi, 
who arrived at the Four Seasons in his beat up ‘97 Hyundai. They set off for 
Maqdisi’s home, in a relatively poor neighbourhood 10 miles north of Amman. On 
the way, Maqdisi’s car broke down. Cursing and stuck in the middle of a traffic 
jam, Cohen said Maqdisi opened up the hood and started beating the engine with 
a wrench. Five minutes later they were off again.

Eventually, they pulled up outside Maqdisi’s white-stucco apartment block. 
After they had climbed five flights of stairs, Maqdisi’s children came rushing 
out of the flat to have their photo taken with Cohen, although his wife was at 
first wary about the presence of this “Jewish lawyer”. The flat was tidy: on 
the floor were children’s toys and, on the walls, framed religious quotations. 
They sat in the lounge, which was surrounded by book-lined shelves. As they 
nibbled on fruit, sweets and nuts, laid out in trays, Maqdisi’s ginger cat 
lounged on Abdel-Rahman’s lap.

People may find Maqdisi’s theories dangerous and morally repugnant, but those 
who have met him tend to like him. He’s a slight, mild-mannered man who speaks 
in a soft, informal Arabic. His meeting with Cohen on 20 October was the first 
in a series of several discussions that took place over the following 10 days. 
(Abu Qatada has confirmed that he was present during one of these meetings.) “I 
really grew to love this guy [Maqdisi],” Cohen says. “Someone described him as 
the Islamist [Noam] Chomsky. I think that gives Chomsky too much credit.” The 
admiration was mutual. Maqdisi told Cohen he appreciated his work defending 
Hamas and Bin Laden’s son-in-law.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1418989558736%2Fa4b3e506-1c1d-4c93-8f79-055fdfc0fcee-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1418989558736%2Fa4b3e506-1c1d-4c93-8f79-055fdfc0fcee-2060x1236.jpeg>
Like the Food group in Kuwait, Cohen said, both Abu Qatada and Maqdisi saw the 
release of Kassig as part of a wider struggle against Isis. They told him that 
Kassig’s release could serve as a message to Isis’s followers and to the world 
that there were alternatives to the cycle of violence, which had left so many 
civilians dead. Maqdisi added that he, too, had been touched by Kassig’s letter 
to his parents.

When Maqdisi laid out his strategy to free Kassig on 21 October, it was much 
more expansive than Cohen had expected: the deal had to be presented as part of 
a much bigger picture, Maqdisi believed, in order to win over Binali. First, 
supporters on each side of the divide between al-Qaida and Isis would agree to 
stop denouncing each other as apostates and infidels. Then, if Isis agreed to 
stop taking hostages altogether, Maqdisi and the cohort of older al-Qaida 
religious scholars – much the same group Isis had tried to win over with offers 
of cash – would tone down their hostile rhetoric, potentially opening the door 
to a complete reconciliation between the two terrorist groups. As part of these 
larger agreements, Maqdisi would insist on Kassig’s freedom. It would 
effectively be bundled into the negotiations as a gesture of good faith.

The proposal had enormous geopolitical implications. It opened up the 
possibility of al-Qaida and Isis militants joining forces to form a powerful 
coalition that might even topple Bashar al-Assad in Syria. To pull off this 
reconciliation between master and prodigal pupil, and possibly even al-Qaida 
and Isis, Maqdisi asked his wife to make contact with Binali’s wife. She was to 
act as a bridge for rebuilding their relationship after their war of words.

There remained just one major obstacle – it would be against Jordanian law for 
Maqdisi to communicate directly with Binali. Having just been released in June 
after four years in prison for terrorism-related charges, Maqdisi did not want 
to risk returning to jail. It was now time for Cohen to see what he could do. 
On 22 October at 12.21am, he sent a message to Mike, to see whether the FBI 
could “reach out to Jordanian intelligence” and ask them to permit Maqdisi to 
contact Binali.

Later that same day, Cohen says that Mike told him he needed to know more 
about the specifics of what he was asking. At 3.16pm, Cohen emailed Mike the 
names of three men who would be the points of contact for Isis during the 
discussions. The list included Binali and another important Isis figure, Saad 
Hunaiti, once a close aid of Abu Qatada.

After further discussions with Maqdisi, Cohen put together a firm protocol 
which would lay out the terms of engagement. At 5.32pm, he texted Mike:

Calls will be limited to discussions with religious scholars about the hostage 
and working for his release and some obvious small talk. Jordan agrees that it 
will not require him [Maqdisi] to make the calls from one of its intelligence 
locations, nor file charges against him for the calls or otherwise interrogate 
him about them.

And, of course, the calls will not be controlled or tracked for purposes of 
military or drone attacks. The Sheikh [Maqdisi] if allowed would also like to 
discuss the need for a complete halt to taking hostages that are journalists, 
relief workers, civilians and Muslims and obviously execution of any of them by 
any means.


On 23 October, at 8.29pm, Cohen got the message he was hoping for. “Was just 
told by my co-worker in the country you’re in, the call is a go,” Mike said in 
a text. The negotiations were on.

Despite what he understood as the FBI’s assurances on the protocol 
arrangement, Cohen was still worried about Maqdisi’s safety. He suggested that 
they buy new mobiles for the talks. On 24 October, Cohen, Abdel-Rahman and 
Maqdisi went shopping for phones downtown, about 30 minutes from the Four 
Seasons hotel. Though he wasn’t paying, the frugal Maqdisi ended up picking the 
cheapest phone he could find, an old Nokia brick, which the vendor assured him 
would be able to connect to the internet. When they got back to the Four 
Seasons, Maqdisi tried to download the instant messaging service WhatsApp – one 
of Isis’s favoured modes of communication – which he would need to talk to 
Binali. It didn’t work. Maqdisi was furious – not only had he been forced to 
buy a new phone, he’d been ripped off. He picked up his old mobile and punched 
in Binali’s number. Cohen tried to stop him, but Maqdisi said, “I’ve got 
nothing to hide.” As far as he understood, the US had said the Jordanians had 
agreed he could make the contact. It seemed perfectly safe.

Maqdisi tried to download the instant messaging service WhatsApp – one of 
Isis’s favoured modes of communication

By now it was evening, and for the next two hours or so, Maqdisi and Binali 
messaged each other on WhatsApp. Their exchange was “very warm,” Cohen says. 
Maqdisi jokingly called Binali “my ungrateful son” and Binali messaged back and 
said, “Abu Muhammad [Maqdisi] is my father. All these other sheikhs [in Isis] 
are my uncles.” Binali was eager to show off: he prefaced some of his messages 
by saying there was a drone overhead or there had just been an air strike, to 
impress Maqdisi. He also sent his former teacher a picture of himself wearing 
an ammunition vest and holding a Qur’an.

As the talks between the two proceeded, Cohen finally began to feel hopeful. 
Though Kassig’s name was yet to be mentioned, Cohen says he sent his assistant 
an email saying, “it’s gonna work”.

On the evening of 25 October, Cohen got more good news, which he shared with 
Mike at the FBI: “Received a message from [the Food group in] Kuwait. I am 
wanted back there. Told it is ‘very important’ ... The phone calls are 
continuing here.” Mike told him to “encourage [the] process” and asked for an 
“honest assessment”. Cohen wrote back: “I am optimistic, more important the 
players are and he’s [Kassig] still alive. There is support among both the 
religious heavyweights and some of the important guys on the ground. My read, I 
follow their requests for now or this approach – perhaps the only realistic one 
– is done.” The reply from Mike was succinct: “Go.”

Things seemed to be progressing well, but the process was taking its toll on 
Cohen. He spent most of his time pacing around his hotel room, watching 
Lebanese satellite television, emailing his assistant in New York about his 
ongoing cases, and working on his patchy Arabic. After a while, his nerves 
began to get the better of him. He felt stressed and tired. His efforts to save 
Kassig had to remain secret if they were going to be successful. When he missed 
his wife’s 41st surprise birthday in late October, all she could tell the 
guests was that “Stanley was off in the Middle East”. The worst part was the 
uncertainty. Cohen says that he kept hearing “from the world’s leading sheikhs” 
that Isis were terrifyingly capricious. So despite promises delivered via Food 
and others, Cohen would keep waking up in the middle of the night to turn on Al 
Jazeera to check that Kassig was still alive.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418918561704%2Fa1654d56-a4b7-46b3-b3fb-45f1f8e65b64-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20race%20to%20save%20Peter%20Kassig%20%7C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%20and%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2F-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F18%2F1418918561704%2Fa1654d56-a4b7-46b3-b3fb-45f1f8e65b64-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Abu Qatada at his home in Amman Jordan. Photograph: Mustafa Khalili 
On 26 October, the night before Cohen and Abdel-Rahman were to fly back to 
Kuwait, they had dinner with Maqdisi at the Four Seasons. Maqdisi told Cohen 
that he’d had an additional WhatsApp discussion with Binali. They made progress 
towards a personal rapprochement and had even started to resolve their 
religious differences. Tomorrow, Maqdisi said, he planned on specifically 
broaching the subject of Kassig with him.

“What do you think they’ll do?” Cohen asked.

“They’ll give him up.”

“Why?”

“Some of them will give him up for the right reasons, some for the wrong 
reasons, some because they want me to like them again and I’m [the one] asking 
for it, but they’ll give him up,” Maqdisi told Cohen.

Maqdisi added that he had received a call from Jordanian intelligence 
requesting his presence for a meeting the next day. He planned to meet them 
after his doctor’s appointment at 1pm. Cohen wasn’t panicked. He believed that 
the negotiation protocol meant that Maqdisi was safe. Nonetheless he sent a few 
short texts to Mike to see what might be up. Mike told Cohen to keep him posted.

After dinner, as Maqdisi’s cab started to drive away from the hotel, Cohen 
says he suddenly signalled for the driver to stop. “I just had this feeling,” 
he recalled. Cohen told Maqdisi that as soon as he finished with the Jordanian 
security services the next day, he should text Abdel-Rahman. “He laughed,” 
Cohen recalled, and said, “‘You worry so much about me.’ I said: ‘There’s a lot 
at stake here, and I like you.’” Maqdisi then gave Cohen a hug, got back into 
the cab and drove off.

* * *

On 27 October, Cohen and Abdel-Rahman returned to Kuwait to speak to Food 
about the “promising developments” that had been unfolding in their absence. 
That afternoon, Cohen was back in his room at the Jumeirah hotel in Kuwait City 
when Abdel-Rahman called to him, four doors down. Pointing to the TV, he said, 
“They’ve just busted Maqdisi!”

“Who busted him?” Cohen asked.

“The Jordanians,” said Abdel-Rahman.

Cohen called Mike right away to find out what had just happened. Was Maqdisi 
being arrested for the phone calls? “We had an agreement, you guys signed off, 
you said the Jordanians signed off,” Cohen says he told Mike. FBI officials, 
however, dispute Cohen’s account. They told the Guardian that the Bureau did 
not provide assurances that Maqdisi or anyone else involved in this effort 
would be immune from possible reprisal for having made contact with Isis.

That evening, Jordanian security forces announced that Maqdisi was charged 
with “using the internet to promote and incite views of jihadi terrorist 
organisations”. “We got sandbagged,” Cohen says he told Mike over the phone. He 
asked Mike why the Jordanians would agree to putting together a protocol if 
they knew they were planning to arrest him just days later. Mike had no answer, 
only that he’d try to find out. (The Jordanian government has not replied to 
multiple requests for comment from the Guardian regarding their reasons for 
arresting Maqdisi and their knowledge of his negotiations with Isis leaders.)

As soon as Food and his group heard about Maqdisi’s arrest, they suddenly 
became suspicious of Cohen, and blamed the American government for having 
orchestrated the whole affair. “There I am, for the first time in 30 years 
defending the US government, wanting to vomit and saying, ‘No, I’m telling you, 
I believe the US was totally caught with its drawers down here,’” Cohen 
recalled. A couple of days later, Cohen says a member of the Food group told 
him that some of their number had received visits from the Kuwaiti intelligence 
services. Members of the group were warned, “If you meet with Stanley – using 
my first name, like we’re first cousins – we’re going to arrest you,” Cohen 
said. “What’s going through my mind is that this is out of control, that we’ve 
been betrayed, that this is not mere happenstance.”

On 30 October Cohen emailed Mike, telling him that he was going to return 
home. “Plug’s been pulled for now on talks,” Cohen wrote. He flew back to New 
York the following day. The day he returned, he sent a three-page appraisal of 
the situation to an FBI counterterrorism division official. He said that a 
“golden opportunity” to obtain Kassig’s release may have been lost:

I full well understand that an agenda independent of the Kassig release may 
have been under way. On the other hand, I saw no such evidence of it and the 
protocol which was agreed upon among myself and the folks in Jordan, with your 
knowledge and approval, was well under way and moving ahead – I thought – with 
positive indicators until the Sheikh’s arrest and the apparent visit of Kuwati 
intelligence to my “contacts” in that country.

Every day from 1 November onwards, Cohen would check in with Food and others 
about Kassig’s status. He’d report back to Mike with the news that Kassig was 
still alive, but Cohen heard little in return. Finally, on 7 November, Mike 
wrote back, “The only option that appears to be gaining traction is to engage 
the Jordanians regarding the Sheikh [Maqdisi]. My co-worker in Amman is going 
to speak with ... contacts and will get back to me this weekend with any new 
information. Preliminary discussion sounds like a long shot though.” (The FBI 
would not reveal to the Guardian who this “co-worker” was.)

On 10 November Mike sent Cohen a pessimistic message: “Given the current 
activities there and the number of people being taken into custody, it doesn’t 
look like the US will have much influence.” That same day, he confirmed that 
the US wasn’t going to be able to free Maqdisi.

Desperate to salvage something from the deteriorating situation, Cohen 
proposed a different approach. Instead of attempting the much harder task of 
securing Maqdisi’s release, perhaps the Food group could be given some 
assurances by the Kuwaiti government that if they restarted their conversations 
with Cohen, they’d remain free from harassment.

On 12 November, Cohen sent Mike another update. “Just received a message from 
Kuwait. Kassig is safe.” The next day Cohen got some more good news: Mike had 
made some progress. “Request was made to the Kuwaitis. Still waiting on a 
response.” At this point Cohen thought, if the US was asking Kuwait for this 
small favour, it was sure to be granted.

The FBI told the Guardian that it would not discuss whether other government 
agencies were involved in this process. Its chief spokesman, Paul Bresson, 
said: “The FBI’s top priority in international kidnapping investigations is the 
safe return of our citizens. Because the circumstances are different in each 
case, the FBI works closely with the rest of the US government to consider all 
viable and legally permissible options to secure their release. To preserve 
these options, and out of respect for their loved ones, we rarely discuss these 
details publicly.”

Cohen is still angry about the way the negotiations ran aground. He wants to 
know why the protocol he’d established was violated by the Jordanians, and why 
the US government failed to intervene at a crucial moment to get Maqdisi 
released from custody – why the US wasn’t able to get Jordan and Kuwait to 
cooperate to save an American citizen. “I want every mother and father in this 
country to understand that when push comes to shove, it could be their kid.”

On Sunday 16 November, Cohen says he had his bags packed and ready by the door 
when he awoke to the email that he had been dreading: “We’re hearing terrible 
news”, wrote Mike at 5.25am. “Wanted to know if you heard anything from you’re 
(sic) contacts.”

“Oh my God. Just woke up to see your message”, Cohen replied. “I have reached 
out. Will get back to you as soon as I hear.”

At 7.07am, Cohen contacted Mike again: “[Food] is saying that he received a 
confirmation ... That Peter was killed.”

“He said we took too long.”

• Additional reporting by Ed Pilkington, Ian Black and George Arnett

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter: @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>
 