
Social businesses trade in the marketplace for social objectives. Often they 
find innovative solutions to problems inherent in society. When someone says 
"but we've always done that", social businesses ask "why?" and look for a 
better way.

With problems in the jobs market making national news every month, nowhere is 
fresh thinking more urgently needed than in the world of recruitment.

At present, the UK recruitment market is failing thousands of skilled workers 
who need jobs with less than full-time hours. Our hiring practices haven't kept 
pace with the increasing numbers of women who need to continue working after 
having children – or the fact that many need part-time hours in order to do so.

But what kind of jobs are working women with families in? And what kind of pay 
are they receiving? The answer is often jobs that are beneath their level of 
skill, ability and earning capacity.Research conducted last year by the Joseph 
Rowntree Foundation and Women Like Us 
<http://www.jrf.org.uk/publications/sustainable-quality-part-time-recruitment> 
revealed that of all openly advertised jobs on the market, just 3% are for 
part-time jobs, offering £20,000 full-time equivalent (FTE) or above. This 
means that skilled and experienced people who need part-time work have an 
incredibly small pool of jobs to search from. As a consequence, many feel 
forced to take jobs that involve a slide five rungs down the career ladder. 
Others feel locked out of the world of work completely. Those who do manage to 
find work with the part-time hours they need find that their salaries (when you 
look at them on an FTE basis) are still 36% lower on average, compared with men 
in the same roles.

Ten years ago, I came to live these issues myself. Despite 10 years of 
continuous employment, I found there was no place for me any more in the world 
of work. It wasn't because I lacked the skills or experience that employers 
wanted, far from it – but because I was now a mother and could no longer work 
full time. After six months of searching for a flexible job that was at least 
close to the level I had previously worked at, I realised I hadn't found a 
single relevant role to apply for. At the school gates I kept meeting women who 
were also facing a career brick wall. Some who had tried to return to the same 
job but had been refused flexible hours, some who for years hadn't been able to 
find a job with hours they could realistically fit with family, many who just 
didn't know where to begin their search in the first place. I realised that 
something, somewhere in the system, was broken. We were missing a trick – for 
here was an incredible pool of talent, that surely employers would want to 
recruit from, on a part-time and thus more affordable basis.

I teamed up with a former colleague, carried out some research and discovered 
that half a million women in the UK desperately want to work, but can't find 
part time jobs at the right level to apply for. At the same time, we discovered 
that employers are actually well aware of, and are indeed keen to recruit from 
the pool of people who want and need part-time work – they just don't know 
where to go, to find the talent. As traditional recruiters are financially 
incentivised to fill full-time jobs, part time means part fee, so such 
vacancies go to the bottom of the pile time and time again. Over the years, 
this has built and consolidated the – incorrect – impression that there are no 
high-quality candidates for part-time roles available, and thus no point in 
advertising such roles openly on the market.

It was clear to me that part-time work needed a status, and that employers and 
candidates alike needed a visible marketplace for flexible work. Last May, we 
launched two recruitment businesses designed to fill that gap – both fully 
focused on the generation and filling of quality part-time jobs (Timewise Jobs 
<http://www.timewisejobs.co.uk/staticpages/11000/revealed-the-uk-s-power-part-time-top-50/>
 andTimewise Recruitment <http://www.timewiserecruitment.co.uk/>). Alongside 
this, we run an advice and support service for parents and carers looking for 
part-time work (Women Like Us <http://www.womenlikeus.org.uk/home.aspx>), with 
money made via the recruitment businesses going into the provision of free 
careers advice and support for those from low-income backgrounds. We have a 
double bottom line – financial and social – which acts like a backbone that 
keeps us true to purpose.

This is the role of social enterprise in the recruitment sector – to help 
people find not just any job, but the job that's right for them, and that they 
will stay in for the long term. We aim to help people optimise their earnings 
in the hours they have available – by helping them to find part-time jobs that 
use all of their potential, rather than just a tenth. And we help employers to 
find talented, experienced candidates.

We now have an incredible 41,000 people registered with us, and we have 
advertised quality part-time jobs for some of the UK's most well-known 
employers, such asVirgin <http://www.virgin-atlantic.com/us/en.html>, EasyJet 
<http://www.easyjet.com/en> and Harrods <http://www.harrods.com/> and have 
recruited for hundreds of SMEs. We have received huge interest from across the 
public, voluntary and commercial sector, and what always strikes me is how the 
issue of quality part-time jobs cuts across so many different areas of society.

Stimulating more quality part-time jobs in the economy has the potential to 
create significant social and economic impact – important steps towards 
building a resilient and sustainable society. And our work is really only just 
beginning. The next big step is to tackle people's perceptions of part-time 
work, and prove that part-time hours don't just work for low-skilled roles, 
requiring little responsibilities. It's time to change all our thinking on 
workplace practices and how to get the best from people.

Karen Mattison MBE is founder of Timewise Jobs 
<http://www.timewisejobs.co.uk/staticpages/11000/revealed-the-uk-s-power-part-time-top-50/>
, a division ofWLU C.I.C. <http://www.womenlikeus.org.uk/home.aspx> She is also 
Ashoka UK's Fellow of the Month <http://uk.ashoka.org/fellow/karen-mattison> 
for February.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To join the Guardian 
Social Enterprise Network,click here 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>.
 