
Shameless e-begging, or a justified act of desperation? The ethics of 
crowdfunding university fees seem bound to divide opinion. But raising money on 
sites such asHubbub <https://hubbub.org/>, GoFundMe <https://www.gofundme.com/>
, andIndiegogo <https://www.indiegogo.com/> is becoming a go-to strategy for 
thousands of students.

Faced with unregulated and increasing tuition fees, postgraduate students are 
among the most desperate of these self-fundraisers. Some are ineligible for the 
government’s newpostgraduate loan 
<https://www.gov.uk/funding-for-postgraduate-study>, while prospects can be 
just as bleak for those who are: the scheme’s repayment terms are steeper than 
those of undergraduate student loans, and it won’t always cover all costs.

Scholarships and bursaries are otherwise few and far between, and a part-time 
job could jeopardise a student’s academic work. It isn’t difficult to see why 
university applicants are turning to the crowd for help.

‘I worry what people will think of me’

Take Ellie Burch, 24, who has recently launched her campaign to crowdfund an 
art psychotherapy course at Goldsmiths, University of London. She graduated a 
year too early to be eligible for the postgraduate loan, and was unable to 
secure any other funding. Her “quest” – as it’s described on herHubbub page 
<https://hubbub.org/p/get-her-to-goldsmiths> – is to raise £20,000 from 
relatives, friends, and good-willed strangers.

Burch’s friends and family were unaware of her campaign at the time she 
launched it, and she felt reluctant to let them know. “There is a fine line 
between begging for money and genuinely asking people for help when you need it 
most. I worry what people will think of me – especially those who don’t know me 
personally,” she says.

Her fear of a backlash is probably well-founded. Back in 2014, Oxford student 
Emily-Rose Eastop attracted media attention when she was branded “a posh brat 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2704394/Posh-brat-Oxford-student-calls-scientist-hula-dancer-singer-raises-14-000-strangers-pay-masters-failing-200-jobs.html>
” during a similar fundraising drive that raised £14,000.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F161359996&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F161359996>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F161359996&media=>
And perhaps the criticism is understandable: Ellie Burch is hardly the UK’s 
only squeezed student. So, what makes her entitled to special treatment? It’s a 
question she anticipates, and has led her to pledge some of the proceeds of her 
campaign to charity. “What separates my plea from others is that I am not 
solely basing my fundraising mission around my own gain. I have made a promise 
to donate a percentage to theFountain Centre <http://www.fountaincentre.org/> 
[a cancer charity], which I have been associated with in recent years both 
professionally and personally.”

Burch originally signed up to Hubbub after observing the success of 
crowdfunding pitches she had read online. “The first time I saw someone 
releasing a campaign I thought, ‘how cheeky’ – but over recent years, it has 
become an option that more and more students are having to explore. It is now 
an increasingly normal thing to do.”

‘I know other students who have been very successful’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fmeet-the-students-crowdfunding-their-university-tuition-fees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b5d5d7e133108d82651c3a595f14188f8bb1306%2F0_0_2149_1709%2F2149.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20students%20crowdfunding%20their%20tuition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fmeet-the-students-crowdfunding-their-university-tuition-fees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20students%20crowdfunding%20their%20tuition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fmeet-the-students-crowdfunding-their-university-tuition-fees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b5d5d7e133108d82651c3a595f14188f8bb1306%2F0_0_2149_1709%2F2149.jpg>
 Lutomi Kassim Photograph: Lutomi Kassim 
A further scroll through the site leads to Lutomi Kassim 
<https://hubbub.org/p/fundmyPhDinurbanperformanceart>, who recently launched a 
campaign to crowdfund her PhD in the politics of urban choreography and theatre 
at Royal Holloway, University of London.

Like Burch, Kassim initially tried more conventional means of funding, 
including a failed application for a studentship. She turned to crowdfunding 
after witnessing a fellow student use it cover their fees. “I know a handful of 
other students who have used crowdfunding and they have been very successful,” 
she says.

‘People seemed to admire my stop-at-nothing attitude’

But how likely are these campaigns to reach their targets? According to one 
successful crowdfunder, it’s not easy. “I did quite a lot of research before I 
started my campaign,” says Joanne Garner, 30, who last yearraised £4,530 
<https://www.indiegogo.com/projects/postgraduate-study-at-the-royal-college-of-art#/story>
 on Indiegogo to fund her master’s degree in jewellery and metal at the Royal 
College of Art.

“I only found a few people who had successfully crowdfunded their studies. For 
a campaign to work, you have to move beyond the people you know at some point, 
since there is only so much your friends and family can give. You have to get 
to the next layer of people.”

The probability of an Indiegogo campaign reaching its goal more than quintuples
 <http://www.infodev.org/infodev-files/infodev_crowdfunding_study_0.pdf> (page 
21) once a quarter of the goal is raised. Garner says she managed to pass this 
threshold by offering rewards – handmade earrings, scarves, dresses – to 
increase the incentive for donors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fmeet-the-students-crowdfunding-their-university-tuition-fees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a70fb2892adfc1303883150c63ce139517f4de%2F48_0_940_940%2F940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20students%20crowdfunding%20their%20tuition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fmeet-the-students-crowdfunding-their-university-tuition-fees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20students%20crowdfunding%20their%20tuition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fapr%2F25%2Fmeet-the-students-crowdfunding-their-university-tuition-fees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4a70fb2892adfc1303883150c63ce139517f4de%2F48_0_940_940%2F940.jpg>
 Joanne Garner Photograph: Joanne Garner 
“They were the real success of my campaign. I asked maybe 13 people if they 
would like to donate things [to offer as rewards], all people I knew very well. 
Then, throughout the project, I was getting messages and emails from people 
offering me things – some worth as much as £170.”

Garner acknowledges that some people might have been bemused by her campaign, 
but the overall response was positive. “People seemed to admire my 
stop-at-nothing attitude and the fact that it was my own proactive and creative 
approach. People understand how hard it is for regular people to take on 
further education, which entails enormous tuition fees.”

Is it really viable?

As Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute, points 
out, crowdfunding is far from being viable for most. He calls it “an ingenious 
but insecure way to fund education”.

“If individual students can make it work, that’s fantastic. But it is almost 
certainly those who seem a little out of the ordinary – perhaps in what they 
want to study or their background – who stand to gain the most,” he says.

Andy Westwood, professor of politics and policy at the University of 
Winchester, says the hard work doesn’t necessarily stop once the fundraising 
target is reached. Successful crowdfunders next need to deliver on all the 
promises made during their campaigns. “The hardest part is presenting an idea 
or an ‘investment’ that has appeal, and then managing multiple relationships 
when you are actually studying.”

But many will be tempted by the success of Garner and others regardless of the 
potential pitfalls.

“Crowdfunding is becoming more and more prominent as a way of fundraising,” 
Garner says. “The irony for me now is that my uni is advertising a crowdfunding 
event to help people run their campaigns effectively. Maybe someone needs to 
let them know that people could do with this kind of support well before they 
begin their studies.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 