
As Veep enters its fifth triumphant series 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JDesAgis8NU>, I’d like to spew forth my 
unfiltered admiration for Julia Louis-Dreyfus. My 90s hair-spiration asElaine 
Benes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sM2x90x0UJs> in Seinfeld, she has come 
to mean so much more to me than that. She navigates a career in Hollywood in 
which she has never been the “girlfriend” or the stereotypical female “voice of 
reason” to her more prominently featured male counterparts. And now she is 
playing the leader of the free world, albeit a seriously inept one, it looks 
like there’s little left for her to conquer.


She is one of the few women in US television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/us-television> to clown and belch and 
discard all vanity in the name of laughs. Her performances are entirely 
laugh-focused, whatever it takes. Introduced into Seinfeld after the pilot, 
reputedly because executives felt the setup was too male-centric, she instantly 
became one of an ensemble, not just the token chick. The prior relationship 
between Elaine and Jerry is quickly dealt with so they can get on with being 
friends and Louis-Dreyfus can get on with being just another one of the gang, 
prone to the same social disgraces and troubles as her male co-stars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fjulia-louis-dreyfus-disgraceful-genius-veep-seinfeld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6439da7f50ac2560884bae534147a498acdb6909%2F3_420_1642_985%2F1642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20disgraceful%20genius%20of%20Julia%20Louis-Dreyfus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fjulia-louis-dreyfus-disgraceful-genius-veep-seinfeld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20disgraceful%20genius%20of%20Julia%20Louis-Dreyfus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F02%2Fjulia-louis-dreyfus-disgraceful-genius-veep-seinfeld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6439da7f50ac2560884bae534147a498acdb6909%2F3_420_1642_985%2F1642.jpg>
 Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Michael Richards, Jerry Seinfeld and Jason Alexander in 
Seinfeld. Photograph: c.Castle Rock/Everett/Rex 
She specialises in playing flawed, often awful, characters whose main focus is 
self-advancement. InVeep <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/veep>, she 
is Selina Meyer, a venal, nasal, Palinesque horror in soft tailoring who 
lurches from one political disaster to the next, mismanaging all around her, 
yet still somehow manages to make it to the Oval Office. But somehow, she also 
makes her likeable. I haven’t worked out the trick she pulls on screen: 
behaving appallingly while appearing utterly charming. She uses the combination 
of her diminutive physical presence and her apparent cuteness to devastating 
effect when she’s pacing the corridors of the White House, swearing every other 
word and trying to martial the chaos. It’s a performance I can’t imagine any 
other actor getting quite as right, male or female.

What would a Trump presidency look like? Just ask Veep's Selina Meyer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/24/veep-selina-meyer-donald-trump-hbo>
Outside of her TV roles, she plays the Hollywood game so perfectly, owning the 
fate of actresses who reach a certain age and the industry no longer knows what 
to do with them. In the Inside Amy Schumer sketch “Last Fuckable Day 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vDz2kcjWpOs>”, she teams up with Patricia 
Arquette and Tina Fey, who host a picnic to celebrate her last day as a 
“believably fuckable woman”. They toast her longevity at 55 and she looks 
forward to her retirement from public life, drinking melted ice-cream and 
ceasing to give a fig about her appearance.

Again, I can’t imagine many other actors agreeing to present themselves in 
this light for laughs. It’s that taking ownership of the crappy way her 
industry works and her place in it that’s so impressive.

One of my favourite JLD moments came at the 2014 Emmys when she went up to 
receive her best actress in a comedy award. Halfway to the podium, she is 
accosted byBryan Cranston, who proceeds to snog her passionately 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xOOSaYtCZzA&t=1m17s> for several seconds. They 
had worked out a skit to liven up proceedings in which, earlier in the 
ceremony, he reminds her of the time he had appeared as her love interest in 
Seinfeld and she feigns ignorance. Now there’s a celebrity who doesn’t take 
herself too seriously and bothers to give an awards show audience something 
more exciting to watch than just another tearful acceptance speech.

Can you tell I love her? I love her.
 