
The sniping among Sky News presenters began just hours after it was confirmed 
Peta Credlin would be part of the line-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/31/peta-credlin-joins-sky-news-as-2016-election-campaign-commentator>
 for the election campaign. The host of PM Live, Paul Murray, declared he was 
“stoked” Credlin had signed up because her insights would be “fascinating”. 
“Can’t wait!,” he squealed.

Fellow Abbott loyalist and Sky host Chris Kenny used the opportunity to say he 
would enjoy watching “those who had viciously sniped and baggedPeta Credlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peta-credlin> go to water 
face-to-face on air”. Who was Kenny referring to? Surely not Sky colleague 
Peter van Onselen, co-author of Battle Ground: Why the Liberal Party 
Shirtfronted Tony Abbott? When PVO asked to whom he was referring Kenny quickly 
replied he was referring to Credlin’s nemesis Niki Savva rather than any of his 
colleagues.

Peta Credlin joins Sky News as 2016 election campaign commentator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/31/peta-credlin-joins-sky-news-as-2016-election-campaign-commentator>
Fairfax fighting (having a quality discussion) among themselves

Speaking of infighting, Fairfax Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fairfax-media> is the scene of a civil war 
between CEO Greg Hywood and the very journalists he has targeted for massive 
redundancies. Keen to make his point heard, Hywood used his own opinion pages 
to “put to bed the myth” that laying off journalists “is some dire threat to 
quality journalism”.

In his piece, headlined Let’s have the quality discussion 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/lets-have-the-quality-discussion-20160324-gnqv52.html>
, Hywood reminisced about the good old days when you could find an ashtray, a 
telex machine and a newspaper clippings library in the newspaper offices of 
Fairfax.

“Currently across the Herald, the Age and the Financial Review, Fairfax Media 
employs in excess of 520 reporters and more than 700 journalists in total,” 
Hywood wrote, the week after the company announced plans to lose 120 
journalists or one in five.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fthe-weekly-beast-peta-credlin-sky-gig-confirmed-and-the-sniping-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa65b8b749bea54580478e33b9677c377b7a04b43%2F0_0_3987_2392%2F3987.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20the%20sniping%20begins%20as%20Peta%20Credlin's%20Sky%20gig%20is%20confirmed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fthe-weekly-beast-peta-credlin-sky-gig-confirmed-and-the-sniping-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20the%20sniping%20begins%20as%20Peta%20Credlin%27s%20Sky%20gig%20is%20confirmed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fthe-weekly-beast-peta-credlin-sky-gig-confirmed-and-the-sniping-begins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa65b8b749bea54580478e33b9677c377b7a04b43%2F0_0_3987_2392%2F3987.jpg>
 Fairfax Media boss Hywood used his opinion pages to ‘put to bed the myth’ that 
laying off journalists ‘is some dire threat to quality journalism’. Photograph: 
Dan Himbrechts/AAP 
Not content with infuriating the journos he now employs, Hywood managed to 
insult the journalists of decades past by saying much of what they wrote in the 
good old days was clickbait too – to fill the space between the ads. “Some of 
what was produced to fill those enormous Saturday papers could not qualify 
under any definition of ‘quality journalism’,” Hywood wrote. “It was the 
‘clickbait’ of its time.”

Union representatives Marcus Strom, Leigh Tonkin, Anne Davies, Gina McColl, 
Simon Johanson and Miki Perkins were quick to reply, posting an open letter on 
the MEAA website: “We’ve changed a lot in the past 40 years. Management needs 
to keep up. Old school thinking and nostalgia won’t cut it in the new media 
landscape. Talk to us, Greg. Together, we know the new media landscape better 
than anyone and want Fairfax Media to be a thriving, diversified company that 
values quality journalism.”

The announcement today that the Canberra Times will cut 12 jobs and move from 
broadsheet to a tabloid size is likely to further anger staff and the union. 
The move, which takes place three years after the rest of the Fairfax 
metropolitan papers, leaves the Australian as the only remaining daily 
broadsheet.

Fairfax executive Rod Quinn talked up the change on Thursday, saying the new 
“compact” size would be “easier to handle and navigate” than the present 
broadsheet.

“The Canberra Times is changing to a more convenient shape but it will 
continue to deliver the same quality, independent journalism and agenda-setting 
local news coverage that has earned the respect and trust of Canberra readers 
for 90 years,” Quinn said.

It is understood that the 12 positions to be cut are mainly journalists.



Nielsen changes push Guardian to fifth spot

It may be several months late but IAB Australia and Nielsen have finally 
launched new cross-platform measurement metrics – called Nielsen Digital 
Ratings Monthly – which provide an independent, cross-device view of the total 
digital audience unduplicated, across PC, smartphone and tablet for both web 
browsers and apps.

The data shows there are 19.6m digital users, the majority on smartphones. 
It’s no surprise that Google, Facebook and YouTube have the biggest share of 
the market. In the news category, the inclusion of mobile devices has brought 
some good news for some players. News Corp’s the Herald Sun and the Daily 
Telegraph have been pushed into the top 10 for the first time now that mobile 
use is included. Also benefiting from the update is Guardian Australia, which 
has been boosted from seventh to fifth spot in the news rankings, behind 
news.com.au, smh.com.au, ABC news websites and ninemsn.com.

ABC’s Scott is ‘blind to bias’, says Bolt

Andrew Bolt was most perturbed 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/opinion/andrew-bolt/a-biased-abc-and-mark-scotts-deaf-left-ear/news-story/555641d0d63292376b2c6db7bb4c4488>
 byMark Scott’s interview on MediaWatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/29/abc-mark-scott-less-relevant-without-digital-and-tv-innovations-says-mark-scott>
 on Monday, calling it “bizarre” and saying Scott was blind to the ABC’s 
“unlawful and dangerous leftist bias”.
 Andrew Bolt claimed that the only non-leftists working at Aunty – Tom Switzer 
and Amanda Vanstone – were ‘exiled’ to Radio National. Photograph: Channel Ten 
Scott may have annoyed Bolt when he said the ABC practised journalism: “We do 
a different style of journalism to the journalism that I think increasingly you 
see in News [Corp] papers and increasingly you see with different columnists as 
well.”

Bolt claimed that the only non-leftists working at Aunty – Tom Switzer and 
Amanda Vanstone – were “exiled” to Radio National and Switzer was “banned from 
speaking on anything but foreign affairs”. Weekly Beast was alarmed so we asked 
Switzer who at the ABC had banned him. “I’ve never been banned from speaking on 
anything but foreign affairs,” Switzer told us, detailing segments he had done 
on domestic politics. Switzer said there was “some internal blowback” after a 
controversial segment with climate sceptic Lord Lawson last winter but he was 
“very happy at RN”.

Liberal MP Dennis Jensen proves truth is stranger than fiction

The Australian’s Western Australia reporter Andrew Burrell had a juicy story 
on Thursday about Liberal MP Dennis Jensen which is more than a little 
embarrassing for someone who is backed by the Christian right. Burrell revealed 
that Dr Jensen has written a novel about a fictional war between Australia and 
a coal­ition of Indonesia and China and he secretly used his parliamentary 
letterhead to look for a publisher for his book, The Sky Warriors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fthe-weekly-beast-peta-credlin-sky-gig-confirmed-and-the-sniping-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2560f15c9de73fb35a92978766091cb0b60a91f%2F0_0_4256_2552%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20the%20sniping%20begins%20as%20Peta%20Credlin's%20Sky%20gig%20is%20confirmed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fthe-weekly-beast-peta-credlin-sky-gig-confirmed-and-the-sniping-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20the%20sniping%20begins%20as%20Peta%20Credlin%27s%20Sky%20gig%20is%20confirmed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Fthe-weekly-beast-peta-credlin-sky-gig-confirmed-and-the-sniping-begins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2560f15c9de73fb35a92978766091cb0b60a91f%2F0_0_4256_2552%2F4256.jpg>
 For a member of the joint standing committee on foreign affairs the subject 
matter is questionable but the book also includes passages which can only be 
described as soft pornography. Photograph: Alan Porritt/AAP 
For a member of parliament’s joint standing committee on foreign affairs, 
defence­ and trade, the subject matter is more than a little questionable but 
the book also includes passages which can only be described as soft 
pornography. Dr Jensen writes about a woman with breasts “as firm as they had 
been in her late teens” who moans as her married lover gropes “her inner thigh 
until he felt the warm wetness with his hand”.

Hypothetical excerpts from MP Dennis Jensen's sexy war novel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/31/hypothetical-excerpts-from-mp-dennis-jensens-sexy-war-novel>
“She pulled his trousers off, ripped the underpants off excitedly, and took 
him in her mouth,” Jensen writes. “Rono massaged her small, soft brown breasts, 
luxuriating in the silky complexion of the skin.” Asked about the book on 720 
ABC Perth, Jensen said it was “really interesting” the years-old letter had 
been leaked just before his preselection. And the sex scene? Well, it was his 
dad’s fault.

“Basically, the reason for the racy section in the first place is my dad is a 
journalist and also has written a couple of novels, and he was told by 
publishers that you needed to have at least one racy scene in the book, so 
that’s why I included it,” Dr Jensen told the ABC.
 