
Holy Motors <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147447/holy-motors>

This weird, wonderful film is the first feature from French director Leos 
Carax in more than a decade: it is partly surreal and entirely bonkers, a 
brilliantly inventive film that could mean almost anything. Devis Levant plays 
Monsieur Oscar, a mysterious figure who travels around Paris in a limousine, 
emerging for a string of dreamlike adventures in a series of elaborate 
disguises. Cameos from Eva Mendes andKylie Minogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/07/kylie-minogue-holy-motors>. 
28 September



Beasts of the Southern Wild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145827/beasts-of-the-southern-wild>

Since its arrival at Sundance earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/30/sundance-festival-prizes-dark-grim>
, this has gained ahugely enthusiastic fanbase 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jan/26/sundance-2012-beasts-southern-wild-review>
, who rave about its Terrence Malick-esque beauty and a performance from 
nine-year-old Quvenzhané Wallis. A girl called Hushpuppy lives in the remote 
Louisiana Bayou and must fend for herself when her father gets ill, and the 
waters begin to rise.19 October



Skyfall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144416/skyfall>

After what many felt was a wobbly moment with A Quantum of Solace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/122628/quantum.of.solace> and financial 
woes for its producers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/14/sony-james-bond-mgm-deal>, the 
Bond franchise returns with a film directed by Sam Mendes and featuring Javier 
Bardem and Ralph Fiennes; Judi Dench is back as M and Ben Whishaw is great 
casting as Q. Will it live up to 007's sensationalappearance at the Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/27/london-2012-queen-elizabeth-bond>?
26 October



Rust and Bone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146658/rust-and-bone>



Marion Cotillard stars with newcomer Matthias Schoenaerts in Jacques Audiard's 
film. Cotillard plays a young woman who works in an amusement-park, training 
whales to do tricks for the crowd. After suffering a horrible accident, she 
strikes up a friendship and then a romance with a moody kickboxer called Ali. 
Despite its bizarre premise this is a surgingly old-fashioned love story made 
with passion and elan. 2 November



The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149066/twilight-saga>



Much has happened since the appearance of the last Twilight movie. A hunk of 
online fan fiction has beenreworked 
<http://crushable.com/entertainment/fifty-shades-of-grey-fanfic-devils-brand-the-darkest-shade-casea-major-449/>
 as the soft-porn megaseller Fifty Shades of Grey, and Kristen Stewart has been
caught "making out" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jul/26/robert-pattinson-kristen-stewart> 
with someone who was not Robert Pattinson. It is difficult to tell how the 
volatile fanbase will take to this final film, but it is bound to dominate the 
airwaves.16 November



Amour <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147440/amour>

Austrian director Michael Haneke won his second Palme d'Or 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/27/cannes-palme-haneke-amour> at 
Cannes with this remarkable film, an intimate chamber-piece with something of 
Bergman'sScenes From A Marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/80188/scenes-from-a-marriage> about it. 
Jean-Louis Trintignant and Emmanuelle Riva are Georges and Anne, an elderly, 
happily married couple in Paris; when Anne suffers a stroke and begins to 
decline, their love faces the greatest test of all. 16 November



Sightseers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146657/sightseers>

Ben Wheatley brings his distinctive black-comic touch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/may/17/director-ben-wheatley-english-cannes>
 to this film written and performed by Steve Oram and Alice Lowe. They play 
Chris and Tina, who take a longed-for caravanning holiday together in 
Yorkshire, but find that their romantic freedom morphs into something else: a 
strange and sociopathic taste for violence. This could be British cinema's 
must-see of 2012.30 November
 