
Festival No 6

This festival is aimed at a punter of a certain age – New Order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/neworder>, Primal Scream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/primal-scream> and Spiritualized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/spiritualized> headline – but its secret 
weapon is its amazing DJ lineup:Derrick Carter <http://www.derrickcarter.com/> 
playing a disco set,Erol Alkan <http://www.myspace.com/erolalkan>, Andrew 
Weatherall <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew_Weatherall> and Italo legend 
Daniele Baldelli <http://www.danielebaldelli.com/movie.asp>. Portmerion, Wales, 
14 to 16 September.festivalnumber6.com <http://www.festivalnumber6.com/>



Angel Haze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/aug/26/angel-haze-new-york-rapper?newsfeed=true>



Humilty-free Michigan MC, signed after an apparently ferocious bidding war 
provoked byher YouTube profile <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7y2UV5t_v9I> and 
fantastic mixtape Reservation 
<http://www.datpiff.com/Angel-Haze-Reservation-mixtape.373768.html>, brings her 
thrilling wordplay to a one-off London gig ahead of a hotly anticipated debut 
album.Hoxton Square Bar And Grill, London, 8 October. hoxtonsquarebar.com 
<http://www.hoxtonsquarebar.com/>

Radiohead

The last Radiohead album, the knotty King Of Limbs 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cfOa1a8hYP8>, met with a muted response. 
Nevertheless, they're still without parallel as a stadium band prepared to take 
musical risks rather than play to the crowd.Tour begins Manchester Arena, 6 
October.radiohead.com <http://radiohead.com/tourdates/>

Jialong, Daphni

Caribou's Dan Snaith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/25/caribou-dan-snaith-daphni> had 
limited ambitions for this side-project (Daphni was intended to provide 
club-friendly music to counter what he termed the electronic dance music 
"barfsplosion"), but hisreleases under that name 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6hFdWGE6RWo> have been some of the most 
acclaimed underground dance tracks of recent times: hence the excitement around 
this album.Released 8 October



Hot Chip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/jun/06/hot-chip-in-our-heads-stream>

Electronic quintet follow their triumphant fifth album In Our Heads with a 
full UK tour: imageless and understated as they seem, they are as good as 
anyone at bridging the gap between dancefloor and live gigs, a genuinely great 
live band.Tour begins 8 October, Norwich UEA. hotchip.co.uk/live 
<http://hotchip.co.uk/live/>

The Velvet Underground Featuring Nico, Super Deluxe Edition

If any album deserves the ultra-lavish box-set treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/26/velvet-underground-first-album-reissue>
, it is this incalculably influential and important 1967 debut, bolstered here 
by a disc of alternate versions and rehearsals, a live show from 1966 and 
Nico's beautiful solo debut albumChelsea Girl 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ype6Hw_Hmjo>. Released 29 October



Nicki Minaj <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nicki-minaj>

Smaller shows earlier this year were uneven in quality, though always 
entertaining and occasionally fantastic. Now rapper Minaj reaches the venues 
big enough to cope with her cartoonish persona and multiple alter-egos.Tour 
begins 21 October, Capital FM Arena, Nottingham

Death Grips

Ferocious, wildly unpredictable west-coast punk-rappers Death Grips (equal 
parts cheerily dumb and whip-smart, not averse to cramming hundreds of ideas 
into one chaotic four-minute song) arrive in the UK. It's not the most 
easily-digestible musical stew, but it is utterly unlike anything else.Tour 
begins <http://www.ents24.com/web/artist/165787/Death_Grips.html> 5 November, 
The Fleece, Bristol.
 