
High-profile Republicans, from Governors Rick Perry and Rick Scott to even 
Chris Christie, have gone hoarse these past few weeks in denouncing the 
overflow of migrant detention centers at the US-Central American border as "the 
federal government's failure." All of them have ignored – or blissfully 
forgotten – that privatization, not government overreach, lies at the heart of 
America'ssuppurating arrest and deportation policy 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/06/20/private-prisons-rule-with-little-oversight-on-america-s-border.html>
.

Despite growing evidence that the private prison industry is neither humane 
<http://www.prwatch.org/news/2013/09/12255/violence-abuse-and-death-profit-prisons-geo-group-rap-sheet>
 norcost-effective 
<http://www.inthepublicinterest.org/sites/default/files/Prison%20Costs%20Backgrounder%20Brief_Template.pdf>
, for-profit incarceration has increased dramatically in the past 10 years, and 
nowhere has the boom been more obvious – and had more devastating impact – than 
along the United States' border.

The tragedy of prison privatization is well-documented. For-profit 
institutions allows states topass on overcrowding problems 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/10/25/california-private-prison_n_4157641.html>
 rather than solve them. There islax 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2013/09/18/2637501/federal-court-holds-private-prison-firm-contempt-violating-staffing-agreement/>
attention 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2012/10/09/971431/nations-first-privately-owned-state-prison-riddled-with-violations-of-state-law/>
 togovernment <http://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2013/06/03/pris-j03.html> 
regulations. This is a system designed for thebenefit of its owners 
<http://www.palmbeachpost.com/news/news/dogged-by-complaints-prison-operator-geo-group-kee/nRHZ8/>
, not in the best interests of the state – or the prisoners themselves.

But almost half of all detainees held by Immigrations and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) and US Marshall Servicewere held in private prisons as of 2012 
<http://sentencingproject.org/doc/publications/inc_Dollars_and_Detainees.pdf>, 
and the rate of private incarceration of immigrants has grown at rateshundreds 
of times faster than the rates at government-run prisons. Go ahead, call in the 
National Guard and complain about the US border patrol. But the US Bureau of 
Prisons spent about $600m on private prison contracts in the last fiscal year, 
as private prisons have become the beneficiaries of ICE’s diversion of illegal 
immigrants to "civil detainment", or housing for those not suspected of 
additional crimes.

Indeed, it is President Obama's enforcement of Bush-era deportation policy, 
not the "amnesty" granted to so-called Dreamers, that's created the 
overcrowding and hellish conditions that so define the lives of border 
detainees.

In 2005, the Bush administration introduced bulk proceedings – unrelated 
immigrants tried and sentenced at the same time – and mandatory detention for 
illegal border-crossers, under a program known as Operation Streamline. This 
assembly-line justice, with up to 100 immigrants tried in a single court in a 
single day, continued under Obama, andeats up the time and resources of 
immigration lawyers and judges 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/operation-streamline-immigration-nightmare-arizona-courts>
. (No wonder the children waiting at the border today aresuing 
<https://www.aclu.org/immigrants-rights/groups-sue-federal-government-over-failure-provide-legal-representation-children>
 for representation.) Industrial justice leads to industrial detention: 
Operation Streamline funnels30% of all those convicted into the waiting beds of 
detention centers run by one of the county's three largest for-profit prison 
operators 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/06/20/private-prisons-rule-with-little-oversight-on-america-s-border.html>
.

Those not caught in the cookie-cutter courtrooms, and found guilty in a 
traditional hearing process, usually wind up in one of the country's Criminal 
Alien Requirement facilities. Every single one of them is run by private 
operators. And so almost every cry for "enforcement first" immigration reform – 
or "enforcement only" non-reform – puts a dollar into the pockets of private 
prison companies: In 2005, prior to the Bush administration's swift and harsh 
border policy, the federal government paid out $400m to GEO and Corrections 
Corporation of America (CCA), the two largest gaolers; in 2011 alone, those 
companies billed the US for $1.4b, with immigrantsgenerating 
<http://grassrootsleadership.org/sites/default/files/uploads/GRL_Sept2012_Report-final.pdf>
 about $250,000 a day. And the long-term outlook is rosy: Federal government 
spending on immigrant detention in private centers has gone from $760m in 2002 
toupwards of $1bn annually today 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/a-3-billion-industry-is-going-to-be-slammed-by-immigration-reform-2013-1>
.

In the circular economy of American politics, that money naturally first 
travels through the coffers of lobbyists and legislators. The private prison 
industryspent 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2012/08/03/627471/private-prisons-spend-45-million-on-lobbying-rake-in-51-billion-for-immigrant-detention-alone/>
 $45m on lobbying in the past decade, much of it going toward legislation that 
would simply incarcerate more people. With thewar on drugs slowing 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/cost-cutting-proposal-release-46000-drug-felons-prison/>
, the industry has taken up immigration as a profit center: Companies 
contributed to the campaigns of 30 of the 36 lawmakers behind Arizona's "show 
your papers" law. The industry has also focused its attention on border states 
– Florida, California, and New Mexico – all of which face overcrowding in part 
due to waves of immigrants; even if state prison populations decrease, after 
all, stricter border enforcement creates federal detainees.

Republicans who are not immediately grandstanding on the shoulders of those 
trapped in private detention centers have posed as simply concerned – and angry 
at the federal government. But almost each figure blaming government ineptitude 
is caught up in the insidiousness of private prisons:

 * Texas governor Rick Perry has actually bragged 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/03/07/rick-perry-prison-reform_n_4919768.html>
 about finding common cause with Eric Holder in reducing Texas's prison 
population, but with Monday'sdeployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/21/texas-governor-rick-perry-troops-mexico>
 of 1,000 National Guardsmanagainst 
<http://www.kgns.tv/home/headlines/Perry-orders-up-to-1000-guardsmen-to-border-267987131.html>
 "criminal aliens," he's on track to undo his legacy of reform – and keep alive 
the private prison system that works against it. 
 * Florida governor Rick Scott waded 
<http://www.tampabay.com/blogs/the-buzz-florida-politics/rick-scott-admin-wades-into-border-immigrant-kid-controversy/2189042>
 in on the migrant crisis rather gently on Friday, with a letter from his 
attorney general about children that might be transferred to Florida: "What 
medical services, if any, were provided," it asked, inquiring about infectious 
diseases and "those who may have come through the flawed federal system." Of 
course, that flawed system maybe be paid for by federal government, but at 
least a third of its detention centers are administered by GEO – which is both 
based in Florida and a significantcontributor 
<http://jacksonville.com/news/florida/2013-07-05/story/gov-rick-scotts-re-election-campaign-strong-start-86m>
 to Scott and the Florida Republican party. Just last night, the governor, an 
enthusiastic and over-promisingpromoter 
<http://articles.orlandosentinel.com/2013-09-24/news/os-prison-privatization-failure-20130923_1_prison-population-prison-privatization-prison-system>
 of private prisons in general, wasarm-in-arm 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2014/07/20/3462058/rick-scott-will-headline-fundraiser-at-private-prison-firm-ceos-home/>
 with the company's CEO at a $10,000-a-plate fundraiser. 
 * Chris Christie, quiet of late, simply told 
<http://latino.foxnews.com/latino/politics/2014/07/18/nj-gov-chris-christie-would-help-immigrant-children-has-great-empathy-for-them/>
 Iowans over the weekend that "I have great empathy for that situation." And 
that the children-at-the-border fiasco exists because "the United States that 
the federal government has refused to address this issue in any meaningful 
way." But Christie's tough-on-crime CV includes a close relationship to the 
euphemistically-named Community Education Centers, the president of which is 
Christie's former law partner and political advisor. CEC's laxly-monitored 
halfway houses have beentied 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/17/nyregion/in-new-jersey-halfway-houses-escapees-stream-out-as-a-penal-business-thrives.html?_r=2>
 to prison escapes and further crimes –including sexual abuse on-site 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/06/18/nyregion/at-bo-robinson-a-halfway-house-in-new-jersey-bedlam-reigns.html?pagewanted=all>
 – and it was theonly bidder 
<http://www.nj.com/news/index.ssf/2011/11/politically_connected_group_re.html> 
in a state contract to build an ICE facility. CEC is also theowner 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/01/24/chris_christies_texas_horror_meet_the_scandalous_prison_company_hes_long_promoted/>
 of Texas'smost notorious detention center 
<http://www.detentionwatchnetwork.org/sites/detentionwatchnetwork.org/files/ExposeClose/Expose-Polk11-15.pdf>
, where inadequate medical care and labor exploitation are the norm. So, yes, 
you would hope Chris Christie has "great empathy" for that kind of situation. 
The immigration crisis at the border has blessed – or cursed – potential 
contenders for the 2016 Republican presidential race: the Perrys and Christies 
and Ted Cruzes and Marco Rubios have an opportunity, right now, to hone their 
rhetoric around the policy, cleaving a careful line between calls for more 
forceful border defense and sympathy for those suffering. (Non-contenders can 
indulge in the luxury of purexenophobia 
<http://www.wnd.com/2014/07/bigger-invasion-than-normandy/>.) But prison and 
detention privatization, the underlying factor in the ongoing humanitarian 
tragedy that is immigration policy, presents another obstacle to GOP hopefuls – 
even as the prison industry itself continues to pump money into politics and 
wring profit out of the ongoing crisis at the border.
 