
The year was dominated by the promise of a sense of renewal thanks to the 
early announcement ofnext-generation consoles PlayStation 4 and Xbox One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/01/xbox-one-versus-playstation-4-review>
. Videogames are bound to hardware in a unique, compulsive way, and to witness 
the frenzied mobilisation of marketing forces and consumer lust was to see the 
full rage and noise of the industry brought to bear on a race that is, for now, 
largely ceremonial. Both machines are slick, blank portals of potential; 
together they provided just one of the year's outstanding games â€“Resogun 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1XGwZ0kGO28> on PS4, an old-fashioned arcade 
shooter that reinvents Armageddon as a frantic cascade of beautiful particle 
effects.

In the face of this symbolic rejuvenation, elsewhere the year seemed to be 
doing its best to prove that excellent games could exist on any format 
regardless of age and power. Three very different handheld titles made the cut:
Fire Emblem: Awakening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/apr/28/fire-emblem-awakening-review>
, a devastatingly polished tactical role-player on 3DS; the archaic dystopia of
Device 6 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/26/device-6-review>
("I am not a number!") which builds a landscape from text and cryptic puzzles 
on iOS, and PlayStation Vita capped a much improved second year withTearaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/01/tearaway-game-review> from 
British studio Media Molecule, a platform adventure of rare delicacy, invention 
and meaning, exploring and celebrating the act of creativity.
 Grand Theft Auto V: 'immense ambition'. 
Aside from the console race, the story to attract most media attention was the 
arrival and extraordinary success ofRockstar's Grand Theft Auto V 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grand-theft-auto-5>, a game which makes 
my top 10 list by force of will and by virtue of immense ambition, its detached 
fascination with America and the staggering achievement of its recreation of 
Los Angeles overshadowing occasionally outmoded approaches to mission design 
and,more troublingly, female characters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/21/grand-theft-auto-5-women-misogynistic-violent>
. Another nonconformist giant that made fewer headlines was developerValve 
<http://www.valvesoftware.com/>, although the unveiling of plans to move its 
vast Steam platform into the living room with open-source hardware and a new 
controller might prove the more influential in the long term. The company also 
officially released its long-in-beta arena battlerDota 2 
<http://blog.dota2.com/?l=english>, a game of complexity and compulsion.

On the eve of a new era, two of the year's finest games also made a point of 
looking backwards.The Legend Of Zelda: The Wind Waker HD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/05/zelda-the-wind-waker-hd-review>
 is a carefully crafted remake of the 10-year-old adventure that marries 
nostalgia with advancing technology, playing like a idealised memory of the 
original. AndGone Home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/oct/06/gone-home-review>, by indie 
startup The Fullbright Company, turns the exploration of an empty house in 1995 
into a moving study of family and identity.

Finally, if the dominant model of the PS360 age was the 10-hour scripted 
single-player showcase, it reached suitably climactic heights as the era closed.
Bioshock Infinite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/mar/31/bioshock-infinite-review> 
was a visually glorious dash of American imagery and ideology, a dazzle of 
cultural references and intellectual invention. But the year's best game was 
Naughty Dog'sThe Last of Us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jun/09/the-last-of-us-review>, 
which achieved a level of emotional intimacy generally considered impossible 
for big-budget releases, matched and intensified by lean, brutal gameplay.
 