
Paul Klee 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/ey-exhibition-paul-klee>

In his own eyes, Paul Klee (1879–1940) was a logical thinker whose art was 
built by rational processes. His 1933 painting Fire at Full Moon, with its 
skewed grid of bright, pure colours, expresses his deep sense of harmony and 
beauty. But Klee's abstract methods led him to create poetic images that have a 
special kind of childlike intensity, their bold lines describing angels and 
demons, innocence and experience, like a 20th-century William Blake. As the 
Nazis rose to power his art became primitive and brutal; perhaps only the 
savagery of cave art could do justice to a darkening world. Klee is one of the 
true modern greats, and this generous encounter with his work ought to be 
scintillating.Tate Modern, London, 16 October to 9 March, tate.org.uk 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/>

Australia <http://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibitions/australia>

The complex art traditions of this remarkable continent – from Aboriginal 
dreamings and immigrant Romantic painters to the visionary Sidney Nolan – 
interweave in what promises to be a compelling epic spanning centuries of 
landscape and myth.Royal Academy, London, 21 September to 8 December, 
royalacademy.org.uk <http://royalacademy.org.uk/>

Turner prize 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibitionseries/turner-prize>

The world's leading art prize has an intriguing shortlist and a fresh location 
in Northern Ireland. Laure Prouvost, Tino Sehgal, David Shrigley and Lynette 
Yiadom-Boakye offer provocative takes on what art is, and how it can be judged.
Ebrington, Derry-Londonderry, 23 October to 5 January,
cityofculture2013.com/event/the-turner-prize 
<http://www.cityofculture2013.com/event/the-turner-prize/>

Facing the Modern: The Portrait in Vienna, 1900 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/vienna>

Powerful portraits by such giants as Gustav Klimt, Egon Schiele and Oskar 
Kokoschka should make this a haunting encounter with a city where modern art 
and life in 1900 meant sex and death and uneasy dreams.National Gallery, 9 
October to 12 January,nationalgallery.org.uk 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/>

Sarah Lucas <http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/exhibitions/sarah-lucas>

From her sensational early scatologies to the confident, contemptuous 
surrealism of her most recent objects, Lucas is the real, rude thing – a 
sculptor with the ability to shape horribly fascinating forms out of the raw 
stuff of life.Whitechapel Gallery, London, 2 October to 15 December, 
whitechapelgallery.org <>

Chinese whispers – the volume is turned up

China has been making great art for about 7,000 years, and this autumn Britain 
finally wakes up to the world's longest living art tradition. Long before 
Leonardo da Vinci drew his first landscape, Chinese artists were painting 
seductive and contemplative panoramas of mountains and forests. These 
prodigious pictures will be shown at theV&A <> in its autumn blockbuster 
Masterpieces of Chinese Painting 700-1900 (26 October to 19 January), an 
encounter with some of the world's most dazzling and thoughtful art. This 
survey of China's ethereal paintings is fleshed out by The Chinese Art Book, 
published byPhaidon <http://uk.phaidon.com/agenda/> on 14 October, a gorgeously 
laid out overview in which classics like Chen Rong's Nine Dragons, painted in 
1244, - the original is in the V&A show - are juxtaposed with contemporary 
artists from heroic Ai Weiwei to the fireworks of Cai Guo-Qiang. Britain's 
China autumn also includes a solo show by Shanghai artist Zhang Enli, who is to 
create an ambitious painted installation at theICA 
<http://www.ica.org.uk/?lid=37934> (16 October to 22 December). It's one thing 
for critics and curators to single out the next rising star from China, 
expecting hushed reverence from the general public, but quite another for us to 
genuinely engage with the art of China past and present. That's why China's 
moment this autumn matters. We can see at the V&A, or in The Chinese Art Book, 
how Ai Weiwei comments on millennia of creativity when he exhibits porcelain 
replicas of sesame seeds: back in 940 AD, when dark ages Britain was hunkering 
down against Viking raids, Chinese artist Huang Quan was painting profoundly 
realistic studies of birds and animals. If China is indeed at the forefront of 
modern art in the 21st century, this is no surprise. It has form on being ahead.
 