
Like many journalists in Russia, Elena Milashina is reluctant to talk about 
her work. In 2006, her close friend and collaboratorAnna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya> was assassinated in 
Moscow, shot four times in the entry hall to her block of flats.

It was an event that shocked the journalism community and signalled that the 
climate of mistrust and the suspicion of a free press, encouraged by a Kremlin 
crackdown on independent media, was reaching a new peak.

Politkovskaya had been reporting closely on the wars in Chechnya, where 
separatist groups had been fighting unsuccessfully for independence fromRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, since 1994. By 2006 the region was 
firmly under the control of its Russian-appointed leader, Ramzan Kadyrov, who 
was operating a large private militia accused of savage brutality.

Though Politkovskaya had been warned by many friends and colleagues that she 
was in danger, she decided to keep returning. Thomas de Waal,writing at the 
time of her death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/oct/12/comment.chechnya>, 
described how she had fearlessly reported “on the bombings, torture camps, 
abductions and corruption in Moscow’s second campaign in Chechnya.”

He added: “It felt at times that our news from Chechnya came from a remarkable 
one-woman reporting operation.”

After her death, many of her colleagues left the profession, fearing for their 
own safety. Others decided to stop reporting from the North Caucausus, where 
the bloody conflict was still raging.

I'm not interested in writing about flowers. I like to be helpful and find 
something wrong

But for some women working in the field, her death seemed to have the opposite 
effect.

Anecdotal evidence suggests there are now more independent female than male 
reporters covering the post-Soviet conflict zones, from the North Caucasus to 
eastern Ukraine, and many more women investigating authorities’ abuses and 
corruption.

Common among these women is a desire to right wrongs and expose the Kremlin’s 
corrupt policies. “I’m not interested in writing about flowers,” says 
Milashina. “I like to be helpful and find something wrong – that is my nature. 
I found the best use of this is journalism.”

Now one of Russia’s leading investigative reporters, Milashina is widely seen 
as Politkovskaya’s heir, andhas described the late journalist 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2009/10/29/russian_journalist_elena_milashina_speaks_out>
 as “like a teacher for me”.


Chechnya
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-women-risking-everything-report-russias-frontlines-politkovskaya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e19b62a7b51d8e540b547c0e342cc9e37191659%2F0_165_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20women%20risking%20everything%20to%20report%20from%20Russia's%20frontlines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-women-risking-everything-report-russias-frontlines-politkovskaya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20women%20risking%20everything%20to%20report%20from%20Russia%27s%20frontlines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-women-risking-everything-report-russias-frontlines-politkovskaya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e19b62a7b51d8e540b547c0e342cc9e37191659%2F0_165_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 A poster on a bullet-riddled wall in Grozny showing Vladimir Putin presenting 
a medal to the Chechen leader, Ramzan Kadyrov. Photograph: Viktor 
Drachev/AFP/Getty Images 
After Politkovskaya’s murder, Milashina decided to take over her unfinished 
investigations. They both worked at Novaya Gazeta, one of Russia’s leading 
independent newspapers, reporting on forced disappearances, torture, arbitrary 
detentions, executions and the persecution of the families of alleged Islamist 
insurgents in the North Caucasus.

In the decade since the murder, Milashina has broken a series of important 
stories, from investigatingthe murder of Natalia Estemirova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/14/leads-ignored-natalya-estemirova-russia>
, a human rights campaigner in Grozny, to exposés on Kadyrov’s abuse of power.

Last year she published a story about the forced marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/18/chechen-teenager-forced-marriage-russia>
 of a Chechen 17-year-old to a local police commander 30 years her senior. 
Milashina reported that the policeman, a close ally of Kadyrov, had threatened 
reprisals against the girl’s family if she refused his proposal.

The story prompted outrage when it appeared in Novaya Gazeta, with human 
rights activists calling for the Kremlin to step in and users of social media 
openly criticising Kadyrov’s regime. However, the wedding went ahead, with the 
Chechen leader posting a picture of himself dancing at the party. Milashina was 
then warned that the Chechen police had “shown an interest in her”.

This was not the first time she had attracted the ire of the authorities. In 
addition to ongoing threats and pressure from the Chechen authorities, in April 
2012 Milashina was beaten outside her home in a Moscow suburb and had her 
laptop stolen. Though she was convinced the event was linked to her work, the 
real perpetrators have never been found.

Dagestan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-women-risking-everything-report-russias-frontlines-politkovskaya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a206df76bbf43d7ae21116fd41bf43c5541e78e%2F0_123_1992_1195%2F1992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20women%20risking%20everything%20to%20report%20from%20Russia's%20frontlines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-women-risking-everything-report-russias-frontlines-politkovskaya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20women%20risking%20everything%20to%20report%20from%20Russia%27s%20frontlines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-women-risking-everything-report-russias-frontlines-politkovskaya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a206df76bbf43d7ae21116fd41bf43c5541e78e%2F0_123_1992_1195%2F1992.jpg>
 Russian T-80 tanks prepare to fire on the Dagestani village of Karamakhi in 
1999. Photograph: AP 
Irina Gordienko, who was a young reporter when Politkovskaya was killed, has 
also decided to ignore the risks and carry on investigating the restive North 
Caucasus region. She is one of a handful of journalists travelling in and out 
of the Republic of Dagestan, whose mountains serve as a hideout for groups of 
local militants with ties to Islamic State.

The police and security services have been in a state of war with various 
armed groups there for more than a decade, with locals targeted by both sides. 
Since the early 2000s, militant groups have used apartment blocks and villages 
to target the police, and the authorities have shelled whole communities in 
response.

“I can’t abandon these people, that’s why I keep writing about Dagestan. 
Sometimes there is a hope I can help them,” she says.

In September, Gordienko published a story in Novaya Gazeta about two teenage 
shepherds apparently killed by the local security services while looking after 
livestock in the mountains.

Early on 24 August, a neighbour discovered their bodies outside the village, 
dressed in new clothes and with guns hanging from their shoulders. The police 
claimed they had eliminated two terrorists who had fired at them.

After investigating the killing, Gordienko concluded it was a set-up. She is 
now calling for an official investigation in the belief that the police 
officers decided to kill the young men and present them as militants.

The Orthodox church
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-women-risking-everything-report-russias-frontlines-politkovskaya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F723fa0f104c84f20a2d63c53669fa11ccc00428d%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20women%20risking%20everything%20to%20report%20from%20Russia's%20frontlines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-women-risking-everything-report-russias-frontlines-politkovskaya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20women%20risking%20everything%20to%20report%20from%20Russia%27s%20frontlines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Fthe-women-risking-everything-report-russias-frontlines-politkovskaya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F723fa0f104c84f20a2d63c53669fa11ccc00428d%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Patriarch Kirill poses for a photo at Russia’s Bellingshausen Antarctic 
station. Photograph: Tass 
Svetlana Reiter started her career by looking into the number and plight of 
homeless children in Russia, and the state of healthcare. “But when you write 
about sick children,” she explains, “very soon you start asking why there is a 
shortage of medicine for them.”

Working for popular outlets including Esquire Russia, Lenta.ru 
<https://lenta.ru/> and RBC Daily, Reiter investigated inflated government 
contracts that put up the price of medicines.

Most recently, Reiter, 40, has investigated the relationship between 
businesses and the Russian Orthodox church.

She exposed the fact that the church’s leader, Patriarch Kirill, ran up a bill 
of more than 20m roubles (£250,000) during a trip to Latin America in February. 
According to Reiter’s report, more than half of this money was spent on the 
patriarch’strip to Antarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/18/head-of-russian-orthodox-church-quizzes-penguin-on-antarctica-visit>
, where he presided over a service at the only church on the continent and went 
on a sightseeing trip to see penguins.

Though the wealth of the church is well known, critical articles about the 
patriarch are rare in Russia: the leader is a powerful political actor and 
close friend of the president. She faced a wave of abuse after her piece was 
published, with calls for her to be excommunicated. Fellow journalist Alexander 
Soldatov, editor of Credo.ru, was forced to leave the country after publishing 
critical articles.

Reiter, who has two daughters, knows the dangers but the pull to investigate 
further is too great. “There is always a balance between a common sense and 
curiosity in our profession. But very often curiosity pushes you forward,” she 
says.
 