
With summer holidays a distant memory and many hopeful students having already 
finished their university applications, the race for a coveted uni place is on.


The most competitive courses have the earliest deadlines 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/apply-and-track/key-dates/2016> – 
applications for Oxbridge and medicine and dentistry have to be in by 15 
October and the rest by 15 January. The concept of a clear hierarchy is 
established from the word go. My comprehensive school sets three deadlines for 
applications; Oxbridge and medicine/dentistry, Russell group/competitive 
courses – and then everywhere else.


And heaven help you if your school isn’t geared up to help. Schools 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/researcharchive/the-personal-statement/> with a 
record of sending kids to top universities are like well-oiled machines with 
informed careers advisers and in-depth tactical knowledge of which Oxbridge 
colleges to go for.

On-the-ball schools make generous but sensible grade predictions that cast 
their pupils in a complimentary light without losing credibility with 
universities. The teachers are organised enough to leave plenty of time to 
write references. And they nudge and steer their pupils in a realistic but 
aspirational direction.

I have friends who have paid special tutors to help them fine-tune their 
supposedly personal statements. With some extra cash you can buy a polished 
statement – though there’s no refund if you don’t get your offer. For some 
students, crafting a statement is a team effort, with siblings, parents and 
family friends all chipping in. But others go it alone and are at a 
disadvantage on this unlevel playing field.

Is the Duke of Edinburgh award really uni application gold?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/12/is-the-duke-of-edinburgh-award-really-uni-application-gold>
Inside knowledge of what different universities want is essential but hard to 
fathom for a 17-year-old who has never done this sort of thing before.Cambridge 
<http://www.undergraduate.study.cam.ac.uk/find-out-more/teachers-and-parents/helping-students-prepare>
 is only interested in extracurricular activities and work experience that are 
directly relevant to the course. All those clarinet lessons and traipsing 
around fields for your Duke of Edinburgh award won’t impress that lot, but may 
be relevant for another uni.

Oxford 
<https://uni-of-oxford.custhelp.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/498/%7E/what-should-i-include-in-my-personal-statement%3F>
 similarly says that the vast majority of a personal statement should be 
related to academic study and interest in the course, with about 25% to 
non-academic life.

But you only write one personal statement for all unis you apply to, so have 
4,000 characters (including those precious spaces) to sell yourself to a 
variety of potential takers. Many have to commit grammar catastrophes and omit 
valuable information due to lack of space. It’s a major existential challenge 
to the average 17-year-old whose complex sense of self is hard to sum up in a 
few lines.

Work experience is important for many courses, such as medicine and 
journalism, but is the first major hurdle for many teenagers. Getting your foot 
in the door is nigh on impossible without contacts. And once in, there’s a 
chance that all you’ll end up doing is being bullied and making tea.Which? 
University <http://university.which.co.uk/> advises students to reflect on what 
they learned from the placement in their personal statements, rather than the 
nitty gritty of what they did on work experience.

Poor students need expert advice to get into medical schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/28/poor-students-need-expert-advice-to-get-into-medical-schools>
Extracurricular activities and work placements should apparently be used to 
demonstrate qualities like problem-solving, leadership, teamwork, creativity 
and critical thinking. But how are you supposed to show all that when years of 
exams have sucked the life blood out of you?


Not all courses require candidates to be interviewed, and when they do it’s 
often an unfair process. At my school, those applying to Oxbridge are invited 
to pay £80 up front (non-refundable) for interview training – even before they 
know if they’re going to get an interview. There’s a burgeoning market in 
private interview training and, again, those with siblings and parents who’ve 
been through the process are at a huge advantage compared to those who are the 
first to apply in their family.


The Universities and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas 
<https://www.ucas.com/ucas/undergraduate/getting-started/when-apply/writing-personal-statement>
) highlights the importance of proofreading your final copy and letting family 
and friends read what you’ve written. That’s all very well if you come from 
that kind of family. Tough luck if you don’t.

The Ucas process works in favour of those who can afford the extra help on 
offer, and greatly disadvantages everyone else. Personal statements are being 
written by teams of experts; they’re not personal and certainly not meaningful 
statements.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 