
What’s the price of failure? For Yahoo’s boss, Marissa Mayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/marissa-mayer>, it could be about 
$137m. Bids are now in for the ailing tech company – and no matter who gets it, 
Mayer is set to be one of the biggest winners.

Mayer has taken home $78m since she was installed as CEO in 2012, according to 
stock analytics firm MSCI; if she’s dismissed from the company after a buyout 
she’s set for another $59m, based on the terms of the company’s most recent 
proxy statement.

By the numbers: why big-name businesses are bidding for Yahoo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/yahoo-bid-marissa-mayer-daily-mail-verizon>
Mayer’s performance pay and vested options peaked in 2014 at $48m (double the 
previous year’s salary).Yahoo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo> 
has yet to finalise this year’s pay package so the final figure is yet to be 
determined, but few are expecting her to take home just her base salary, in 
excess of $2m.

Yahoo’s earnings are scheduled for Tuesday after the close of the New York 
Stock Exchange. Mayer and the board are under siege, but they have recently 
retrenched: in March the company added two new board members without consulting 
Starboard Value, the activist investor that has openly criticized Mayer’s 
management. Starboard isnow calling for the company’s entire board to be 
replaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/24/yahoo-starboard-value-board-fired-financial-performance>
.

Despite the company’s fundamental problems – it has lost the ad wars to Google 
and Facebook and bet billions on new businesses that have failed to take off – 
Yahoo’s share price is still in better shape than it was when she started. The 
rally in the stock price is entirely due to its holding inAlibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba>, China’s largest e-commerce 
company.

Shares are close to their mid-2014 levels, in fact, and that almost certainly 
means Mayer is owed further cash whether she keeps or loses her job or the 
company is sold.


Mayer has benefited from a low “strike price” for her stock options: $18.87, 
the cost of the company’s shares on 29 November, 2012. According to Yahoo’s 
most recent proxy, the last time those shares were sold, 27 February 2014,they 
were worth more than twice that 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-12-09/marissa-mayer-s-unusual-options-buoy-her-pay-even-as-yahoo-falls>
.

“It looks like there were six separate tranches reported at this time, based 
on a combination of the year of the award versus the year of vesting versus the 
portion of the original offering involved,” said MSCI’s Ric Marshall of the 
2014 proxy filing. “For example, one tranche would be for the 2014 vesting of 
the 2013 ‘make whole’ award, and so on. But all are based on the same exercise 
price of $18.87 per share.”

Mayer’s original contract provides for an annual equity award, a “make whole” 
award to compensate her for the share options she lost when she left Google, 
her previous employer, and a one-time retention award. All three are spread out 
over different parts of her five-year term of employment, and all are based on 
the company’s share price on November 29, 2012: $18.87. The awards are $12m, 
$14m and $30m respectively, based on heroffer letter 
<https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1011006/000119312512307595/d384719dex101.htm>
.
Mayer's declared pay since she joined Yahoo in 2012. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/04/yahoo-mayer/>  Mayer’s declared 
pay since she joined Yahoo in 2012. 
Marshall is MSCI’s executive director of environmental, social and governance 
research at the firm and he says much of the eventual compensation depends upon 
the decisions of the board: “What you can’t say is how the committee will 
evaluate the performance and what percentage of the original target they will 
deem as having been met,” he said.

 The board’s assessment of her performance is expected later this month. Given 
that there are bids open for Yahoo’s core assets, however, experts say that 
filing may be delayed.

While nothing is cut and dried yet, the smallest amount Mayer could make at 
the company is about $80m if she receives absolutely no more of her long-term 
incentives – $78m plus her base salary of $2m.

“Until the new proxy is out it isn’t really possible to say how much Mayer 
will ultimately end up making, or to what extent she will be entitled to any 
additional severance amounts,” said Marshall.

Investors see the board as unduly supportive of Mayer.


There is reason for shareholders to worry: Starboard thinks that the net value 
of the “Yahoo stub”, that is to say, Yahoo without its stake in Alibaba, is 
worthless. With the amount of money a purchasing company would have to pay 
Mayer to leave in the event of a change in ownership –$59.3m 
<http://www.sfgate.com/business/article/Marissa-Mayer-s-severance-is-worth-59-million-6684882.php>
 in numbers adjusted for share price from the company’s most recent proxy 
filing – Yahoo’s value by Starboard’s reckoning would be negative.

“The firm buying her knows all about this,” said Alan Johnson of compensation 
consulting firm Johnson Associates. “They’re not going to pay for it. That’s 
coming out of the hide of Yahoo’s shareholders – everybody’s got that in their 
spreadsheets. They look at this as another sunk cost, like a bad lease.”

In a word, Starboard is afraid shareholders may end up having to pay someone 
to haul Yahoo away.

Marshall told the Guardian he’s seen that happen in the past. “It has been 
proven more expensive to sell a company because of the change in control than 
it is to just bankrupt it.” He hopes it won’t be the case at Yahoo, he said.

 