
Western medicine doesn’t know it all. There are treatments that don’t work at 
all well, others that work for reasons that nobody can fathom, and all sorts of 
others again that are still to be discovered. It is also true – as western 
medicine itself has firmly established – that the sugar pill can sometimes be a 
wonder drug. The administration of anything with the form of a treatment can do 
real good, and remarkably this applies even wherethe patient knows that 
“treatment” is nothing but a placebo 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2015/07July/Pages/The-placebo-effect-can-still-work-even-if-people-know-its-a-placebo.aspx>
.Administering placebos with extra ritual 
<http://harvardmagazine.com/2013/01/the-placebo-phenomenon> appears to redouble 
the effect, and so it would be no surprise, either, if a spoonful of 
mumbo-jumbo helped the medicine go down.

Homeopathy on prescription could be banned from NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/13/homeopathy-prescription-banned-from-nhs>
All this may sound like an argument for the NHS to give homeopathy a go. Sure, 
there might be, asthe health service bluntly surmises 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/homeopathy/Pages/Introduction.aspx#does-it-work>, 
no decent evidence of any effect. Sure, too, the homeopathic practice of 
diluting agents until there are no molecules leftdefies not only science, but 
common sense too 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/homeopathy/Pages/introduction.aspx>. No matter, 
it may be said, if the quackery can work placebo magic, then that’s OK. But 
this line of thinking is confused. Ministers arequite right to consider 
blacklisting <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-34744858> homeopathy from the 
English health service.

For why should this one form of mock medicine be favoured over others? Until 
and unless homeopathy can outperform general placebo effects, it is surely 
better to stick with sugar pure and simple, rather than squandering time and 
effort on the dilution charade. In this era of punishingly tough financial 
choices, every frittered resource leaves theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> failing to fund something else that’s 
important.

If magical thinking is allowed into one corner of medicine, how are doctors 
supposed to root it out in other contexts?

More controversially, there is also an educational duty on the NHS here; it is 
meant to foster public health, which means encouraging public understanding of 
science. It cannot do so while lending its chequebook and its good name to 
homeopathy. If magical thinking is allowed into one corner of medicine, then 
how are doctors supposed to root it out in other contexts? When, for example, 
they confront the smoker, who maintains, in the face of all evidence, that 
their habit will do them no harm because they know an old lady who reached 99 
while getting through 30 a day; or the patient demanding antibiotics that 
cannot conceivably do anything at all for their viral infection?

Medics must grapple with many such irrational impulses. They will be best 
placed to do if they act consistently on the evidence. And that means saying no 
to homeopathy.
 