
For all its promise and the growth graphs shaped like hockey sticks I see as 
standard at every digital conference I attend, it's a reality that my 
generation will not experience a more disruptive force in our entire lifetimes 
than that of the smartphone.

So ingrained in our lives are our smart devices that faux medical conditions 
have been created, the pick of the bunch being ringxiety (the phenomenon of 
mistakenly checking your mobile phone in the belief that you are receiving a 
call) and phantom vibration syndrome. And not to be forgotten, the Daily Mail's 
warning that pedestrian-related mobile phone injuries have doubled in the last 
five years and are set to do the same again by 2015.

Smart devices – by which I count smartphones, tablets and the perfectly 
balanced portmanteau phablets – in their mere seven-year existence have begun 
to replace countless things in our day-to-day lives. Satnavs, torches, alarm 
clocks, remote controls, pocket translation books, photo albums, cameras, USB 
sticks, compact mirrors, portable games consoles, golf scorecards, guitar 
tuners, baby monitors, digital radios – the list goes on. The Guardian itself 
even signalledthe demise of Ordnance Survey in its paper maps form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/19/end-of-the-road-ordnance-survey-rachel-hewitt>
 last month and the meteoric rise of Snapchat has as good as killed off kids 
writing love letters to each other. It seems that even the most trivial of 
items cannot escape impending doom by way of smartphone, with Ellie Goulding 
tweeting from her US tour earlier this year:"Last nights [sic] show was a first 
… people throwing iPhones onstage. So naturally I took selfies on them and 
threw them back" <https://twitter.com/elliegoulding/status/448498941525377024>. 
Imagine going back in time and telling Sir Tom on his knicker-strewn stage in 
the Seventies that in less than 40 years gig-goers would be hurling £600 mini 
computers at his pop star equivalents instead.

Not only have smartphones replaced things, but they've created new behaviours 
with second screening and showrooming being most prevalent. They've also forced 
us to renegotiate manners and etiquette as devices get pulled out and pored 
over in meetings, over dinner and in the bedroom.Banksy's Mobile Lovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/17/banksy-mobile-lovers-display-bristol-youth-club-removed-police>
 captures this social dilemma brilliantly and New York band The Yeah Yeah Yeahs 
proactively ask fans tocome and be "in the moment" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/shortcuts/2013/apr/10/yeah-yeah-yeahs-phones-gigs>
 instead of viewing their gigs through via a smartphone screen. Of course, the 
generation-defining selfie itself is a product of having a front-facing camera 
on our smartphones and has spurned embarrassing politicians, duck pouts and the 
occasional hit pop song.

Arguably, the smartphone's impact on time is the biggest disruption of all. 
The ability to access any nugget of information within 30 seconds has empowered 
today's generation of smartphone owners like never before. This new sense of 
immediacy has shortcutted the way we complain, translate words, order 
takeaways, and navigate comfortably around places we've never visited before. 
What's more, smart devices have filled in gaps that used to exist in our day 
before we carried smartphones around in our pockets and purses – essentially 
rendering dead time as dead.

It is in this disruption of time that brands and advertisers should sense the 
biggest opportunity, be that an acknowledgement of mobile's ability to 
dismantle the traditional funnel that has served marketers since the dawn of 
advertising or create moments of time to give back to customers as a reward 
just likeKitKat have done in Amsterdam 
<http://adsoftheworld.com/media/ambient/kit_kat_free_nowifi_zone>, allowing 
consumers to enter a "Free No Wi-Fi Zone" and literally "Take a Break".

Google's Eric Schmidt captures mobile's trajectory brilliantly, stating that: 
"The pace of change now is the slowest it will ever be." With that in mind, 
expect an abundance of mobile-driven disruption happening faster than we could 
ever imagine it.

James Chandler is global mobile director at Mindshare 
<http://www.mindshareworld.com/>. You can find him on Twitter @jameschand1er 
<https://twitter.com/jameschand1er>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled as Advertisement feature. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 