
An independent editorial review of the ABC’s business coverage has invited 
rightwing thinktank the Institute of Public Affairs to put in a submission on 
what it thinks is wrong with Aunty’s attitude to the corporate sector. It is 
the first time reviewers have called for submissions from outside parties, and 
it is perhaps somewhat surprising they’ve asked an outfit that believes the ABC 
should be privatised to have an input.

According to an IPA report on the ABC in 2014: “Only privatising the ABC will 
resolve the public policy failure that sees more than $1bn of taxpayers’ money 
annually spent campaigning for leftwing causes.”

Q&A does not have 'leftwing anti-Coalition bias', leaked report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/10/qa-does-not-have-leftwing-anti-coalition-bias-leaked-report-finds>
Earlier this year the ABC board appointed the former ANZ chief executive Mike 
Smith and the former BBC broadcaster Kerry Blackburn to examine whether there 
is “perceptible bias” in favour or against companies, and whether the ABC’s 
business news and programs offered a sufficient range of interviewees and 
subjects. This is the eighth such review and comes after the high-profile one
journalist Ray Martin and former SBS boss Shaun Brown conducted into Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/10/qa-does-not-have-leftwing-anti-coalition-bias- 
leaked-report-finds> last year.

Smith and Blackburn chose to ask for submissions from companies, unions and 
the like so the ABC’s editorial director, Alan Sunderland, wrote to the IPA, 
among others, and asked for 1,000 words of wisdom. The IPA was, of course, 
delighted. The thinktank’s director of energy and innovation policy,Brett Hogan 
<https://ipa.org.au/people/brett-hogan>, said he was “happy to oblige” when he 
got the letter from Sunderland.

“Notwithstanding our criticisms, full credit to the ABC, by the way, for 
asking us for comment,” Hogan told Weekly Beast.

The IPA has already passed judgment on the ABC and a 2014 report about its 
coverage of the energy sector 
<http://ipa.org.au/portal/uploads/IPA-Public-broadcaster-or-green-activist-How-the-ABC-spins-Australias-energy-choices-August2014.pdf>
 concluded it was hopelessly biased in favour of renewables: “The ABC treated 
the renewable energy industry highly favourably, the coal industry 
unfavourably, and the coal seam gas (CSG) industry highly unfavourably.”

Royal blue

It was such a romantic story. HRH prince Saud Bin Khalid Al-Faisal, 
honeymooning in Australia recently, had booked out the 300-seat O Bar at 
Australia Square from 11.30pm to 3am for the sole use of him and his new wife, 
the Sun-Herald’slifestyle reporter, Jenna Clarke 
<http://www.smh.com.au/lifestyle/by/Jenna-Clarke>, wrote.

The “glamorous, clean-eating couple” dined on Fraser Island crab with 
compressed melon non-alcoholic aperitif, a 400-gram sirloin on the bone and a 
cup of tea with two sugars, said the detailed report. But on Sunday the 
fairytale date went up in flames when the paper ran an apology, saying the 
prince had never been to Australia, never mind to the O Bar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fthe-weekly-beast-rightwing-institute-of-public-affairs-gets-a-say-on-abc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f9a79023f544f4142ce949a35583123694cbade%2F15_183_723_434%2F723.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20rightwing%20Institute%20of%20Public%20Affairs%20gets%20a%20say%20on%20ABC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fthe-weekly-beast-rightwing-institute-of-public-affairs-gets-a-say-on-abc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20rightwing%20Institute%20of%20Public%20Affairs%20gets%20a%20say%20on%20ABC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fthe-weekly-beast-rightwing-institute-of-public-affairs-gets-a-say-on-abc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f9a79023f544f4142ce949a35583123694cbade%2F15_183_723_434%2F723.jpg>
 An index page for the Sun-Herald writer Jenna Clarke, including the piece 
about the Saudi prince, Saud Bin Khalid Al-Faisal, booking out the O Bar in 
Sydney, which was the subject of a subsequent correction. Photograph: smh.com.au
“An article headlined ‘Saudi prince books out Sydney’s iconic O Bar for date 
night with wife’ in last week’s column incorrectly named HRH prince Saud Bin 
Khalid Al-Faisal as attending a function at the O Bar.Fairfax Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fairfax-media> recognises that HRH prince 
Saud has never visited Australia and apologises for any inconvenience that the 
article may have caused.”

Wait. “Attending a function at the O Bar”? That wasn’t what you reported. 
According to Clarke the prince had “requested O Bar at Australia Square be shut 
down for the evening”.

Weekly Beast asked the O Bar’s Michael Moore, who appeared to be the source 
for the story, who the mystery diner was if not the prince. He was no help, 
simply saying: “As far as we are concerned the matter is closed and we have no 
further comment.”

We also asked the Sun-Herald’s editor, David Rood, and Clarke what had gone 
wrong and Rood would only say he had apologised and that was the end of the 
matter. But the fairytale lives on. It waswritten up by the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3466707/Saudi-Prince-books-entire-300-seat-Opera-Bar- 
extravagant-date-night-new-wife-Harbour-Bridge.html> and Business Insider 
<http://www.businessinsider.com.au/a-saudi-prince-booked-one-of-sydneys-most-exclusive-bars-to- 
impress-his-wife-2016-2> and their versions remain online.

Nuts and Bolt of Pell interview

There was a curious footnote to Andrew Bolt’s travels in Rome last week. 
OriginallyBolt’s exclusive interview with Cardinal George Pell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/04/george-pell-tells-andrew-bolt-he-wont-resign-from- 
vatican-position>, which ran live on Sky News on Friday night, was going to be 
produced by Simon Nasht, the man behind Bolt’s upcoming ABC documentary I Can 
Change Your Mind About Recognition.

Bolt is filming the doc this year with the Indigenous Labor MP Linda Burney 
and it will screen on Aunty next year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fthe-weekly-beast-rightwing-institute-of-public-affairs-gets-a-say-on-abc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90c71549d8967e49f0d02bfb336eb145943eb9af%2F0_0_2520_1512%2F2520.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20rightwing%20Institute%20of%20Public%20Affairs%20gets%20a%20say%20on%20ABC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fthe-weekly-beast-rightwing-institute-of-public-affairs-gets-a-say-on-abc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Weekly%20Beast%3A%20rightwing%20Institute%20of%20Public%20Affairs%20gets%20a%20say%20on%20ABC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmar%2F10%2Fthe-weekly-beast-rightwing-institute-of-public-affairs-gets-a-say-on-abc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90c71549d8967e49f0d02bfb336eb145943eb9af%2F0_0_2520_1512%2F2520.jpg>
 George Pell speaks to Andrew Bolt in an exclusive interview on Sky on Friday 
night. Photograph: Sky 
Before Sky confirmed it would screen the interview last week, Weekly Beast 
heard that Nasht had offered it to the commercial broadcasters for a price but 
they had knocked it back.

Nasht told us: “No, I am not involved with anything Andrew is doing in Rome 
right now. We spoke some time ago about his offer from Pell’s office about a 
potential interview and I explored it with some broadcasters, but nothing came 
of it. His arrangements with Sky and his radio network are all his own work.”

Bed of roses for redunded journos?

Here at the Weekly Beast we are always on the look out for jobs for 
journalists as so many have lost theirs due to the digital revolution in news 
and the collapse of print advertising. This week we spotted the headline 
“Mattress company hires journalists”in the Wall Street Journal 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/cmo/2015/05/04/dont-sleep-on-content-marketing/> and were 
intrigued.

What would journalists do at a mattress company? Well, the US startup mattress 
brand Casper is hiring journalists for a new website about the worthy topic of 
sleep, and they have already picked up some impressive hacks, including a 
former editor-in-chief of the New York Observer and a founding editor of 
gawker.com, the WSJ said.

This is not unusual. Companies everywhere are hiring journalists to write 
content for their brands and many promise the content will be real journalism 
and not marketing. But the jury is still out on that.

Casper’s communications guy is adamant his mattress journalists will be 
practising their craft: “I’m hiring journalists, not marketers.”

Whelan takes the wheel at Sydney Morning Herald

As part of the restructure which saw the departure of the Age’s 
editor-in-chief, Andrew Holden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/17/the-age-editor-in-chief-andrew-holden-quits-as- 
fairfax-media-restructures>, last month, on Thursday the Sydney Morning Herald 
appointed the news director – and former Good Weekend magazine editor – Judith 
Whelan, as its second female editor, after Amanda Wilson, who was the first 
female editor in the paper’s 185-year history.

Lessons from Louise: the story of Paul Sheehan and the Sydney Morning Herald
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/lessons-from-louise-the-story-of-paul-sheehan-and-the-sydney-morning-herald>
Whelan’s main role will not, however, be to edit the daily paper, as editors 
traditionally have done. In keeping with the digital age, she will prioritise 
smh.com.au and oversee the paper, which will be edited by someone else.


The Herald’s editor-in-chief, Darren Goodsir 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/judith-whelan- 
appointed-editor-of-the-sydney-morning-herald-as-masthead-achieves-record-readership- 
20160309-gnevrk.html#ixzz42Rzi3DZN>, says Whelan will “oversee the 
implementation of the restructure, aimed at strengthening the Herald’s 
significant advances in digital journalism”.

But that’s not all in big Herald moves. Last Friday Goodsir chose to suspend 
rather than sack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/04/paul-sheehan-suspended-%20sydney-morning-herald-false-rape-story>
 the highly paid veteran columnist Paul Sheehan, but just a few days later 
decided that two high-profile writers were not worth saving from the axe.

All the background to Sheehan’s incredible survival against the odds at the 
SMH can be found herein this terrific read by Richard Cooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/lessons-from-louise-the-story-of-paul-sheehan- 
and-the-sydney-morning-herald>. Wendy Harmer 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/by/Wendy-Harmer> and John Birmingham 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/by/John-Birmingham>, who shared the same space 
in the weekend paper, have been replaced by in-house writer Jacqueline Maley as 
a cost-saving measure. (Birmo will, however, still appear inFairfax’s Brisbane 
Times <http://www.brisbanetimes.com.au/comment/by/John-Birmingham-hvf2q]>. And 
Harmer is the mornings presenter on ABC 702.)

Not to be outdone, the Australian also announced its new editor on Thursday, 
to replace Clive Mathieson who left last month for a job in NSW premier Mike 
Baird’s office. Taking on the job of running the national broadsheet is John 
Lehmann, a veteran News Corp reporter and editor who had the dubious honour of 
being the last editor of Kerry Packer’s The Bulletin magazine before it closed 
down. Lehmann, who took some time off to work in the wine industry, has worked 
for the Courier Mail, the Daily Telegraph and Rupert Murdoch’s New York Post. 
He answers to fellow Queenslander Paul Whittaker, the Oz’s editor-in-chief.
 