
In today's G2 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/g2> and on guardian.co.uk/culture 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture>, we publish the results 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2010/apr/26/election-2010-poster-politics>
 of our challenge to British artists to come up with an alternative poster 
design, to represent any party of their choosing for the forthcoming election.

The resulting posters vary in style and tone: Alison Jackson hunted high and 
low for Brown, Cameron and Clegg lookalikes for herimagined scenes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2010/apr/26/election-2010-poster-politics>
 backstage at the leader debates;Martin Parr provided a depiction of 
contemporary Britain 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2010/apr/26/election-2010-poster-politics?picture=361891993>
 for his apolitical poster;Jeremy Deller addressed Rupert Murdoch's involvement 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/gallery/2010/apr/26/election-2010-poster-politics?picture=361890219>
 in the election.

Guardian art critic Jonathan Jones writes of the posters 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2010/apr/27/general-election-2010-political-poster>
:

This is a British election and these are British artists, who have rejected 
the Saatchi tendency towards killer publicity in favour of recapturing the 
intense emotions of us-and-them, of anger and loyalty, that Labour adverts 
inspired 25 years ago.

But as this has been the election of the poster - thanks to the ingenuity of 
web users rather than the parties' official campaigns, as this blog has noted - 
we want to see your variations on the theme, be it a Photoshopped parody, or an 
artwork in tribute to the party you love.

Send submissions to your.pictures@guardian.co.uk 
<mailto:your.pictures@guardian.co.uk> along with your name, address, telephone 
number and a comment about the inspiration behind your poster. A selection of 
the best will appear inG2 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/g2> and on 
guardian.co.uk/culture <http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture>. By submitting your 
poster you agree to ourterms and conditions <http://www.guardian.co.uk/terms>.
 