
Since the European court of human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> (ECHR) in 
Strasbourg first began handing down judgments in 1960, successive decisions 
have transformed the legal landscape of the United Kingdom.

Often rulings have not been immediately welcomed by the government of the day. 
Sometimes they have been dismissed as inventing fresh rights. Many, over the 
course of time, have come to be seen as inevitable milestones in the march of 
progress.

Opponents of the ECHR’s developing case law fear that the courts ever 
expanding interpretations of the European convention on human rights has turned 
it in effect into a law-making body. Supporters describe it as a “living 
instrument”, through which fundamental rights are applied to changes in society.

Even Lady Hale, deputy president of the supreme court and a staunch defender 
of theHuman Rights Act <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act>, has 
expressed concern that “the current problem facing both Strasbourg and the 
member states is whether there are any limits to how far the [convention] can 
be developed”.

Among the landmark judgments that changed the law are:

• Ireland v UK. 
<http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-73559> The 1978 
ECHR decision ruled that the British army’s use of five techniques on detainees 
– wall-standing (forcing detainees to remain in a “stress position” for hours, 
spreadeagled against the wall), hooding, subjection to noise, and deprivation 
of sleep, food and drink – amounted to inhuman and degrading treatment.

• Sunday Times v UK. 
<http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-57584> The 1979 
ruling from the ECHR in Strasbourg overturned a court injunction imposed on 
reports by the Sunday Times about the thalidomide compensation cases.

Thomas Hughes, executive director of the free speech organisation Article 19, 
commented: “From the 1970s when the ECHR supported the Sunday Times’ 
publication of the thalidomide scandal, to curbing court abuses during the 
McLibel trials, the ECHR has filled the gap where there are bad court 
decisions, repressive UK laws, or simply no laws at all. As a final court of 
appeal it has shown time and again that it is a vital backstop when the British 
courts fail to protect free speech.”

• Dudgeon v UK 
<http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-57473>. In a 
famous victory for gay rights, the ECHR ruled in 1981 that the criminalisation 
of homosexuality in Northern Ireland was illegal.

Jonathan Cooper, a human rights lawyer and chair of the Human Dignity Trust, a 
gay rights group, said: “The European convention on human rights, which was 
drafted by an eminent Scottish Conservative, recognised that across Europe we 
needed enforceable human rights. The British were the first to sign up to it. 
Those rights are now part of UK law through the Human Rights Act.

“They fill gaps missing in UK law, such as the right to privacy and protest. 
In reality there is nothing more British than the Human Rights Act. And through 
it, our values are being woven into human rights law across the globe. With 
human rights comes peace and security. Will so-called British rights be as 
effective? We replace the Human Rights Act at our peril.”

• Hirst v UK 
<http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-70442>. The 2005 
ruling by the ECHR granting some prisoners voting rights has yet to be enforced 
by the British government. It has become the test case over Strasbourg’s 
authority and on which the Conservative’s new policy is founded.

The prime minister, David Cameron, said of the ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/13/prisoners-right-to-vote-david-cameron>
: “If parliament decides that prisoners should not get the vote then I think 
they damn well shouldn’t. It should be a national decision taken in our 
parliament.”

The adoption of the Human Rights Act in 1998 meant that British courts 
routinely began to base their decisions on rights in the European convention of 
human rights.

• In 2010 Aso Mohammed Ibrahim, a Kurdish asylum seeker who caused the death 
of a 12 year girl in a driving accident, avoided deportation.Tabloid papers 
seized upon the fact that he had claimed the right to a family life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/libertycentral/2010/dec/28/human-rights-act-aso-mohammed-ibrahim>
, enshrined in article 8 of the convention, to avoid deportation at an 
immigration tribunal.

The prime minister remarked of the case: “My personal response is one of great 
anger that this is allowed to happen. Here we have an Iraqi asylum seeker 
convicted of an offence that led to the death of a child and yet we are being 
told that there is no way that this person can be deported to Iraq.”

• Al-Jedda <http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-105612>
 andAl-Skeini 
<http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-105606> v UK. 
Judgments in Strasbourg in 2011 said that those detained in Iraq by UK armed 
forces were subject to the jurisdiction of the European court of human rights.

• Abu Qatada v UK 
<http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-108629>. A 2012 
judgment by the ECHR said that the preacher could not be deported to Jordan 
because of the risk that he would be tried there on evidence obtained by 
torture. The Jordanians eventually gave undertakings not to use such evidence 
and he was finally removed in 2013 – where he stood trial and was acquitted 
last month.

At the time, Theresa May, the home secretary, blamed the ECHR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/03/abu-qatada-appeal-home-secretary>
, saying the radical Islamist cleric would have been sent back to Jordan long 
ago had it not “moved the goalposts” by establishing new, unprecedented legal 
grounds for blocking his deportation.

No one could argue that the impact of Strasbourg’s case law has been 
insignificant. Limiting its role in future will diminish its contribution.

Professor Philippe Sands QC, who was a member of the coalition government’s 
stalematedCommission on a Bill of Rights <http://www.justice.gov.uk/about/cbr>, 
warned that the Conservatives’ proposal “has no support in Northern Ireland, 
Wales or Scotland, but will be warmly embraced by President Putin.

“It’s a recipe for lawlessness, a return to the rights-free world of the 
1930s. A shameful day for Britain and the rule of law,” he said.

However, Michael Pinto-Duschinsky, another member of the ill-fated Bill of 
Rights Commission, defended the justice secretary’s plans to allow parliament 
to select which of Strasbourg’s rulings are incorporated into UK law. He said: 
“We want the [ECHR] to be like the canary in the mine. To be taken seriously, 
but not the final authority.”
 