
Mrs Biggs 


ITV looks at the Great Train Robbery from the point of view of Ronnie Biggs' 
then wife, Charmian. The underrated Sheridan Smith plays the titular role with 
great style, while Danny Mays is excellent as her infamous husband.ITV, 
September

Hunted

It looks like Spooks <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/spooks>, sounds 
like Spooks, and is even made by the same company. But BBC1's new international 
spydrama starring Melissa George <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8BnUkJc6qlg> – 
a co-production with HBO's Cinemax – is altogether more high-end, with MI5 
ditched in favour of spying for paying clients. It is, possibly, even more 
ludicrous.BBC1, October 

Hotel GB

Either a brilliant idea or a hideous one: let viewers check in to a hotel run 
by C4 stars includingGordon Ramsay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jun/08/gordon-ramsay-behind-bars>
 andMary Portas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/mar/23/mary-portas-interview> 
(dare you to leave them a bad Trip Advisor review) and help to raise cash for 
employment charities. Book by emailingbeahotelguest@optomen.com 
<mailto:beahotelguest@-optomen.com>. Channel 4, October

Girls

British audiences have had to wait for HBO's comedy drama about a group of 
20-something women <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KyzUG2nyf5k> living in New 
York. ButLena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/mar/23/lena-dunham-tiny-furniture-emma-brockes>
's show – she writes, stars and sometimes directs – finally makes its way to UK 
screens this autumn following largely positive US reviews.Sky Atlantic, October



Playhouse Presents … A Young Doctor's Notebook

Daniel Radcliffe and Jon Hamm star in an adaptation of Mikhail Bulgakov's 
short stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/18/daniel-radcliffe-jon-hamm-sky-arts>
 for the Playhouse Presents strand. The four-part drama draws on Bulgakov's 
time as a doctor during the Russian revolution. Hamm as the central character 
talks to his younger self, played by Radcliffe.Sky Arts, December

The Girl

BBC2 has been on fine form, with a series of ambitious dramas. The latest is 
The Girl, starringToby Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/aug/19/toby-jones-interview> as 
Alfred Hitchcock and Sienna Miller as Tippi Hedren, the last of the "Hitchcock 
blondes". The single drama explores Hitchcock's obsession with the star ofThe 
Birds <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R2Im8Lu5pP0>. BBC2, December
 