
The first page took your breath away: a mortified 14-year-old girl has started 
writing letters to God because she can tell no one else that, although "he 
never had a kine word to say to me", "he" [her putative daddy] has raped her 
and warned that she "better … git used to it". Page two, letter two: her mama 
dead and she "big" with her second baby. He "kilt" the first. "Kill this one, 
too if he can." Letter three: the letter-writer has a little sister she will 
protect "with God help". Letter four: sister Nettie has a friend named Mr ___. 
Letter seven: Mr ___ wants to marry Nettie but he carries a picture of a 
beautiful, worldly woman named Shug Avery in his wallet. The letter-writer is 
mesmerised by Shug Avery.

We in turn are mesmerised by the letter-writer's pitiable but profoundly 
perceptive, truthful voice. "Negro dialect", now called "folk speech": we might 
not have been ready for it before – thought it ignorant or demeaning, some of 
us – but we're ready for it now. This voice is clear, simple but not 
simplistic, allowing us no escape. Letter eight: Mr ___ will marry the 
letter-writer instead of Nettie, not because he likes her, but because – stupid 
and ugly as she is – she'll be a good worker. And she finally reveals her name. 
She is Celie, embarking on a 40-year journey that will take her from 
bewilderment, through degradation, bestowed and reciprocated love, to self-love 
and personal agency.

The Color Purple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780753818923/the-color-purple>
, a simple yet intriguing title, was published in 1982. Alice Walker, the 
eighth child of southern sharecropping parents, was 38 and already the author 
of three poetry collections, one volume of essays, two previous novels, and an 
editor ofMs. Magazine, the women's movement's well-financed and glossy American 
mouthpiece <http://nymag.com/news/features/ms-magazine-2011-11/>. In other 
words, she was not unknown to those of us who cared about the African-American 
female literary voice. Nor was the novel's terrain an unacknowledged world: a 
candid exploration of sometimes toxic relationships between black men and black 
women, the struggle of black women for self-appreciation and personal power. We 
had read of this in Zora Neale Hurston and Carlene Hatcher Polite, in Gayl 
Jones and Toni Morrison, heard it sung in countless blues as well as the poetry 
of Sonia Sanchez and Ntozake Shange to name but a few. But Walker's track 
record and The Color Purple's singular clarity made the outside (white) 
literary establishment take notice. In 1983, Walker became the first 
African-American woman to win both the Pulitzer and National Book awards for 
fiction, amid all hell breaking loose.

What Walker has defined as "womanism" caused an uproar in many corners of the 
African-American establishment, full of indignance at what was judged her 
"negative imagery" of the black male, the black family. We had been this way 
before, with Ntozake Shange'sFor Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When 
the Rainbow Is Enuf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/poetry/9780413385604/for-colored-girls-who-have-considered-suicide-when-the-rainbow-is-enuf>
 in 1976, with Michelle Wallace'sBlack Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/society/9781859842966/black-macho-and-the-myth-of-the-superwoman>
 in 1979, and with Toni Morrison'sThe Bluest Eye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099759911/the-bluest-eye>
 and Song of Solomon: creatively gifted and politically engaged 
African-American women dismissing black activist Stokely Carmichael's diktat 
that the "only position for a woman in [the revolution was] prone", and 
resisting the communal adage against airing dirty linen in public.

Morrison, exploring black female truths, refused to engage with this nonsense, 
kept her counsel and kept right on stepping, while the younger, more vulnerable 
Shange and Wallace were deeply wounded by the abuse; but this time, with The 
Color Purple, white folks were taking closer notice than they had before, 
awarding prizes, giving mainstream showtime. Some in the black community 
maintained that the only reason Walker and the rest of these women were getting 
this recognition was the white man's glee in the black man being put down. 
Better that its women remain invisible if this is all they had to say. Where 
were their loyalties?

Smouldering coals reignited two years later with the release of Steven 
Spielberg's film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82583/color-purple/review>. It was the 
director's first "serious" drama, and to my mind referenced almost every known 
Hollywood coon cliche, from the Harlem sitcom Amos 'n' Andy to sultry sexpot 
mulattos, while treating Whoopi Goldberg's Celie as ET's equally alien first 
cousin, and simply ignoring the book's many subtleties in regards to Africa, 
the will and road to power, and unapologetic woman-to-woman love. Yes, it was a 
film, but this was supposed to be The Color Purple, not some Hallmark greeting 
card.

However, out in hinterlands, black women, seeing themselves on screen with 
sympathy and dressed in dignity, came in their droves. The film's success laid 
the groundwork for the still soft but more mature stage version, which I saw on 
Broadway in 2005 – not least becauseOprah Winfrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/oprah-winfrey>, who played Sofia in 
the film, is one of the musical's primary producers and her huge audience its 
primary target.

Rereading the book for the first time 30 years on, as the story appears on the 
London stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/16/the-color-purple-musical-review>
, I am struck by its elements of fable: though dangerous and demeaning white 
folk lurk just beyond its trees, its black community is sturdily prosperous and 
self-sufficient, its God manifest in colourfully abundant nature. I am struck, 
too, by its subtle discussion of the African-American relationship with our 
homeland, by the simple metaphor of Celie's folk pants, comfortable and 
flattering regardless of the shape and gender of the wearer; and by its 
ultimate generosity of spirit. For in the end, Mr ___ is redeemed in the manner 
Celie is redeemed, via self-discovery, self-acceptance and a willingness to let 
love just be – rather than try to control it, and the world.

• Candace Allen is the author of Soul Music: The Pulse of Race and Music.
 