
App: Theatre Billboard 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/theatrebillboard-pro/id432883730?mt=8>

By: Theatrebillboard.com

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>, though 
it is scheduled to be rolled out across all smartphones soon.

What is it?

An app that searches major vendors to find the cheapest theatre tickets for 
shows in London and across the country.

Who is it by?

The app accesses data on the Theatrebillboard.com website 
<http://www.theatrebillboard.com/default.aspx>, which was launched by Rich 
Allen and Neil Walker, two graduates from the Central School of Speech and 
Drama.

What does it promise?

"Theatrebillboard.com enables customers to search, compare and buy theatre 
tickets to over 350 top shows in a matter of minutes, comparing prices and 
deals from all the major ticket vendors online includingTicketmaster 
<http://www.ticketmaster.co.uk/>, lastminute.com <http://www.lastminute.com/> 
andSee Tickets <http://www.seetickets.com/>. Simple and easy to use, the 
powerful tools of the website can now come straight to the palm of your hand."

How does it work?

Search for the show you wish to see from a scrolling list, or input the 
details in the app's search engine. You can also browse top-rated shows (as 
voted for by users of the website) and look up information about your chosen 
production.

Once you have found what you want, input a date and the app will search for 
the best deals, displaying them in a comparison table showing price, vendor and 
seat location.Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> locations are 
displayed on an integrated Google map (though this only works for London), 
which also gives users their current position with directions to the theatre.

Is it easy to use?

Yes, although it helps if you know what you want to see in advance as the app 
doesn't list information on all productions – especially the fringe or 
short-running ones. We searched for a forthcoming performance ofBilly Elliot 
<http://www.billyelliotthemusical.com/> at the Victoria Palace theatre 
<https://www.victoriapalacetheatre.co.uk/Online/default.asp> and the app found 
tickets ranging from £34.50 for restricted views in the grand circle to £97.50 
for premium seats in the stalls.

The app displays whether the vendor will charge a fee, but consumers should be 
aware that even if the vendor levies nothing extra, it might have already built 
this into the headline price. For example,DiscountTheatre.com 
<http://www.discounttheatre.com/>'s restricted view seats had a headline price 
of £34.50 and claimed to be fee-free, but on booking it became clear the face 
value of the ticket was £27.50, meaning the vendor had already built a whopping 
£7 fee into the price. But this, of course, is not the app's fault.

One mis-step is that the app only allows you to search for one ticket, rather 
than a pair or more, which is confusing as you then have to choose the number 
of tickets you require once you get through to the purchasing page of the 
vendor. But the app is being updated within the next fortnight to allow users 
to search for the exact number of tickets they want. There are also some minor 
navigation issues, with two sets of backwards and forwards arrows making things 
confusing for users.

Is it fun?

Money-saving is always fun.

Is it pretty?

The shades of orange have a faint touch of the Mastercard logo about them, but 
minor quibbles aside the comedy and tragedy mask icons get the aesthetic juices 
flowing and transport the symbols of ancient Greek muses Thalia and Melpomene 
into the digital age.

Should you download it?

Future upgrades promise regional map functionality, and there are plans to 
sell Broadway shows in the next few months as well as a shift into sporting 
event and gig tickets.

We've used the Theatrebillboard.com website to find and purchase cheap theatre 
tickets and have had no problems with its service, so the app is well worth a 
look. Our testing found the app to work faster than accessing the website via 
our iPhone's browser, so we would encourage the creators to roll-out the app to 
other smartphone users sooner rather than later.
 