
The Detroit deep house veteran Theo Parrish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/14/theo-parrish-teddys-get-down-review-barbican-london>
 has released a statement condemning the dance music world for its lack of 
support for the Black Lives Matter movement in the wake of recent incidents of 
police brutality in the US.

In a Facebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/permalink.php?story_fbid=10155045234804676&id=375955904675>
, the musician said that he was “overwhelmed” and “embarrassed at the lack of 
overt commentary from this art form”.

Written amid protests in both the US and UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/09/black-lives-matter-rallies-hundreds-in-second-uk-day-of-protest>
 following the deaths ofAlton Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-gun-baton-rouge-new-video>
 andPhilando Castile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/remembering-philando-castile-everything-mr-phil-did-was-for-the-kids>
, Parrish’s post goes on to question dance artists who perform their music, 
“when on the same weekend you’re playing, in the same city, a man just like you 
has quietly, arbitrarily, been silenced by one paid to protect him and the 
public?”


He concludes his statement with a final call to arms: 

How do you dance when we still swing from trees, when we still are murdered in 
front of our loved ones, murdered while subdued and harmless? How do you dance 
when our very image as a people is used to manipulate sympathy for a system of 
belief that wants you and your children to be dead or in jail? You better. You 
better learn to listen with your body, you better play from your heart. It was 
a preference before, now it’s essential. Escapism has always been an adjective 
used to describe the dance. That’s an outsider’s view. Solidarity is what it 
really offers …

Parrish also uses his post to express how he is struck by the apathy from 
house artists given how the genre’s lineage is “rooted in reaction to racism, 
birthed in struggle”.

While now often regarded as a preserve for hedonists, house music’s origins lie
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/15/frankie-knuckles-invents-house-music>
 in uniting communities who felt ostracised from mainstream American culture, 
the genre especially embraced by black and LGBT crowds. Frankie Knuckles 
famously described the Chicago Warehouse club in which the genre was founded as 
“a church for people who have fallen from grace”.
 