
It seems that Theresa May is still smarting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/sep/30/tories-curb-right-appeal-deportation>
 from her comprehensive thrashing at the hands ofAbu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/07/abu-qatada-no-terrorist>
's legal team. The man himself may have left for Jordan (after Jordan finally 
signed a treaty guaranteeing his safety) but he did so not at the behest of the 
courts but after a 4:2 set of victories that left the home secretary on the 
ropes and sagging.

May is getting sick of losing appeals, and so she has moved the goalposts – 
the recourse of sore losers everywhere. Under her plan, foreign national 
offendersfacing deportation could only appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/30/conservative-conference-george-osbornes-work-for-benefits-speech-politics-live-blog#block-524946b1e4b0f2e0c7543855>
 on article 8 grounds (right to family life) from abroad. TheDaily Mail seems 
to believe 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2438130/Theresa-May-Ill-kick-illegal-migrants-BEFORE-chance-appeal-says-Home-Secretary.html>
 this would have affected Qatada; in fact it wouldn't have done, as his case 
relied on two absolute rights: freedom from torture and the right to a fair 
trial.

Article 8 
<http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/human-rights/our-human-rights-work/human-rights-review/the-articles/article-8/>
 is, for the government, the albatross of the Human Rights Act. It provides 
that a person has a right to family life, but this is a qualified right; it 
must be balanced against the state's rights to interfere if this is for the 
purposes of "national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of the 
country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health 
or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others".

This means that when a person commits an offence and can be deported – which 
is now automatic for anyone with a 12-month sentence, and discretionary for any 
lesser offences – their rights must be balanced against the state's rights. 
Some cases are clear cut: a foreign criminal who comes to the UK in order to 
commit offences will be unlikely to have much success at appeal. But for every 
one of those, there are a dozen with far more complex cases: the man with 30 
years' UK residence, whose British-born wife is dying of cancer and won't see 
him again if he is deported; the single mother of three British kids; the angry 
teenager who came to the UK as a baby, became involved with postcode gangs, but 
has no knowledge of their country "of origin". If their risk of re-offending is 
low, or the crime at the lower end of the spectrum, the proportionality balance 
may well fall in their favour.

The Mail claims that there are an "astonishing" 68,000 such cases lodged every 
year – that certainly would be astonishing, as the entire prison population is 
barely a quarter more than that – while the Telegraph places it at a rather 
more sedate 1,888. The government's own statistics say that for the second 
quarter of 2012, 216 deportation appeals were promulgated, of which 61 were 
allowed, 139 were dismissed and 16 withdrawn. That is a "win" rate for the 
appellant of 28.2%.

Perhaps the question we should be asking is why nearly 30% of cases are 
successful on appeal. It would be all too easy to attribute it to "soft touch" 
judges, which is evidently May's reasoning. In reality, it is connected to 
tick-box decision-making, in which immigration officers are given no discretion 
to make sensible decisions and all must be deported. Easier, after all, to 
issue mass decisions and leave it to the tribunals to sort out – with the 
advantage that we can blame the judiciary and not the executive when some 
appeals are successful.

It is unlikely that May's proposal will be legal under current laws. 
Deportation, even pending appeal, must not place the UK in breach of its 
obligations under the European convention on human rights. Even in pursuit of 
would-be Ukip voters, the government has not yet had the stomach to withdraw 
from the most prominent human rights legislation we have, although May claims 
thatthis time they mean it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/30/conservative-conference-george-osbornes-work-for-benefits-speech-politics-live-blog>
. It is possible that this is just May drawing open theOverton Window 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overton_window>, hoping that we will be relieved 
when something mildly less monstrous replaces this idea. If not, she is 
forgetting that when we reduce the individual complexities of human lives to a 
one-size-fits all exercise, we are taking the first step towards ignoring human 
rights altogether.
 