
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has appointed a 
cabinet overwhelmingly educated at state schools but only a third of posts have 
gone to women, despite claims she would appoint more female colleagues to key 
roles.

Theresa May's decisive reshuffle draws line under Cameron era
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/theresa-mays-decisive-reshuffle-draws-line-under-cameron-era>
The new prime minister promoted a raft of MPs who are not from privileged 
backgrounds, includingJustine Greening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, Andrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom>, Greg Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/greg-clark>, Priti Patel, David Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> and Karen Bradley, spelling 
an end to the era of the so-called Notting Hill set that has dominated Downing 
Street.

Five – or around 22% – of her new cabinet attended public schools, while about 
43% went to either Oxford or Cambridge University. This compares with 45% of 
Cameron’s cabinet who were educated privately and 54% who went to Oxbridge.
Education 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/07/cabinet-analyis/embed/embed.html?mode=education>
The total is still higher than the 7% of the population who were educated at 
independent schools but suggests a move towards making the cabinet more 
representative.

Two of her cabinet – Javid <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sajid-javid>, 
the new communities secretary, and Priti Patel, the development secretary – are 
from ethnic minority backgrounds, making up 9% of the total.

Ethnicity 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/bme/giv-12515LaZd8rYna8Nd/index.html?mode=bme>
However, only a third are female, with eight out of 23 roles announced so far 
going to women, compared with seven out of 22 underDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>. 


The total is equal to the highest ever – under Tony Blair – but is still a 
long way from gender parity, with most of the senior roles going to men apart 
from the new home secretary, Amber Rudd, and May herself as prime minister.


On Tuesday, May’s spokeswoman had indicated that she would be trying to 
promote more female colleagues: “It was Theresa who set up the campaign to 
elect more female MPs to parliament and she has always believed that there 
should be more women in prominent government positions.”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/theresa-may-set-to-fill-key-cabinet-positions-with-female-allies#img-1>
Gender 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/07/cabinet-analyis/embed/embed.html?mode=gender>
Overall, May’s cabinet is slightly older with a median age of 51 compared with 
Cameron’s 49 and similarly dominated by MPs from the south. Only Davis, the 
Brexit secretary, represents a seat in the north of England.

Age 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/07/cabinet-analyis/embed/embed.html?mode=age>
Labour claimed there had been a shift to the right, highlighting the fact that 
leave campaigners Fox and Davis taking charge of exiting the EU and trade 
negotiations, Patel in charge of foreign aid despite calling for the department 
to be scrapped andAndrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom>, the pro-Brexit 
leadership candidate, running the environment department.

Who's who in Theresa May's new cabinet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/who-theresa-may-cabinet-boris-hammond-rudd>
They are among the third of the cabinet who did not support Cameron’s gay 
marriage legislation.

Jon Ashworth, the shadow minister without portfolio, said the appointments did 
not tally withMay’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jul/13/theresa-mays-speech-what-she-said-and-what-she-meant>
 outside Downing Street on Wednesday. “We had warm words from the prime 
minister yesterday on the need for her government to stand up for more than 
just a privileged few,” he said. “But Theresa May’s appointments are completely 
out of kilter with her words on the steps of Downing Street yesterday.

“It’s difficult to see this new-look cabinet as anything other than a sharp 
shift to the right by the Tories. The test now is to demonstrate that all 
members of the Tory government are wholly committed to the priorities Theresa 
May set out yesterday.”
 