
Theresa May has vowed to maintain peace and stability in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> despite fears that Britain’s 
vote to leave the EU will lead to the creation of a “hard border” with the 
Irish Republic.

On her first visit to the province as prime minister, May tried to assuage 
concerns about a fortified frontier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/25/theresa-may-rule-out-return-border-checks-between-uk-ireland>
 between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.


May, while campaigning for a remain vote as home secretary during the 
referendum campaign, had said it was inconceivable that border arrangements 
between the two could remain unchanged in the event of a Brexit vote.

Bertie Ahern: UK would have to reimpose Irish border after Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/04/bertie-ahern-uk-reimpose-irish-border-after-brexit-eu-northern-ireland>
Speaking in Belfast <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> on Monday, the 
prime minister said: “No one wants a return to the border of the past.” May was 
referring to the state of the border during the Troubles, when hundreds of 
rural roads were blocked by security barriers and there were armed vehicle 
checkpoints, and permanent border posts manned by police and British troops.

May described her talks with the deputy first minister, Martin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness> of Sinn Féin, and 
Arlene Foster, the first minister and Democratic Unionist party leader, as 
“very constructive, positive”.

“What we do want to do is to find a way through this that is going to work and 
deliver a practical solution for everybody – as part of the work that we are 
doing to ensure that we make a success of the United Kingdom leaving the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> – and that we come out of 
this with a deal which is in the best interests of the whole of the United 
Kingdom,” she said.

May will hold further talks on the implications of the Brexit vote for the 
island of Ireland when she meets the taoiseach, Enda Kenny, in London on 
Tuesday.

The Irish government is increasingly hopeful that it will be able to retain 
both free movement and a customs union across the border with Northern Ireland, 
but the shape of any deal will depend on the kind of wider Brexit sought by May 
and the willingness of the rest of the EU to be flexible.


Kenny is expected to say he is not pushing May to trigger article 50 
immediately, so giving the UK government time to think through the implications.


May’s 90-minute meeting in Belfast with the leaders of the Northern Ireland 
executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/25/northern-ireland-forms-new-power-sharing-executive>
 coincided with a legal challenge being mounted by a coalition of pro-EU human 
rights and community groups in the province. They are attempting to overturn 
the Brexit vote so the region can remain in the EU.

However, May repeated her assertion on entering Downing Street that her 
governmentwill begin the process of leaving the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/19/theresa-may-vows-to-make-success-of-brexit-cabinet-meets-for-first-time>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftheresa-may-hard-border-fears-northern-ireland-visit-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5900c41d60d90f4c6bb5c1e0bd2243df847e46d8%2F0_1711_3014_1807%2F3014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20tries%20to%20ease%20'hard%20border'%20fears%20on%20Northern%20Ireland%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftheresa-may-hard-border-fears-northern-ireland-visit-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20tries%20to%20ease%20%27hard%20border%27%20fears%20on%20Northern%20Ireland%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F25%2Ftheresa-may-hard-border-fears-northern-ireland-visit-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5900c41d60d90f4c6bb5c1e0bd2243df847e46d8%2F0_1711_3014_1807%2F3014.jpg>
 May is greeted by Martin McGuinness and Arlene Foster. Photograph: Paul 
Mcerlane/EPA 
“Brexit means Brexit, but we will be making a success of it and I am clear 
that the Northern Ireland executive and the other devolved governments will be 
involved in our discussions as we set forward the UK position,” she said.

McGuinness said he told the prime minister that in terms of Brexit, there was 
“no good news for the people of the north of Ireland”.

On Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, McGuinness said he, 
rather than the pro-Brexit Foster, spoke for the majority of people – 
“unionists, nationalists and republicans” – who voted to remain in the EU. In 
the referendum on 23 June, 56% of those who voted in Northern Ireland wanted to 
stay in the EU.

Foster said she was delighted that May regarded Northern Ireland as a 
strategic part of the United Kingdom. “No one wants to see the borders of the 
70s, 80s, 90s [again],” she said.

The first minister went on to say she would object to any special restrictions 
being imposed on Northern Irish citizens travelling to other parts of the UK.

“There must be no internal borders within the United Kingdom. She [May] 
responded positively to that. There will be no internal borders in the United 
Kingdom,” Foster said.

Foster rejected McGuinness’s claim to speak for the majority of people when it 
came to the EU. She said the UK as a whole hadvoted to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/meet-10-britons-who-voted-to-leave-the-eu>
 and that this would have to be respected.
 