
The attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, may have approved 
at least one highly secretive “special intelligence operation” under which 
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation officers are granted sweeping 
immunity from prosecution in the use of force – but he won’t tell you. Asio 
won’t tell you. Even our intelligence watchdog won’t tell you. And journalists 
quite simply can’t tell you.

This is not a review of an episode of the TV show Utopia 
<http://www.abc.net.au/tv/programs/utopia/> (although it’s probably on their 
agenda for next season). This is the strange situation in which journalists now 
find themselves when reporting – just generally – on whether even one of these 
operations exists.

No comment: citing 'security' to avoid questioning threatens democracy | Tim 
Lyons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/16/no-comment-citing-security-to-avoid-questioning-threatens-democracy>
Special intelligence operations were authorised under Tony Abbott’s government 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/26/journalists-and-whistleblowers-will-go-to-jail-under-new-national-security-laws>
in September 2014 as part of the first tranche of national security legislation 
flagged by Brandis. Asio officers and affiliates involved in such operations 
have sweeping immunity from prosecution in situations where they may need to 
commit offences as part of intelligence operations. This immunity can extend to 
the use of force and other offences, but does not apply to causing death or 
serious injury, torture or the commission of sexual crimes.


The new operations have attracted heavy criticism from news organisations, 
legal groups and civil rights organisationsbecause they potentially criminalise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/16/journalists-face-jail-leaks-security-laws>
 public interest reporting and other disclosures about Asio operations.

Under section 35P 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/asioa1979472/s35p.html> of 
the Asio Act, any disclosure that relates to a special intelligence operation 
can potentially be a criminal offence attracting a sentence of up to ten years’ 
jail. The new offence raised particular concern following the disclosures from 
US National Security Agency whistleblowerEdward Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>, and appears in part 
directed at curbing future disclosures and subsequent reporting should another 
intelligence whistleblower emerge.

Since the legislation passed little has been heard about these operations. But 
the inspector general of intelligence and security’sannual report 
<https://www.igis.gov.au/sites/default/files/files/Annual-Reports/2015/IGIS_AR_14-15.pdf>
 provides the first hint that a special intelligence operation may have been 
approved. As the IGIS is the oversight agent for Australia’s intelligence 
community, the report is likely to be the only way this information can be 
officially disclosed, with the exception of the parliamentary intelligence 
committee.

So has an operation been approved? Here’s what the inspector general’s report 
said:

“SIOs may be authorised for periods of up to 12 months. Asio is required to 
notify the IGIS when the attorney general approves an SIO, and must report to 
the attorney general and IGIS after six months and at the conclusion of the SIO.

“As this is a significant new power, we intend to review each SIO that is 
authorised by the attorney general. Asio has advised that there are security 
concerns with disclosing the exact number of SIOs. IGIS staff received relevant 
documents and attended relevant briefings, and did not identify any issues of 
legality or propriety.”

This paragraph makes Scott Morrison’s briefings about on-water matters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/07/scott-morrison-tight-lipped-on-turnback-of-asylum-seeker-boat>
 look like the very model of directness. And it was probably designed to be 
that way.

One reading could be that no applications have been made, because it “intends” 
to review each SIO. But the fact the inspector general has received documents 
to consider “for issues of legality or propriety” suggests the oversight role 
conferred once an operation has been authorised could have been engaged.

Either interpretation may be true. But it’s not something a journalist would 
want to be wrong about.

Guardian Australia asked the inspector general’s office to clarify this 
statement, and it said: “The office of the inspector general of intelligence 
and security does not have anything to add to the statement in the annual 
report. Any more specific comment on the use of the powers is a matter for the 
relevant agency.”

The response from the shadowy “Asio media team” was: “Thank you for you 
inquiry, Asio does not comment on operational matters.”

The attorney general’s office has not responded to requests for comment about 
whether he has approved any special intelligence operations.

There are understandable limitations on what could be disclosed about a 
particular special intelligence operation. If one has been recently approved, 
it is probably still a live operation. Any particular details about it could 
jeopardise the operation.

But we’re not looking for details, just a general clarification that one has 
been approved. Asio has advised that there are “security concerns” about 
disclosing the exact number of these operations, but we have no way of knowing 
what the concerns are.

The justification for this level of secrecy is not entirely clear. It is 
possible that the reason for the inspector general’s vagueness reflects concern 
that the office itself may fall foul of the offence surrounding disclosures of 
the operations by confirming the existence of an operation.

There is some reason to doubt this is the case though – and also to dispute 
Asio’s assertion about the security risks of disclosing statistical information 
about SIOs. The disclosure offence has been modelled on anexisting offence 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ca191482/s15hk.html> in the 
Crimes Act for “controlled operations” that are conducted by the Australian 
federal police. These operations are similarly sensitive, in that they will 
generally involve officers going undercover in some capacity, and they can be 
granted immunity from committing certain offences.

But despite the similarities, the commonwealth ombudsman 
<https://www.ombo.nsw.gov.au/news-and-publications/publications/annual-reports/law-enforcement>
 has had no problems disclosingdetailed information 
<http://www.ombudsman.gov.au/reports/inspection/> about these operations each 
year. There appear to be no problems with the ombudsman confirming the 
existence of controlled operations, despite the identical wording of the 
disclosure offence.

Some of these concerns have been flagged by the the independent national 
security legislation monitor, Roger Gyles QC, whohas been conducting 
<http://www.dpmc.gov.au/pmc/about-pmc/core-priorities/independent-national-security-legislation-monitor>
 an inquiry into the scope and potential application of the disclosure offence 
under the Asio Act. But Gyles’s office has limited resources, and his report on 
the matter has yet to be finalised. His report will likely be critical in 
determining whether the government winds back the disclosure offence from the 
current sweeping gag clause.

So for the moment, you will just have to make up your own mind about whether a 
special intelligence operation has occurred. Because we can’t tell you and 
nobody else will.
 