
For the past six days, reports that opioids were found in Prince’s home (or 
“on him”,according 
<http://fox2now.com/2016/04/28/prince-had-opioid-medication-on-him-at-time-of-death-source/>
 to some news sources) at the time of his death have dovetailed one national 
tragedy – the untimely death of a revered musician – with another: theso-called 
“opioid epidemic” 
<http://www.startribune.com/prince-s-death-a-reminder-of-state-opioid-problem/377649911/>
 that isblamed 
<http://www.cnsnews.com/news/article/susan-jones/dea-drug-overdoses-kill-more-americans-car-crashes-or-firearms>
 for more deaths each year than car or gun accidents.

Much of this alarm, captured in headlines 
<http://www.nola.com/health/index.ssf/2016/04/prince_death_percocet_addictio.html>
 such as “Was Prince a casualty of the opioid epidemic?” and “Prince’s death 
puts opioid crisis at center stage 
<http://www.sacbee.com/opinion/editorials/article74578837.html>”, has rightly 
resulted in calls 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/04/28/opinions/massachusetts-opioid-treatment-prince-vox/>
 for better ways to address opioid use in the country. And it has helped us 
focus on the issue of susceptibility – if Prince, with all the medical and 
financial resources available to a multimillionaire, could die from opioid use, 
it’s clear that we misunderstand how these pain relievers are prescribed and 
used. It’s also clear that the treatment system we have built on those 
misunderstandings is causing more harm than good.

Prince's final days: few clues pointed to secret behind star's untimely death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/prince-final-days-death-percocet>
Many, including Prince’s lawyer for the past 25 years, L Londell McMillan, and 
his personal chef, Ray Roberts,have 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/04/prince-death-drug-reports> denied 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/05/prince-death-drugs-percocet-health-chef-interview>
 that the musician had an addiction. But whatever the cause of Prince’s death, 
it provides us with a new lens that looks beyond the continuing stigmatization 
of those with addiction, which has prevented the creation of effective 
treatment programs and compassionate laws to assist users, rather than trap 
them in a permanent and destructive cycle of criminal charges and incarceration.

American history is rife 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/press_box/2005/08/crack_then_meth_now.html>
 with “drug panics”, from opium in the 1700s to alcohol in the early 1900s, 
from coke in the 1970s and crack in the late 80s to methamphetamines in the 
early aughts. From the beginning, the way that users have been viewed has 
affected drug regulation and treatment, often with disastrous results. In her 
new book, Unbroken Brain: A Revolutionary New Way of Understanding Addiction,
Maia Szalavitz <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/maia-szalavitz> writes that 
drug use has been “enmeshed with fears about ethnicity, class and foreigners 
since the idea was first applied to drug problems and used as a reason to ban 
substances”.

Blame for addiction (and related deaths) has most often been placed on the 
substance or on its users, who are viewed as weak-willed, dishonest 
individuals, often minorities or the poor, worthy only of forced “cold turkey” 
detox and incarceration. Butstatistics 
<http://www.asam.org/docs/default-source/advocacy/opioid-addiction-disease-facts-figures.pdf>
 regarding opioid use have exposed the lie at the heart of our assumptions 
about who uses them.

According to a 2015 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report 
<http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6426a3.htm>, opioid use has 
increased among all demographic groups, even as heroin rates “remained highest 
among males, persons aged 18–25 years, persons with annual household incomes 
less than $20,000, persons living in urban areas and persons with no health 
insurance or with Medicaid”.

Most heroin overdoses involved the use of other drugs; cocaine use was the 
highest indicator of heroin use, and non-medical opioid use was the second 
highest.Only 22% <http://www.samhsa.gov/atod/opioids> of those who misuse 
prescription opioids get them from their doctor, and recent coverage has 
continued to condemn opioids without fully acknowledging their incredible 
benefits to patients in pain.

The problems – and deaths – that result from opioid use in the US stem 
primarily from two issues: doctors often are not trained in how to prescribe 
opioids, so they and their patients seldom understand the risks (for instance, 
studies have shown that the vast majority – up to 90% – of overdoses occur when 
opioids are used with other drugs); and our understanding and treatment of 
addiction is all wrong.

Drug addiction should be treated like a learning disorder – not a crime | Maia 
Szalavitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/drug-addiction-treatment-learning-disorders>
In Unbroken Brain, Szalavitz identifies addiction not as the result of 
individual weakness or a character flaw, nor as a result of the nature of the 
drugs, but as alearning disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/drug-addiction-treatment-learning-disorders>
, developed predominantly in the young as they learn to use drugs. Addiction, 
then, is a coping mechanism for overcoming challenges such as poverty, trauma, 
insecurity and mental disability or illness. Yet addicts continue to be shamed, 
adding to their fear and increasing their need to use.

“The heroin epidemic in these communities is like a symptom,” photographer 
Michelle Frankfurtertold a journalist 
<http://www.fastcoexist.com/3055532/witness-life-in-a-small-town-at-the-center-of-the-american-opiate-epidemic/13>
 when she visited southern Ohio to photograph people addicted to opioids. The 
shame of addiction makes finding treatment difficult. New laws meant to limit 
opioid use often force those with addiction to find illegal heroin. Maintenance 
programs that could help users live long enough to outgrow their addictions 
(which Szalavitz writes can often occur by the time users reach their 30s) are 
expensive and highly regulated, often not providing doses strong enough to 
stabilize users.

Still, the dangers of opioid use are exaggerated. “If you do not have a past 
history of addiction and are in your forties and getting pain treatment with 
opioids, your odds of becoming newly addicted are low,” Szalavitztold 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/69973436e1894caeba9d146c6e2a93a5/death-raises-questions-did-prince-die-overdose>
 Karla K Johnson of the Associated Press last week. “One study of thousands of 
ER visits for overdose found that only 13% of victims had a chronic pain 
diagnosis.”


The results of toxicology reports from Prince’s autopsy will probably not be 
released for weeks, until a full investigation has been completed. Whatever the 
cause of his death, the reported connection to opioids will likely compound 
fears regarding the treatment of pain and addiction.

But it should also make us reconsider how we look at opioid users – and our 
nation’s addiction problem. Prince’s death should give us the opportunity to 
reframe our understanding of the “opioid epidemic” in ways that help those with 
addiction, not continue to jeopardize people’s treatment and their lives.
 