
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, the home 
secretary, was winning rare all-party plaudits on Sunday for sticking to her 
guns and doggedly finding her way through the legal thicket to finally remove 
Abu Qatada from Britain.

Calmness, sheer determination, thoroughness and prime ministerial were among 
the many plaudits being sent her way.

Six home secretaries have tried to get rid of the radical cleric, and she was 
both fortunate and strong enough to be there when he finally ran out of 
options. Notoriously, the Home Office is the graveyard of political 
reputations, the department where ministers discover either their civil service 
or the law render them frustrated, powerless or railing about a department that 
is not fit for purpose.

She can point to Abu Qatada's departure as a political achievement the public 
genuinely cares about. The wider political story is that she is the practical 
home secretary that gets things done.

In an administration that is determined to show in its final 18 months that it 
is delivering on its promises, she is the stellar performer for the 
Conservatives.

A generous former Labour home secretary, Lord Reid, admitted: "There is 
nothing we would have liked better than to be in Theresa May's position this 
morning."

It will do wonders for her wider political ambitions with the Tory party 
faithful once David Cameron stands aside, and it was hardly surprising that she 
used her moment of triumph to appear at length on The Andrew Marr Show and then 
on Sky's Murnaghan Show.

Asked directly if this feather in her cap increased her chances of becoming 
prime minister she was typically blunt: "Well I have done my job, and now we 
get on with the rest of our Home Office work. The first lesson is when you want 
to achieve something keep at it."

However, the Abu Qatada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> story 
is quite a subtle one. She made mistakes in the legal process, expensive ones, 
but she also rejected the advice of those who said she should go outside 
existing human rights laws to throw him out.

Despite successive setbacks, she did not play to the rightwing gallery by 
throwing him out. Many Tories were demanding she went for a temporary 
derogation of human rights laws.

Instead she went back to the Jordanians and to the British courts to close the 
final loopholes, including ensuring that a group in Jordan would be monitoring 
his treatment. The redrafted treaty with the Jordanians can also now be used in 
other similar cases.

She also made clear that she was not going to rest on her laurels and would be 
seeking to pass legislation to prevent this happening again â€“ mainly by seeing 
if she can reduce the number of appeals.

Nor did she resile from her personal commitment to withdraw from the European 
convention on human rights, a battle she will now have to fight in the Tory 
manifesto process.

She was also not shy about pointing to the progress she was making in the rest 
of her brief, pointing to falling immigration numbers, the decline in crime and 
police pay reforms.

She should enjoy these few summer days. They will not last. The Home Office, 
and the issues its building handles each day, is built to bring hubristic 
politicians to their knees.
 