
Theresa May has been urged to end a “summer of speculation and confusion” 
about the future of the northern powerhouse project.

Andy Burnham and Steve Rotheram, Labour’s mayoral candidates for Greater 
Manchester and Liverpool city region respectively, have written to the prime 
minister asking her to clarify her plans for further devolution in England and 
to make aclear commitment to the HS3 scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/08/build-a-better-hs3-now-to-rebalance-economy-and-boost-north-says-ippr>
 to link the cities of the north.

“Prime minister, you must honour your promises to the north of England,” said 
Burnham, shadow home secretary. “Last year at the general election you couldn’t 
move for Tory candidates wandering around these parts promising people the 
earth, and we are just over a year away from that and it seems they have 
changed their tune.”

In early August, the Times reported [paywall] 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/end-for-northern-powerhouse-feared-as-may-shifts-focus-6kg7snwr7>
 that May intended to “shift the focus to other rural and industrial areas” 
away from the north of England. It also reported that she was planning to 
impose greater cost controls on HS2 and could curtail HS3.

Later that month, May wrote in the Yorkshire Post 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/opinion/theresa-may-my-vision-for-yorkshire-s-bright-future-1-8074726>
 reaffirming her commitment to theformer chancellor George Osborne’s northern 
powerhouse project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/osborne-budget-chancellor-northern-powerhouse-manchester>
 and the plans for an east-to-west high speed rail route. The new minister for 
the northern powerhouse, Andrew Percy, has also said he is “100% committed” to 
promoting the region’s economy.

“We’ve had newspaper briefing after newspaper briefing over the summer saying 
that the plug is about to be pulled on the northern powerhouse concept,” said 
Burnham.


“I say to the prime minister that if you pull the plug on the northern 
powerhouse concept it will be as big a betrayal to the people of the north of 
England … as it was here in the 1980s when Margaret Thatcher pulled the plug on 
our industry.”

Rotheram, the MP for Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> 
Walton, said: “The doubt and confusion was created in Downing Street, so it’s 
for the prime minister to provide some clarity and clarification of what it is 
she actually thinks should now happen with both high speed rail and the 
northern powerhouse.”

He said that in the world of Westminster politics, rumours often had substance 
to them. “The government can close these things down very, very quickly, as it 
has done just recently on certain issues,” he said. “Theresa May can make that 
statement. It is in her gift to put to bed that speculation.”

The creation of elected mayors is the most controversial condition of a series 
of devolution arrangements agreed by Osborne and a series of “metro” regions, 
including the West Midlands,Greater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> and the Liverpool city 
region. The regions will elect mayors in May 2017.
 