
This has been a bumper autumn for political publishing. I’ve recently finished 
five of the main books on the EU referendum campaign and, although some of the 
key revelations have already been serialised in newspapers, there is plenty of 
material in them worth reporting that hasn’t yet been flagged up anywhere. So, 
as a Christmas service for anyone who has not read enough about the EU 
referendum already this year, here are 30 things about it that you might not 
know.

First, the books.

All Out War by Tim Shipman 
<https://www.harpercollins.co.uk/9780008215156/all-out-war>: Shipman is the 
Sunday Times political editor and this is his indispensable account, 624 pages 
covering not just the referendum campaign but the Conservative leadership 
contest too. Shipman seems to have spoken to everyone and he is commendably 
even-handed. It really is superb; taking into account the speed with which he 
turned it around, the volume of exclusive detail and the quality of the writing 
sets a new standard for the writing of contemporary political history.


The Bad Boys of Brexit by Arron Banks 
<https://www.bitebackpublishing.com/books/arron-banks-brexit-diaries>: Banks 
became a key player through his alliance with Nigel Farage and the £8m he spent 
on Leave.EU and leave campaigning generally, and this is his campaign “diary” – 
reconstructed after the event with the journalist Isabel Oakeshott co-writing. 
Much of the book is about his feuding with Vote Leave and, although the book is 
not very good on the high politics of the referendum, or even on what really 
motivates Banks himself, for anyone interested in low campaign skulduggery it’s 
hard to put down.

The Brexit Club by Owen Bennett 
<https://www.bitebackpublishing.com/books/the-brexit-club>: Bennett, deputy 
political editor of the Huffington Post, has written a book just covering the 
leave campaign, and the Vote Leave/Leave.EU rivalry. He published before 
Shipman and his account is thorough, revealing and very readable.

Breaking Point by Gary Gibbon 
<http://hauspublishing.com/haus-curiosities/breaking-point-the-uk-referendum-on-the-eu-and-its-aftermath-by-gary-gibbon>
:Gibbon, the political editor of Channel 4 News, has written a book that 
combines campaign diary with reflections on what happened. At 82 pages it 
barely qualifies as a book, but it’s well crafted and contains some lovely 
quotes.

Unleashing Demons by Craig Oliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/17/unleashing-demons-inside-story-brexit-craig-oliver-david-cameron-review>
:Oliver was David Cameron’s communications director and this is the story of 
the referendum as told from within the No 10 remain camp. Some of the reviews (
like this one 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/books/what-to-read/craig-olivers-eu-referendum-diary-will-leave-its-few-readers-suf/>
) have been very harsh but it is the first insider account from a member of the 
Cameron inner circle and it contains quite a lot of juicy detail. It is also 
good on the physical and mental ghastliness of working full-on for a losing 
campaign.

One of the best things about Oliver’s book is the title. It is taken from 
something Cameron said to him in 2015, when asked if he could see the case 
against a referendum. “You could unleash demons of which ye know not,” Cameron 
replied. Oliver says he thought this might be a quote from the Bible or 
Shakespeare, but couldn’t find the source. Knowing Cameron’s cultural 
hinterland, Oliver might have had better luck checking with Game of Thrones. It 
crops up quite a lot in these books. For the Blair administration, The West 
Wing was the TV reference point of choice. In the Thatcher era it was Yes, 
Minister. For Cameron and his colleagues it was a fantasy epic noted for its 
violence and its cruelty. That may sound inappropriate, but the EU referendum 
certainly did unleash very strong passions.

Anywhere, here are 30 new revelations about it.

The Vote Leave campaign

1. Vote Leave came close to losing the contest to be designated the official 
leave campaign, Shipman says.VL was up against the Ukip-linked Grassroots Out, 
and Shipman says VL only realised at 10.30pm on the night before it had to 
submit documents to the Electoral Commission saying why it should get the 
designation that its draft was missing key information. Staff stayed up until 
3.30am rewriting it.

2. Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> tried to 
get Vote Leave to stop claiming that the UK was sending £350m a week to the EU, 
Banks says. In a diary entry for 12 June he writes:

Nigel had dinner with Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> a couple of weeks ago and 
begged them to drop it [the £350m claim]. He pointed out that the net figure is 
impressive enough, and has the benefit of being accurate.

Gove shrugged, and claimed it was too late, as the figure was “already out 
there”.

Bennett quotes John Mills, who at one point was VL’s deputy chair, as saying 
that he also told VL colleagues they should stop using the £350m figure. Mills 
told Bennett:

Their response was that we’re better off with a big number because, even if 
it’s disputed, just in tactical terms it keeps the size of the contribution in 
front of everyone.

3. Vote Leave’s campaign director Dominic Cummings once described hardline 
anti-European Tory MPs as “flying monkeys”, Shipman reports.

After Michael Heseltine’s attack on Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, [Paul] Stephenson [VL’s 
communications director] remembered a conversation he had had with Cummings 
weeks before about how some of the more hotheaded Eurosceptics would have their 
uses at points in the campaign. Cummings, with his usual delicacy where MPs 
were concerned, had said, ‘We just need to kick the flying monkeys in the cage 
and release them at the right point.’ Now Stephenson went in search of a flying 
monkey to turn up the pressure on Cameron. He called Steve Baker [chair of 
Conservatives for Britain] ...

The concept of “flying monkeys” is quite a useful one when trying to 
understand why Theresa May is wary of announcing anything that sounds like a 
move towards a “soft” Brexit. The “flying monkeys”, and the flying monkey 
press, are a potent force.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b22f2f9019b47438e2c7c8faa6b4ab060d7b902%2F0_450_4825_2896%2F4825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn't%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn%27t%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b22f2f9019b47438e2c7c8faa6b4ab060d7b902%2F0_450_4825_2896%2F4825.jpg>
 Dominic Cummings. Photograph: David Levenson/Getty Images 
4. Vote Leave asked Chris Grayling to intervene with Farage after the killing 
of Jo Cox to get him to stop releasing more inflammatory posters, Shipman says. 
Grayling subsequently met Farage in a pub and Farage said Ukip would be 
refocusing its campaign on sovereignty. Shortly before Cox was killed, Farage 
had releasedthe infamous Breaking Point poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
.


5. Some Vote Leave campaigners were never aiming for a win, Gibbon says. He 
quotes what he was told by a pro-leave Tory who worked closely with Michael 
Gove and VL in a conversation three weeks after the referendum. The source told 
him:

We weren’t meant to win. That line, ‘you were only meant to blow the bloody 
doors off’, it’s true. The plan was to run the remain side close enough to 
scare the EU into bigger concessions. None of us thought we were ever going to 
win. With the possible exception of Dominic Cummings, who just wanted to drive 
a car into the Camerons’ living room. It’s all such a mess. I want a second 
referendum now.

Britain Stronger in Europe

6. Britain Stronger in Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
feared Theresa May could be trying to help the leave campaign because she was 
so reluctant to support remain. Oliver’s book is particularly good on this, and 
he quotes Will Straw, Stronger In’s executive director, as saying in a text 
after she briefed details of a speech in an unhelpful manner:

Are we sure May’s not an agent for the other side!?

7. Cameron came under intense pressure to announce a new immigration strategy 
in the final days before the referendum, with Labour’s Lord Mandelson even 
drafting policy he could announce. Shipman records the six pledges Mandelson 
wanted Cameron to announce: new money for areas affected by high immigration; a 
law to prevent wages being undercut by EU migrants; a new move to get the EU to 
cut welfare migration; agreement with France and Germany to review free 
movement; a cross-party review of immigration; and an affordable housing 
programme, with new arrivals excluded. Oliver also writes at length about how 
No 10 considered changing tack to try to win the argument on immigration, but 
decided against it on the grounds that this approach would lack credibility. He 
also recalls how, at a postmortem meeting after the referendum, Mandelson 
attacked No 10 for not taking his advice. Describing Mandelson’s argument, 
Oliver writes:

It’s not even coded – David Cameron and George Osborne (and their pathetic 
lackeys) should have turned to me.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3f8a0f016f8d7185749efa43759035dbf764e41%2F0_154_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn't%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn%27t%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3f8a0f016f8d7185749efa43759035dbf764e41%2F0_154_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 David Cameron (left) with Craig Oliver in Downing Street. Photograph: Andy 
Hall for the Observer 
8. Cameron refused to announce that he would veto Turkey joining the EU, even 
though this would help the remain campaign, because this might jeopardise 
Turkish counter-terrorism cooperation with the UK.Shipman quotes a No 10 figure 
saying Cameron put the national interest first “although it arguably lost him 
the referendum”.

9. President Obama may have had a grievance against Britain before becoming 
president, but not because of the way his grandfather was treated under the 
British empire, Oliver suggests. Oliver quotes David Cameron telling him:

[Obama] once joked that before he was president his main impression of Britain 
was formed when he lost his luggage on a British Airways flight.

10. Cameron told Nicola Sturgeon she should be involved in the Brexit 
negotiations, Oliver says. He says Sturgeon, the Scottish first minister, was 
one of three people Cameron spoke to by phone on the Friday morning before he 
announced his resignation; the others were Michael Gove and John Major. Cameron 
told Sturgeon “he wants her to be involved in any negotiations”.

Labour

11. Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> remain campaigners 
thought Jeremy Corbyn’s office was actively trying to sabotage their efforts.
Shipman’s book is particularly good on this because he has interviewed so many 
of the key figures and he quotes Lord Mandelson saying:

We were greatly damaged by Jeremy Corbyn’s stance, no doubt about that. Not 
only was he most of the time absent from the battle, but he was holding back 
the efforts of Alan Johnson and the Labour In campaign. At times they felt 
actually their efforts were being sabotaged by Jeremy Corbyn and the people 
around him.

And Shipman quotes Alan Johnson, chair of the Labour In For Britain campaign, 
saying:

Jeremy’s advisers – Seumas Milne, Andy Fisher – absolutely wanted to leave.

Milne, who is serving as Corbyn’s director of communications and strategy 
while on leave from his job as a Guardian journalist, is cited again by Shipman 
in a quote from an unnamed Stronger In press officer, who told the author:

The shadow cabinet was banned from doing anything for us by Seumas. Even when 
people like Heidi Alexander or Seema Malhotra would approach us they’d get 
slightly threatening calls from the leader’s office, and their offers would be 
quickly retracted. They couldn’t even do quotes for us.

Craig Oliver also writes in detail about how frustrated No 10 was with the 
contribution Corbyn’s office was making to the remain campaign. Oliver says:

To us, the Labour leader’s office resembles a madhouse, where the patients 
have taken over the asylum. There’s also the real possibility they don’t care 
if we win or not.

And Gary Gibbon recalls meeting Milne in the Commons the week after the leave 
vote, and being surprised by his reaction to the result.

‘What did you feel when you heard the result?’ I asked. ‘Shocked, really 
shocked,’ came the reply. ‘Interesting,’ I said. ‘Others say “horrified”, 
“sad”.’ ‘Shocked, really shocked,’ [Milne] repeated. ‘You’re not really like 
the general London demographic, are you?’ I said. He walked off with his pastry 
and coffee, laughing.


Corbyn and his team object to the way their conduct during the campaign is 
presented in Shipman’s book, I understand. They say Shipman did not speak to 
Corbyn or anyone in his immediate circle during his research and believe claims 
that they were out to “sabotage” the remain campaign come from people opposed 
to Corbyn’s leadership. Corbyn did not use all the Britain Stronger in Europe 
messages because his argument was different, they say. They also reject the 
allegation that shadow cabinet members were banned from helping Stronger In.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ff5570ce69c0a5f21f3e21bb8fb95e758711fe5%2F0_123_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn't%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn%27t%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ff5570ce69c0a5f21f3e21bb8fb95e758711fe5%2F0_123_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Jeremy Corbyn at a Labour In for Britain event. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA
12. John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, argued in 2015 that Labour should 
stay neutral in the EU campaign until David Cameron secured his EU deal in 
February 2016. Shipman quotes a source who worked with Corbyn saying:

John McDonnell was most hostile to the EU, and would have been pleased if we’d 
been campaigning to leave. John argued forcefully that we should say nothing 
until February.

At another point, Shipman quotes an unnamed Labour official saying McDonnell 
refused to go on the Labour In battle bus “because it’s too ‘New Labour-ish’ to 
be on a bus”.

13. Corbyn’s office kept removing a line from Corbyn’s speeches saying he was 
campaigning to remain in the EU, Shipman says.He quotes Alan Johnson saying:

We kept trying to get [Corbyn] to say, ‘That’s why I am campaigning to remain 
in the EU.’ It’s a simple sentence. It kept going into speeches, and it kept 
coming out. It would be taken out by Seumas Milne, it would be taken out by 
Andrew Fisher.

14. Corbyn’s office proposed getting Corbyn to visit Turkey during the 
referendum campaign to meet refugees, Shipman says. Corbyn was supposed to be 
using the visit to promote the benefits of open borders. Shipman quotes Johnson 
as saying the proposal was a “disaster” and James McGrory, Stronger In’s head 
of communications, as saying:

If I’d been making up what is the worst possible thing that Jeremy Corbyn 
could do right now, I might not have been able to come up with something that 
shit.

The plan was eventually dropped, but Shipman says that for three weeks it was 
under consideration and that Labour officials saw the fact that Corbyn’s office 
was pushing for the visit, despite knowing that highlighting immigration from 
Turkey would help leave, as further evidence that Corbyn’s aides were trying to 
undermine the remain campaign.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7415cc7d148f018f05d793ecf4191043f1034bb3%2F0_171_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn't%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn%27t%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7415cc7d148f018f05d793ecf4191043f1034bb3%2F0_171_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Alan Johnson. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
15. Corbyn’s office ordered a Labour In press release to be rewritten to 
remove a mention of Tony Blair, Shipman says.The original mentioned the fact 
that Blair and other former Labour leaders were engaged in coordinated campaign 
activities. Later, a video for use at a Labour rally was edited on the orders 
of Corbyn’s office to take out a mention of Blair.

16. Gordon Brown was blamed for sabotaging attempts to get three former prime 
ministers, Brown, Blair and John Major, to join David Cameron at a remain rally.
Shipman quotes various sources saying Brown objected to sharing a stage with 
both Cameron and Blair.

17. Katy Clark, Corbyn’s political secretary, told a colleague on the night of 
the referendum that leaving the EU had its advantages, Shipman says. He quotes 
a source who recalls Clark telling a fellow Labour staffer:

It was the right thing to do, because we distinguish ourselves from the 
capitalist case for leaving, and even if we leave, we’ll be out of that 
capitalist thing.

The Conservatives

18. Boris Johnson privately agreed to do five campaign events alongside Nigel 
Farage in the final weeks of the campaign, Banks says.But those events never 
took place. Vote Leave thought Farage had a negative effect on undecided voters 
and refused to campaign with him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F628b76c03c11cc4efab609a7371b2777a4e49190%2F0_90_2737_1642%2F2737.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn't%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn%27t%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F628b76c03c11cc4efab609a7371b2777a4e49190%2F0_90_2737_1642%2F2737.jpg>
 Michael Gove (left) and Boris Johnson on the Vote Leave bus. Photograph: 
Stefan Rousseau/PA 
19. Cameron used to treat the idea of Michael Gove running the country as a 
joke, Oliver says. He recalls a conversation with Cameron:

As I walk into DC’s office, he is commenting on a line in one of the papers 
that Michael Gove should be made deputy PM. He turns to me, knowing I will 
wholeheartedly agree with his view: ‘Can you imagine him ever being left in 
charge of the country.’

At another point Oliver writes this about Gove’s unsuitability to be prime 
minister:

[Gove’s] set of friends agreed he wasn’t the man for the job, saying he was 
not worldly enough, and claiming, ‘This is the man who had to be stopped trying 
to unblock his loo with a hoover.’

Oliver is damning about Gove, essentially accusing him of being phoney.

The more I looked at [Gove], the more everything he did appeared to be an act 
or a performance ... Having worked with him for a number of years now, I’m not 
sure what he really believes.

It is not clear how much this is just a personal view, and how much Oliver is 
channelling the thoughts of Cameron himself. No doubt we’ll find out when 
Cameron publishes his own memoirs.

20. However, Vote Leave focus group research suggested that people trusted 
Gove precisely because they knew he was campaigning against Cameron, who had 
been a close friend.Bennett’s book quotes Matthew Elliott, the VL chief 
executive, recalling the results of focus group research. Elliott told Bennett:


One thing that did come up with Michael Gove [in the focus group research] was 
‘I may not particularly like him, I don’t like what he did with schools, that 
sort of thing, but he basically let down his best friend, he’s followed his 
conscience, he’s friends with the PM yet he’s campaigning for leave and the PM 
is annoyed about that and, if he’s done that, he must be serious about what he 
is saying, he must be telling the truth.’

21. Priti Patel was labelled the most “obnoxious” leave campaigner by fellow 
Tories on the remain side from No 10, Oliver says. He describes this 
conversation shortly before the EU referendum:

DC decides he wants to go for a walk. A group of us join him – there’s plenty 
of gallows humour about what the hell we thought we were doing calling this 
referendum, and who has been the most obnoxious on the Brexit side. Priti Patel 
is a popular choice.

Patel, who is now international development secretary, particularly angered No 
10 because she was willing to put her name to Vote Leave statements attacking 
the government’s record, such asone saying immigration was to blame for parents 
not getting their first choice of primary school 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/661944/priti-patel-brexit-thousand-children-miss-out-primary-school>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F211b441360e105425aa86475cb32b38519f0cdb3%2F0_44_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn't%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn%27t%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F211b441360e105425aa86475cb32b38519f0cdb3%2F0_44_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
 Priti Patel at a Vote Leave event. Photograph: Isabel Infantes/REX/Shutterstock
22. Banks, a Ukip supporter, decided to use his Leave.EU organisation to try 
to helpAndrea Leadsom <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> win 
the Conservative party leadership. In his diary, in an entry for 30 June, he 
writes:

We’ve decided to get behind [Leadsom]. We’ve now got a million supporters, 
many of them Tories. We could make a real difference.

23. Leadsom told Graham Brady, chairman of the Conservative 1922 committee, 
that she was thinking of pulling out of the leadership contest on the Thursday 
when she made it on to the final shortlist of two, Shipman says.Most people 
assume she did not start thinking of withdrawing until a Times interview 
published on the Saturday backfired badly. But Shipman says on Thursday she was 
already thinking of standing aside because Theresa May had such an overwhelming 
lead among MPs.

24. Leadsom’s Times interview contained an unpublished remark about how it 
might be sensible for abused children to be adopted by gay couples, Shipman 
says.The interview damaged Leadsom because she told the Times that having 
children gave her an advantage over May. But Shipman says the Times chose not 
to publish her suggestion that it might be helpful for abused children to be 
adopted by gay couples of a different sex from the abuser because that might be 
“therapeutic” for the children. “The comment may have been intended to 
demonstrate that Leadsom was not homophobic, but it was notably eccentric,” 
Shipman writes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61ae4b22d95edcbef6e6c538c3ff8106cbc6fbf8%2F40_246_4579_2748%2F4579.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn't%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn%27t%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61ae4b22d95edcbef6e6c538c3ff8106cbc6fbf8%2F40_246_4579_2748%2F4579.jpg>
 Andrea Leadsom in one of the EU referendum debates. Photograph: Matt 
Frost/ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
25. Boris Johnson refused to commit to campaigning for Leadsom for the 
leadership, and this helped to persuade her to withdraw, Shipman reports. 
Johnson backed Leadsom for the leadership. But he did not want to campaign 
against Theresa May.


What is certain is that Johnson helped Leadsom to decide to throw in the 
towel. She called Boris on the Monday morning [the day she announced her 
withdrawal] and said she would continue if he was prepared to campaign for her 
around the country and Lynton Crosby would run the campaign. Crosby had already 
refused, and Johnson said he was not prepared to spend his entire summer on the 
stump.

Ukip and Arron Banks

26. Douglas Carswell wanted an assurance that he would be compensated if he 
lost before he defected from the Conservatives to Ukip and triggered a 
byelection in Clacton, Banks claims. Bennett’s book reveals that Carswell’s 
defection to Ukip was partly motivated by a desire to “neutralise” the “toxic” 
impact of Nigel Farage, which Carswell feared would damage the leave campaign, 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/douglas-carswell-infiltrated-ukip-to-neutralise-nigel-farage_uk_57f0ff98e4b0397f73b9ce1a>
 but Banks’s diary has further insights into quite how poisonous relations 
between Carswell and the Farage faction were. On Clacton, Banks writes:

Only [Carswell] knows whether his heart was ever really in leaving the 
Conservative party, but it is interesting that he went to great lengths to 
ensure that if his great gamble backfired, he would be well looked after. 
Arrangements were put in place for him to receive a considerable sum of money 
from Ukip if he failed to win the byelection triggered by his defection.

Banks also implies that Carswell was giving the Tories Ukip election data from 
South Thanet during the 2015 general election to help them stop Farage becoming 
an MP.

Long after polling day ... my own forensic post-mortem examination of South 
Thanet revealed something quite remarkable: Carswell was routinely downloading 
data and sending it to an anonymous computer server.

He did so on six separate occasions. While there were files on every target 
seat in the country, curiously, only the information from South Thanet was 
shared. Quite where the information went once it left our offices, nobody 
knows, but I can make an educated guess: the Tories.

Asked about these claims, Carswell told me that Banks’s book was “a work of 
fiction” and that there was “absolutely no basis for any suggestion” that he 
passed election information on to other parties. But on the Clacton allegation 
he just said that he risked his career when he triggered the byelection and 
that: “I don’t think anyone can fairly accuse me of doing so for personal gain.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F678d6873c538ac06966caaa452f65d3433965d0d%2F0_204_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn't%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn%27t%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F678d6873c538ac06966caaa452f65d3433965d0d%2F0_204_5976_3584%2F5976.jpg>
 Douglas Carswell. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
27 Russia’s security service sent an agent to the Ukip conference last year, 
Banks believes.In his diary he records a meeting with the Russian ambassador 
and describes how it was set up.

We’d been invited by a shady character called Oleg we’d met in Doncaster at 
Ukip’s conference. He was introduced to us as the first secretary at the 
embassy – in other word’s, the KGB’s man in London.

The KGB has now been replaced by the FSB, but never mind. Banks says the 
Russian ambassador wanted “the inside track on the Brexit campaign” and that 
the pair of them “hit it off from the word go”.

28. Richard Tice, the businessman who co-founded Leave.EU with Banks, thought 
No 10 ordered HM Revenue and Customs to launch an investigation into his tax 
affairs because of his support for the leave campaign. Describing how angry 
Tice was about an HMRC probe in January 2016, Banks says:

[Tice is] convinced he detects the hand of No 10. ‘You and I were the first 
business people to stick our heads above the parapet on the referendum last 
year. Bet someone in Downing Street’s encouraged HMRC to have a little look,’ 
he said darkly.

29. Banks claims that two small parties asked for money in return for backing 
the Grassroots Out bid to be the official leave campaign.He claims that the DUP 
asked for £30,000 a month for four months, which was not paid, and that, in a 
meeting in a pub, the New Communist party asked for £2,000 in cash, which was 
handed over. In response,the DUP, which backed Vote Leave’s bid to win the 
official campaign designation, denied asking for money and said it was Banks 
who offered cash 
<http://www.newsletter.co.uk/news/tycoon-dup-demanded-30-000-a-month-to-back-my-brexit-campaign-1-7689127>
. The New Communist party was listed as a Grassroots Out supporter, but its 
general secretary, Andy Brooks, told me that the party was not meant to be 
affiliated to any leave group and that Banks might have muddled it up with 
another communist group, or that the pub meeting was with readers of its 
newspaper who were not authorised to make commitments on behalf of the party.


30. Relations between Banks and Vote Leave got so bad that in March Banks 
served a writ on Matthew Elliott, VL’s chief executive, for defamation.But he 
dropped the legal action “extremely reluctantly” because he thought it would 
damage the leave campaign.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7732093f871fd0c165e0636a24b0827c9a87b6d0%2F0_396_3816_2289%2F3816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn't%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thirty%20things%20you%20didn%27t%20know%20about%20the%20EU%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthirty-things-you-didnt-know-about-the-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7732093f871fd0c165e0636a24b0827c9a87b6d0%2F0_396_3816_2289%2F3816.jpg>
 Nigel Farage (left) and Arron Banks. Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA  