
The Labour party is divided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/the-guardian-view-on-the-labour-leadership-a-challenge-is-just-the-start>
. The Tories – and by extension the country – are undernew leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/panel-theresa-may>. In 
the three weeks since the referendum, British politicshas seen more crises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/09/country-political-crisis-tories-prime-minister>
 than many of us can remember.

And it’s not going to get any better, not for a long time yet. The parties are 
not just tearing themselves apart over policies and personalities; they are 
engaged in a furious battle to decide what they stand for, heart and soul. Is 
the Conservative party a bastion of Cameronite liberalism or a reactionary 
collection of near-Ukippers? Does Labour want to tackle the 21st century’s 
great questions of liberation, climate change and inequality, or to lament the 
decline of industrialism andthe loss of a loyal working class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/10/working-class-britain-brexity-betrayed-labour-vote-leave>
?

These are big questions, but they cannot be answered until the biggest one of 
all is decided. What do we want Britain’s role in the world to be once we leave 
the EU? Inward-looking or internationalist? Open or protectionist? That 
decision will shape Britain’s role in Nato, the Middle East and the global 
economy.

Theresa May: our writers’ prognostications for the new prime minister | The 
Panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/panel-theresa-may> 
But decisions about the European Union should raise broader questions about 
what kind of a country we want Britain to be. Do we want an economy based on 
rampant capitalism or gradations of social democracy? Hasthe time come 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/brexiters-voters-eu-referendum-result-proportional-voting>
 for proportional representation? And perhaps most importantly of all,will the 
kingdom remain united 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/07/scottish-brexit-voters-pose-quandary-for-independence-campaign>
?

It is only through providing these answers that the parties can decide what 
they will look like. The suggestions put forward will shape what is possible. 
We may find thatLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and the 
Tories discover their places in this new world, or perhaps those labels will go 
the way of the Whigs and Liberals – descriptions for a different time. New 
parties may be better placed to represent the new divisions which have opened 
up in society.

Both of our major parties should get it over with and split. Perhaps each will 
form two splinter groups: one moderate and one extreme. This would leave us in 
the new position of having four semi-major parties to choose from, and could 
perhaps usher in a new era of coalition government. People may even – at a 
stretch – feel better about democracy when they can cast votes for parties 
which more accurately reflect their views.

For the Tories, closed ranks: for Labour, open warfare | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/12/tories-labour-angela-eagle-labour-corbyn-party-membership>
Another possibility looms, although it has perhaps become less likely with 
Theresa May’s victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/cameron-announces-he-will-step-down-after-pmqs-on-wednesday>
 over Andrea Leadsom. That is for the moderate wings of each existing party to 
band together, sweeping up the remnants of the Liberal Democrats, and form, if 
not a party, a modernist coalition – a broader SDP, if you will. As we leave 
the EU andbecome vulnerable to extremist views 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/brexit-europe-far-right-rightwing-extremists-politics-terrorism>
, this seems the preferable option if the new group can provide a buffer 
against such nastiness. Leaving the remains of the Labour and Tory parties to 
make the case for isolationism and radical economic views, this coalition could 
be the voice of progressivism and moderation. In the current climate, this is 
exactly what the country needs – although it is far from guaranteed to get it.

Whatever happens, Britain’s political landscape will undergo seismic change. 
So if you’re already fed up ofthe chaos and the bickering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/11/leadsom-fresh-meat-tory-orgy-political-homicide>
, it may be time to find a bunker. It will take time for the country to find 
its way, and even longer for the parties to coalesce around platforms which fit 
this new reality.

Even once May has become prime minister, she will have Brexit to negotiate. 
The deal which arises out of that will shape British politics and determine 
which parties are contesting our elections in the decades to come.
 