
What the reading public finds interesting about the world is as subject to 
fashion as hemlines on the Paris catwalk. Had Asne Seierstad's The Bookseller 
of Kabul been written at any time before 11 September 2001, for example, the 
chances are it would never have been published in English. But overnight, the 
previously obscure workings of Afghan culture, where hemlines remained strictly 
earthbound, became a matter of global significance.

Seierstad had the right idea in the right place at the right time and produced 
a piece of imaginative reportage that became an international bestseller 
translated into 29 languages. Actually, it was her second book.

Her first was completed just before September 2001 and was called With Their 
Backs to the World (Virago Â£7.99, pp352). It examined the plight of Serbians 
immediately before and after the fall of Slobodan Milosevic. Now, after the 
success of The Bookseller of Kabul, it has been updated and translated into 
English. It would be hard to think of a less timely piece of publishing. To put 
it bluntly, Serbia is so last season.

Not that Seierstad is too concerned with the fickleness of geopolitical 
sentiment. A tall, striking Norwegian, she doesn't give the impression that 
she's much taken by trends. She returned to Serbia because she was curious to 
see what had happened.

The answer appears to be not a lot. Essentially a series of interviews with 
various Serbs, this is not a book that's likely to endear itself to Seierstad's 
fans. 'One thing that is always hard for the writer,' she concedes, 'is to know 
where is the reader. I don't only have academics who really follow what's going 
on in the Balkans but also general readers in book clubs. Then you have to make 
a choice about how much you explain. I made the decision to not have everybody 
with me. I'd rather lose some readers who are not knowledgeable of the 
situation than annoy the really good readers.'

Seierstad, who speaks five languages and is no doubt as straightforward in all 
of them, has a way of talking that on the page might seem rather bold or even 
arrogant. But in person, it's clear that she is simply being open.

She came in for a certain amount of criticism after The Bookseller of Kabul, 
not least from the bookseller himself, Shah Mohammed Rais. The accusation was 
that she had misrepresented Afghan culture, judged it by Western standards, and 
betrayed confidences and hospitality.

Shah Mohammed has threatened to write his own book in which he would expose 
Seierstad. 'I never saw him write anything,' she notes with a hint of irony, 
when I ask her about the proposed book, 'but why not? I wouldn't be surprised - 
but I wouldn't be surprised if it was just words.'

She is unapologetic about revealing such incidents as Shah Mohammed's son's 
sexual abuse of child beggars and the 'honour killing' of a female relative. 'I 
realised after The Bookseller that I'm not a cultural relativist. In Norway, if 
a husband beats up his wife he's going to go to prison. Not so in Afghanistan. 
But the pain of the woman is the same in Afghanistan as it is in Norway. How 
can we say it doesn't hurt so much because it's part of her culture? Also, you 
have Afghan people here who are happy to have their opinion about the West, so 
why should I not have my opinion about Afghanistan?'

Nor can she be accused of exploiting Afghanistan's misfortune, insofar as she 
has built a girls' school (now in its first year with 600 students) and set up 
a fund to train midwives.

Seierstad describes herself as a product of a classic Seventies liberal 
upbringing. Her father is a political scientist and her mother, Froydis 
Guldahl, is a well-known feminist author in Norway. She came of age in 
Lillehammer believing that she could rival boys in any field of endeavour. 
'That was in my blood,' she once said. As such, she is the walking antithesis 
of the domestic slaves, imprisoned in burkas, she got to know in Kabul. What, I 
wondered, did they make of her?

'They saw me as a weirdo travelling around the world like an outcast. One girl 
said, "It seems your parents don't love you because you are allowed to travel 
without protection."'

Seierstad studied Russian, Spanish and philosophy in Oslo and political 
science at Moscow University, before becoming a freelance journalist in Russia. 
When the Chechen war broke out, she hitched a ride on a Russian troop carrier 
and was taken in by a Chechen family of women whose husbands were either killed 
or away fighting.

It's tempting to see her as a grown-up Pippi Longstocking with a satellite 
phone, but there is far more to her than an intrepid spirit. Her hero is the 
great Polish foreign correspondent Ryszard Kapuscinski.

'He is always respectful of other people, no matter who he is describing. 
That's what I try to do so I'm really sorry that I've been criticised for the 
opposite.'

Sometimes you can imagine that Seierstad is almost literally biting her 
tongue. In With Their Backs to the World, she hovers around the edge of the 
action, making the occasional barbed comment. It's almost as if she's not sure 
when to come in and when to stay out, an uncertainty that must have been 
increased by the fact that she started writing the book as an unknown hack and 
finished it as a star of the international literary circuit.

The one book she has written in its entirety post-The Bookseller is A Hundred 
and One Days, her account of the invasion of Baghdad. She was one of the very 
few journalists who remained in Baghdad during the bombing and, as such, it's a 
perfectly admirable, not to mention brave, example of war reporting, which also 
examines the business of reporting a war. But it lacks the shape and elegance 
of The Bookseller. At the end of the book there is a quote from Stendhal: 'I'm 
profoundly convinced that the only antidote that can make the reader forget the 
perpetual I's the author will be writing, is a perfect sincerity.'

It reads like an apology for her presence in the foreground of an 
international conflict. Indeed she is more comfortable in the background 
picking up the smaller human stories, yet one can sense an author sifting a 
little too desperately through the wreckage in search of her subject.

I asked her if she felt the pressure of having written a bestseller. 'No, I 
honestly don't,' she replied without hesitation. 'I can say maybe that was my 
book. I realise this is once in a lifetime.'

She denies that she has become addicted to war zones, though she admits that 
she would like to write a book about Chechnya. 'The Russian army is so brutal 
and there is no focus on it. The Western leaders are so "Oh hello, Putin" as 
long as he's signed up to the war on terror.'

Does she have any other book plans?

'I have some plans that I won't tell you,' she says, like a literary flirt.

Have you started?

'Um, I won't tell you.'

Does it involve travel?

'Yes,' she smiles. 'It's not about Norway.'
 