
Picasso for the people


The Willem de Kooning retrospective 
<http://moma.org/visit/calendar/exhibitions/1149?gclid=COij09Pfg6wCFYSK4AodPk9FJw>
 at the Museum of Modern Art in New York is a revelation, giving a sense of 
this Dutch-born artist's obsession with the female form which, when figure and 
ground are conflated, becomes hectic, fleshy abstract expressionist landscapes. 
It costs an eye-watering-but-worth-it $25 (£16) to get into MoMA; for free art 
in New York one must turn, ironically, to the commercial galleries. Sometimes 
these can feel like museum shows: a case in point is thePicasso exhibition 
planned forGagosian <http://www.gagosian.com/> by John Richardson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/10/writers.rooms.john.richardson>, 
the artist's biographer. Richardson, who broughta much-admired exhibition 
devoted to Picasso's later years to London's Gagosian last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2010/aug/13/picasso-mediterranean-years-gagosian>
, is now turning his attention to the period 1943-52, when Picasso lived with
Françoise Gilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/art/9783933040954/pablo-picasso-the-time-with-francoise-gilot>
 – who is still alive and painting in New York – in Vallauris, near Cannes. 
Richardson said: "It's one of the most interesting periods of Picasso's life – 
he lives a good, petit-bourgeois, Communist party member's life with Françoise 
and their two children. He reinvents pottery and puts the ceramics town of 
Vallauris on the map; he reinvents lithography and breaks all the rules. With 
the ceramics, he is trying to bring his art within financial reach of other 
party members. Of course, the dealers win: they get in, snap it up – and make a 
fortune." That opens in May. Meanwhile, opening on Wednesday is the first New 
York survey, at theNew Museum 
<http://www.newmuseum.org/assets/general/pressreleases/holler_pressrelease_v7.pdf>
, ofCarsten Höller, he of the slides in Tate Modern's Turbine Hall in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/oct/10/familyandrelationships.arts>. You 
can ride on a crazily mirrored fairground carousel, whizz down the building in 
one of his signature helterskelters or relax in a flotation tank. The New 
Museum is taking no chances though: a two-sided, detailed waiver form guards 
against visitors suing for any injuries sustained.

Protest art for the Twitter age


You could call it folk art: the multiple small acts of creativity embodied in 
the placards and banners homemade by the protestors ofOccupy Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/occupy-wall-street> at Zuccotti Park, each 
vying for attention through the purposefulness of its message, or its wit. This 
is protest art for the Twitter and Flickr age: in the past, one image might be 
seen on TV, these days any number of slogans and messages that will find their 
way into the wider world. Critics may deprecate the protestors' apparent lack 
of unity and coherence, but to my mind the individuation of the sentiments 
gives the protests a certain dignity. My favourites are, "World-class 
education: social standing, indentured servant", and, "We are the new 
barbarians, occupying our Rome."

Sonic booms


To the closing night of the SONiC music festival <http://sonicfestival.org/>, 
devoted to new music by composers under 40, includingTarik O'Regan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/feb/06/new-york-composers>, Radiohead's 
Jonny Greenwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/mar/08/radiohead-jonny-greenwood>, Nico 
Muhly <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nico-muhly> and, at the concert I saw, 
Bryce Dessner, guitarist of the rock bandthe National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/16/brassland-record-label-new-york-the-national>
. The orchestral concert, held in the winter garden of the World Financial 
Centre, was free, and full of families, passing shoppers and music geeks. A 
brilliant and unpretentious showcase for music in the new millennium.
 