
The flag of St George may not be flying in the central square here where those 
of the 16 African Nations Cup competitors are on display. But an English 
presence has been felt in Mali's capital as excitement mounts for a tournament 
which begins today.

As the locals went about their business yesterday, women selling anything from 
apples to sandals while a goat stood tethered to a telegraph pole beside a busy 
road, most were surely unaware of the Football Association's work here.

On Wednesday the FA's chairman Geoff Thompson addressed the congress of the 
Confederation of African Football (CAF) and announced plans to aid the 
development of the continent's game. Yesterday he visited an SOS children's 
village where the homes have been named after the Nations Cup qualifiers.

This poor but welcoming country is proud. Scooters, cars, shops and even the 
carts used for hauling oranges display Mali's red, green and yellow flag. When 
the hosts get things under way against Liberia this afternoon, the stadium in 
which seats have been selling for 500F (50p) will be buzzing. Those without 
tickets will gather around the televisions which sit outside roadside stalls.

This west African country, in which more than half the population live below 
the poverty line and teachers make Â£50 a month, has worked wonders to host the 
tournament given the economic climate. The jamboree promises to be colourful 
but Mali's football infrastructure - like many on this continent - lags behind 
Europe. And that is a problem the FA is taking on.

Thompson announced that this year and next the FA will host workshops on 
coaching, referee instruction, administration and marketing. All of the 
continent's national associations will be welcome and the appreciation was 
plain from one Cameroon delegate. "When I heard your words," he told Thompson, 
"I thought I was in heaven."

After the accusations levelled at the FA during its abortive bid for the 2006 
World Cup, the governing body is showing a more selfless side. Similar 
programmes will take place in the Caribbean and Asia. Ray Clemence, England's 
goalkeeping coach, has already run a course in Kuala Lumpur.

"We have a responsibility to the whole game," Thompson says. "We can't claim 
to be the mother of the game, the home of the game, if we don't develop it 
throughout the world, particularly in places like Africa, the Caribbean and 
Asia.

"We are rich and I think we need to share some of those riches and the 
experiences we have with developing nations. And we can learn. Our referees' 
officer said he gained a lot from a course he took in Botswana and that he 
would change his techniques."

The FA has a dedicated international relations section as well as special ties 
with Botswana, Lesotho and Malawi under the Uefa-Meridian project. The delivery 
of a computer as well as playing resources to Malawi and Lesotho has been 
invaluable. "A small amount of help makes a big difference," Thompson says. 
"They are things we take for granted."

He talks of helping to "unlock the vast potential of the game" in Africa, and 
there were skills to enjoy at the SOS village south-east of Bamako, where some 
of the 126 orphans and abandoned children ran about on a gravel pitch. The FA 
was greeted with broad smiles.

That so many of the children wore clothes with a Nations Cup logo further 
emphasised what hosting the competition means to the people. Others donned FA 
T-shirts as small footballs were handed out.

Thompson's route back to the capital took him past a 24-hour market which 
sells goats. From there it was straight to meetings with African football 
officials, building relationships.

Among those who heard and warmly greeted Thompson's speech to the CAF congress 
was Fifa's president Sepp Blatter. The FA alone was there without vested 
interest and knows its development work is helping to improve its profile and 
clout in the decision-making of world football. It has more people on the 
committees of Fifa and Uefa than ever before.

"It's important to have people on committees and panels who can give the 
English view to help to create the strategy for world and European football," 
Thompson says. "If you haven't got a voice like that you can do very little."

If Africa does not get outside help it will never realise its potential. As 
Thompson says: "The work will never finish." The FA, though, has made a start.
 