
More than 4,600 academics from across the globe have signed an open letter 
protesting against thedeath of Giulio Regeni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/07/italian-student-giulio-regeni-dead-cairo-killed-violent-blow-head>
, a Cambridge PhD student from Italy whose body was found on the outskirts of 
Cairo bearing signs of torture last week, and demanding an investigation into 
the growing number of forced disappearances in Egypt.


Egypt must look into all reports of torture, not just the death of Giulio 
Regeni | Letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/08/egypt-must-look-into-all-reports-of-torture-not-just-the-death-of-giulio-regeni>
The letter, published by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/08/egypt-must-look-into-all-reports-of-torture-not-just-the-death-of-giulio-regeni>
, has attracted signatories from more than 90 different countries and across a 
wide range of academic disciplines. It is likely to heap further pressure on 
both the Egyptian and Italian authorities to uncover and make public the facts 
behind Regeni’s killing.

The 28-year-old, who was researching labour unrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/06/murder-giulio-regeni-egypt-academic-freedom-students>
 and independent trade unions – a politically-sensitive topic in Egypt – went 
missing on 25 January, the fifth anniversary of thestart of Egypt’s revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/02/egypt-revolution-turns-ugly>, 
amid anunprecedented security crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/24/state-repression-egypt-worst-weve-ever-seen-activist-hossam-bahgat>
.

His body was discovered nine days later by the side of a road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/italian-student-found-dead-egypt-giulio-regeni-torture>
, marked with cigarette burns, bruising and multiple stab wounds. The Italian 
interior minister, Angelino Alfano, said that Regeni had been subjected to 
“inhuman, animal-like violence”.

The Italian foreign minister, Paolo Gentiloni, said in an interview with La 
Repubblica published on Monday thatEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> appeared to be cooperating with a 
team of Italian investigators dispatched to Cairo but warned Rome wanted 
justice for Regeni. “We will not settle for alleged truths,” he said. “We want 
those really responsible identified and punished on the basis of law.”

It has since emerged that Regeni wrote occasional reports from Egypt under a 
pseudonym for the leftwing Italian newspaper Il Manifesto. In a piecepublished 
posthumously under Regeni’s own name 
<http://ilmanifesto.info/in-egypt-second-life-for-independent-trade-unions/>, 
he criticised the scale of authoritarianism and repression underPresident Abdel 
Fatah el-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/15/egypt-jails-record-number-of-journalists>
 and hailed “popular and spontaneous initiatives that break the wall of fear”.

Italian media outlets have pointed the finger of suspicion over Regeni’s fate 
at Egypt’s security forces 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/df70b1b30d304e94a95147095964bdd7/apnewsbreak-body-italian-student-found-outside-cairo>
.

The Egyptian interior minister, Magdy Abdel Ghaffar, described charges of 
security forces involvement as “completely unacceptable” when asked at a press 
conference on Monday if Regeni had been arrested by police. “This is not 
Egyptian security policy; Egyptian security has never been accused of such a 
matter,” he said.

The letter notes that, according to human rights organisations, state 
institutions in Egypt “routinely practise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/22/disappeared-egyptians-torture-secret-military-prison>
 the same kinds of torture that Giulio is reported to have suffered against 
hundreds of Egyptian citizens each year”. It calls for an independent 
investigation into Regeni’s death and “all instances of forced disappearances, 
cases of torture and deaths in detention during January and February 2016 … in 
order that those responsible for these crimes can be identified and brought to 
justice.”


State repression in Egypt worst in decades, says activist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/24/state-repression-egypt-worst-weve-ever-seen-activist-hossam-bahgat>
Several hundred professors and other senior academics have put their name to 
the letter, including Charles Butterworth, emeritus professor of political 
philosophy at the University of Maryland, Sir Timothy Gowers, Royal Society 
research professor of mathematics at the University of Cambridge, and Ha-Joon 
Chang – the economist and bestselling author of 23 Things They Don’t Tell You 
About Capitalism.

It was begun by Regeni’s colleagues at Cambridge and subsequently went viral 
among academics.

The number of forced disappearances 
<http://www.alaraby.co.uk/english/news/2015/12/24/in-egypt-enforced-disappearance-is-a-daily-risk>
 has risen sharply in Egypt over the past year, coinciding with the state’s 
growing intolerance of any form of political opposition or dissent.

“National human rights groups are reporting an average of three people a day 
being forcibly disappeared across the country,” said Mohamed Elmessiry,Egypt 
researcher at Amnesty International 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/countries/middle-east-and-north-africa/egypt/>.

“Both the security forces and the judiciary have failed to hold officers to 
account in cases where citizens have been tortured to death, or which involve 
excessive use of force.”

The Egyptian government was invited to comment but provided no response by the 
time of publication.
 