
The main attractions

Before arrival, the prospect of a visit to Christchurch – the city devastated 
by two earthquakes in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jan/27/christchurch-after-earthquake-rebuild-image-new-zealand>
 – was coloured with expectations of visible destruction and tragedy. There’s 
no camouflaging the damage, but the transitional nature of the city’s new 
geography has given it new life. Bring your cameras and walking shoes; a 
weekend in the re-emerging capital of Canterbury is a treat for all lovers of 
the visual.



The largest city of New Zealand’s South Island, and the nation’s third 
biggest, sleepy Christchurch once prided itself on its Englishness. Nestled 
around the gentle River Avon, and with a similarly temperate climate to the 
south of England, the city was famous for a gothic cathedral, green parks and 
gardens, cricketing whites and an old-money establishment that entertained 
itself in private clubs.

That changed in 2011 when two earthquakes struck at the very heart of 
Christchurch city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2011/feb/22/newzealand-natural-disasters>
, flattening the CBD’s high-rises and most of its inner-urban infrastructure. 
Two-and-a-half-years later, most of the unrecoverable structures have been 
pulled down, leaving entire blocks of gravel where buildings used to be. What 
has sprung up in the ruins, however, are creative solutions to improvised 
infrastructure, as well as an enthusiastic campaign to transform what remains 
into an extraordinary public art gallery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393484841474%2Ff865fb99-e825-4bf7-bbaa-8fa90ccdee27-2060x2029.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393484841474%2Ff865fb99-e825-4bf7-bbaa-8fa90ccdee27-2060x2029.jpeg>
 Gap-filler projects in Christchurch’s city centre: mini golf and arches. 
Photograph: Van Badham for Guardian Australia 
On foot


Christchurch always was a compact city, and its lack of hills makes it ideal 
for cycling. The best way to tour the city’s attractions is by bike and on foot 
– making a visit an appealing destination for budget travellers.

To find out what’s happening in Christchurch, make a morning visit to the 
tourist information cart currently set up inCathedral Square 
<http://www.newzealand.com/travel/media/press-releases/2013/7/tourism-news_christchurch-reopens-cathedral-square.cfm>
. As a city determined to not lose sense of itself despite missing most of its 
landmarks, there’s an impressive number of festivals and activities going on.


Then take a walk through Cathedral Square to Canterbury Museum 
<http://www.canterburymuseum.com/>. The cathedral itself was once the pride of 
the Garden City – building commenced in 1864 and attracted early visitors like
Anthony Trollope <https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthonytrollope>. Of its 
pretty towers and stained glass, now only a crumbling shell remains – anda 
campaign fought by the locals 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Save-the-Christchurch-Cathedral/169471766434050>
 to retain its ruins was lost a few weeks ago. Around it, wire fences decorated 
with the tribal patterns of street art and a “green chapel” constructed of 
living plants are an immediate symbol of how post-earthquake Christchurch is 
reinventing itself with art.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393485547838%2F82e4d632-690b-4279-8549-b1091170ea34-1020x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393485547838%2F82e4d632-690b-4279-8549-b1091170ea34-1020x1020.jpeg>
 Street art decorating the police station. Photograph: Photograph: Van Badham 
for Guardian Australia 
Street art city

If you can make it to Christchurch before 23 March, you’ll enjoy the fantastic 
privilege of seeing Canterbury Museum’s innovativeRise/Oi You! 
<http://streetart.co.nz/rise/> exhibition of street art. The most visited 
exhibition in the museum’s history, the centrepiece is the world’s largest 
collection of artwork byBanksy <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/banksy>
. There’s also a comprehensive collection of work by local and international 
artists includingIan Strange/Kid Zoom <http://www.kid-zoom.com/>, Milton 
Springsteen 
<http://www.prints.co.nz/page/fine-art/CTGY/Artists_Springsteen_Milton> and 
Thom Buchanan <http://www.residualrecall.com/>. Brilliantly, the museum has 
commissioned works by street artists on the walls and gables of the smashed-up 
city beyond; inner Chirstchurch has been transformed into a gallery with 
monumental works by the likes of Belgium’sRoa <http://roaweb.tumblr.com/>, and 
Australia’sRone <http://r-o-n-e.com/> and Anthony Lister 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthony_Lister>. Maps locating the 25 
commissioned artworks are available from the museum, or via a dedicated Rise/Oi 
You! app.

Afterwards, relax in the museum’s attic cafe with views overlooking 
picturesque Hagley park, decent coffee and the ubiquitous local speciality, the 
addictively inedible Lolly Cake – a diabetic coma in cake form.

As you explore the Oi You! artworks street by street, you’ll also notice the 
number of public art spaces and projects supplied byGap-Filler 
<http://www.gapfiller.org.nz/> – community-led creations to reinvigorate the 
city’s empty spaces. On my visit, these included a sprung public dancefloor 
with stereo system you could program with your iPod, an obstacle-course 
gallery, some guerrilla gardens and, most spectacularly, a free nine-hole 
mini-golf course set up across the city.

End your day by visiting the impressive Pallet Pavilion 
<http://palletpavilion.com/>, a monumental bar structure created from donated 
shipping pallets. There’s usually live entertainment at the Pavilion and 
there’s also the unmissable taco truck,Mamacita’s 
<http://www.menumania.co.nz/restaurants/mamacitas-christchurch> – the best 
Tex-Mex you will live to have at a price so cheap, it’s shameful. For post-taco 
drinks, get toSmash Palac <http://thesmashpalace.co.nz/category/christchurch/>e 
– a friendly, popular shipping container pub up the road, punnily named after 
not only the local disaster, but a cult Kiwi movie.


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393484947339%2F998f5066-2135-4516-97b3-c83287a1138c-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393484947339%2F998f5066-2135-4516-97b3-c83287a1138c-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Ducks in Hagley park. Photograph: Photograph: Van Badham for Guardian Australia
Parks, picnics and cocktails


If you take in the Canterbury Museum in the morning, explore Hagley park in 
the afternoon – it’s on the same side of town. Containing theChristchurch 
Botanic Gardens 
<http://www.ccc.govt.nz/CITYLEISURE/parkswalkways/christchurchbotanicgardens/index.aspx>
, a golf course and other leisure facilities, Hagley’s glorious greenery 
survived the earthquake. The perfect place for an easy ramble or gentle cycle, 
this cool, green serenity-generator is truly one of the world’s most beautiful 
public parks. It’s a fantastic place to imagine a lazy picnic.


For dinner, grab a wood-fired pizza from Base in the Re:Start Cashel Mall 
<http://www.restart.org.nz/>. Constructed to replace collapsed shopping 
facilities, the project is a maze of colourful shipping containers housing 
pop-up boutiques, some excellent coffee houses and quirky eateries. The shops 
carry everything from designer clothes to truly unusual homeware and souvenirs, 
while the double-decker containers offer you a rooftop view of the city

Those who wish to grab a post-meal posh drink in less-improvised circumstances 
are advised to visit Christchurch’s casino, where enthusiastic refurbishment 
has led to the creation of theDiamond Bar 
<http://www.chchcasino.co.nz/restaurants-bars/diamond-bar> – a cocktail lounge 
decorated with more than 3,500 hanging crystals. You’ll certainly be seeing 
stars after a cosmopolitan or two, but while you might want to get messy, don’t 
arrive messy: like many of the city’s top-end bars, there is a dress code.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393485255391%2F676c5fe2-119f-4d33-8d93-871820c60fdb-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393485255391%2F676c5fe2-119f-4d33-8d93-871820c60fdb-2060x2060.jpeg>
 183 Chairs earthquake memorial commemorates victims of the quake. Photograph: 
Van Badham for Guardian Australia 
Remembering the lost



When travelling to a devastated city, it’s only proper to visit places created 
to mourn its loss. Two monuments in close proximity provide this necessary 
civic service. The unutterably moving185 Chairs 
<http://www.lostateminor.com/2012/11/19/185-empty-white-chairs-commemorating-the-christchurch-earthquake/>
 is an open-air installation containing white chairs commemorating each 
individual victim of the quake.


It’s close to the Cardboard Cathedral <http://www.cardboardcathedral.org.nz/>, 
which, for all its visual simplicity, is worth a lengthy, quiet visit. Built 
quickly to replace its ruined stone predecessor, the cathedral is a spectacular 
creation of industrial cardboard and corrugated plastic, with design and 
construction donations from the Japanese community, who lost many citizens when 
the quake hit a Christchurch language school.

To round off your visit, take in some more contemporary art with improvised 
spaces theArt Box <http://www.artboxgallery.info/> and the Physics Room around 
Tuam and St Asaph streets.


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393485078519%2F7719c64b-af11-4a4c-a036-c2a838ef7421-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393485078519%2F7719c64b-af11-4a4c-a036-c2a838ef7421-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Cafes housed in shipping containers in the the Re:Start Cashel Mall. 
Photograph: Van Badham for Guardian Australia 
Eat and drink

Good eats can be found everywhere, from fresh produce picked up at the local 
grocers to the many restaurants that dot Christchurch. Recommended from this 
visit areDose Diner <http://www.cafedose.co.nz/cafe.html> in Tuam Street and the
Hummingbird Cafe 
<https://plus.google.com/114400185036468599091/about?gl=au&hl=en> and Crafted 
Coffee Company <http://www.craftedcoffeecompany.co.nz/> in the Re:Start Cashel 
Mall; coffee and decent snack will not set you back more than $12.

 For an afternoon snack, cross town to the Canterbury Cheesemonger 
<http://www.cheesemongers.co.nz/>. Hidden behind hedges in the corner of the 
old Arts Centre, it offers breads, chutneys and cheeses of memorable tastiness.

The numerous food trucks around the Pallet Pavilion are fantastic options for 
budget eaters and foodies alike. High-endSaggio’s Di Vino 
<http://www.saggiodivino.co.nz/> offers locally sourced gourmet produce in a 
European menu andKing of Snake <http://www.kingofsnake.co.nz/> is the locals’ 
pick for high-end Asian – three courses, with the great local wines, will set 
you back $100 per person.

Getting there and around

Air New Zealand, Virgin Australia, Jetstar and Qantas all offer flights from 
Australia to Christchurch, with the majority, though not all, air traffic from 
Australia via Sydney. Once you’re in Christchurch, everything is accessible by 
foot and bike. Day trips to outlying towns likeLyttelton 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lyttelton,_New_Zealand> are easy on public 
transport. City tram services are increasing but limited since the earthquake 
and a tourist tram is a good option for less mobile travellers.

When to visit

Although winters in Christchurch can be as English as its reputation, the rest 
of the year the city is comfortably temperate – though, as rain is frequent, a 
variety of outerwear is always sensible. For more information about festivals 
and events to coincide with your visit, check outbethere.co.nz 
<http://bethere.co.nz/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393485365158%2F0380a7a7-661d-4423-8604-b06801e5a6f4-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20in%20Christchurch%2C%20New%20Zealand%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Ffeb%2F28%2Fthree-days-christchurch-new-zealand-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F2%2F27%2F1393485365158%2F0380a7a7-661d-4423-8604-b06801e5a6f4-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Cardboard Cathedral, Christchurch. Photograph: Van Badham for Guardian 
Australia 
Sleep

As Christchurch rebuilds, the city’s hotel room rates are incredibly 
reasonable, with online bargains starting at $130 and the average stay around 
$180. TheHeritage Hotel’ 
<http://www.heritagehotels.co.nz/hotels/heritage-christchurch>s luxury 
facilities – including well-appointed rooms and a classy indoor pool – are good 
value.

Cheaper stay options include several romantic inner-city B&Bs that have 
undergone refurbishments since the earthquake. Of these,Eliza’s Manor Boutique 
Hotel <http://www.elizas.co.nz/> is particularly well located. There are also 
plenty of hostels and Airbnb options for super-budgeteers.
 