
A tournament short of incident and surprise got both as Senegal beat Nigeria 
to reach the final for the first time. In a game of dramatic swings, 10-man 
Senegal led twice before two late red cards for Nigeria ensured England'sWorld 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> opponents missed 
out on a meeting with Cameroon.

"We fought hard when we went down to 10 men and deserved our victory," said 
Khalilou Fadiga, magnificent throughout forSenegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal> on the left flank. It was his 
ball that sent Henri Camara racing through in the first minute, but with the 
Nigerian keeper Ike Shorunmu beaten the striker's cross-shot ricocheted off an 
upright to safety.

As if stung into action the otherwise anonymous Austin Okocha sent a shot 
crashing into a Senegal post with a magnificent curling free-kick.

Senegal had the better of the play, however, until Pape Sarr's moment of 
madness loaded the dice in Nigeria's favour. With Garba Lawal on his back and 
the ball at his feet, the Lens midfielder swung an elbow and connected with the 
Nigerian. The referee had little choice but to reach for red.

Finidi George and Julius Aghahowa should have done better for Nigeria when in 
good shooting positions; their lack of conviction in front of goal was put into 
sharp context by the Senegalese opener 12 minutes after half-time. Fadiga's 
inswinging corner was met by Bouba Diop's firm header and it sent the largely 
pro-Senegal crowd into raptures.

In the 89th minute, however, Lamine Diatta's hesitation let in Aghahowa, who, 
just as two years ago when his late double knocked Senegal out in the 
quarter-finals, finished with authority.

Extra-time was more passionate than polished. Salif Diao's second goal in two 
games, an easy finish from an El Hadj Diouf cross, forced a stirring conclusion 
to a great match.

With less than three minutes to go Diatta's chopping tackle on Nwankwo Kanu 
gave Nigeria a penalty, but Wilson Oruma's weak effort rebounded off a post. 
Worse still for the Super Eagles, Aghahowa's rash lunge on Omar Daf brought his 
second yellow card and Ifeanyi Udeze's kick at Fadiga and subsequent expulsion 
only confirmed what was by then obvious.

 Nigeria  (4-4-2): Shorunmu; Yobo, Okoronkwo, West, Udeze; George (Babangida, 
68min), Oliseh, Okocha (Oruma, 74), Lawal (Ojigwe, 105); Kanu, Aghahowa.

 Senegal (4-4-2) : Sylva; Coly, Cisse, Diatta, Daf; Diop, Sarr, Diao (Faye, 
112), Fadiga; H Camara (S Camara, 91), Diouf.

 Referee : C Codjia (Benin). 

Â· You've read the piece, now have your say. Email your comments, be as frank 
as you like, we can take it, tofootball.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk 
<mailto:football.editor@guardianunlimited.co.uk>.
 