
Nearly 60% of people in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> believe abortion in the 
province should be decriminalised, a new survey has found. When asked whether 
abortion should be permitted for victims of rape, and in cases where the foetus 
cannot survive outside the womb, three-quarters of those polled agreed.


Northern Ireland is the only part of the UK where abortion is illegal, except 
in the limited circumstances where continuing a pregnancy would put the 
mother’s life in direct danger. The 1861 Offences Against the Persons Act, 
which makes abortion a criminal offence, is punishable by a life sentence in 
prison.

Attempts by individual members of the Northern Ireland assembly to introduce 
limited abortion reform in the Stormont parliament have been met by opposition 
from the biggest party, the Democratic Unionists, as well as members of the 
nationalist Social Democratic and Labour party.

Irish women report relief and gratitude after using abortion pills
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/home-abortion-kits-women-ireland-study>
The public attitudes survey was conducted last month by local pollsters 
Millward Brown on behalf ofAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>, which backs abortion 
reform in Northern Ireland. The polling of 1,000 adults, carried out in 
September, found:

• 72% of people think abortion should be available if the pregnancy is the 
result of rape or incest; only 15% are opposed.

• 67% of people think abortion should be available in cases of fatal foetal 
abnormality; just 17% are opposed.


• 58% of people think abortion should be decriminalised so that there would be 
no criminal penalty for women who have abortions in Northern Ireland; 22% are 
opposed to this change.


• 59% of people think abortion should be decriminalised so there would be no 
criminal penalty for doctors and medical staff who assist women to have 
abortions in Northern Ireland; 21% are opposed to this change.


• 68% of people think the fact that in most cases abortion is classified as a 
crime in Northern Ireland adds to the distress of women seeking an abortion; 
14% disagree.


• 75% of people think the fact that women from Northern Ireland who are 
seeking a lawful abortion must travel to Britain adds to their distress; 11% 
disagree.

Adrianne Peltz, Amnesty International <https://www.amnesty.org/en/>’s Northern 
Ireland campaigner, said the findings reflected how the people were ahead of 
politicians in terms of liberalising abortion laws.

“These poll findings demonstrate an overwhelming demand for change to Northern 
Ireland’s draconian abortion laws,” she said. “This is not a small margin of 
support for women’s access to abortion – it’s a definitive landslide. Northern 
Ireland has changed.

“Not only do a huge majority of people in Northern Ireland want to see 
abortion made available to women and girls in the tragic circumstances of rape, 
incest or fatal foetal diagnosis, but they also want to see abortion 
decriminalised for all women. It’s time for these outdated laws to be brought 
into the 21st century.

“Decisions about women’s bodies should be made by women themselves, never by 
politicians, who should be aware that voters from all parties – including those 
who have previously blocked change – want to see a radical overhaul of these 
inhumane laws.”

Last November, Northern Ireland’s high court ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/30/northern-ireland-law-on-abortion-ruled-as-incompatible-with-human-rights>
 that the region’s restrictive abortion laws breached the European convention 
on human rights in cases of fatal foetal abnormality and where the pregnancy 
resulted from sexual assault. The Northern Ireland executive has appealed 
against the judgment and a decision from the court of appeal is pending.

In April this year, a 21-year-old Northern Irish woman was given a three-month 
suspended prison sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/04/northern-irish-woman-suspended-sentence-self-induced-abortion>
 after being found guilty of taking abortion pills to end her pregnancy. The 
court was told that the woman, aged 19 at the time of the offence, could not 
afford to travel to England to have a lawful abortion.

On Tuesday, Amnesty International activists will hand over a petition of more 
than 45,000 names to the Northern Ireland executive at Stormont calling for a 
loosening of anti-abortion laws in the region.
 