
Australian authorities believe individuals or groups have the intent and 
capability to conduct a terrorist attack, which would likely involve low-cost 
weapons such as knives, according to domestic security advice published on 
Thursday.

The government issued a two-page summary of its assessment of the risks as it 
rolled out a new five-tier system for communicating the national terrorism 
threat level.

From Thursday the government describes the threat as “probable” – compared 
with the “high” category that had been force under the old four-tier system 
since September last year.

Malcolm Turnbull calls for unity not 'machismo' in face of terrorism threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/24/malcolm-turnbull-calls-for-unity-over-machismo-in-face-of-terrorism-threat>
Police, security chiefs and ministers emphasised the new description did not 
reflect any increase in Australia’s assessed threat level, but said the new 
system was intended to help people better understand the nature of the risks.

“There is no change in the reality of the threat between what we faced 
yesterday and what we we face today,” Duncan Lewis, the head of the Australian 
Security Intelligence Organisation (Asio), said at a media conference on 
Thursday.

“The threat level has endured since September last year when we elevated the 
threat. There is the issue, of course, about lone actor versus some form of 
more concerted effort by a number of actors. We have no evidence to suggest 
that a Paris-type attack is imminent here at all, but we have seen tragically 
three lone actor events in this country.”

The three domestic events were a reference to the stabbing of two police 
officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/police-and-politicians-call-for-calm-after-killing-of-victoria-terror-suspect>
 in Melbourne in September 2014, thedeadly siege in Sydney’s Martin Place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/20/sydney-siege-timeline-how-a-day-and-night-of-terror-unfolded-at-the-lindt-cafe>
 in December 2014, and thefatal shooting of a police employee in Parramatta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/17/curtis-chengs-funeral-hears-about-gentle-man-who-was-devoted-to-family>
 in October 2015.

The government released a statement of public advice 
<http://www.nationalsecurity.gov.au/Securityandyourcommunity/Pages/National-Terrorism-Threat-Advisory-System.aspx>
 describing the threat level in more detail. It urged the public to exercise 
caution and report any suspicious incidents because “credible intelligence, 
assessed by our security agencies indicates that individuals or groups have 
developed both the intent and capability to conduct a terrorist attack in 
Australia”.


Three out of four Australians expect a large terrorist attack, poll shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/23/three-out-of-four-australians-expect-large-terrorist-attack-poll>
The statement said a small number of people in Australia adhered “to an 
interpretation of Islam that is selective, violent and extreme” and were 
influenced by extreme messaging from terrorist groups such as Islamic State 
(Isis). The radicalisation and recruitment of Australians was said to be 
increasing.

Isis sympathisers and supporters “might be emboldened by the perceived success 
of their overseas counterparts” inrecent, large coordinated terrorist attacks 
overseas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/24/belgian-police-hunt-mohamed-abrini-seen-in-car-with-paris-attacks-ringleader>
.

“Elements of some of these recent attacks, such as the use of firearms and 
explosives as weapons, the capturing of hostages, and the focus on ‘soft’ 
targets, could be employed in an attack in Australia,” the statement said.

In a section on the likely targets, the statement pointed to symbols of 
government such as the military, police and security agencies, but added that 
indiscriminate attacks were increasing. Overseas extremists had encouraged 
local sympathisers to attack the public anywhere.

Citizenship revocation bill to be amended further after fresh legal advice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/26/citizenship-revocation-bill-to-be-amended-further-after-fresh-legal-advice>
The most likely form for a terrorist attack in Australia would be an attack by 
an individual or a small group of like-minded individuals, the statement said.

“However, a larger, more coordinated attack cannot be ruled out. Threats can 
develop quickly, moving to an act of violence with little preparation or 
planning,” it said.

“It is highly likely that a terrorist attack in Australia would use weapons 
and tactics that are low-cost and relatively simple, including basic weapons, 
explosives and/or firearms.”

The statement said basic weapons were readily available, everyday objects that 
did not require specialist skills, such as knives, machetes and even cars. This 
was similar to comments by the former prime minister Tony Abbott that “today’s 
terrorism requires little more than a camera-phone, a knife and a victim”.

The statement also noted that explosives remained “a favoured terrorist weapon 
globally”, and could be manufactured from readily available materials. Firearms 
could also be sourced through legal and illicit channels.

Scott Morrison warns against 'hot-headed' response to Syrian crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/23/scott-morrison-says-kevin-andrewss-response-to-syrian-crisis-is-hot-headed>
But the statement also sought to assure people that the federal, state and 
territory governments were working together to strengthen preventive efforts 
and build social cohesion.

Malcolm Turnbull foreshadowed the imminent rollout of the long-planned 
five-tier alert system inhis national security address on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/24/malcolm-turnbull-calls-for-unity-over-machismo-in-face-of-terrorism-threat>
, when the prime minister also reinforced his plea for community unity and 
called for calm and effective action against terrorism rather than 
anger-fuelled “gestures or machismo”.

The proposal has been in the works since February, when an Abbott-commissioned 
report 
<http://www.dpmc.gov.au/sites/default/files/publications/190215_CT_Review_1.pdf>
 said the four-tier system had been in place since 2003 and did not contain 
enough public alert levels, “making it difficult to raise and lower the alert 
level in response to a temporarily increased threat environment”.

The four levels in the previous system were: low (meaning that a terrorist 
attack is not expected), medium (a terrorist attack could occur), high (a 
terrorist attack is likely) and extreme (a terrorist attack is imminent or has 
occurred).

The five levels in the new system backed by the Council of Australian 
Governments in July are: not expected, possible, probable, expected and certain.

Tony Abbott’s campaign to make Turnbull look weak on terrorism is a losing 
battle | Lenore Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/23/tony-abbotts-campaign-to-make-turnbull-look-weak-on-terrorism-is-a-losing-battle>
The attorney general, George Brandis, said the levels provided “more nuance in 
the system, particularly at the upper end”. The justice minister, Michael 
Keenan, said the system would also allow the provision of more information to 
the public about the nature of the threat.

The Australian federal police commissioner, Andrew Colvin, said state and 
territory police services would provide more localised information about the 
security situation.

Asked about the change in rhetoric between Abbott and Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/09/malcolm-turnbull-urges-australians-to-show-mutual-respect-in-battle-against-extremism>
, Colvin said he would not comment on the political narrative but added that 
“words matter”.
 