
The main attractions

Once the domain of the Tasmanian tiger – the sadly extinct dog-like marsupial 
with stripes on its back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2013/sep/07/tasmanian-tiger>
and the unoffical emblem of the city – Launceston was settled by the British in 
1806, and is the second biggest city in Tasmania after Hobart. Situated on the 
Tamar estuary, where the North Esk and South Esk rivers meet, it’s a compact 
and elegant full of Victorian architecture and handsome parks, surrounded by 
some spectacular scenery.

 The greenhouse in city park. 
Cataract Gorge  <http://www.launcestoncataractgorge.com.au/>is a 15-minute 
walk from the centre, a stunning spot where parkland with roaming peacocks 
gives way to an awe-inspiring valley spanned by a suspension bridge, 
Launceston’s bushland sloping up from the South Esk. With lookouts providing 
breathtaking views down the river, it’s perfect for a morning’s walk, with 
tracks catering to all fitness levels. Those without vertigo – and not unnerved 
by the fact that an unlocked iron bar lies between you and a hundred-foot drop 
into the wilderness – can be ascend above it all on the world’s longest 
chairlift, which whisks you above the trees, black swans and turbulent waters 
for $15 return.

In the city itself there’s a design centre <http://designtasmania.com.au/>, 
showcasing the area’s architects and furniture makers; theQueen Victoria museum 
and art gallery <http://www.qvmag.tas.gov.au/qvmag/>, with an interesting 
selection of work including everything from the colonial art including Robert 
Dowling’s pictureAborigines of Tasmania 
<http://nga.gov.au/Exhibition/DOWLING/Default.cfm?IRN=192011&BioArtistIRN=22797&mystartrow=13&realstartrow=13&MnuID=3&GalID=3&ViewID=2>
, toJenny Gill’s collection of matchboxes 
<http://www.qvmag.tas.gov.au/qvmag/index.php?c=243>; and the Seaport area, 
great for a bracing stroll or a quayside lunch. It’s very quiet at night 
though, to the point where if you wander down beside the old Boags brewery you 
might feel like the last people left on earth.

To get the most out of the area you’ll need a car. With its sumptuous hills 
and ancient, fern-wreathed oak trees, the scenery of northern Tasmania is very 
different to the rest of Australia, and deserves wide-ranging exploration.You 
might even see a Tassie tiger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/11/zoologists-on-the-hunt-for-tasmanian-tiger-declare-no-doubt-species-still-alive>
 (you won’t).
 Cataract Gorge as seen from the chairlift. 
Segway through the trees

About 20 minutes’ drive from Launceston lies the Hollybank Treetops Adventure 
and Reserve <http://www.treetopsadventure.com.au/index.php/location/hollybank/>
, where brave souls can get strapped to harnesses and go swinging on zipwires 
from tree to tree. Devoted cowards and those with more delicate constitutions 
can take a guided Segway tour through forest trails. It takes about 10 minutes 
to master a Segway, and soon you’re speeding through eucalyptus groves, 
fern-filled Dogwood forests and into clearings where you can bomb around to 
your heart’s content.


Our two guides were friendly and knowledgeable, via an earpiece pointing out 
areas of interest (the spindly ash trees planted by British settlers wanting a 
taste of home) and warning of dangers (rocks painted a fluorescent green to 
alert the unwary and, apparently, snakes). It’s not cheap – $100 apiece – but 
it’s exhilarating.

 Two Tasmanian devils chewing on a conservationist's trouser leg. 
Indulge in devil worship

The undisputed highlight of our trip, Trowunna Wildlife Park 
<http://trowunna.com.au/> is situated about 70km west of Launceston, in the 
middle of wonderfully green and gold landscapes reminiscent of the UK’s Peak 
District. A giant statue of a Tasmanian devil guards the entrance. Inside, you 
can see plenty of the real things, marsupials which are only ankle-height but 
have a lot of attitude – it’s hilarious to see them come defiantly barreling 
towards you when they spot you coming over to their pen. “They scream and yell 
but so do a lot of people,” says one of the conservation team, a dedicated 
bunch headed up by Androo Kelly. The devils eat carrion and it’s a sight to 
behold when they start tearing up the corpse of what may have once been a 
rabbit, about five of them taking a limb each and loudly crunching through skin 
and bone. Here, thanks to the staff’s care, the devils are thankfully free of 
devil facial tumour disease, a communicable cancer which has devastated the 
species in the wild.

Besides the devils, Trowunna is like being in the garden of Eden. A gang of 
kangaroos hang out on the lawn, seemingly unbothered by human presence. You can 
cuddle a wombat – one woman had flown from Western Australia to do just that. 
Wallabies stand alert in the undergrowth, and spotted quolls, like mice crossed 
with leopards, run around in large compounds. The point of the place is 
conservation; most of the animals end up here after being injured or orphaned, 
and many are returned to the wild when they have been fully rehabilitated. As 
the afternoon wanes and the fields are bathed in golden light, it’s a truly 
magical place.
 Late afternoon with the kangaroos. 
A doorway to the past

Built in 1838 by former convict, and later brewer and innkeeper Britton Jones, 
Franklin House <http://www.nationaltrust.org.au/tas/FranklinHouse> is still 
recognisably a colonial family home, with the accumulated furniture, china, 
clocks and even a wedding dress once owned by its many former residents. You 
can’t touch, but with little roped off, you’re welcome to peer at it all as 
closely as you like, and the place still seems like a home rather than a 
showpiece will the history bleached out. Downstairs, you can see the old 
schoolroom built when the house was extended four years after it was built, the 
stables, the kitchen, and there’s a cosy tea room too.


Behind the house are large gardens to ramble around in, where in the afternoon 
I visited a woman who was hanging pieces of coloured glass from one of the 
trees, one of several artistic interventions. Now the headquarters of the
National Trust of Australia <http://www.nationaltrust.org.au/>, at only $10 for 
an adult visit, it’s a vivid piece of history, and a bargain. Like many of 
Tasmania’s buildings, it also seems to be a magnet forthose interested in (of 
perhaps morbidly obsessed with) the paranormal 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-07-07/ghostbusters-check-colonial-house-for-bumps-in-the-night/4804354>
. Those people are also well catered to by theghost tour 
<http://www.launcestoncityghosttours.com/> Launceston hosts.

Local produce

The Tamar valley <http://www.tamarvalley.com.au/> around Launceston is wine 
country, and you can get a tour that lasts most of the day withPrestige Leisure 
<http://www.prestigeleisuretours.com.au/>. At upwards of $150 it isn’t cheap 
(though lunch is included), but unless one of your party is willing to stick to 
mineral water, driving is clearly not an option. There are over 30 wineries in 
the valley, most of which offer cellar door tastings. We took in half a dozen, 
all with plenty to recommend them.


Josef Chromy wines <http://www.josefchromy.com.au/> offers an oaked Chardonnay 
so delicious each sip deserves to be accompanied by a trumpet fanfare (their 
2011 vintage was declared the best in the world 
<http://www.examiner.com.au/story/1757429/chromy-chardonnay-on-top-of-the-world/>
), especially when accompanied by a delicious charcuterie.Vélo 
<http://www.velowines.com.au/>, owned by the former Olympic cyclist Michael 
Wilson 
<http://cyclingtips.com.au/2011/12/where-are-they-now-michael-wilson/?mid=54> 
and his wife Mary, has a delightful dining room (complete with bespoke light 
fittings made out of large twigs) and splendid wines, particularly their 2009 
Pinot Noir. Mary says that the backbreaking business of building up a vineyard 
came naturally to her husband – athletes, she points out, “love pain”.

 The bend in the Tamar River. 
There are the sweeping vistas of Tamar Ridge 
<http://www.brownbrothers.com.au/visit-us/tamar-ridge-cellar-door> and Devil’s 
Corner, named after a treacherous bend in the river, whose 2013 Sauvignon Blanc 
has hints of passionfruit and is dangerously quaffable. The cellar door of
Marion’s Vineyard <http://www.marionsvineyard.com/> is a cosy shed full of the 
owner’s Ralph Steadman-influenced artworks as well as amazing wines, whileGoaty 
Hill <http://www.goatyhill.com/> is a magnificent spot for lunch. By the 
afternoon, and the time you get toHolm Oak <http://holmoakvineyards.com.au/>, 
another winery, even if your palate is getting a bit jaded, as mine was, you 
can meet a large pig called Pinot who will play "sit" for apples – and there’s 
cider as well as yet more fine wine if you’re still in the mood for a tipple.

Local produce is best sampled via the lunch platters offered in many of the 
local wineries and cafes in the region, such asLilydale Larder 
<http://lilydalelarder.com.au/>, set up by Sarah Hirst, a former political 
journalist based in Canberra, and her husband Mark. Their lunch platter groans 
with local delights from wallaby sausage to smoked salmon and wonderfully 
delicate cheeses, in a setting that’s idiosyncratic (all exposed wood and raw 
edges) without seeming too much like a stage set.

Eating and drinking

Launceston is working hard to gain a reputation as a foodie destination, and 
the three restaurants we had dinner at all impressed. Situated in the old rail 
yard and not exactly easy to find (follow the old train tracks), once you’re in 
theBlue Café-Bar  <http://www.bluecafebar.com.au/>the excellent service and 
polished-concrete industrial chic will sooth any navigation-induced stress. The 
food is delicious, particular the starters; both my sister’s beef carpaccio 
with little pieces of fried polenta and my pastel-coloured tuna tartare were 
beautiful both to see and taste. Starters are around the $24 mark; mains about 
$30.

The following night we tried the Black Cow <http://blackcowbistro.com.au/>, a 
new steakhouse by the people behindStillwater <http://www.stillwater.com.au/>, 
said to be the best restaurant in the region. They certainly know how to cook a 
macho hunk of protein, but for my money the star of the meal were the dozen 
local oysters we had presented five ways as a starter, each a mouthful to tell 
your grandchildren about. The service is fantastic – not overbearing, but so 
tuned into your requirements that you don’t even have to ask for your coat when 
you’re finally ready to go. It’s not cheap though – two of us burned cheerfully 
north of $300 without really trying. Having wine served from conical flask in 
the name of Breaking Bad chic was also an idea that took some getting used to.


Mud <http://www.mudbar.com.au/> has a prime location on the harbour, and the 
chef clearly has big ambitions, but not everything comes off – my fried Chinese 
chicken was saltier than a Queensland croc. It was, however, preceeded by a 
wonderfully delicate rabbit tortellini, washed down by some of that Vélo 
Sauvignon Blanc. Starters are around $20-25, mains $35-40 and there’s a good 
selection of local wines on offer.

Where to stay

We stayed at the Teahouse Apartment, part of the Hatherley Birrell Collection 
<http://hatherley.com.au/>, right in the middle of the city. It's a large open 
plan flat with an astroturfed back yard you could sit out on, a lemon tree out 
front, and two double bedrooms, one kingsized and with an en suite bathroom. 
The lounge room was decorated with Japanese touches including a kimono hung 
from the wall. Cheese, figs and fruit compote waited in the fridge to be 
scoffed. The only thing it lacked was, er, drinkable tea for those with simple 
tastes (me), and the heating was also a bit difficult to control as the Tassie 
temperature plunged after dark. It costs $385 a night to hire.
 Teahouse Apartment in the city. 
Getting there and back

Fly into Launceston airport and the town is a 20-minute drive away, or buses 
leave every 20 minutes. The city is compact and walkable, with Cataract Gorge 
in striking distance, but you may need to research the local buses to get into 
the countryside.

 * Guardian Australia travelled with Tourism Tasmania
 