
Police arrested three suspects and were seeking a possible fourth suspect 
accused of stealing several handguns as part of what authorities on Tuesday 
described as a “substantial, credible threat” to harm police officers in the 
Baton Rouge area.

The arrests come at a time of heightened tensions after the deadly police 
shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/alton-sterling-philando-castile-black-gun-owners>
 of black men in Baton Rouge and Minnesota and thekilling of five police 
officers in Dallas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/09/police-killings-dallas-shooting-racism-american-history>
 last week.

Two police killings revive claims of discrimination against black gun owners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/alton-sterling-philando-castile-black-gun-owners>
Authorities in Baton Rouge discovered the alleged plot while responding to a 
burglary at a pawn shop early Saturday morning, the Baton Rouge police chief, 
Carl Dabadie, said in a press conference. The first suspect arrested told 
police that “the reason the burglary was being done was to harm police 
officers”. The chief said the suspect didn’t indicate any details about when or 
where a possible plot would be carried out.

“We have been questioned repeatedly over the last several days about our show 
of force and why we have the tactics that we have. Well, this is the reason, 
because we had credible threats against the lives of law enforcement in this 
city,” he said.

The police department has come under criticism for the tactics it has employed 
to deal with protesters, using riot police and military-style vehicles on the 
streets of the capital city. Over a three-day period, police arrested about 200 
protesters.

Authorities said they arrested one suspect at the pawn shop and tracked down 
two others. The third suspect arrested was a 13-old boy who was apprehended on 
a street. They called on the fourth suspect to turn himself in.

Police didn’t immediately release the names of the suspects but said they all 
are from Baton Rouge and all are black.

Col Mike Edmonson of the state police called it a “substantial, credible 
threat” to police.

Six of the eight stolen firearms have been recovered and two are still at 
large, authorities said.

A week after 37-year-old Alton Sterling was shot and killed by two white 
police officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-gun-baton-rouge-new-video>
 in Baton Rouge outside a convenience store, tensions are high in the city.

Alton Sterling shooting: new footage appears to show police taking gun from 
body
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-gun-baton-rouge-new-video>
While protesters demand justice for Sterling, the shootings in Dallas last 
week and other attacks on police around the country have put the police on edge.

Earlier on Tuesday, Louisiana’s governor, John Bel Edwards, defended the 
police response to protesters rallying against the shooting death of a black 
man by white officers, saying that the riot gear and weaponry were appropriate.

“We’ve had a police officer with teeth knocked out of his face because of a 
rock. If you don’t have on riot gear, you have no defense against that sort of 
thing,” said the Democratic governor, who comes from a family of sheriffs.

“In light of what happened in Dallas, understanding that just one gunman can 
change the situation entirely, how do you in good conscience put police 
officers on the street without the ability to defend themselves?” he said.

After nearly a week of protests over the killing of Sterling, Baton Rouge 
officers, state police and other law enforcement agencies have received 
criticism for their methods of dealing with demonstrators.

Protests have spread across the country as people express outrage over the 
recent death in Baton Rouge and of a second black man,Philando Castile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/philando-castile-police-shooting-calls-justice-department-inquiry-fbi-minnesota-officers>
, at the hands of police in Minnesota last week. The justice department has 
opened a federal civil rights investigation into Sterling’s shooting.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fminnesota-police-philando-castile-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Minnesota%20man%20shot%20dead%20by%20police%20was%20'quiet%20and%20loving'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fminnesota-police-philando-castile-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Minnesota%20man%20shot%20dead%20by%20police%20was%20%27quiet%20and%20loving%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F07%2Fminnesota-police-philando-castile-video&media=>
Minnesota man shot dead by police was ‘quiet and loving’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/07/minnesota-police-philando-castile-video>
In the first few days after Sterling’s death, police took a reserved approach 
to enforcement, keeping a low profile as hundreds gathered outside the 
convenience store where Sterling died.

But tensions escalated at weekend protests that moved away from the store and 
into other areas of the city, with nearly 200 people arrested and a show of 
force from law enforcement that included police wielding batons, armed with 
long guns and wearing shields.

The American Civil Liberties Union of Louisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana> has criticized police as using 
“violent, militarized tactics on groups of people who have gathered 
peacefully”. Amnesty International has questioned the high number of arrests.

Community leaders have tried to defuse tension and keep interactions between 
protesters and law enforcement calm.

State representative Ted James, a black lawyer who grew up in the area where 
Sterling was shot, and Cleve Dunn Jr, a prominent black businessman in Baton 
Rouge, met with local Republican leaders at a public luncheon to discuss the 
shooting. The two men have showed up at protests and urged calm.

“I truly believe that we can have parallel conversations about respect for 
police officers, making sure that they’re safe, but also have a parallel 
conversation about the things that are happening with African American males 
across the country,” James said.

James said black community leaders want Louisiana’s attorney general, Jeff 
Landry, to appoint a special prosecutor to handle any state investigation into 
Sterling’s shooting death. He said the attorney general’s office doesn’t have 
the level of expertise to do the investigation and the appointment of an 
outside prosecutor would depoliticize the work.
 