
Alaa Al Aswany's defence of Islam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jul/20/islam-west-muslims-media-prejudice>
 provoked the predictable avalanche of self-righteousness (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/jul/23/islam-west-women-sex>, 23 
July). One letter asserted categorically that "the murder [of Neda Soltan] was 
an act of state policy". Would the unnamed author also indict the British state 
for the "murder" ofIan Tomlinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/g20-police-assault-ian-tomlinson> at the G20 
demonstrations? The same author dismisses Islamist text in favour of actions by 
which to judge Islamists. It is ironic that Christianity never came under fire 
because of IRA bombing or of the slaughter by Bush and Blair of one million 
Iraqis on the basis of a lie. Neither was Hinduism criticised because of the 
terrorist actions of the Tamil Tigers. Most of the deplorable extreme 
punishments meted out by Islamist regimes, and mentioned in the letters, come 
from Saudi Arabia, which never gets a bad press. Double standards?

D Ramprakash

Pinner, Middlesex

• I remember "the tale of the old iron pot" and "dressed up like a dog's 
dinner" (Wiz woz for a wowzer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jul/20/words-language-father>, 
20 July). My old granny was full of phrases like that (in the 50s). My regular 
Christmas gift to her of a box of man-size hankies was always greeted with 
"corn in Egypt!"; when everything was correct it was "all sigarney" and she 
referred to her hat as her "cadey". What phrases will the young of today 
remember, know wha' I mean, innit?

Simon Hill

London

• Combined christening and wedding services are all very well (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/jul/23/church-of-england-baptisms-weddings>
, 23 July) but I can't help feeling that, as Trinitarians, we ought to be 
offering three-in-one liturgies. How about adding a "spread-bet" option which 
could be a kind of confession-with-confirmation, depending on which way God 
goes on the baptism-marriage combo?

Fr Alec Mitchell

Manchester

• The National Air and Space Museum at Suitland, Maryland, seems to be the 
most suitable place for Neil Armstrong's spacesuit (Eyewitness, 21 July).

Neville Denson

St Bees, Cumbria

• What have we here (1948 no catastrophe says Israel, as term nakba 
banned from Arab children's textbooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/22/israel-remove-nakba-from-textbooks>
, 23 July)? Nakba denial?

Cyril Brown

Lakenheath, Suffolk
 