
Three people remain in a critical condition in Melbourne hospitals following a 
thunderstorm that triggered a mass asthma event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/23/thunderstorm-asthma-deaths-to-be-investigated-by-health-authorities>
 and left another four people dead.

Victoria’s health minister, Jill Hennessy, said senior doctors were amazed 
there were not many more deaths given the number of people who suffered cardiac 
arrest and difficulty breathing during Monday’s unprecedented event which 
overwhelmed emergency services and hospitals

Nine patients were still in intensive care, the minister said on Thursday. 
Three were in a critical condition.


“I’m pleased we haven’t had more deaths than what we have had ... but those 
deaths are four deaths too many,” Hennessy said.



Monday evening’s thunderstorm saw extreme winds and air moisture break pollen 
particles up into small enough pieces to enter peoples lungs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/22/melbourne-hit-by-thunderstorm-and-asthma-spike-after-day-of-extreme-heat>
.

'Thunderstorm asthma': third person dies as health investigation begins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/23/thunderstorm-asthma-deaths-to-be-investigated-by-health-authorities>
Clarence Leo, a father-of two from Noble Park, Apollo Papadopoulos, 35, Hope 
Carnevali, 20, and year-12 student Omar Moujalled all died following asthma 
attacks believed to have been triggered by the weather, a rare event described 
as “thunderstorm asthma”.

The inspector general of emergency management will lead a statewide review of 
the emergency response to the event, with emergency departments and paramedics 
stretched due to a spike in calls for help and in asthma attacks.

Paramedics dealt with an unprecedented 1,900 emergency calls in five hours on 
Monday evening and hundreds more people streamed into hospitals. It led to long 
delays in ambulance response times.

The review will be an extensive examination of how Victoria’s emergency 
services and health system responded to, and managed, the emergency, and help 
services better prepare for and respond in the future.

“This was a health emergency of an unprecedented scale and we have an 
obligation to ensure that we learn every lesson there is to learn from this 
event,” Hennessy said.

“This review will make sure that should this, or an event of a similar scale, 
ever occur again we have the right systems, measures and resources in place to 
provide the very best response.”

Moujalled’s death was confirmed by his school, the Australian International 
Academy in Coburg. In a Facebook post, the school wrote: “It is with great 
sadness and a heavy heart that we inform you of the death of Omar Moujalled, 
one of our year 12 students.

“Sadly, he passed away last night from a medical condition.”

A GoFundMe page <https://www.gofundme.com/a-dedication-to-clarence> has been 
set up by Leo’s family to raise money for his funeral.

“Our brother Clarence was a father, husband, son and friend to many,” family 
wrote on the page. “We are overwhelmed with everyone’s love, support and offers 
of assistance.”

Meanwhile, relatives of Carnevali, a law student, told Seven News Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> it took more than 40 
minutes for an ambulance to arrive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thunderstorm%20asthma%3A%20what%20causes%20it%20and%20why%20is%20it%20so%20dangerous%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thunderstorm%20asthma%3A%20what%20causes%20it%20and%20why%20is%20it%20so%20dangerous%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fthunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer&media=>
Thunderstorm asthma: what causes it and why is it so dangerous? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/nov/26/thunderstorm-asthma-what-causes-it-and-why-is-it-so-dangerous-video-explainer>
“Just knowing that, if they had of gotten there a little earlier, that the 
situation might be different, is very hard to deal with,” her aunt, Melissa 
Carnevali, said.

A department of health spokesman said Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/melbourne> hospitals treated more than 
8,500 patients across Monday night and Tuesday.

“There continues to be patients in metropolitan Melbourne intensive care
units associated with this event, with three in a critical condition,” he said.
“This was an unexpected and tragic occurrence and we are monitoring the
ongoing condition of those in the care of our hospitals.
“We are aware of a number of deaths that may be associated with thunderstorm
asthma.
“Due to the complex nature and scale of the event further comment is not
appropriate until a cause of death has been attributed for these cases.”

 