
A three-day drive from Melbourne to Sydney along the Victorian and New South 
Wales coasts isn’t exactly a tribute to slow travel, with enough attractions 
and gastronomic pleasures along the route to fill a week. But allowing for time 
to dwell in a few well-chosen locations, this road trip offers an enticing 
taste of regions like Victoria’s East Gippsland and the Sapphire coast in the 
far south of New South Wales.


It will also draw you into wild national parks like Croajingalong in Victoria 
and Ben Boyd, over the border, near Eden. Coastal lakes in Gippsland that 
constitute Australia’s biggest inland waterway, and long, unspoilt beaches, 
like Ninety Mile form the journey’s dramatic backdrop. And the foreground isn’t 
bad either, particularly as the route twists and curls through the thick 
forests around the border.

The route

All the action of the drive is around the A1 Princes Highway, which begins in 
central Melbourne and continues all the way to Sydney, a distance of 1032kms 
not including side-trips. The only busy sections are within an hour’s drive of 
start and finish but otherwise the route is largely traffic-light with 
attractions providing regular pit-stops.

Main attractions

Unless you have time to detour to the Mornington Peninsula or the Wilson’s 
Promontory, there’s not much to see along the early part of the drive. 
Concentrate on getting to the Gippsland lakes further east. Take your time at 
the excellent Krowathunkoolong Keeping Place in Bairnsdale to learn about the 
Gunnai/Kurnai people’s connection with the region that dates back tens of 
thousands of years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409552646965%2Fd5e8f9fe-a0d2-43e7-b0c9-036af4fceb1a-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409552646965%2Fd5e8f9fe-a0d2-43e7-b0c9-036af4fceb1a-1020x765.jpeg>
 Beach at Croajingolong national park, Victoria. Photograph: Daniel Scott 
Shortly before reaching Lakes Entrance, the village of Metung is a lovely base 
from which to explore Gippsland’s waterways, with several good eateries and 
boat hire. Nearer to the border, two coastal parks, Cape Conran and 
Croajingalong, encompass windswept beaches, quiet coves, rocky headlands and 
significant native wildlife. On either side of the Victoria / New South Wales 
border are historic lighthouses, Point Hicks in Croajingalong and Greencape, 
south of Eden, in Ben Boyd national park. Both are top whale watching spots.

Whale watching is a prime feature of much of the NSW south coast, particularly 
between September and December when humpbacks are returning to Antarctica with 
their calves. In Eden, a whaling centre until the 1930s, a siren is sounded 
every time there is sighting out in Twofold Bay. Eden also holds an annual 
whale festival (on 1 November in 2014).

Along the Sapphire Coast, a scenic drive links the seaside towns of Merimbula, 
Tathra and Bermagui and the Mimosa Rocks national park, with its secluded 
beaches, coastal walking trails and the eponymous lichen-covered boulders. 
Beyond Bermagui, a short detour inland leads to Central Tilba, a National 
Trust-listed village full of nick-nack shops and cheese and fudge stores.

The main Princes Highway continues north behind lakes, crossing rivers and 
skirting the towns of Narooma, Moruya and Bateman’s Bay. A little further on, a 
turn-off leads to Pebbly Beach and its famous “surfing kangaroos”, converging 
on the ocean to nibble on vegetation.

Three hours south of Sydney, Jervis Bay has everything from dazzling Hyams 
beach, a contender for Australia’s whitest stretch of sand, to dolphin watching 
cruises and some of the state’s top diving spots. The road trip reaches a 
theatrical denouement with a drive across Sea Cliff Bridge, swerving for 680m 
around the cliffs, north of Woolongong.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409553003727%2F4a9d3b3a-046c-4a41-b249-46f0dca58217-1530x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409553003727%2F4a9d3b3a-046c-4a41-b249-46f0dca58217-1530x2040.jpeg>
 Through the lens: Points Hicks lighthouse. Photograph: Daniel Scott 
Three must-dos

Skipper your own boat on Gippsland Lakes: It takes five minutes instruction 
from Riviera Nautic at Metung (rivieranautic.com.au 
<http://rivieranautic.com.au/>) to prepare for a sunny morning put-putting 
among these calm waterways. In three hours I get as far as Barrier Landing, 
where I stroll through dunes onto Ninety Mile beach, which I have to myself. 
Back on the lake, I dawdle past squadrons of pelican, black swans and dolphin 
pods. It’s a relaxing gear change from driving the coastal road.

Trek to Point Hicks lighthouse: Getting to the start of this walk, along an 
unsealed 45km road through Croajingalong’s forested slopes, is part of the 
adventure. The 4.5km return trek winds behind beaches framed by granite 
boulders before ascending to the lighthouse, reaching 37m above a rocky 
headland that was Captain Cook’s first sighting of the Australian mainland, in 
April 1770. Weekend tours at 1pm.

Visit the Eden killer whale museum: “Which is the second most intelligent 
creature on the planet?” asks guide Barry Smith during our tour before 
answering his own question: the killer whale. There is plentiful evidence for 
his claim, including the symbiotic relationship between killer whales (actually 
the largest dolphins) and man going back to early Koori habitation of this area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409553240540%2F7e0cdd7a-664a-4b9f-864c-3956ca8ca8ce-2060x1313.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409553240540%2F7e0cdd7a-664a-4b9f-864c-3956ca8ca8ce-2060x1313.jpeg>
 Old Tom killer whale skeleton, Eden. Photograph: Daniel Scott 
As European settlers arrived in the 19th century they began exploiting that 
connection to help them harvest baleen species to supply oil for lighting and 
other industrial uses. The local killer whale pod, marshalled by their 
matriarch, would lead larger whales like humpbacks into Twofold Bay, leaving 
them exhausted and at the mercy of the whalers’ harpoons. In return, the 
Killers were fed the humpback’s tongue and lips (their favourite parts). 
Details:killerwhalemuseum.com.au <http://killerwhalemuseum.com.au> (entry $9).

Where to eat

Taking a break on the initial section of the road from Melbourne is made all 
the more attractive thanks to Gippsland’s only hatted restaurant,Neilsons 
<http://Neilsons.com.au> in Traralgon. Set in the front-room of a period 
Californian bungalow, innovative dishes include Campari cured salmon with dill, 
squid ink, local prawns and turnip and a crunchily textured pot roast 
cauliflower with lemon myrtle, hazlenuts, leek oil and pear vinegar. 
Presentation on earthy stone slabs rounds off a thrilling gastronomic 
experience.

It’s hard to go wrong eating anywhere in the little but lively lakeside 
village of Metung.Bancroft Bites <http://bancroftbites.com.au> is a convivial 
café delivering fresh, locally sourced fare morning, noon and night. The sticky 
date pudding is particularly irresistible. Across the street is theMetung Galley
 <http://themetunggalley.com.au> where the Middle Eastern eggs topped with 
spinach, feta and dukkah set you up beautifully for a day on the lakes. The 
lakefrontMetung Hotel <http://metunghotel.com.au> has one of Australia’s finest 
pub settings and top-quality tavern food and wine, including spicy seafood 
laksa, packed with fresh oysters, mussels, scallops, prawn and salmon.

Further along the East Gippsland coast near Cape Conran, Marlo Hotel <> is the 
place for sunset drinks over the Snowy River mouth. Over the border into New 
South Wales, A Taste of Eden is one of a cluster of eateries in Eden’s Snug 
Cove harbour, good for sustainably sourced local fare. Fans of bivalve mollusks 
shuold followthe oyster trail  <http://oystercoast.com.au/oyster-trail>from 
Pambula to the Shoalhaven for regular tastings. Along the Sapphire Coast drive, 
the Wharf Locavore is a rustic gourmet eatery on historic Tathra quay. Bermagui 
has harbourside modernItalian at Il Passagio <http://www.ilpassaggio.com.au/> 
and theGelati Clinic  
<https://plus.google.com/108253026046763903448/about?gl=au&hl=en>for afters. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409553826013%2Fbbaa561e-eb42-4f8e-8531-ab6d0afe6c03-1020x769.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409553826013%2Fbbaa561e-eb42-4f8e-8531-ab6d0afe6c03-1020x769.jpeg>
 Squid stuffed with black pudding at Wharf Rd restaurant. Photograph: Daniel 
Scott 
Further north, three hours drive from Sydney, Brit Rick Stein has established 
a small kingdom at Bannisters 
<http://www.bannisters.com.au/rick-stein-at-bannisters/> in Mollymook, his 
signature restaurant paying homage to the South Coast seafood that he’s loved 
since first visiting in the 60s. Even the bar food is excellent. And an hour 
closer to Sydney, in previously-unappealing Nowra, another chef, Dave Campbell, 
has conjured South American-themed magic atWharf Rd  <http://wharfrd.com.au>
restaurant beside the Shoalhaven River. From ceviche to my first (but not last) 
taste of Alpaca, served kebab-style, to Jervis Bay squid stuffed with black 
pudding and cancha corn nuts and squid ink, Campbell’s tasting menu is an 
organic tour-de-force.

Where to stay

The Moorings <http://themoorings.com.au> in Metung are well-equipped luxury 
waterfront apartments in the heart of Metung village. Stay in a low-impact tent 
pitched amid coastal banksia above the beach in the 11,000-hectare coastal park,
Cape Conran Wilderness Retreats <http://conran.net.au/index/php/wilderness>, 
where nighttime visitors include potoroos and wombats. In-tent massage from a 
local therapist and proper coffee machine in the adjacent kitchen add luxurious 
touches to the bushcamping experience.

Million-dollar ocean views through huge picture-book windows, wraparound 
decks, spa baths and, at Sydney prices, a million dollar’s worth of personal 
space. That’s just the rooms atBannisters Point Lodge, Mollymook 
<http://bannisters.com.au>. Then there’s the food and the bar beside the 
infinity pool. If only Rick Stein himself were around to throw a shrimp on the 
barbie, Bannisters would be south coast perfection. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409552830377%2Fa4b49ea6-06d5-4e39-94a6-9f116994f149-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20days%20on%20the%20Melbourne%20to%20Sydney%20coastal%20drive%20%E2%80%93%20travel%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F01%2Fmelbourne-to-sydney-coastal-drive-travel-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F1%2F1409552830377%2Fa4b49ea6-06d5-4e39-94a6-9f116994f149-1020x612.jpeg>
 Gippsland lakes sunrise at Metung. Photograph: Daniel Scott 
When to visit

All year, but best in winter for empty beaches and whale watching and early 
December before school holidays for sunshine, al fresco dining and plenty of 
accommodation options. Further information at i 
<http://inspiredbygipsland.com.au>nspiredbygipsland.com.au 
<http://inspiredbygipsland.com.au>, visitvictoria.com <http://visitvictoria.com>
 andvisitnsw.com <http://visitnsw.com>

Guardian Australia travelled with Tourism Victoria, Destination Gippsland and 
Destination NSW.
 