
On 3 August 2012, the American comedian Tig Notaro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/01/tig-notaro-crush-of-the-week> 
decided to change her life. The prospect in itself didn’t scare her. After all, 
she’d already gone through an extraordinary number of life changes in the 
previous year. “Four months,” Notaro quickly and firmly corrects me when we 
meet at her house in Los Angeles. “It all happened in four months.”

Before, Notaro had always been lucky. “Tig Luck”, her friends would call it, 
fondly. She was the kind of person who would find five $100 bills in a car park 
after a comedy gig, who would announce that she wanted a cat and then find a 
stray kitten curled up in her driveway, looking for a home. She happily moseyed 
through what she calls “a seamless life”, one in which for years she was a 
reasonably successful standup in the US with occasional roles in cult TV shows (
The Office <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/may/08/us-tv-the-office>, 
Community <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/community>, The Sarah 
Silverman Program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/07/sarah-silverman-wreck-it-ralph>) 
and films (In A World… 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/12/in-a-world-review>).

Then in March 2012, at the age of 40, she collapsed in overwhelming pain. Her 
then girlfriend drove her to hospital. She was suffering from so much internal 
swelling doctors couldn’t identify her individual organs. She was eventually 
diagnosed withClostridium difficile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2007/oct/11/health.medicineandhealth1> (C 
diff), a potentially fatal condition in which bacteria attack the intestinal 
lining. Even after she started to recover, her weight continued to plummet to 
below seven stone. One week after getting out of hospital she got a call from 
her stepfather to tell her that her mother, Susie, had tripped and hit her head 
at home and was now in a coma, about to die. Soon after her mother’s funeral, 
still frail from the C diff and poleaxed by grief, Notaro casually mentioned to 
her doctor that she had a lump in each of her breasts.

“I went in for my mammogram feeling I was being quite thorough in my 
preventative care,” Notaro writes in her new memoir. “I didn’t feel as if I was 
waiting to hear if I had cancer. I felt as if I was waiting to hear I didn’t 
have cancer.”

On 25 July, the doctor called: she had cancer in both breasts – invasive stage 
two, she was later told, and she would need a double mastectomy. Oh, and she 
and her girlfriend were breaking up. It was, Notaro recalls in a deadpan voice 
that hovers between ironical understatement and embarrassment about all the 
drama, “a pretty crazy time”.

Hello. Good evening. Hello. I have cancer, how are you?

The day she got that diagnosis, Notaro decided to take what little control she 
could. She had a regular slot at LA comedy club Largo in nine days’ time, and 
she decided to go ahead with it, believing this might well be her last show.

“Hello. Good evening. Hello. I have cancer, how are you?” she asked the crowd 
that night, as casually as if she were asking if it was anyone’s birthday. The 
crowd laughed, certain a punchline was around the corner. “Hi, is everyone 
having a good time? I have cancer,” she continued. Some people continued to 
laugh, but others gasped, realising the truth. “Oh my God!” Notaro whispered, 
the words just sinking in for her, too.

That set, in which Notaro talked about everything that had happened to her, 
changed her life more than either of her terrible illnesses. It was an 
extraordinary gig, not just for the personal revelations, but for the way she 
turned the then tragedy of her life into comedy in a way that went beyond 
simple black humour. The sense of spontaneity in her delivery, the artless 
honesty and her unsentimental wit combined to give the event a feeling of real 
intimacy, as if your closest friend was telling you about their diagnosis for 
the first time.

“I’m single and I would love to meet somebody so [my internet dating] 
profile…?” she wondered aloud. “‘I have cancer. Serious inquiries only.’ I 
don’t know! That’s all I have going on now.”

At one point she asked the audience if she should just tell silly jokes. “No!” 
they shouted. “This is fucking amazing!” a man yelled at the back, and everyone 
applauded. “Oh,” murmured Notaro, stunned.

Immediately after the show audience members were tweeting and blogging about 
it, including some of Notaro’s high-profile comedy friends. One of these was
Louis CK <https://louisck.net/>, to my mind probably the greatest living 
standup, who tweeted: “In 27 years doing this, I’ve seen a handful of truly 
great, masterful standup sets. One was Tig Notaro last night at Largo.” Word of 
this gig, which only a handful had seen, was soon all over the internet.

Louis CK begged Notaro to let him sell a recording of it through his website 
<https://louisck.net/news/about-tig-notaro>. Eventually, she agreed and called 
it Live – pronounced with a short “i”, like an order to herself not to die. In 
its first week, itoutsold the new album by Kiss 
<http://2paragraphs.com/2015/04/comedian-tig-notaro-sold-more-records-than-kiss/>
, which especially pleased Notaro, a longtime Kiss fan; it went on to be
nominated for a Grammy award 
<http://www.grammy.com/blogs/first-time-grammy-nominee-tig-notaro>. With one 
gig, Notaro had become a bona fide star. Which was all great, of course – 
except first, she had to deal with possibly dying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5caa864eeab67229ca08aea977f71dffd81f483e%2F166_522_3247_4059%2F3247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5caa864eeab67229ca08aea977f71dffd81f483e%2F166_522_3247_4059%2F3247.jpg>
 ‘People complain about Hollywood comedians, but I feel like I selected a 
tremendous group, ones who aren’t fame-obsessed.’ Photograph: Amanda Friedman 
for the Guardian 
Notaro lives in a stylish, airy house in the Hollywood hills, just off the 
motorway but up a windy, quiet road that eats up phone reception. It’s the 
perfect place for someone who has to work a lot in the Hollywood melee but 
wants to live in almost rural privacy. As I arrive, an American TV crew is just 
leaving; four years on, everyone still wants to talk to Notaro. In her usual 
tomboyish outfit of jeans, a T-shirt and a thick cardigan, she ushers out one 
lot of journalists and welcomes another, perfectly at ease with spending yet 
more hours with a stranger probing the most intimate details of her life.

She still has the skinny body of someone who has gone through a severe medical 
trauma, but her health is good – so good that, since 2012, she’s had a schedule 
that would exhaust a healthy teenager. As well as appearing in TV shows 
including Inside Amy Schumer and the brilliant Amazon seriesTransparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/transparent>, last summer Netflix 
released a documentary about her <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80028208>, 
Tig, which focuses on life since 2012, including her then burgeoning 
relationship withStephanie Allynne <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2782402/>, an 
actress who looks as if she walked out of aBotticelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/botticelli> painting. The two of them 
married last autumn. One month after that, HBO put out her standup comedy 
specialBoyish Girl Interrupted 
<http://www.hbo.com/comedy/tig-notaro-boyish-girl-interrupted>, in which she 
performs part of the show bare-chested, showing her scars to the audience (she 
did not have reconstructive surgery after her double mastectomy).

“It felt awesome,” she grins, when I ask how it felt to take her shirt off on 
stage. “I had the idea in a crazy, maniacal way the day I came home from the 
hospital when I felt really insecure and damaged and sad. But the thought just 
kept coming up and, yeah, it’s a political statement but I also wanted to make 
the statement in a funny way.”

That Notaro has become such a specialist in self-revelation surprises no one 
more than her. Before 2012, her comedy hovered between sweetly surreal setups 
and skilful one-liners, the sort of dry humour loved by listeners of NPR’sThis 
American Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/11/podcasts-listen-now-serial-true-crime>
, to which she contributed, all delivered in an impassive voice that suggests 
both detachment and straight-down-the-line honesty. Typical jokes included a 
riff on a bee travelling alongside her on the motorway, and a shaggy dog story 
about the year she kept bumping into 1980s pop starTaylor Dayne 
<http://www.taylordayne.com/>.

Why did she decide to talk about her most personal life at the Largo show? “I 
think several things were going on,” she says. “It was me taking control of the 
narrative, and I think it was me asking for help as well. Because I had friends 
and family, but I also felt very, very alone.”

Does it bother her that it was only by baring her soul that she became so 
successful?

“I feel fine with it. I… I feel, even though it was personal, I always go back 
to that it was still just my standup. I guess it just took me to the next 
level,” she says, with enough hesitancy to suggest it has taken her a while to 
get used to being, as she puts it, “Tig the Truth-Teller”. The title of her 
memoir,I’m Just A Person 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/421422/>, is a 
reference to what she would tell herself whenever she wondered why all this bad 
stuff was happening toher (“You’re just a person, why not you?”). It’s also 
what she now says to people who treat her as a spokeswoman for cancer survival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F729402401e37a76e493b0d4b2b92a1eca1e9538b%2F72_18_812_1015%2F812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F729402401e37a76e493b0d4b2b92a1eca1e9538b%2F72_18_812_1015%2F812.jpg>
 Tig Notaro as a child. Photograph: courtesy of Tig Notaro 
Mathilde Notaro (“Tig” was a childhood nickname that stuck) was born in 
Mississippi and raised in Texas, but her accent is more laconic west coast than 
liquid southern. Her father, Pat, was at most a sporadic presence in her life, 
but her mother, Susie, judging from Notaro’s memoir, was so dazzling she 
outshone everyone in the room. She saw the party in everything, even a school 
sports day; as soon as her kids were in bed, she would go out dancing until 
dawn.

“She was just so outrageous and funny and without any boundaries,” smiles 
Notaro. Her mother accepted her daughter just as she was, defending 
seven-year-old Tig when others asked why she refused to wear pretty dresses, 
preferring T-shirts and jeans: “My mother was so stylish, but she never pushed 
that on me. She always thought I looked cool,” she says.

Notaro struggled at school, and her confidence was truly shot when she was 12 
and opened a letter from her school to her parents suggesting she might need 
special education. Mortified, she never passed the letter on, choosing instead, 
she writes in her memoir, to hide “the envelope in my closet, right next to my 
latent homosexuality”. She ended up having to repeat three school years before 
finally dropping out in the 9th grade (the equivalent of year 10 in the UK), 
and making her way to LA and comedy.

I’ve always felt like a tomboy. People are choked by being told how they 
should be

Her progress was slow and involved a fair amount of time sleeping in her car. 
But by her late 30s she was a favourite of influential TV and radio hosts, such 
asConan O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/15/conan-obrien-in-armenia> and 
NPR’sIra Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/07/ira-glass-i-feel-like-im-actually-sort-of-scared-all-the-time>
.

Notaro has always been open about her sexuality, but it is not something she 
touches on in her comedy. She looks flat-out surprised when I ask when she 
realised she was gay: “Ummm, about 19?” she replies, as if taken aback that 
someone would be interested in something so unimportant. Despite coming from a 
religious, military, southern background, she says her family were really 
supportive when she came out to them at 20. In her Largo set, she refers to her 
double mastectomy as a “forced transition”: did her operation make her feel 
differently about herself as a woman?

“No, no. I’ve always felt like a tomboy, and that hasn’t changed,” she says. 
It is, though, she says, an interesting time when it comes to gender identity: 
“I don’t think that it’s as black and white as people think. Just all that 
sickening pink and blue, and boy and girl stuff, I think that’s where the 
problem comes in, when people are being choked to death by being told how they 
should be. My mother always thought I looked adorable in my cowboy boots.”

I tell her I was struck by something Amy Schumer once said to Vanity Fair 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/2013/01/tig-notaro-breast-cancer-dont-connect-with-jokes>
 about Notaro: “Looking masculine and being gay, the challenges of the road are 
20 times harder for Tig than other female comedians. People fear what they 
don’t understand.” Has she found that to be true?

Anger sparks in Notaro’s normally calm eyes. “I don’t know what she was 
talking about. It sounds like offensive nonsense to me. I find that so 
offensive and weird,” she says, looking down, trying to control her very 
audible irritation. “If you knew me well, you would never say that.”

I thought the two of you were friends, I say, surprised. Schumer has spoken in 
the past about taking care of her “great friend Tig”.

“Ummm…” Notaro says, looking away. Did you just work with her? The atmosphere, 
previously relaxed, has palpably prickled.

“I’ve worked with her. I worked with her for the first season [of Inside Amy 
Schumer],” she replies curtly. Ironically, the episode in which Notaro appeared 
was about Schumer exaggerating their friendship and using Notaro’s cancer to 
look good in front of other people.

“Let’s leave it there,” Notaro says, closing down the subject.

I say how supportive Notaro’s close circle of LA friends, especially comedian 
Sarah Silverman and film-makerLake Bell <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1128572/>, 
seem to have been during her illness. “They were. People complain about 
Hollywood comedians, but I feel like I selected a tremendous group, ones who 
aren’t fame-obsessed. So I was taken care of,” she pauses a beat. “But there 
were some inauthentic people wanting to take care of me, just to look good.”

So you could be their anecdote?

“Yes! And I started to sniff that out and I was like, ‘Oh! This is so gross!’ 
and I got out of there as quickly as I could,” she says, careful to mention no 
names.

Although Notaro had plenty of girlfriends in her life, it wasn’t until she met 
Allynne that, she says, “I understood the importance of marriage, because I 
didn’t know how not to be with her. Part of that is because everything I went 
through really opened me up [to being with someone], but really, the majority 
of the credit should go to Stephanie for being an extraordinary person.”

But their courtship wasn’t straightforward. For a start, Notaro had had her 
mastectomy only four months previously. But the main hurdle was that Allynne 
had never before been with a woman, and it took her a while to recognise her 
feelings. After a few months, she did, and the two have been inseparable since. 
They had a “huge” wedding last October, getting married on the beach in 
Mississippi in front of 270 people. “I think my friends were all like, ‘What’s 
this gay wedding in Mississippi going to be like?’” Notaro says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf74d83c6a92401c001eda62037bf0ba3fa81421%2F35_85_1882_1128%2F1882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf74d83c6a92401c001eda62037bf0ba3fa81421%2F35_85_1882_1128%2F1882.jpg>
 Notaro with her wife, Stephanie Allynne. Photograph: Mike Pont/WireImage 
As she talks about Allynne, I notice that she keeps looking at the house 
across the street. She laughs and explains it’s because that’s where Allynne’s 
mother lives, and Allynne is having tea there while we talk; Allynne’s brother 
and his girlfriend live in Notaro’s guesthouse.

“We have a little commune,” she says proudly, marvelling at her Tig Luck.

The most moving storyline in the Netflix documentary had nothing to do with 
Notaro’s health, her mother or her relationship with Allynne: rather, it was 
her attempt to have a baby. Before she was diagnosed with cancer, Notaro 
started looking into ways of starting a family on her own. Once she was in 
recovery, she decided to try with the help of a surrogate. So, against the 
advice of her oncologist, she delayed starting the hormone blockers, which 
would help prevent the return of the cancer, so as to harvest her eggs. She 
would have just one shot at this. She named the one viable embryo Jack Notaro.

“I truly believed that there was no way I could go through all I went through 
and not have a child. At least the universe would dole that out,” Notaro tells 
me. The scene where she receives the news that the implantation was not 
successful is utterly devastating, even more so for Notaro’s characteristically 
understated response: “I see,” she says, her jaw locking.

It is incredible that she experienced this moment with a camera crew in her 
face, I say. “There’s no way I would have agreed to [have the cameras there] if 
I hadn’t been so positive the IVF would be successful. It was brutal,” she 
agrees. But while her face is serious, her voice is light, free now of the pain 
from that time. Because as she is talking, there are a handful of balloons in 
the corner behind her, leftovers from a baby shower her stepfather and brother 
threw for her two days ago. Resting by the front door are two baby car seats: 
Notaro and Allynne are expecting twins, due later this month via a surrogate. 
Notaro is wary about talking about them, but she can’t suppress her bright-eyed 
excitement. When I show her a photo of my own twin babies, she becomes a little 
tearful: “Oh my God…” she says, looking at mine and thinking of hers.

Will she talk about the babies in her standup? “Yeah. Oh yeah! A lot of 
comedians get a bad rep once they have kids and that’s all they talk about and 
people are like, ‘I don’t want to hear about your kids!’ I’m like, ‘Prepare 
yourselves. That’sall I’m going to talk about.’” •

‘I couldn’t bring myself to look down’: Tig Notaro on life after breasts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a387d6c83353188fedb12fd075b1bd5a76786e7%2F14_24_1490_894%2F1490.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a387d6c83353188fedb12fd075b1bd5a76786e7%2F14_24_1490_894%2F1490.jpg>
 A selfie from when she was unwell. Photograph: Netflix/Everett/REX/Shutterstock
I was in a fog when my surgeon came in after my double mastectomy. She had a 
great bedside manner. It seemed entirely impossible that this friendly, 
easygoing woman had just finished cutting into my flesh and pulling out globs 
of tissue. She smiled and said she had some good news: she believed the cancer 
had not spread and that she had got it all.

A stream of friends came by, but I was so jacked up on painkillers that my 
hospital room looked like a party going on around someone who had overdosed 
before the guests had arrived. My face was greasy, my tits were off, and it 
looked like a horse had been chewing on my hair since 1977. The only thing I 
had going for me was I could use the bathroom on my own.

For a month after being discharged, I was at the mercy of kind friends who 
fought for the chance to bring me food, help me get dressed, and drain the 
blood and gunk coming from my chest – which I couldn’t bring myself to look at.

Instead, I Googled images of “bilateral double mastectomy”. The worse the 
photos looked, the more certain I was that my chest looked like that. I never 
let myself glance down. Even when I was able to start showering, I let the 
running water clean my chest while I stared straight at the ceiling.

That grisly sight confirmed that I didn’t want to see any more of what I was 
now calling my 'Frankenchest'

But I knew I had to consider my chest’s future. I met with several 
reconstructive surgeons, and each meeting left me wondering why on earth I 
would go through such intense procedures just to have fake boobs. My chest was 
barely anything to begin with, so why go through such pain and recovery time 
for something that wouldn’t be noticed? I’d essentially be surgically attaching 
the equivalent of two kiwis (less hair, no stickers). So I settled on no 
reconstructive surgery, which meant no boobs, no nipples, just nice, uneven 
scars.

One morning when I was brushing my teeth, I leaned toward the mirror and 
caught a startling glimpse of swollen, bruised flesh crisscrossed with black 
stitching, which made me feel as though I had been in a horrible accident 
instead of expertly tended to by a surgeon. That grisly sight confirmed that I 
didn’t want to see any more of what I was now calling my “Frankenchest”. But 
someone had to. And unfortunately for her, it was my friend Lake. She had come 
over for a visit, and after chatting for several hours, I asked if she’d look 
at my chest – a typical move on my part, I must say. She agreed, but I could 
sense her fear as I slowly lifted my shirt. Immediately I saw relief in her 
face. “Tiggy,” she said. “You can do this. You can totally do this.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F640affb8adaa5fd56da82d5c1dea56f868c0e6b4%2F137_76_1618_2023%2F1618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tig%20Notaro%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20were%20wanting%20to%20take%20care%20of%20me%2C%20just%20to%20look%20good%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Ftig-notaro-people-wanting-take-care-look-good%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F640affb8adaa5fd56da82d5c1dea56f868c0e6b4%2F137_76_1618_2023%2F1618.jpg>
 Notaro performing in 2014. Photograph: David Buchan/Getty Images 
A couple of days later, I stood in front of a mirror and slowly unbuttoned my 
shirt. When I looked down, what I saw turned out to be just a flat chest with 
fresh scars on their way to looking healed. My stitches had dissolved. I took 
my shirt off and stared at myself, thinking, “Lake was right, I can do this.”

The next month, I moved from LA to New York City to write and appear on Comedy 
Central’s new show InsideAmy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer>. Before the surgery I had 
been dating Jessie, a gorgeous woman I had known for a while. She also happened 
to be temporarily living in New York City while she starred in an off-Broadway 
musical, and one night, she invited me over. I got into bed wearing my T-shirt. 
It was winter and the heater was cranked. I told Jessie that I was sorry, but I 
needed to take off my shirt. She said, “Of course,” and lay back to wait.

I was now facing the exact moment I had been dreading – my first topless 
romantic encounter. Jessie and I had been out to dinner a few weeks after my 
surgery, when I was still struggling to look down, and I asked if it would 
freak her out to see my scars. She said it wouldn’t. I asked again, and she 
replied that no, it wouldn’t freak her out at all. I asked her one more time 
just to make sure and she said, “To be totally honest, I fucking love scars!” 
Wow. If there’s one thing I do have to bring to this relationship, I thought, 
by God, it’s scars.

The amount of confidence she gave me that night is beyond words. I went from 
uncomfortably adjusting and readjusting my shirts to hide my new body to 
wanting to wear fitted T-shirts, and it was all because Jessie said she thought 
scars were sexy.

Now, in bed, was the moment of truth. I sat up on my knees facing her as she 
was lying down and took off my T-shirt to reveal my bare chest with its 
two-inch scars in place of my two-inch breasts. “Oh my God! You’re so hot!” she 
said, pulling me toward her. “You look so sexy!”

When I returned home to LA from New York, I looked anxiously around my 
apartment. My unmade bed, my dirty cup in the sink. It was the scene before the 
crime. I was staring at my assumption that life would continue to go on right 
where it had left off. I spent an entire day in and out of a paralysing panic 
attack. I could only sit very still on my couch, trying to breathe. I felt like 
I was about to lose my balance and fall off not only the couch, but the planet 
entirely.

I guess being anonymous and misplaced in New York had stalled this anxiety, 
because it turned out to be the final panic attack about all that had happened 
to me; a few days later, on the morning of 1 January 2013, I suddenly landed 
right back into my body, feeling like the world’s most experienced and 
knowledgeable infant. Breathing was as easy as doing nothing. I was ready to 
embark on a new life

• This is an edited extracted from I’m Just A Person, published by Bluebird on 
16 June at £12.99. To order a copy for £10.39, with free UK p&p, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/421422/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846.
 