
Ledio Bilali has already resigned himself to a day off on Thursday. At midday 
he will be obliged to lock the doors of Muza Bar, the business he runs with his 
family in a tower block overlooking the Elbasan Arena, and will make his way 
upstairs to his apartment on the 10th floor.

The view is spectacular from there: if he feels curious, he will be able to 
look down as bomb squad officers sweep the stadium early in the afternoon, but 
by the timeAlbania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> and Serbia kick 
off at 8.45pm he will have had to secure his balcony and will not even be 
allowed to venture towards the window. Anybody caught watching the match from 
this high up has technically broken the law – anybody, that is, except for the 
teams of snipers and spotters stationed on every roof overlooking the stadium.

These are extreme measures for extreme times. If Albania manage to better 
Denmark’s result in Portugal, they will qualify automatically forEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> – a stunning achievement in 
its own right for a country that has never come close to reaching a major 
tournament before. That is enough to hold the interest but Serbia’s 
participation casts matters in an altogether different light. Their being 
accessories to Albania’s qualification would constitute the perfect storm: the 
enmity between these countries still runs deep after their involvement in the 
brutal war over the disputed territory of Kosovo, and this is before last 
year’s bizarre incident in Belgrade is considered.

Alleged drone pilot arrested on eve of Albania v Serbia Euro 2016 qualifier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/07/albania-serbia-alleged-drone-pilot-arrested>
That was when Ismail Morina piloted a remote-controlled drone bearing a 
Greater Albania flag into Partizan Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/15/balkan-nationalism-drone-football-serbia-albania>
 while the countries competed for the first time, setting off a chain of events 
that began with a mass brawl and ended, in July, with Albania being awarded 
three points from the abandoned game. It undoubtedly abetted Albania’s cause in 
Group I and another effect has been the unprecedented security operation in 
place for the match in Elbasan.

Bilali was among the residents to receive a letter from the ministry of 
interior affairs informing them that the building – a perfect haven for anyone 
with a craft to steer – will be locked down to all visitors from Thursday 
afternoon. He never had any intention of watching the match, whose 12,800 
tickets have been sold amid demand that exceeded supply tenfold, from the 
stadium itself.

“I’ll stay inside,” he says. “I’m too concerned that something might happen 
here – it’s better to be in my apartment, watching on television.”

The chances of anything untoward will be lessened further by the 500 special 
forces officers, 1,400 police and a group of undercover Serbian police who will 
accompany the Serbia team to the stadium on its 35-mile journey from Tirana. 
From 6pm, the entire road between the two – one of the country’s more important 
highways – will be closed. No Serbian supporters will be present in the stadium 
apart from 100 exchange students, even if rumblings continue in both countries’ 
media that reprisal measures may be attempted.Serbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia> were eventually deducted three 
points for their role in last year’s debacle and a team rich in talent but low 
in spirit sit bottom of the group; it could be argued that there is little to 
be lost.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Falbania-serbia-euro-2016-qualifier-tight-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444261675891%2Faafd016c-5992-4623-ba9c-e5914fd1f351-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tight%20security%20to%20ensure%20no%20flights%20of%20fancy%20between%20Albania%20and%20Serbia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Falbania-serbia-euro-2016-qualifier-tight-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tight%20security%20to%20ensure%20no%20flights%20of%20fancy%20between%20Albania%20and%20Serbia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Falbania-serbia-euro-2016-qualifier-tight-security%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F8%2F1444261675891%2Faafd016c-5992-4623-ba9c-e5914fd1f351-1020x612.jpeg>
 Ledio Bilal looks out over the Elbasan Arena from his apartment. Photograph: 
Bart van Eijden 
At this stage, the situation seems in tighter control than that of a year ago, 
when Morina managed to evade security forces in Belgrade by climbing the Church 
of Saint Archangel Gabriel, 150 metres from the stadium, to effect his plan. 
The odds on a repeat performance lengthened significantly in the early hours of 
Wednesday morning when Morina was arrested for illegal possession of a firearm 
and held in Tirana’s Police Station No1. He had been driving an English film 
crew to Tirana from the city of Durres and there are suggestions that he had 
been spotted firing a gun out of his car window. In a country where illegal 
firearm possession is a longstanding problem this seems a convenient move by 
the authorities and Morina was still in custody 24 hours before kick-off.

Morina, a slight figure who led a quiet life as a crane operator in Milan 
until concocting his plan – originally intended as revenge for Serbian 
supporters’ burning of an Albanian flag at a match in Genoa five years ago – 
has bona fide celebrity status in Albania and has been increasingly prominent 
in the media over recent weeks. When the Guardian met him and other members of 
the Tifozat Kuq e Zi ultras group on Monday, the evening was studded with 
requests for photographs and handshakes from passers-by; last month, before 
their qualifier in Denmark, members of theAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> team were happy to pose with him 
for photographs later circulated on social media.

“What I did was not based on any racism or propaganda, and there was no 
intention to offend the Serbian people – it was founded on clean facts,” said 
Morina, whose flag depicted a territory of which Kosovo and ethnically Albanian 
areas of Macedonia were constituent parts.

“It was important for me to promote Albanian values in the house of a rival, 
but there was no direct insult. I’m glad that I did it and I would do it again 
regardless of how things turned out on the pitch. It started as a simple plan 
for revenge, but it ended up raising levels of patriotism throughout the 
Albanian people. It gives me a surge of pride.”

Morina says he had, in fact, intended to pilot the drone straight out of the 
stadium – instead miscalculating and seeing his flag caught by the Serbia 
player Stefan Mitrovic. Regardless, he would be at risk of arrest or attack if 
he enteredSerbia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serbia> again and – even 
before Wednesday’s development – found himself viewed dimly by some agencies at 
home too. The Albanian FA has banned him from attending the game, even though a 
ticket has been issued in his name, and Morina claims his fellow supporters are 
“pissed off” about his treatment.

Their anger has been piqued further by his detainment, but the broader view is 
that the stakes are too high for Albania here. If the current position held by 
Gianni De Biasi’s well-drilled but unremarkable team owes something to fortune, 
the slightest slip-up off the pitch in Elbasan would compromise the opportunity 
of a country’s football lifetime. A place in France next summer is something 
that even the most panoramic of vantage points would be worth sacrificing for.

The man in the middle

Today’s match will be refereed by the Italian Nicola Rizzoli. Uefa appears to 
have chosen the safest possible pair of hands for the most combustible of 
occasions: Rizzoli refereed last year’s World Cup final and will be asked to 
keep under control an occasion that – even before the appearance of the drone – 
simmered last year, with both sides’ players claiming that they had been 
verbally provoked by their opponents.
 