
It was a script reading at a small Western Australian film festival in 2012 
that finally lit a fire underSpin Out, the Australian comedian Tim Ferguson’s 
debut as a feature film director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/29/spin-out-first-look-review-tim-ferguson-dials-up-the-ocker-in-sweet-but-parochial-feature-debut>
. Ferguson had an inkling that a romantic comedy set at a bachelor and spinster 
ball in country Australia and its youthful cast of ute fiends would appeal to 
the young CinefestOz, then in its fifth year.

He approached the festival’s PAC Script Lab with the project, then titled 
Circle Work, anda reading was staged 
<http://if.com.au/2012/08/27/article/Tim-Ferguson-talks-comedy-and-rom-com-Circle-Work/AHGMQFENTF.html>
 in Busselton with a group of rising actors, including a local Emma Booth, and 
Matilda Brown.

Last week, four years later, Ferguson returned to Busselton with the finished 
product, where it competed in CinefestOz’s jury prize competition. In a 
surprising confluence, Booth was back, too, serving as one of the prize’s 
judges (thoughshe had to withdraw 
<https://au.news.yahoo.com/thewest/entertainment/a/32459082/emma-booth-pulls-out-of-cinefestoz-jury/>
 mid-festival), and Brown returned as an actor in The Death and Life of Otto 
Bloom, another competition film.

Spin Out first-look review: Tim Ferguson dials up the ocker in sweet but 
parochial feature debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/29/spin-out-first-look-review-tim-ferguson-dials-up-the-ocker-in-sweet-but-parochial-feature-debut>
Ferguson says the 2012 reading inspired he and his co-writer, Edwina Exton, to 
push forward with the project. “It was only after we’d come to CinefestOz and 
seen the audience reaction that we thought we might actually be on to something 
here and we should focus our energies on it.”

He took the script to his former collaborator and comedy veteran Marc Gracie, 
a film and TV director who had once worked as promoter for Ferguson’s comedy 
act the Doug Anthony All Stars. Gracie suggested they direct it together.

“I always doubted that I could do it myself, only because of my physical 
limitations,” Ferguson says. He announced he has multiple sclerosis in 2010, 
during an episode of Good News Week. “It’s in the bush, so how the hell am I 
going to go back and forth from video village to actors and that sort of stuff?”

On set, Gracie focused on the technical side while Ferguson took charge of the 
actors and the story. “My job was to concentrate on performances and, where 
it’s present, the comic aspects. And also keep an eye on the emotional 
heartbeat, so that it didn’t get lost.”

Girl Asleep wins Australia's richest film prize at CinefestOz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/28/girl-asleep-australia-richest-film-prize-cinefestoz-rosemary-myers>
That emotional side is personal to Ferguson. Though the film is a raucous 
ocker comedy, its romance hinges on the exodus of young people from rural 
communities. “I grew up in the country [in Blayney, New South Wales] and there 
is a diaspora at the end of every graduation year,” he says. “The year twelves 
just disappear. That’s where the heartbeat is – what do you do when everybody 
starts leaving?”

 But it was the broader comic aspects that first brought he and Exton to the 
story, starting with a firm conviction about the international commercial 
appeal of Aussie piss-ups. “Edwina and I were very attracted to the idea of a 
bachelor and spinster ball as a story prospect, because nobody parties like 
Australians do. Nobody wears tuxedos and ball gowns in a shearing shed in the 
middle of nowhere, where they plan to drink and dance and have a mud fight, and 
then drive their cars like mad people.

“We thought if the world gets a glimpse of how we do it we might actually be 
able to make B&S balls and ute musters infect their culture. Wait till the 
midwest of America finds out that you can do doughnuts and win five grand.”

• Spin Out is released on 15 September
 