
Tim Minchin <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/tim-minchin> hopes that one of 
his future shows will have its world premiere in Australia. Speaking on the red 
carpet at the Sydney opening of Matilda the Musical, he said his current 
project Groundhog Day was not the piece to debut “for a number of reasons”, but 
added: “one day I’ll open something here.”


Matilda the Musical: the Australian premiere – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/aug/21/matilda-the-musical-the-australian-premiere-in-pictures>
The comedian-composer is working on the musical version of Harold Ramis’s 1993 
film about a weatherman forced to live the same day over and over again. The 
musical is set toopen at London’s Old Vic 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-arts-32387214> in July 2016, before a 
Broadway run in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/03/tim-minchin-groundhog-day-musical-broadway-2017>
 in March 2017. Minchin hopes that it will also transfer to Australia. “I’d be 
devastated if Groundhog Day didn’t get here.”

He’s happy with the production’s development so far, but says there is work 
still to be done. “Certainly there’s an instrumental section I want to have a 
go at, and maybe one more song. Obviously there are always tweaks with lyrics, 
and the way that songs and script integrate.”

The project reunites him with many of the award-winning Matilda team, 
including director Matthew Warchus, choreographer Peter Darling and designer 
Rob Howell. They have recently recorded a workshop with 12 actors.

“I listen to it all the time and it’s a thing,” said Minchin of his new work. 
“I have no idea what other people think, but we think it’s all right.”

Minchin was in fine form on the red carpet, clearly excited to open the much 
anticipatedSydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> run of 
Matilda the Musical. “Everyone has done their jobs so well,” he said, adding 
the production had a distinctly Aussie flair. “It’s Australian-style [to say]: 
‘Oh yeah, we’ll do a show’ and then smashing the crap out of it. It’s 
brilliant.”

We smashed the crap out of Matilda ... it’s brilliant
Tim Minchin 
He also confirmed plans were in place for the show to open in Melbourne and 
Perth, adding: “I would be very surprised if it didn’t eventually at some point 
play everywhere in the whole fucking world, hopefully.”

Matilda the Musical review – still a revoltingly subversive success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/20/matilda-the-musical-review-still-a-revoltingly-subversive-success>
The multi-talented Minchin, who grew up in Perth, is set to perform a one-off 
(and already sold out)Winter Sonic 
<http://fac.org.au/events/704/tim-minchin-sonic-session?pid=58> evening of 
music and conversation at the Fremantle Arts Centre in August.

Matilda the Musical premiered in Stratford upon Avon in November 2010, before 
opening in London’s West End in November 2011, and then running on Broadway 
from April 2013. But Minchin, who wrote the music and lyrics, largely credits 
the show’s writer Dennis Kelly with Matilda’s success around the world.

“It’s a great story, an incredible adaptation,” he said. “I didn’t bugger up 
the songs.” Successful musicals could be difficult to create, he said, “because 
there are so many moving parts and you really need cohesiveness between those 
parts.”

Almost six years after Matilda first opened, Minchin said all the show’s 
elements came together well.

“I realise the music sounds like the set, and the set looks like the story and 
it’s almost cross-sensory. It is all pursuing the same goal, which is to take 
care of this story. I think that is what makes a good musical, and I think we 
did all right.”

 * Matilda the Musical  
<http://www.ticketmaster.com.au/Matilda-the-Musical-tickets/artist/1601714>is 
at Sydney’s Lyric theatre until 20 December
 