
The OECD's fourth high-level forum on aid effectiveness 
<http://www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/> will hear a collective call for a 
new deal for "fragile states" from theg7+ <http://www.g7plus.org/> – a group of 
19 countries that struggle with poverty, instability and the threat of violent 
conflict. Few of them are expected to meet a single millennium development goal.

The call is timely: recent years have seen a growing understanding 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/53/0,3746,en_2649_33693550_48696949_1_1_1_1,00.html>
 of why some fragile states recover, while others remain unstable or slip back 
into conflict.Research from the Overseas Development Institute 
<http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/39/43/48153575.pdf> and others 
<http://wdr2011.worldbank.org/fulltext> suggests that the development of 
national institutions is crucial. Unless citizens believe that problems can be 
solved through political processes, there is a risk that they'll be solved 
through violence.

But building effective institutions can take decades, and each country must 
blend local culture with national identity and traditions tobuild institutions 
seen as legitimate <http://www.gsdrc.org/go/display&type=Document&id=3767> by 
all citizens. In this way, fragile states are not just "a more difficult case 
of development 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTABOUTUS/ORGANIZATION/EXTPRESIDENT2007/0,,contentMDK:22029111~menuPK:64822311~pagePK:64821878~piPK:64821912~theSitePK:3916065,00.html>
", but require a fundamentally different approach that also recognises 
political and security challenges.

It may be tempting to walk away. Why not just quarantine fragile states until 
their people grow sick of violence?

Fragile states are not in a vacuum – apart from the humanitarian concerns we 
may have, the challenges they face are directly relevant to global security and 
economic interests. The experience of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Somalia, as 
well as the wars in west and central Africa demonstrate thatviolence tends to 
spread 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bottom-Billion-Poorest-Countries-Failing/dp/0195311450>
 to surrounding countries and beyond. Weak governance can also allow space for 
traffickers in guns, children and drugs – as well as pirates and terrorists – 
to operate with impunity.

Then there are the global financial costs. UN peacekeeping in Liberia and 
Sierra Leone costs five times more than aid flows to these countries; in 
Afghanistan, military support costs 20 times more than civilian assistance 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/details.asp?id=5961&title=budget-strengthening-fragile-states-conflict-g7>
.

Success is possible. Many former fragile states have made good use of foreign 
aid and are set to be tomorrow's emerging markets.

Helping countries to establish their own capable, accountable and legitimate 
institutions, so as to avoid chronic aid dependency and allow the withdrawal of 
peacekeepers, requires a shift in aid spending that "does no harm 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/30/0,3746,en_2649_33693550_44408734_1_1_1_1,00.html>
" to local institutions.

I see four key steps. First, we need to speed up the delivery of results. The 
g7+ countries are burdened by theslow pace of aid 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/2/0,3746,en_2649_33693550_45347394_1_1_1_1,00.html>
, complicated procedures and a lack of donor flexibility. Procurement policies 
may assume competitive markets and efficient logistics that simply might not 
exist. Bureaucratic rules often lock humanitarian and development funds into 
separate compartments.

Second, we need a better balance between the risk 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/53/0,3746,en_2649_33693550_48696949_1_1_1_1,00.html>
 that money will go astray and therisk 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/details.asp?id=6132&title=busan-fragile-states-aid-effectiveness-managing-donor-risk>
 that programmes will fail to deliver peace and development by delivering too 
little, too late. Development assistance to fragile states is usually provided 
either the same way as in more resilient countries with stronger institutions – 
with the same procedures and aversion to risk – or by fragmented, 
unco-ordinated and low-impact aid that bypasses legitimate national 
governments. Reasonable financial controls are quite feasible in fragile states.

Third, more money must go through the country's own systems, with additional 
financial safeguards. Evidence from countries as diverse asAfghanistan 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/details.asp?id=5934&title=afghanistan-budget-support-aid-fragile-states-corruption>
, Rwanda and Sierra Leone shows that with external verification of 
expenditures, and contracting out of fiduciary management, we can channel aid 
through national treasury systems without excessive risk, even in countries 
suffering pervasive corruption and abuse of power.

Fourth, we need more transparency from donor countries, international 
agencies, NGOs and the governments of fragile states themselves. Donors should
publish information on their aid flows <http://www.publishwhatyoufund.org/> and 
results; governments of fragile states should publish information on their 
budgets and communicate this to citizens.

International conferences for the past decade have called for better 
co-ordination, which remains elusive.Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> that is fragmented into 
thousands of tiny projects from multiple donors is impossible for a 
post-conflict government, and probably anyone else, to manage. The budget of 
the sovereign government can provide the framework to co-ordinate and align aid 
with national priorities and plans.

Fragile states need support here to consolidate assistance 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/details.asp?id=5934&title=afghanistan-budget-support-aid-fragile-states-corruption>
 into sector-wide national programmes, and to prepare and execute national 
budgets. Co-ordination can be improved if transactions costs to government are 
reduced and if risks are shared among donors bypooling funds 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/details.asp?id=5925&title=pooled-funds-fragile-states-aid-south-sudan-afganistan-liberia>
. Trust funds, such as those inAfghanistan 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/SOUTHASIAEXT/AFGHANISTANEXTN/0,,contentMDK:20152008~pagePK:141137~piPK:217854~theSitePK:305985,00.html>
, Timor-Leste and West Bank/Gaza, and the Liberia health pooled fund, have been 
successful in doing this.

Helping countries move from fragility to resilience requires not just 
agreement in Busan, but also country-level compacts that set out monitorable 
goals for countries and their partners to achieve.

Success is not only important for the 1.5 billion citizens who live with the 
everyday threat of violence and hunger, but also for the security and 
consciences of us all.

• Alastair McKechnie is a senior research associate at the Overseas 
Development Institute, London. He was the World Bank's director for fragile 
states and country director for Afghanistan
 