
September 1993

Abu Qatada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> arrives with his 
family in the UK on a forged United Arab Emirates passport. A year later he is 
granted asylum and is permitted to remain for an initial period of four years.

March 1995

The preacher issues a fatwa saying it is justified to both kill Muslims who 
renounce their faith and kill their families.

April 1999

A court in Jordan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jordan> convicts Qatada, 
in his absence, of conspiracy to commit terrorist acts in the country.

October 1999

Makes a speech in London that advocates the killing of Jews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/dec/19/jasonburke.martinbright> and 
praises attacks on Americans.

December 2001

Qatada goes into hiding as laws are passed allowing terror suspects to be 
detained without charge or trial. After 10 months on the run, he is traced to a 
council house in south London and taken to Belmarsh prison.

April 2002

Police in Germany find recordings of some of his radical sermons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/apr/25/september11.world> in a home used 
by some of the September 11 attackers.

March 2005

Qatada is freed on bail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/mar/11/terrorism.politics1> under a 
control order that limits his movements. Five months later he is returned to 
custody pending extradition to Jordan.

December 2005

In a video statement recorded in jail, he calls on the kidnappers of British 
peace activist Norman Kember to release their hostage. His appeal is broadcast 
throughout the Middle East.

April 2008

Three appeal court judges halt his deportation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/apr/09/terrorism.law> to Jordan, ruling 
that his 1999 conviction for terrorism was based on evidence extracted through 
torture. The court rejects as insufficient a "no torture" guarantee from the 
Jordanian government.

June 2008

Qatada is released from jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/jun/18/terrorism.uksecurity> under 
unprecedented bail conditions, including that he remains in his west London 
home and does not use the internet and telephone, or meet with named 
terrorists, including Osama bin Laden.

November 2008

He is arrested after allegedly breaching his bail conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/nov/13/terrorism-uk-security-jordan>. At a 
subsequent hearing, a Special Immigration Appeals Commission (SIAC) panel is 
told that Qatada had been plotting to flee the UK.

December 2008

The SIAC panel rules that Qatada should be returned to prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/dec/03/abu-qatada-bail-revoked> for 
breaching the bail conditions.

February 2009

The law lords rule that Qatada can be deported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/feb/18/abu-qatada-deport-jordan> to 
Jordan. The judgment backs a Home Office challenge against the April 2008 court 
of appeal ruling that Qatada could not be deported because he might not receive 
fair treatment in Jordan where, he claimed, evidence against him was extracted 
by torture.

June 2009

The European court of justice rules Qatada's assets were unlawfully frozen 
across Europe when he was added to a UN sanctions blacklist in the wake of 
9/11. UK ministers subsequently introduced emergency legislation to ensure bank 
accounts of terror suspects, including Qatada, remain frozen.

August 2011

The chief inspector of prisons raises concerns over a group of national 
security detainees, believed to include Qatada, saying they are isolated and in 
legal limbo.

January 2012

The European court of human rights blocks the deportation of Qatada to Jordan 
because of the risk of him being put on trial based on torture-tainted evidence.

February 2012

The special immigration appeals commission frees Qatada on strict bail 
conditions. David Cameron and the home secretary,Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, begin pushing for a 
deportation deal with Jordan.

March 2012

May visits Jordan in an attempt to get guarantees that any future trial will 
not be tainted by evidence gained under torture.

April 2012

Qatada is arrested at his London address and told a fresh attempt is to be 
made to deport him. But the deportation is halted by the European court of 
human rights less than 24 hours after it was ordered by the home secretary 
after Qatada's lawyers lodge an 11th-hour appeal. May had ordered Qatada's 
arrest in the belief that the three-month deadline for appeals to be lodged 
against the original Strasbourg ruling on the case, on 17 January, had already 
passed.

May 2012

Judges at the European court of human rights reject Qatada's appeal to the 
Strasbourg court. Later in the month, he is denied bail by the special 
immigration appeals commission, in London, after Mr Justice Mitting says the 
security and intelligence services would lack the resources to deal with a 
potential escape attempt by him during the Olympics.

July 2012

Two high court judges dismiss Qatada's application for judicial review and a 
writ of habeas corpus.

November 2012

Qatada is released from Long Lartin high-security prison after winning a legal 
challenge against being sent back to Jordan. Mitting and the two other senior 
judges allow his appeal on the basis that a real risk remains that Qatada would 
face a trial based on evidence obtained through torture, despite assurances 
obtained from the Jordanian authorities by the home secretary. The radical 
cleric is released on an electronic tag under a 16-hour curfew lasting between 
4pm and 8am, and under severe restrictions as to whom he may meet.

March 2013

Qatada is arrested after allegedly breaching his bail conditions. 
Later in the month, three appeal court judges reject May's latest attempt to 
deport Qatada, reminding her that "torture is universally abhorred as an evil", 
and states cannot expel someone where there is a real risk that they will face 
a trial based on evidence obtained by torture.

April 2013

The court of appeal turns down May's attempt to take the case to the supreme 
court.

May said she had signed "fair trial guarantees" with Jordan that she believed 
would reassure courts that torture evidence would not be used against Qatada. 
May said she believed the treaty would give the government "every chance of 
succeeding" in its aim to deport Qatada to Jordan.

May 2013

Qatada's lawyers tell the immigration tribunal he will voluntarily return to 
Jordan if the new treaty is ratified by both parliaments. The terror suspect is 
denied bail at Siac by Mr Justice Irwin. The immigration tribunal heard 
"jihadist files" were found on digital devices in his home.

June 2013

It is confirmed that both houses of the Jordanian parliament have approved the 
mutual assistance treaty with the UK. In a letter to MPs, the home secretary 
confirms the legal costs to the public purse of attempting to remove Qatada 
since 2005 have hit Â£1,716,306. Later in the month it is confirmed the King of 
Jordan has approved the mutual assistance treaty with the UK and the UK 
government completes its parliamentary scrutiny process for the treaty.

7 July 2013

It is confirmed the treaty has been published in Jordan's official government 
gazette. Qatada is taken from Belmarsh prison to RAF Northolt, west London, 
leaving the UK on a private flight at about 2.45am.
 