
 Some bad news for John Grisham fans, some good news for the rest of us. The 
best-selling writer has stated in a lecture at Baylor University in Waco, Texas 
that he has no further plans to adapt any of his novels into films because 
Hollywood doesn't have the book's best interest at heart. Grisham has 
reportedly called The Chamber a "horrible adaptation".

 Bernardo Bertolucci has agreed to become the first sponsor of the 
International Critics' Week (May 11-19) at this year's Cannes Film Festival. 
The director will also host a workshop in which he will debate film issues with 
selected Critics' Week directors. Bertolucci's film, Before the Revolution, 
which made his name in the Critics' Week in 1964, will be screened again at 
this year's festival.

Casting Couch

 Penelope Cruz <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Cruz,+Pen%E9lope> who wowed 
audiences with her performance in the highly-acclaimedAll About My Mother 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Title?0185125> is to join Nic Cage in an adaptation 
of the best-selling world war two romance, Captain Corelli's Mandolin. Cruz 
will play Pelagia, the Greek girl who is torn between two men in thisJohn Madden
 <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Madden,+John+(II)>-directed epic set during the 
Italian occupation of the Greek island of Cephalonia. Shooting starts on May 22 
in Greece.

 Will Smith <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Smith,+Will> is in talks to play 
the lead in Phone Booth. Not as Superman, but as man who answers a random call 
in a phone booth and ends up the target of a sniper. No director is attached, 
but that should quickly change once Smith climbs aboard.

 British star made big in Hollywood, Alfred Molina 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Molina,+Alfred>, is to star with Johnny Depp 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Depp,+Johnny> and Juliette Binoche 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Binoche,+Juliette> in Chocolat, a romantic 
comedy directed by Cider House Rules helmer, Lasse Hallstrom. Molina will play 
the Comte de Reynaud, a highly-strung nobleman and leader of a small town whose 
control over the populace is compromised by their patronage of a chocolate shop 
opened by a woman (Binoche).

 Rachael Leigh Cook <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Cook,+Rachael+Leigh> has 
signed to star in a love triangle called Conspiracy. Cook will play the object 
of two men's complicated affections.Jay Lowi 
<http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Lowi,+Jay> will direct and shooting is scheduled 
for May.

 Helena Bonham Carter <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Bonham+Carter,+Helena> 
will co-star withSteve Martin <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Martin,+Steve> and 
Kevin Bacon <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Bacon,+Kevin> in a black comedy 
called Novocaine. She will play Martin's patient who pulls his comfortable 
dentist's life into a spiral when she seduces him. No director is yet attached 
but shooting is scheduled to begin in the spring.

 Lynn Redgrave <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Redgrave,+Lynn> and Richard 
Harris <http://guardian.imdb.com/Name?Harris,+Richard> are in negotiations to 
star in My Kingdom, an indie tale of power, ambition and greed in a 
contemporary Liverpool family, scripted by Don Boyd and The Guardian's Nick 
Davies. Harris will play a gangland leader who finds himself embroiled in a 
family struggle with his daughters when a tragic event causes him to relinquish 
control over his underworld kingdom. Production is set to begin in May.
 