
6.59pm GMT 

Final thoughts

I'm starting another MBM 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jan/30/arsenal-liverpool-live-mbm-report>
 in four minutes, so no time to hang around. What a frustrating game that was. 
I'd love to see these teams play on a decent pitch with a decent referee – both 
seemed capable of some decent stuff, though Tunisia's defence looked a little 
suspect. I'll remember the match more than anything for the astonishingly 
abysmal decision-making of English-born official Daniel Bennett, who got pretty 
much everything wrong all game. And so it was that the score was 1-1, Togo 
scoring an offside goal and Tunisia equalising with a dubious penalty. Had 
Tunisia scored with their second dubious penalty in the second half, Bennett 
would basically have beaten Togo single-handed. The outcome, however, was fair. 
Togo deserved to go through on this showing, and they have. Another match on 
this sad sandpit awaits on Sunday.

That's all from me. Thanks, and bye!

6.52pm GMT 

It's all over! Togo go through!

90+6 min: The referee makes his final wrong decision, adding but three seconds 
of extra stoppage time for Togo's lengthy substitution break, and then blows 
his whistle. That's it!

6.51pm GMT 

90+5 min: Togo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/togo> take up a few more 
seconds by replacing Adebayor with Dove Wome.

6.51pm GMT 

90+4 min: Adebayor is pushed in the back by Abdennour in the penalty area, but 
he overplays it a bit and obviously no penalty is awarded.

6.50pm GMT 

90+4 min: "The referee's wikipedia page says he won the Tunisian lottery 
today," writes David Goldman. By the time I make it there to check, that has 
been deleted – but it does say that "Bennett is also known to suffer from 
selective blindness".

6.48pm GMT 

90+2 min: The corner is knocked down by Adebayor – rather foolishly, really – 
to Ben Youssef again, who needed only to prod the ball in from two yards, but 
he manages to hit Agassa in the head, and the ball bounces clear.

6.47pm GMT 

90 min: There will be five minutes of stoppages, and the first of them sees 
Ben Youssef run on to a weak defensive header, but Agassa comes out of his goal 
to save.

6.46pm GMT 

89 min: Togo do precisely the opposite substitution to the one Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tunisia> did a minute ago. Where they 
brought off a defensive midfielder and brought on a striker, Togo have taken 
off a forward, Floyd Ayite, and brought on a defensive midfielder, Sadate 
Ouro-Akoriko.

6.44pm GMT 

88 min: Tunisia bring on a big man up front, Fakhreddine Ben Youssef, in place 
of Traoui. Jonathan Ayite runs down the left and slams a shot over the bar from 
a silly angle, leaving Adebayor fairly miffed in the centre.

6.42pm GMT 

86 min: Floyd Ayite is booked for a foul on Togo's right wing, the ninth 
caution of the match by my count.

6.41pm GMT 

84 min: Togo have nine men back, and will try to do something on the break. 
Tunisia have eight men in attack. Six minutes and stoppages to come, battle 
lines drawn.

6.35pm GMT 

79 min: Togo deserve to win this match and any other result would be, if not a 
travesty, certainly an injustice. And the referee needs to be subjected to 
immediate career-euthanasia.

6.34pm GMT 

Justice! Mouelhi hits the post!

This time Mouelhi, whose first penalty went low and left, shoots high and 
right, and the ball hits the post and bounces clear. Agassa, the keeper, had 
also got booked, for refusing to retreat to his line and delaying the kick.

6.33pm GMT 

Tunisia get another penalty!

77 min: Jonathan Ayite gets booked for dissent, as does Adebayor, who knocked 
the referee's book out of his hands. Khlifa won the kick, crumpling under the 
flimsiest contact from Nibombe.

6.31pm GMT 

75 min: Togo take off Gakpe and bring on Jonathan Ayite, Floyd's brother.

6.30pm GMT 

73 min: I think the officiating in this match has quite possibly been the 
worst I've ever seen. It's been embarrassing. Daniel Bennett would have got 
more decisions right had he simply blown his whistle and then asked a blind and 
deaf man to toss a coin to decide who gets the ball. And his assistants have 
not been much better. Really, incredibly bad.

6.27pm GMT 

71 min: Adebayor is clean through! He decides to take the ball round the 
keeper, who doesn't touch the ball but does take out the striker. The referee 
gives … a corner.

6.26pm GMT 

70 min: Togo hit the bar! Ayite runs clear on the left and crosses for 
Adebayor, who rises excellently to head the ball against the bar.

6.25pm GMT 

69 min: Turns out Nibombe, booked in that case of mistaken identity, will now 
miss the quarter-final should Togo qualify.

6.23pm GMT 

67 min: We are at that stage where Tunisia are going to have to commit to 
attack even if it means leaving more holes in their defence. Which, given the 
number of holes that were already in their defence, should be quite encouraging 
to Togo.

6.22pm GMT 

66 min: Darragi's free-kick, from a yard outside the penalty area, is saved.

6.21pm GMT 

64 min: Another abysmal call from the referee, who sees Akakpo catch Msakni's 
ankles on the edge of the area and promptly books Nibombe, who was the covering 
defender, nowhere near the ball at the time, and about two feet taller than 
Akakpo.

6.19pm GMT 

63 min: Adebayor does well on the right touchline, and looks up to see two 
teammates unmarked in the penalty area. He slides the ball towards Ayite, who 
misjudges the path of the ball and doesn't even muster a shot.

6.18pm GMT 

61 min: Neither side is playing terrifically well, but the match officials and 
the pitch are both having terrible games. Tunisia bring on Zouhaeir Dhaouadi 
for Kharzi.

Updated at 6.18pm GMT

6.15pm GMT 

58 mins: Another penalty claim, this time Hichri getting caught in possession 
by Adebayor, before both fall down. The referee is not impressed, and Adebayor 
certainly made the most of the contact (but there was some contact). Moments 
later Ayite is played through on the inside right, but delays his shot for so 
long that Abdennour is able to block. Excellent chance, the second one.

6.13pm GMT 

56 min: Gakpe is booked, for connecting his studs with Khlifa's ankle.

6.09pm GMT 

52 min: Bossou, a centre-back, is wearing the No9 shirt, so perhaps it's no 
surprise that he's started to tackle like a centre-forward. For that matter, 
Adebayor is wearing No4, which perhaps explains the poor finishing that has 
ruined his one-and-a-half chances thus far.

Updated at 6.09pm GMT

6.08pm GMT 

50 min: Bossou goes to ground to dispossess Darragi, who collapses, well 
inside the penalty area with the referee five feet away. Replays show that 
Darragi got to the ball first, Bossou didn't get to it at all, and that should 
have been another penalty. Wahbi Kharzi is booked for telling the referee that 
he'd messed up again.

6.05pm GMT 

49 min: The pitch really is very poor. It's odd that Fifa would probably 
sooner submit its chairman's bank accounts to external scrutiny than allow a 
big match to take place on an artificial pitch, but you are allowed to pour so 
much sand on top of grass that it essentially becomes a beach. Togo have 
started this half, as they did the last, on the front foot.

Updated at 6.05pm GMT

6.01pm GMT 

Peeeeeeeeeeeeep!!!

46 min: The second half has begun. Tunisia must score.

5.55pm GMT 

The penalty related to a connection between Togo's Dare Nibombe and Tunisia's 
Walid Hichri, as Tunisia sent in a corner. There was perhaps a little push. 
Certainly not a big one. It's the type of penalty that can't be discussed 
without the phrase "You'd have to give 20 penalties every match!" being 
exclaimed at some point.

5.47pm GMT 

Half-time!

45+1 min: ...which is headed away for a throw-in, which doesn't come to 
anything. And that's it for this half. There have been 24 fouls in the 46 
minutes, according to on-screen statistics. Add in the offsides, the penalty 
and the corners and that's probably a set-piece ever 70 seconds or so. I'm 
going to procure something caffeinated.

5.45pm GMT 

45 min: We'll have just a single minute of stoppage time at the end of the 
first half. Tunisia have a corner.

5.43pm GMT 

43 min: Tunisia curl a corner into the arms of Togo's keeper, who immediately 
boots the ball towards Oussama Darragi, who reaches it first, gets his shirt 
pulled and wins a free-kick just outside the other penalty area.

5.42pm GMT 

42 min: Since I mentioned the possibility of the game becoming pretty bad, 
it's been very bad. There was an optimistic penalty claim against Mamah Gaffar, 
Togo's defender, and otherwise just a lot of not-very-good passing.

5.39pm GMT 

38 min: Another offside, this time Kharzi, careering forward in an attempt to 
reach a curled cross from the left. This game is OK, apparently undecided 
between fairly good and pretty bad, with too many stoppages. Msakni is 
responsible for the last of them, fouling Komlan Amewou and getting booked for 
it.

5.36pm GMT 

36 min: The consensus among the commentators is that it was a very weak 
penalty, the match officials seemingly intent on continuing their 0% record 
when it comes to major calls in this game. Alaixys Romao shoots just over from 
25 yards.

5.32pm GMT 

32 min: Nice cake though. Very light. Tunisia still haven't reconsidered that 
high defensive line, which I fear will be their undoing (again).

5.31pm GMT 

GOAL! Togo 1-1 Tunisia (Mouelhi 30, penalty)

I'll just get this out there – when the penalty was awarded I was saying 
farewell to Guardian staffer Everton Gayle, who leaves us today and had come 
over with some cake. His timing was not good, but Mouelhi's penalty was – 
slipped with enormous cool into the bottom left corner, while the keeper 
stepped the other way.

5.27pm GMT 

27 min: Another through-ball to Saber Khlifa, again the referee blows his 
whistle. This time he's been given offside (again wrongly).

5.26pm GMT 

26 min: Tunisia win a free-kick on the left, and spend an age getting everyone 
up and where they want them, before promptly flipping the ball straight at the 
keeper.

5.24pm GMT 

23 min: Oussama Darragi plays the ball through to Khlifa, but the referee 
blows his whistle for a perceived foul on Bossou and the move is over. Didn't 
see it myself, I must say. The Tunisian would have inside the penalty area 
without a defender in sight but for the official's intervention.

5.21pm GMT 

21 min: ...and again! This time Gakpe is released on the right, and he has all 
the time in the world to weigh up his options before sliding the ball square to 
Adebayor. It takes an enormous bobble, though, and the shot flies very 
comfortably wide.

5.20pm GMT 

20 min: Togo break out of Tunisia's offside trap yet again. Having missed an 
offside in the build-up to the goal, however, the linesman evens things up by 
raising his flag erroneously this time.

5.18pm GMT 

17 min: Youssef Msakni cuts in from the left and dribbles the ball across the 
edge of Togo's penalty area, before producing an incredibly useless shot when 
excellently well-placed, the ball dribbling into the keeper's arms.

5.16pm GMT 

16 min: "We had a sweep going last game when he'd put in his first 'very 
Abdennour' tackle," writes Phlippa Booth of the bulky Toulouse and Tunisia 
stopper. "He got through it without a booking, possible the most surprising 
thing about the game." No booking, but this game hasn't started well for him.

5.14pm GMT 

GOAL! Togo 1-0 Tunisia (Gakpe 13)

Togo take the lead! Adebayor is the creator, prodding the ball through 
Tunisia's dangerously high line – Abdennour, perhaps still groggy from that 
early head-bashing, was a few yards behind the rest of the defence – and Gakpe 
runs onto it before beating the keeper with his left foot, rolling the ball 
across goal and in at the far post. He was, though, a foot or so offside when 
the ball was played.
 Serge Gakpe celebrates after scoring. Photograph: Francisco Leong/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Updated at 5.54pm GMT

5.12pm GMT 

11 min: Tunisia attack, for the first time. Msakni pops the ball to Khlifa, 
whose attempted return flick is collected by the keeper. Moments later Mouelhi 
is booked for a nasty foul on Mamah Gaffar.

5.11pm GMT 

10 min: Gakpe plays in Ayite on the right. First he tries to slam the ball low 
and hard across goal, but Moez Ben Cherifia in goal blocks it. Ayite gets it 
back, and prods it to Adebayor, who with enormous nonchalance taps the ball 
wide both of the keeper and the post, with barely enough pace to roll out of 
play.

5.07pm GMT 

7 min: Togo suddenly find themselves with both Serge Gakpe and Ayite clear of 
the last defender, Walid Hichri having gone totally to sleep. Gakpe, wide on 
the left, drills in a low cross, but a defender manages to get in Ayite's way.

5.05pm GMT 

4 min: Aymen Abdennour and Floyd Ayite clash heads while competing for a high 
ball. Ayite isn't bothered; Abdennour rolls around for ages, repeatedly putting 
his palm to his bonce and then examining it, just to check if his head had 
started bleeding in the 0.8 seconds since he last did it. At no stage was his 
head bleeding. He's now fine again.

5.02pm GMT 

2 min: Tunisia curl a through-ball over the Togo defence from the right wing, 
and Kossi Agassa has to come out of his goal pretty smartly to head clear of 
the onrushing striker, Khlifa.

5.00pm GMT 

Peeeeeeep!

1 min: They're off! Togo do the honours, and give away a free-kick 14 seconds 
later.

5.00pm GMT 

We've had anthems, huddles, adverts and assorted guff. There is nothing now to 
look forward to, except the football.

4.56pm GMT 

Jonathan Wilson is in Nelspruit, enjoying the action. "Today I smuggled a 
roast beef sandwich, a tube of Pringles, a banana, an Aero and a bottle of 
mango juice through the bag search," he reports. "It adds a frisson to getting 
to an emoty stadium three hours before kick-off." That is most excellent 
smuggling. I always think I'm clever if I manage to get into a ground with both 
a bottle of water and the lid for the bottle of water; a beef sandwich is 
another level entirely.

4.54pm GMT 

Actually they were merely moving from one part of the tunnel – a pre-tunnel, 
if you like – to a more advanced tunnel area. They are now emerging from that 
one.

4.52pm GMT 

The players are emerging from the tunnel even as I type. Action imminent. Gird 
yer loins, folks.

4.45pm GMT 

By way of amuse-bouche, here's Tunisia's moment of the tournament so far, 
Youssef Msakni's stoppage-time winner against Algeria. More like this, please, 
but without the 91-minute wait. Thanks.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdGZbKTxRif0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdGZbKTxRif0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdGZbKTxRif0&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdGZbKTxRif0&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdGZbKTxRif0>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdGZbKTxRif0&media=>
close 
4.37pm GMT 

Jonathan Wilson emails to demonstrate why 72.2 and 72.3 exist. The answer was 
pretty ruddy obvious, frankly. I have been self-chastised.

72.2 and 72.3 exist in the event of a three- or four-way tie. A
three-way tie happened in Angola in 2010 between Zambia, Cameroon and Gabon; 
and also in qualifying for last year's tournament between Niger, South Africa 
and Sierra Leone. Poor South Africa thought goal difference was the decider, 
played out a goalless draw and celebrated, only for the dread truth to dawn – 
see group Ghere 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2012_Africa_Cup_of_Nations_qualification#Group_G>.

Updated at 4.48pm GMT

4.35pm GMT 

The teams are in!

The teams are in, and they look rather like this:

Tunisia: Ben Cherifia; Hichri, Abdennour, Chammam, Kharzi; Traoui, Mouelhi, 
Hammami, Msakni; Darragi, Khlifa.
Togo: Agassa; Akakpo, Nibombe, Bossou, Djene; Gaffar, Amewou, Romao, Gakpe, 
Ayite; Adebayor.
Referee: Daniel Bennett (South Africa).

4.29pm GMT 

Hello world!

This is how things stand. Ivory Coast have lived up to the second part of 
their name by sealing progress as group winners with a game to spare, which 
leaves Togo and Tunisia slugging it out for the second and final slot in the 
quarter-finals, where whoever it is will play Burkina Faso.
 Africa Cup of Nations Group D table, results and fixtures, before the two 
final games. Photograph: /The Guardian 
You may be wanting to know how the teams will be divided if they finish level. 
Which is good news, because I want to tell you. According to Article 72 of the 
regulations of the competition, the answer is:

In case of equality of points between two or more teams, at the conclusion of 
the group matches, the ranking of the teams shall be established according to 
the following criteria:

72.1 Greater number of points obtained in the matches between the teams in 
question;
72.2 The best goal difference in the matches between the teams in question; 
72.3  Greater number of goals scored in the matches between the teams 
concerned;
72.4 Goal difference in all group matches; 
72.5 Greatest number of goals scored in all the group matches; 
72.6 Fair Play points system taking into account the number of yellow and red 
cards;
72.7 Drawing of lots by CAF Organising Committee.

Because the only way they can finish level is by drawing, 72.1, 72.2 and 72.3 
are not going to come into play (and why 72.2 and 72.3 exist in the first place 
is beyond me). Next is goal difference, which as the pre-match table suggests 
favours the Togolese. So Tunisia need to win, and a 100% head-to-head record 
(in four previous meetings) suggests they may very well do so. Togo – seeking a 
place in the final eight for the first time in their history – are not about to 
park any kind of bus, according to their coach, Didier Six:

I don't have a team which plays defensive football, the spirit of my players 
on the pitch is to win. Yes, mathematically, we need only one point, but the 
reality of our football is not to be content with that. We'll be going for the 
win.

There has been a lot of criticism of the pitch at the Mbombela Stadium, which 
is about 60% sand after the grass was attacked by fungus. Six insists it's not 
an issue – "Have you been to Lome lately? This pitch is much, much better than 
the one at the national stadium there" – and it's just as well, as whoever 
comes out on top today will play their quarter- and, if successful, semi-finals 
here too.
 Burkina Faso's Saidou Mady Panandetiguiri, left, and Ethiopia's Seyoum 
Tesfaye demonstrate the sandiness of the pitch at the Mbombela stadium in 
Nelspruit. Photograph: Armando Franca/AP 
Finally, for those not watching this on ITV4, I think it would be only fair to 
share what I've just been treated to on that fine channel: old-fashioned 
Batman, complete with Eartha Kitt as Catwoman. Amazing. Ludicrous. This is the 
very episode.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQovjJhWhnU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQovjJhWhnU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQovjJhWhnU&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQovjJhWhnU&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQovjJhWhnU>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQovjJhWhnU&media=>
close 
1.52pm GMT 

Simon will be here from 4.30pm. In the meantime, here's Jonathan Wilson's blog 
on Mali's fortunes:

For Mali <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/mali>, this is becoming a habit: 
win the first group game narrowly, lose to Ghana, do just enough in the third 
match to get through and set up a quarter-final against the hosts. What they 
did in Libreville a year ago, whenthey beat Gabon on penalties 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lgpG3HckdBw>, they will have to do again on 
Saturday as they face a newly enthused South Africa in Durban.

That quarter-final – a year ago to the weekend – was characterised by tears. 
Tears from the Gabonese for the shattering of their dream as half the 
government looked on from the stands, and tears from the Mali captain Seydou 
Keita as he described the crisis in his country. Since then, of course, the 
situation has deteriorated, with an attempted coup by the army followed by 
further incursions from Islamist separatists in the north-east and then French 
intervention. If Monday's reports that the historic library in Timbuktu has 
been burned are true, that is a devastating blow against the heart of Malian 
culture.

Keita has become a great spokesman for his country and the Mali national team 
is fortunate to have such an eloquent speaker as captain. His ghastly 
familiarity with discussing the war in post-match press conferences keeps his 
emotions in check these days, but there is no doubt how deeply affected he is 
by the trouble back home. Nor is there any doubt that the conflict has provided 
les Aigles with additional motivation and a clear sense of their 
responsibilities.

Mali had been quietly impressive in beating Niger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jan/20/mali-niger-africa-cup-nations> 
in their opening game, the 1-0 scoreline – the winner bundled in eight minutes 
from time after a goalkeeping error – scarcely reflecting their superiority. 
Against Ghana, though, they had lost 1-0 and, while the coach, Patrice 
Carteron, was justified in believing the Ghana goalkeeper Fatawu Dauda should 
have been sent off early, that did not explain his side's flatness.

Click here for the full story.  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jan/29/mali-keita-africa-cup-nations>
 