
If there’s something a lifetime of following footy teaches you it’s that the 
rain never arrives when you want it to. With that in mind I find myself 
standing in a persistent drizzle on the corner of Upper Heidelberg road and 
Darebin street in Heidelberg, 13km north-east of Melbourne, on a dark and 
gloomy morning that at least offers a bright prospect.

Local English as an additional language teacher, amateur football historian 
and true believer Phil Dimitriadis is about to guide me through the gates of 
Warringal cemetery to the newly restored grave of Tom Wills, the founder and 
father ofAustralian rules football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-rules-football>. Finals beckon, 
so its hard to begrudge winter’s lingering chill.

What’s in front of us as we huddle from the rain under Dimitriadis’s umbrella 
is far different than the sight confronting this determined footy fan when he 
first approached the monument two years ago, on a regular visit to Warringal to 
pay his respects to his late father, Tom, only “a short stab pass away”. 
Decades of neglect had left Wills’ resting place a shabby and crumbling ruin, 
its cast-iron railings rusted over and the grave’s central slab broken.

Dimitriadis couldn’t believe what he was seeing. “When I found it in a state 
of total neglect it pissed me off,” he tells me. So he issued a call to arms, 
posting a contribution to the Footy Almanac website (since deleted, which is a 
good thing because I don’t have to link to it and make you tear up too) that 
was equal parts manifesto and exasperated concession of defeat. Included were 
photos that detailed the extent of the damage. It stirred something in those 
who read it. “People were really upset when they saw it,” Dimitriadis says.

“We sat on it for a few months, and then Marius [Cuming, a fellow Almanacker] 
got on to it. We had a meeting in September that year and he organised the 
crowdfunding and liaised with Melbourne memorials to make sure it was restored 
as close to the original as possible, which it is. It just went from there.”

Now, thanks to 150 donors who contributed to the $15,000 crowdfunding campaign 
<http://www.footyalmanac.com.au/tom-wills-grave-restoration-the-father-of-football-needs-our-help/>
 driven by Dimitriadis and a cohort of fellow football history buffs – 
including the Almanac founder, John Harms, Wills’ biographer, Greg de Moore, 
and the chief organiser, Cuming – the grave has been restored to its original 
state, as per a previous overhaul helmed by the Melbourne Cricket Club for the 
centenary of Wills’ death in 1980.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ftom-wills-grave-restoration-project-reveals-footballs-heart-soul-and-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc25790bb4880c7093c00d71b2b896bf760c6a3b4%2F0_0_1024_683%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Wills%20grave%20restoration%20project%20reveals%20football's%20heart%2C%20soul%20and%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ftom-wills-grave-restoration-project-reveals-footballs-heart-soul-and-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Wills%20grave%20restoration%20project%20reveals%20football%27s%20heart%2C%20soul%20and%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ftom-wills-grave-restoration-project-reveals-footballs-heart-soul-and-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc25790bb4880c7093c00d71b2b896bf760c6a3b4%2F0_0_1024_683%2F1024.jpg>
 Greater Western Sydney star Steve Johnson trains at Tom Wills Oval in Sydney. 
Photograph: Mark Metcalfe/Getty Images 
For Dimitriadis this has been a deeply meaningful quest to preserve the memory 
of an important sporting figure, but also an unexpected source of personal 
salvation. “I’ve had the same issues with alcoholism and delirium tremens that 
he [Wills] suffered, so I had an empathy for that as well,” he tells me, 
matter-of-factly. “I was struggling with a relapse myself at the time and it 
was as if this guy was reaching out from the grave and saying, ‘Do something to 
help yourself.’ It was really weird. It was almost like a metaphysical 
encounter.

“I just thought of all that with my own battles and his, and I just made the 
connection. I want his name to be brought out for the good things he did and 
not just the dark elements. Though they’re important to explore too, but not to 
judge.”

Standing in front of the freshly restored monument and talking footy for an 
hour and a half, we both soon forget the biting morning cold. Neither of us 
outwardly acknowledges the sweeping backdrop provided by the distant green 
valleys depicted after Wills’ death by the likes of Arthur Streeton and Tom 
Roberts – views perfectly glimpsed from the plot high up on the cemetery’s 
pronounced slope.

Widely recognised as Australia’s first truly great sportsman – and certainly 
its first significant cricketer – Tom Wills remains a strangely under-explored 
figure in Australian sport. On account of his central role in the creation of 
Australia’s football code, and his significant and fascinating ties with 
Indigenous Australia (his father was one of 19 people killed in a bloody 
chapter of the frontier wars, the Cullin-la-ringo massacre in central 
Queensland, yet only five years later Wills was coaching the country’s first 
Aboriginal cricket team), this is particularly regrettable.

Yet even at current levels of apathy, relatively speaking, we’re in the midst 
of Wills’ great revival, driven in large part by the football writer Martin 
Flanagan’s 1998 novel The Call, a fictionalised account of Wills’ remarkable 
life, and the appearance 10 years later ofGreg de Moore’s comprehensive 
biography 
<https://www.allenandunwin.com/browse/books/general-books/biography-autobiography/Tom-Wills-Greg-de-Moore-9781742375984>
. A Louis Laumen statue of Wills now adorns the concourse outside the MCG, 
Greater Western Sydney train on the Tom Wills Oval, anda Wills documentary was 
screened (in a somewhat off-Broadway timeslot) on network TV 
<http://www.theage.com.au/afl/afl-news/tom-wills-one-hell-of-a-story-20160804-gqlal2.html>
. Yet outside historians and scholars Wills is only partially understood and 
undoubtedly under-appreciated, his complicated life and abundantly clear legacy 
paid no more than lip service by the AFL.

That is difficult for diehards like Phil Dimitriadis to accept. In 2008 the 
league commemorated the 150th anniversary of the famous game between Melbourne 
Grammar and Scotch college with a soon-forgotten Wills-themed round, but there 
has been nothing in the way of a follow-up, and theAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> showed no interest in the grave 
restoration project. “If it wasn’t for him, they wouldn’t have their game and 
their bloody big-money positions,” Dimitriadis says, “It’s about respect.”

He adds: “There’s something to be learned from this in terms of why we do the 
things we do as sports fans. The role that he played in the formation of the 
game is something we just take for granted. He was the one who wrote the letter 
and said, ‘We need a game in the winter for our cricketers.’ His part in the 
rules might be debatable, but he lit the flame. That can’t be denied.”

Funding for and interest in the project did come from the Melbourne Cricket 
Club and Cricket Australia, the latter of which has now expressed a desire to 
properly honour the 150th anniversary of the trailblazing, Wills-initiated 1868 
Aboriginal Australian cricket tour of England, perhaps with a documentary. 
“Once they found out about it, and that we were fair dinkum about restoring it,
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia wanted to be a 
part of it,” says Dimitriadis. “They’ve been good. The interest was really 
genuine.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm7UF523U-64&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm7UF523U-64>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm7UF523U-64&media=>
 The Footy Almanac’s crowdfunding video for the Tom Wills grave restoration 
project. 
On a practical level, the project could not have got off the ground without 
Cuming, who produced a video for the crowdfunding campaign and liaised with 
Melbourne memorials. It has also shown the strength, determination and 
community spirit of the Footy Almanac community, enough of whom rallied for the 
cause and dug into their pockets when a football league swimming in money 
wouldn’t.

Nobody poured as much of themselves into the project as Phil Dimitriadis. 
“Symbolically, I saw it as like a restoration of myself,” he says. “The more I 
got involved with it – when I started I was suffering from really severe 
depression – just being part of this project helped me see my life in a 
different light, and get help. I’ve been great the last year or so. I think 
being part of this really helped in my healing.”

It being September, Dimitriadis and I end up talking about falling in and out 
of love with footy and how easy it is to become cynical and lose sight of what 
made you cherish the game in the first place. For Phil, it’s been a case of 
watching games through his daughter’s eyes. “Her expression, and the hugging … 
It lit another fuse in me,” he says. “This is why I love it. This is why I keep 
coming back. Why deny it, and why let the bastards at the AFL and all the 
commercial interests ruin it?”

This is a case of football not just intersecting with life, but revealing 
itself at life’s very core – love, family, community, and the chaos and 
unpredictability of human existence. “My parents shifted to Collingwood from 
the village, and from civil war in Greece in the 50s,” Dimitriadis says. 
“Collingwood was their new village. For their kids, part of that expression and 
identity was following the football club. So in a way the football club 
symbolisedour village: a new language, a new game. Powerful. It stays with you. 
It’s huge.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ftom-wills-grave-restoration-project-reveals-footballs-heart-soul-and-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3af08ebcace3bddbaab36f71731e73743f632648%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Wills%20grave%20restoration%20project%20reveals%20football's%20heart%2C%20soul%20and%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ftom-wills-grave-restoration-project-reveals-footballs-heart-soul-and-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Wills%20grave%20restoration%20project%20reveals%20football%27s%20heart%2C%20soul%20and%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Ftom-wills-grave-restoration-project-reveals-footballs-heart-soul-and-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3af08ebcace3bddbaab36f71731e73743f632648%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 The newly restored grave: ‘This bloke was so far ahead in his vision.’ 
Photograph: Russell Jackson for the Guardian 
We also talk about how lamentable it is that some of Wills’ philosophies 
didn’t outlive him. “Sometimes I think it’s a tenuous link, but I think of the 
way [Adam] Goodes was booed out of the game last year,” Dimitriadis says. “This 
bloke [Wills] was so far ahead in his vision and I still think we haven’t in 
many ways as a country, as a culture … we don’t get it.

“The more I learn about his life the more I’m intrigued by the influence he 
had on cricket with the Aboriginal team in 1868 – I mean, that was huge. In the 
context of the society we’re living in now, to get a team of Indigenous 
cricketers together back then was incredible, especially considering an 
Aboriginal tribe massacred his old man and 18 other people. And he tried to do 
something to heal the situation.

“The more I learn about him the more I want to know about his motivations for 
that. Have a look at the representation ofIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> in cricket. 
It’s disgraceful.”

Dimitriadis now has his sights set on loftier goals for the project: a Tom 
Wills society with an annual dinner on Wills’ 19 August birthday, ongoing 
preservation of the grave, plus – if funding permits – an annual Tom Wills 
scholar who can address members on research conducted into this fascinating 
Australian.

The last thing I wonder is what it felt like to see the finished restoration 
for the first time, after investing so much of himself into honouring a man 
who’d been dead for 135 years. “It actually felt like a new beginning and a 
rewriting or revisiting of Tom Wills’ life,” he says.

“It was like opening a new chapter. It’s a new beginning.”

• If you need support you can call: Lifeline 
<http://%20www.lifeline.org.au/gethelp> 13 11 14, Suicide Call Back Service 
<http://%20www.suicidecallbackservice.org.au/> 1300 659 467, Kids Helpline 
<http://www.kidshelp.com.au/> 1800 55 1800, MensLine 
<http://%20www.mensline.org.au%20www.mensline.org.au/> 1300 78 99 78
 