
Tony Abbott has implicitly criticised Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> for a knee-jerk 
reaction to the Four Corners program on the Northern Territory’s Don Dale 
juvenile detention centre and accused the ABC of bias.

It is the latest of several policy interventions from Abbott before the 
resumption of parliament next week.

In July Turnbull called a royal commission into the Northern Territory 
detention system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/26/malcolm-turnbull-announces-royal-commission-northern-territory-detention>
 the morning afterthe Four Corners program which featured graphic footage of 
treatment of boys at the centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/25/teenage-boys-were-locked-in-cells-when-sprayed-with-teargas-in-nt-juvenile-centre?CMP=soc_567>
.

From the Darling Downs to Don Dale: a litany of monstrous acts against 
Indigenous children | Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/30/from-the-darling-downs-to-don-dale-a-litany-of-monstrous-acts-against-indigenous-children>
On Friday, Abbott told Alan Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> on 2GB radio the story was 
“shocking” but it was “a pretty one-sided report”.

“When the rest of the story started to come out it appeared things were not 
nearly as black and white – so to speak – as the ABC presented them,” he said.

“Governments normally need to pause and think before they take precipitate 
action. And I am confident this royal commission, given its terms of reference, 
will come up with a reasonable report.

“But you’re right, Alan, normally governments should not respond in panic to 
TV programs.”

Footage in the Four Corners program showed the restraint and spit-hooding of 
one youth at the Don Dale centre, and another beingstripped and physically held 
down by guards on more than one occasion. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/25/teenage-boys-were-locked-in-cells-when-sprayed-with-teargas-in-nt-juvenile-centre?CMP=soc_567>

Abbott said “a lot of terrible things are happening, a lot of very good things 
are happening ... but sometimes in response to terrible things the authorities 
have got to be very firm”.

“Hopefully the royal commission will come up with both sides of the story and 
we will find a report that actually takes us forward rather than just points 
fingers and attributes blame.”

Speaking in Indonesia at the Pacific Islands Forum on Friday, Turnbull 
responded to the criticism by saying the “royal commission is a very 
appropriate response to what appeared to be a systemic failure in the justice 
system in the NT”.

“There clearly has been a shocking failure in the territory and that is why 
the Territory government, both before the election and after the election, 
strongly supports the inquiry.”

In the past week Abbott has proposed that donations be limited to individuals 
on the electoral roll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/abbott-joins-call-for-ban-on-donations-from-unions-and-corporations>
,called for the expansion of welfare quarantining 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/indigenous/expand-successful-welfare-card-scheme-says-tony-abbott/news-story/59fbbda2c290799a7731b4d279842959>
 and reportedly confronted the treasurer, Scott Morrison,over proposed 
superannuation changes 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/politics/tony-abbott-scott-morrison-clash-over-superannuation-changes-report/news-story/94f77f6750bf379d45d1c4058321117f>
.

The Turnbull government had a rough first sitting week since the 2 July 
election, whichculminated in Labor winning a number of procedural votes to 
force debate on a banking royal commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/labor-wins-votes-in-lower-house-to-force-coalition-to-debate-banking-inquiry>
.

The resumption of parliament on Monday contains a number of political dangers 
for Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/26/danger-for-turnbull-as-the-new-parliament-heads-into-the-unknown>
, including negotiations with Labor over budget savings and the crossbench over 
industrial relations changes and tax cuts.

Key details of the government’s program are yet to be clarified. No draft 
legislation has been presented for its proposed marriage equality plebiscite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/marriage-equality-plebiscite-coalition-misses-its-own-deadline-for-draft-bill>
 andnegotiations are still taking place with the Coalition’s own backbench over 
superannuation reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/06/scott-morrison-to-release-draft-of-super-policy-minus-contentious-elements>
.

But Turnbull’s fortunes have steadied after a good week at the G20 and Asean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/malcolm-turnbull-says-there-is-cautious-optimism-of-deal-on-south-china-sea>
, and thedownfall of Labor shadow consumer affairs minister, Sam Dastyari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
.

The Four Corners program on Don Dale has previously been criticised 
<http://www.abc.net.au/mediawatch/transcripts/s4524617.htm> by former NT chief 
minister Adam Giles,who claimed it was designed to damage him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/adam-giles-says-abc-report-on-don-dale-juvenile-detention-aired-to-damage-him>
 by airing old footage shortly before the NT election.


Executive producer Sally Neighbour emphatically rejected the claim.
Sally Neighbour (@neighbour_s) 
Adam Giles' claim is false, outrageous and desperate. @SkyNewsAust 
<https://twitter.com/SkyNewsAust> @caromeldrum <https://twitter.com/caromeldrum>
@adamgiles <https://twitter.com/adamgiles> #4Corners 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/4Corners?src=hash> #dondale 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/dondale?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/neighbour_s/status/763533554873610240> August 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/neighbour_s/status/763533554873610240> 
Another criticism centred on the fact the program did not cover reforms to the 
Northern Territory juvenile detention system and use more material from an 
interview with NT justice minister John Elferink, despite reporter Caro 
Meldrum-Hanna praising improvements in an email to him seeking access to Don 
Dale.

Neighbour denies that Elferink was misled into letting Meldrum-Hanna into Don 
Dale and told ABC’s Media Watch 
<http://www.abc.net.au/mediawatch/transcripts/s4524617.htm> the NT government 
was informed that the nature of the story had changed after the team uncovered 
the abuse in the centre.
 