Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FG9a_sZNN3o4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FG9a_sZNN3o4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FG9a_sZNN3o4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Tony Blair is caught secretly placing a bet on David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to win the election in a 
cheeky new advertising campaign by the bookie Ladbrokes.

Ladbrokes has hired Alison Jackson, the photographer behind the famous "Sch 
... you know who" lookalike ads for Schweppes, to produce a series of 
tongue-in-cheek films playing on the general election and the World Cup. The 
first ad by Jackson, who three years ago produced aspoof image of Gordon Brown 
and Tony Blair pulling a Christmas cracker for Schweppes 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2007/nov/27/advertising>, has been launched 
online today.

In the 45-second film a lookalike of Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> is "caught" on handicam 
footage going into a Ladbrokes to place a hefty bet on David Cameron to win the 
election. "I always back the winner, you know," says "Blair" to the bookie 
taking his bet.

The campaign, called "What are the Odds?", will run for three months and 
include at least six films with "lookalike" celebrities.

Jackson, who has produced a series of famous images of celebrities in 
compromising positions includingSven-Göran Eriksson and Ulrika Jonsson 
apparently caught in an illicit liaison 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2006/aug/01/advertising>, won a Bafta in 2003 
for her BBC 2 series Double Take.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 