 Behavioural psychologists trying to find the real Tony Blair among the prime 
minister's many smiling postures are inundated by choice. An obvious analysis 
is to see the prime minister as a rightwing social democrat who succeeded in 
capturing the victory-starved Labour party from within. Another psychologist 
might favour a rival, less obvious scenario. As the son of Leo Blair (a leader 
of the pre-war Glasgow young communists), Tony Blair has brought more 
leftwingers into government than even Harold Wilson and revolutionised 
constitution. So which psychologist would be right?
There is much to favour the second case, that of Blair the radical. The 
Foreign Office is the most leftwing in history, with Robin Cook's "ethical 
dimension" to foreign policy and, until his recent and mysterious demotion to 
energy, the sanction-supporting, anti-apartheid hero Peter Hain. At 
international development is Clare Short, who, like the leader of the Commons, 
Margaret Beckett, was in the hard-left Campaign Group until 1988. Her deputy is 
now the radical-turned-mainstream Chris Mullin.

And there are two other former hard leftwing northerners in the cabinet: 
Stephen Byers and Alan Milburn - who once hung out in Newcastle's Days of Hope 
socialist bookshop (known locally as "Haze of Dope").

The conflict between these two scenarios leads to a more realistic synthesis: 
that the PM, apart from his Anglo-Catholicism, has no rooted ideology whatever 
and is a political weathervane subject to any puff of hot air from one of 
Philip Gould's focus groups.

A leak in July 2000 revealed Blair's insecurity: his reaction to Gould's 
doom-laden over-interpretation of the fears of Middle England: "We should think 
now of...locking up street-muggers," responded the barrister-PM. "Something 
tough, with immediate bite." And then the fatal: "This should be done soon and 
I... personally should be associated with it."

True to his word, soon after Mr Blair announced plans for on-the-spot Â£50 
fines for hooligans or putting 3m DNA prints on a police database, troubling 
both the police or and own home secretary. Apart from undermining cabinet 
responsibility, this suggests a leader driven by a scaled-down Clintonism.

Well to the right of Al Gore's disastrous tilt at the US presidency, Blair 
favours a new self-made entrepreneurial elite. So, of course, did Margaret 
Thatcher.

The absence of thought-through ideology undermines the prime minister's 
serious achievements in office - such as devolution and economic success. 
Having in theory devolved power to Wales, London, Scotland and Northern 
Ireland, Mr Blair opened himself up to accusations of control-freakery by 
imposing Alun Michael on Wales and "anybody-but-Ken" on London.

His achievement in Northern Ireland was undermined by pulling the rug from 
under the wildly popular Mo Mowlam in favour of massively unpopular Peter 
Mandelson.

Similarly, the House of Lords has been shorn of all but 92 of its hereditary 
peers without any early guarantee of further reform.

Geneticists might find such fluidity a hereditary trait. Mr Blair's father 
made the jump from pre-war Young Communist League to the Conservative ethos 
and, when he became a law lecturer after the war, he hoped to become a Tory MP 
and was only stopped by ill-health.

Leo made sure his son went to suitable schools, Durham Choristers and Fettes, 
the grandest and strictest Scottish public school. Although young Tony stood as 
a victorious Tory candidate at 11 in a 1964 mock-election at Durham Choristers 
school, he was slow to develop an interest in politics.

At St John's College, Oxford, in the early seventies, as the hopes of the wild 
child generation of the sixties burned out like a tired joss stick, Mr Blair 
showed no outside interest except in playing guitar in the rock group Ugly 
Rumours and listening to the idealistic Catholicism of a visiting Australian.

But the Tories, who initially tried to tag him as a leftwinger (an 
anti-European with CND sympathies) on the basis of his 1982 byelection stand in 
Beaconsfield, are miles wide of the mark.

Once Blair decided, as a young barrister, on a career in the Labour party 
(with the encouragement of his chambers chief Derry Irvine, now lord 
chancellor, and his room-mate Cherie Booth) he had to adopt the political 
garments required by Labour's then-tiny selection panels. (Famously, Richard, 
now Lord, Marsh had borrowed a CND badge to secure his selection for Greenwich.)

Far from being aligned with the left, Mr Blair adapted himself to their tastes 
but considered party activists to be a "small group of utterly unrepresentative 
people" who "hijacked the party" and almost "tipped it into extinction".

This explains his insensitivity to Labour activists in later years. Blair and 
his one-time cabinet colleague Harriet Harman had no qualms about sending their 
children to selective (but state run) schools against which Labour workers had 
been agitating for years.

This contrast between leader and party has been a theme of the Blair years. In 
the beginning both saw each other as a vehicle for achieving power. For the 
party, which chose him in 1994, Mr Blair was the TV-friendly moderate needed to 
persuade southern England into voting Labour. For the leader, the party was a 
sluggish and anachronistic machine that could be catapulted back into the 
mainstream with a kick up its clause IV.

Thus the talk from the party leadership is of apathy being the enemy, not the 
Tories - the need to "get out the heartlands" rather than defeat the 
Conservatives or grapple with the Lib Dems.

To compensate for this abrasiveness, in office Blair has delivered on his 
promise of making New Labour a party for which disillusioned ex-Tories in 
Middle England could vote.

Along the way there have been squalls - the Millennium Dome, the petrol crisis 
in late 2000 and Peter Mandelson's resignation in early 2001 (the worst of all) 
- but nonetheless the government, it seemed in the spring of 2001, was on 
course for an easy election win.

On course, that is, bar foot and mouth. The agricultural plague which has laid 
waste to much of Britain's farming and tourism industries left the urban 
apparatchiks at Millbank tower bemused and the prime minister uncertain as to 
whether to go ahead with May 3.

His dilemma was caught on camera when, at the Stockholm summit, Mr Blair was 
overheard telling Romano Prodi, head of the European Commission, that he had 
"10 days" left to decide.

With a poll lead of 26 points - two points for every month left before an 
election must be called - the result can hardly be in doubt. Yet Labour has 
another problem: 30,000 members have left since 1997. Can the party summon up 
enough door-knockers to enthuse Labour voters?

Meanwhile, Gordon Brown, the Scot in No 11 who hopes to gain the succession, 
will watch events - and wait.

Ask Aristotle about Tony Blair 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-463,00.html>
 