
Senior figures from Labour and the Scottish National party are considering 
calls for legal action againstTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> if the former prime minister 
faces severe criticisms from the long-awaited inquiry into the war in Iraq.


A number of MPs led by Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> are expected to use an 
ancient law to try to impeach the former prime minister when the Chilcot report 
comes out on Wednesday.

The law, last used in 1806 when the Tory minister Lord Melville was charged 
for misappropriating official funds, is seen in Westminster as an alternative 
form of punishment that could ensure Blair never holds office again.

Triggering the process simply requires an MP to propose a motion and provide 
supporting evidence as part of a document called the article of impeachment 
which has no time limit placed upon it. If the impeachment attempt is approved 
by MPs, the defendant is delivered to Black Rod before a trial.

A simple majority is required to convict, at which point a sentence can be 
passed which could, in theory, involve Blair being sent to prison. However, MPs 
have said the attempt will be symbolic and is unlikely to result in 
imprisonment.

Salmond, the former Scottish first minister, said there “has to be a judicial 
or political reckoning” for Blair’s role in theIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> conflict. “He seemed puzzled as to why 
Jeremy Corbyn thinks he is a war criminal, why people don’t like him,” he told 
Sky News.

“The reason is 179 British war dead, 150,000 immediate dead from the Iraq 
conflict, the Middle East in flames, the world faced with an existential crisis 
on terrorism – these are just some of the reasons perhaps he should understand 
why people don’t hold him in the highest regard.


Families to get free copy of Chilcot report after Cameron intervenes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/03/chilcot-report-iraq-war-soldiers-families-free-copy-david-cameron-intervenes>
“[MPs] believe you cannot have a situation where this country blunders into an 
illegal war with the appalling consequences and at the end of the day there 
isn’t a reckoning. There has to be a judicial or political reckoning for that.”

John McDonnell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, the 
shadow chancellor, did not disagree with the suggestion that he and Corbyn were 
going to “crucify” the former leader for “being a war criminal”.


Questioned by Dermot Murnaghan on Sky News, McDonnell said he did not rule out 
calling for Blair to be prosecuted for war crimes. “I want to see the Chilcot 
report. Nobody can comment on this until we see the report itself and I’m 
hoping that the report will be thorough and for me the importance is not Tony 
Blair or any individuals – it’s about the processes so we never ever get into 
this tragic, tragic mess again with such loss of life,” he said.

But John Prescott <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/johnprescott> called 
for Labour’s leadership not to increase tensions within the party by making 
“very angry statements” about the Iraq war.

“Bitter division within the PLP talking about different parties can only be 
made worse by very angry statements about Iraq,” Lord Prescott told the BBC’s 
Sunday Politics show. “We can have a proper debate, but keep it less personal. 
Let’s debate it and probably learn from the lessons and avoid such a terrible 
situation.”

Tony Blair camp readies its defence to Chilcot report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/blair-camp-readies-its-defence-to-chilcot-report>
Blair refused to comment on Chilcot before it is made public. “Wednesday is 
the time the report is published. I have said many times over these past years 
I will wait for the report and then I will make my views known and express 
myself fully and properly,” he told Sky News.

“I have taken the view, I think rightly or wrongly, we should wait for the 
report to be published and then I will express myself and I’m not getting into 
either the politics or the detail of it until I’ve actually seen it.”

When asked why some Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
members hate him “so fundamentally” he replied: “I don’t know” and added: 
“There may be lots of reasons for it but politics is a strange business.”

Blair continued: “Politics it goes in waves of sentiment and feeling. I think 
one of the most important things in politics is to do what you think is right. 
In the end you might be right or wrong but ultimately I think leadership is 
about assessing the situation as you see it and doing what you think is right, 
even if it’s not always very popular.”

Sir John Chilcot’s report is expected to scrutinise Blair’s role in the US-led 
invasion of Iraq in 2003.


The likelihood of Blair being tried for war crimes remains remote, according 
to reports. In an official statement to the Telegraph, the international 
criminal court (ICC) indicated that the decision to go to war remained outside 
its remit.


Chilcot inquiry must restore trust in government, says top lawyer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/02/chilcot-iraq-inquiry-must-restore-public-trust-bush-blair-philippe-sands>
It means individual soldiers could be prosecuted for war crimes but not Blair.

The ICC, based in The Hague, has begun a preliminary examination of claims of 
torture and abuse by British soldiers, after receiving a dossier from human 
rights lawyers acting for alleged Iraqi victims.

In the statement, the office of the prosecutor at the ICC said: “We will take 
note of the Chilcot report when released in the context of its ongoing 
preliminary examination work concerning Iraq/UK. A preliminary examination is 
not an investigation but a process aimed at determining whether reasonable 
basis exist to open an investigation. As already indicated by the office in 
2006, the ‘decision by the UK to go to war in Iraq falls outside the court’s 
jurisdiction’.”

The prosecutor’s office said the ICC was looking at introducing a “crime of 
aggression” which would cover illegal invasions but that “has not yet 
crystallised and in any event, will not apply retroactively”.
 