
Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> says he 
doesn’t agree with Malcolm Turnbull’s claim that the European colonisation of 
Australia could be described as an invasion.

He says Australia could be described as having been “settled” or, if people 
thought that was too benign, they could say “occupied” – but not invaded.

But he has distanced himself slightly from Cory Bernardi and Scott Morrison, 
both of whom complained this week that opponents of marriage equality, such as 
themselves,have also faced hatred and bigotry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/22/cory-bernardi-furious-malcolm-turnbull-implied-coalition-mps-are-homophobic>
, withMorrison equating his own experience to that of LGBTI Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/22/same-sex-marriage-plebiscite-scott-morrison-says-he-faces-bigotry-too>
.

'Team player' Tony Abbott says Coalition should not preference Greens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/03/team-player-tony-abbott-says-coalition-should-not-preference-greens>
Abbott said only that he had “copped all sorts of criticism” for the positions 
he’s taken over the years but he’s got a pretty thick skin so he just wears it.

Speaking to the conservative TV host Andrew Bolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/andrew-bolt> on Wednesday evening, Abbott 
said the best thing conservatives could do in the election was to vote for the 
Turnbull government because it was the best option available.

He said he could understand why some conservatives were disgruntled about what 
happened in September when Turnbull toppled him for the prime ministership, but 
that was in the past now.

But he said he didn’t agree with Turnbull’s remark from last week that the 
colonisation of Australia could fairly be described as an “invasion”.

Turnbull said: “Well, I think it can fairly be described as that and I’ve got 
no doubt obviously our first Aboriginal Australians describe it as an invasion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/14/malcolm-turnbull-says-colonisation-of-australia-could-be-described-as-invasion>
.”

Abbott said what happened in 1788 and beyond “involved a very, very big change 
and it was a change that had pretty big consequences for the Aboriginal 
inhabitants of Australia”.

“But I would certainly describe it as a settlement, maybe even an occupation, 
but I certainly wouldn’t use the word invasion because I think that connotes 
the primacy of armed force,” he said.
Sky News Australia (@SkyNewsAust) 
.@TonyAbbottMHR <https://twitter.com/TonyAbbottMHR> disagrees with 
@TurnbullMalcolm <https://twitter.com/TurnbullMalcolm> in labeling British 
settlement as an 'invasion'#ausvotes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ausvotes?src=hash> https://t.co/rUCKrZTiKr 
<https://t.co/rUCKrZTiKr>
 <https://twitter.com/SkyNewsAust/status/745550457540534272> June 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SkyNewsAust/status/745550457540534272> 
Bolt asked him why Turnbull had used the word invasion.

Abbott replied: “Well, look, different people use different phrases at 
different times and I’m not going to get into a big argument with people over 
this. The terminology that I use is settlement. If people think that’s too 
benign, fair enough, say that Australia was occupied if you like.”

He then said there were still “some big things to do” in Australia like 
acknowledging in the constitution that Indigenous people were the first 
Australians, saying “I hope that we can successfully do that at some point in 
the next term of parliament.”

Bronwyn Bishop returns to public eye with excruciating Sky News interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/03/bronwyn-bishop-excruciating-sky-news-interview>
Abbott was criticised in 2014 when he told an audience at the 
Australia-Melbourne Institute thatAustralia had been “unsettled” before the 
British arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/04/tony-abbott-says-australia-was-unsettled-before-british-arrived>
 and it owed its existence to Britain’s “form of foreign investment”.

“Our country is unimaginable without foreign investment,” he said at the time.

“I guess our country owes its existence to a form of foreign investment by the 
British government in the then unsettled or, um, scarcely settled, Great South 
Land.”
 