
Majors Bay

A rarely busy gem of a beach, Majors 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.226603,-62.648599&hl=en&sll=17.222422,-62.647777&sspn=0.032055,0.049481&oq=Major%27s+ba&t=m&z=14>
 is located a few yards from the tip of the south-east peninsula highway, just 
next to where the Sea Bridge ferry to Nevis picks up and lets off vehicles and 
passengers. Majors could hardly be simpler: a longish, narrow stretch of golden 
sand, warm blue water that always seems to be calm, and nothing by way of beach 
bars or other amenities. It's been touted as the location for a major hotel, 
and doubtless that will happen at some time in the not-too-distant future, so 
catch it while it's still off the beaten track.

South Friar's
 Photograph: Alamy 
They say you can't go wrong if you follow the locals, and that doesn't apply 
only to restaurants.South Friar's 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.27410,+-62.67569&hl=en&ll=17.274412,-62.675629&spn=0.016248,0.026114&client=firefox-a&hnear=0x8c121bb6f91a07d1:0x8a06bbbefacfa692,17.27410,+-62.67569&t=m&z=16>
, a long stretch of golden sand handily located off the south-east peninsula 
highway just beyond theFrigate Bay 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.28123,+-62.68855&hl=en&sll=17.274412,-62.675629&sspn=0.016248,0.026114&t=m&z=15>
 tourist area, is a favourite with savvy Kittitians for its excellent Caribbean 
bathing and wide choice of places to eat and drink. These range from ramshackle 
bars oozing charm and character to one of the eastern Caribbean's most elegant 
beach restaurants,Carambola 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.28123,+-62.68855&hl=en&sll=17.274412,-62.675629&sspn=0.016248,0.026114&t=m&z=15>
, where you can take a break from swimming to nibble on superb sushi. A word of 
warning: you will noticeNorth Friar's beach 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.27726,+-62.67211&hl=en&sll=17.28123,-62.68855&sspn=0.032496,0.052228&t=m&z=14>
 just over the road from South Friar's and will be tempted by its beauty and 
emptiness. Resist the temptation: it's deserted because the Atlantic water is 
treacherous, even in shallow areas.

Frigate Bay South
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
For years the most popular beach in St Kitts with locals, Frigate Bay South 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.28115,+-62.68885&hl=en&sll=17.2002,-62.61117&sspn=0.008127,0.013057&t=m&z=15>
 has had stern competition since the 1989 opening of the south-east peninsula 
highway, which made an assortment of superb white-sand beaches easily 
accessible. But Frigate Bay is still home to St Kitts' major tourist hotels and 
most of the island's big houses, and over the past decade a string of 
beachfront bars, known collectively as 'The Strip', has sprung up. The bars 
have become a big attraction for locals and tourists, many of whom enjoy taking 
a dip and a drink – not necessarily in that order.

Frigate Bay North
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
An off-the-beaten-track gem on the Atlantic side of the island, Frigate Bay 
North 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.29213,+-62.68305&hl=en&sll=17.27726,-62.67211&sspn=0.064993,0.104456&t=m&z=16>
 is a superb beach, long stretches of which you can usually have more or less 
to yourself, even on public holidays and at the height of the tourist season. 
That's despite the fact that one stretch of Frigate Bay North is the location 
for a bunch of beachfront condo developments and the sprawling Marriott hotel. 
The bathing and swimming are excellent, and a long reef ensures that the 
normally treacherous Atlantic water is remarkably safe. A bonus is that a 
lengthy stretch of beach north of the Marriott is kept in immaculate condition 
thanks to the hotel's expansion of its beach cleaning area beyond the sand 
immediately in front of its premises.

Cockleshell
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
A small but diverse choice of watering holes, a gorgeous stretch of powdery 
white sand and excellent bathing from end to end makeCockleshell 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.23005,+-62.63314&hl=en&sll=17.28115,-62.68885&sspn=0.032496,0.052228&t=m&z=13>
 the most popular of the handful of beaches around the tip of the south-east 
peninsula. It's a magnet for locals out to party on weekends and public 
holidays, and a favourite destination for cruise-ship tourists, which means the 
scene can get decidedly lively. But you can have the beach pretty much to 
yourself on weekdays in the quiet summer season. For food and drink, theSpice 
Mill 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.230333,+-62.635074&hl=en&ll=17.230333,-62.635117&spn=0.130018,0.208912&sll=17.23005,-62.63314&sspn=0.130018,0.208912&t=m&z=13>
 is elegant and upmarket, Lion Rock, just next door, is funky, fun and popular 
with the local crowd, and the lively Reggae Beach Bar and Gril, 100m or so 
further down the beach, features fresh fish and lobster, most of it caught by 
owner Gary Pereira.

Sand Bank Bay
 Photograph: Alamy 
One of the eastern Caribbean's loveliest beaches, Sand Bank 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.24984,+-62.64061&hl=en&ll=17.251031,-62.639923&spn=0.01625,0.026114&sll=17.29213,-62.68305&sspn=0.016247,0.026114&t=m&z=16>
 is also off the beaten track. A few years ago, in fact, it was completely 
untouched by human hand – not so much as a beach bar intruded on its pristine 
beauty, much less a hotel or a house. That's no longer the case; there is a 
scattering of houses set back from the beach, and a decidedly upmarket but 
mercifully unobtrusive private beach club at the back of the south end of the 
semi-circular stretch of sand. The cliffs that tower at either end of the beach 
keep the Atlantic waves down to manageable proportions – they're usually big 
enough to be fun without being a threat. Like most of St Kitts' best white-sand 
beaches, Sand Bank is on the island's south-east peninsula, a little more than 
a kilometre from the end of the highway that extends to the tip of that rugged, 
narrow stretch of land.

Turtle beach
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
Tranquillity reigns most of the time at Turtle beach 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.23697,+-62.62482&hl=en&sll=17.224758,-62.6443&sspn=0.065011,0.104456&t=m&z=13>
, a lovely stretch of sand on the south-east peninsula, located at the end of a 
sometimes tricky dirt road just off the branch of the highway that leads to 
Cockleshell and Banana Bay. The bathing's excellent, and a bonus for 
snorkellers is a smorgasbord of dazzling fish swimming around the coral reef 
that protects Turtle beach from the Atlantic waves. It's worth noting that a 
small fence makes the beach look as though it might be private property. It's 
not: like all beaches in St Kitts and Nevis it's public, and can be accessed by 
a gate in the fence.

Pinney's beach, Nevis
 Photograph: Sergio Pitamitz/Robert Harding 
No roundup of the best beaches in this part of the world would be complete 
withoutPinney's 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.15736,+-62.62894&hl=en&sll=17.251031,-62.639923&sspn=0.01625,0.026114&t=m&z=15>
. With mile after mile of superb white sand and a beguiling array of options 
for eating and drinking, Pinney's is not only recognised as one of the finest 
beaches in the Leeward chain of islands, it's one of best in the entire 
Caribbean. It's also – like Nevis itself – a favourite playground of the rich 
and famous. That's at least in part because big names don't attract a lot of 
attention here, and you might easily find yourself sitting next to Beyoncé and 
Jay Z or Keith Richards or Oprah hanging out and enjoying a Killer Bee cocktail 
atSunshine's 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.154935,+-62.628639&hl=en&sll=17.274412,-62.675629&sspn=0.016248,0.026114&t=m&z=16>
, a beach bar that helped define the funky-chic ambience of Pinney's. Oh, and 
the bathing's superb too, from end to end.

Oualie beach, Nevis
 Photograph: Alamy 
While it's nowhere near as long as Pinney's, Oualie beach 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.20020,+-62.61117&hl=en&sll=17.154935,-62.628639&sspn=0.016259,0.026114&t=m&z=17>
 offers equally good white sand and equally good bathing. It's dominated by a 
single establishment, the venerable Oualie Beach Hotel, which offers rustic 
beachfront accommodation and a down-to-earth bar frequented by a lively mix of 
locals and tourists. Oualie is also the base for a variety of water activity 
operations, including catamaran and sloop cruises, scuba diving, windsurfing 
and kayaking.

Banana Bay
 Photograph: Fred Hoogervorst 
Just next door to Cockleshell, Banana Bay 
<https://maps.google.com/maps?q=17.22554,+-62.64027&hl=en&sll=17.230333,-62.635074&sspn=0.130018,0.208912&t=m&z=14>
 offers equally fine sand and equally good bathing, and the lack of facilities 
of any sort means it's rarely as busy as its neighbour. Not so long ago, St 
Kitts was known as "the Caribbean the way it used to be". A spate of 
development over the past decade or so has rendered that description pretty 
much redundant, but Banana Bay is very much St Kitts the way it used to be. An 
ideal choice for a quiet beach picnic or just a lazy, laidback day of sun and 
sand.

Garry Steckles is an editor and writer; he is the author of Bob Marley: A Life 
(2009) and has been a regular visitor to St Kitts for more than 30 years
 