
Stephen Merchant <http://www.stephenmerchant.com/>

"I really am mediocre [at standup]," Stephen Merchant told Radio 4 last year. 
In fact, he's just mediocre at self-promotion. The more self-effacing half of 
the duo behindThe Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/apr/03/ricky-gervais-office-uk-us>
, Merchant has been building up to this debut tour for years. The warm-up gigs 
have been very funny.

Tour <http://www.stephenmerchant.com/> starts at Wyvern theatre, Swindon  
<https://wyverntheatre.org.uk/Online/default.asp?doWork::WScontent::loadArticle=Load&BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::article_id=B5BBC3F0-9AD3-46DB-86F6-0C726F38262A>
(01793 524481), 6 September.

Lee Evans <http://www.leeevans2011tour.co.uk/>

Evans sold Â£7m worth of tickets on the first day of booking for his 
forthcoming tour; untilMichael McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-mcintyre> came along, he was 
unchallenged as UK standup's biggest draw. In the live arena, the big-hearted 
takes on everyday frustrations and turbo-charged, elastic-limbed clowning 
seldom disappoint.

Tour <http://www.leeevans2011tour.co.uk/> continues tonight at the Brighton 
Centre 
<http://www.brightoncentre.co.uk/scripts/default.htm?book=bc022006&c=290&link=ACACADACAAABA~nctblEvents_pbLink~fODgzMTk5AA==,:eventID~cctblEvents,1&_id=636d>
 (0844 847 1515).

Russell Kane <http://www.russellkane.co.uk/>

Writing plays for the Bush theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/aug/03/great-british-fete-michael-billington>
and presenting I'm a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here? Playing cat-and-mouse with 
highbrow and lowbrow, whip-smart Essex boy Kane hits the road with his best 
show yet: a flash but thoughtful take on class, sex and the identities 
available to the modern, single male.Tour <http://www.russellkane.co.uk/> 
starts atLowry, Salford <http://www.thelowry.com/event/russell-kane-manscaping> 
(0870 787 5780), 18 September.



Angie Le Mar <http://www.angielemar.com/>

Back in 2000, Le Mar became the first black standup to sell out a show in the 
West End. Now she launches a new, solo show, directed by Olivier award nominee
Femi Elufowoju Jr 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/theatre-dance/features/femi-elufowoju-jr-answer-the-questions-736167.html>
.Soho theatre <http://www.sohotheatre.com/pl2205.html>, London W1 (020-7478 
0100), 15 October to 5 November.

Stewart Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stewart-lee>

For so long the torch-bearer of anti-populist standup, Lee is now the 
establishment: a star of his own TV series;, sent up by young Turks such asTom 
Rosenthal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/17/tom-rosenthal-edinburgh-review>
on the fringe. But he remains an experimentalist, and his new show should be an 
autumn highlight.Leicester Square theatre 
<http://leicestersquaretheatre.ticketsolve.com/shows/126516643/events>, London 
W1 (08448 733433), 15 November to 28 January.
 