
Overheard just now, a conversation between my daughter Alula (aged eight) and 
her friend:


Alula: “Oh my god, this book is amazing. It’s all about a girl who got shot.: 
(She was talking about the young readers’ edition of I am Malala,Malala: The 
Girl Who Stood Up For Education and changed the World 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/299256/>).

Friend: “Wow. Why was she shot?”
“Because she thought all girls should have the right to go to school. There 
are some places in the world where they can’t.” (A pause.) “I know I’m eight 
but I’m a feminist.”

 Whether you’ve got a budding younger feminist in your family, or you’re tired 
of princesses yourself and want to find a book with a strong female role model 
or just a positive message about girlhood, here are my top 10 feminist icons in 
children’s and teen books, roughly listed in age order from books for younger 
children, to teen, YA and beyond!

 * Pirate Girl (Pirate Girl 
<http://www.scholastic.com/teachers/book/pirate-girl> by Cornelia Funke) 
 Our eponymous Pirate Girl, Molly, sets off alone in her boat to visit her 
grandmother and is set upon by a fierce pirate captain who takes her prisoner 
and makes her slave away for him, cooking and cleaning. But Molly refuses to be 
cowed and instead uses her wits to summon her mother – the fiercest pirate of 
the lot – to rescue her. Together with her mum, Molly turns the tables on her 
captors and heads off alone once more to visit grandma. Female characters for 
the under-fives don’t come more brave or bold than this.

2. Matilda (Matilda <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/matilda.html> by Roald 
Dahl)


My daughter Alula says about Matilda: “She’s really powerful. She refuses to 
be bullied or watch others being bullied. She shows that being intelligent and 
reading books, and being kind, is more important than being pretty.” And that 
says it all really.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425640870967%2F51352900-0fa6-438a-b0be-ab56bf21da91-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20feminist%20icons%20in%20children's%20and%20teen%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20feminist%20icons%20in%20children%27s%20and%20teen%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425640870967%2F51352900-0fa6-438a-b0be-ab56bf21da91-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Luna Lovegood, so often overshadowed by Hermione, is smart, brave and loyal 
(played by Evanna Lynch in the films, seen here in Harry Potter and the Half 
Blood Prince). Photograph: PR 
3. Luna Lovegood (Harry Potter 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/harry-potter-and-the-prisoner-of-azkaban-11.html>
 series by JK Rowling)

 Oft overlooked, Luna Lovegood stands out among the pantheon of great female 
characters Rowling offers us in the Potter series. Yes, Hermione is the classic 
choice but Luna too is smart, brave and loyal, and more than that, she refuses 
to bow to bullying or pressure to change. She is who she is – quirky and 
strange – and is unapologetic about it. She embraces her weirdness, remains 
compassionate to those who bully her and is unfazed by critics. We love Luna!

4. Malala (I am Malala <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-am-malala.html> and 
the young readers’ editionMalala: The Girl Who Stood Up For Education and 
changed the World 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/299256/> by Malala 
Yousafzai and Patricia McCormick)

 At just 17 years old, human rights activist Malala Yousafzai won the Nobel 
Peace Prize in 2014 for her work in advocating for girls’ education. Shot by 
the Taliban for speaking up on the right of girls to attend school, she has 
since started a fund to empower girls to reach their full potential. Her story 
is incredibly inspiring.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425640697392%2Fb8a2e47b-c75f-4c0e-a85d-b0b69162d548-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20feminist%20icons%20in%20children's%20and%20teen%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20feminist%20icons%20in%20children%27s%20and%20teen%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425640697392%2Fb8a2e47b-c75f-4c0e-a85d-b0b69162d548-2060x1236.jpeg>
 No list of feminist teen icons can be complete without including Katniss 
Everdeen (portrayed here by Jennifer Lawrence in The Hunger Games: Mockingjay 
Part 1). Photograph: Murray Close/AP 
5. Katniss Everdeen (The Hunger Games 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/hunger-games-8.html> by Suzanne Collins)

 Yes, Katniss is strong, brave and can wield a bow and arrow like nobody else. 
She also becomes the poster child for equality for all, but it isn’t this alone 
that makes her a feminist, I would argue that the way she forges relationships 
with others, particularly women and girls, in defiance of a patriarchal 
society, is why she ultimately triumphs in the arena and what makes her such a 
special character in the YA world.

6. Celie (The Color Purple 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/color-purple-2.html> by Alice Walker)

 Alice Walker’s famous novel tells the story of Celie, a poor black woman in 
1900s America. Starting off as a victim of abuse Celie finally learns, through 
the support, example and sisterhood of other black women, to speak up for 
herself, and ultimately finds the courage to make her own choices.

7. Tavi Gevinson (Rookie Yearbook 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/rookie-yearbook-one.html> edited by Tavi 
Gevinson)

 At just 18 years old, Tavi Gevinson is hailed as one of her generation’s 
leading voices. The website she founded and edits,Rookie 
<http://www.rookiemag.com/>, tackles subjects from break-ups to politics, with 
all the content (art and writing) contributed by teenagers as well as 
influential thinkers, musicians and creatives. The yearbooks (there are three) 
contain curated highlights from the website.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425640449489%2F4103ff11-9e18-4a46-ad99-bddcb3d0e8f2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20feminist%20icons%20in%20children's%20and%20teen%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20feminist%20icons%20in%20children%27s%20and%20teen%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425640449489%2F4103ff11-9e18-4a46-ad99-bddcb3d0e8f2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s book We Should All Be Feminists is a fantastically 
inspiring read. Photograph: REX 
8. Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie (We Should All Be Feminists 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-should-all-be-feminists-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie.html>
 by Chimanada Ngozi Adichie)

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, the author of the award winning novel Half a Yellow 
Sun <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/half-of-a-yellow-sun-2.html> (another 
recommended teen reading), writes a funny and accessible book (based on her 
TEDx talk) about what it means to be a feminist today, and entreats everyone to 
consider the profound ways that inequality affects us all.

9. Melinda Sordino (Speak <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/speak-4.html> by 
Laurie Halse Anderson)

 Teenage Melinda is finally set free from her traumatic burden of silence by 
choosing to speak up against her rapist and by fighting back against the 
cultural and societal pressure imposed on her to keep quiet about the attack. 
In doing so she becomes a symbol of courage and power to all victims of abuse.

10. Lena Dunham (Not That Kind of Girl  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/not-that-kind-of-girl.html>by Lena Dunham)

 This is the book I wish I had read as a teenager. Musing on issues including 
body image, sex, mental health, friendship, career and sexuality with her 
trademark honesty and wit, Lena Dunham admits she’s a ‘girl who is keen on 
having it all’ and then humbly offers her own nuggets of wisdom and experience 
to help others do the same.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425640187995%2F657f8de0-ba73-45ee-ac35-45993b560c4f-1335x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20feminist%20icons%20in%20children's%20and%20teen%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20feminist%20icons%20in%20children%27s%20and%20teen%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Ftop-10-feminist-icons-childrens-teen-books-international-womens-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F6%2F1425640187995%2F657f8de0-ba73-45ee-ac35-45993b560c4f-1335x2040.jpeg>
 Sarah Alderson’s YA thriller Conspiracy Girl is available at the Guardian 
Bookshop <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/conspiracy-girl.html>. 


Who are your favourite female characters in books? You can tell us by emailing 
childrens.books@theguardian.com or join in with our live Twitter chat on Sunday 
8 March (that’s International Women’s Day) from 7-8pm@Gdnchildrensbks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> #Gdnteenfeminism. We’re being joined by a 
host of authors including Holly Smale, SF Said and Arabella Weir. See you there!
 