
We Need to Talk About Kevin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141828/we-need-to-talk-about-kevin>

After a long period away from commercial cinema's front line, Lynne Ramsay  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lynne-ramsay>returns to cement her status as 
one of Britain's best film-makers with this brilliant adaptation of theLionel 
Shriver bestseller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9781846687341/we-need-to-talk-about-kevin>
.Tilda Swinton <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton> stars as Eva, 
the middle-aged mother in a state of shellshock. Her teenage son Kevin is now 
in prison for carrying out a Columbine-style atrocity in a featureless American 
town and now her existence is an unending hell. She is brutally insulted and 
assaulted on the streets, yet can make no amends to anyone, and she is 
condemned to relive the past every waking moment. Was it her fault that Kevin 
turned out the way he did? Was there some moment, some quietly catastrophic 
parenting decision, that pushed Kevin on to the wrong path? Or was he always 
going to be evil? Ramsey superbly conveys the nihilist and subversive feminist 
parable at the heart of this story. Just as you can choose your friends but not 
your relatives, a progressive career woman can choose her decent and supportive 
male partner, but not her male offspring. What happens when a woman gives birth 
to a boy – precisely the sort of nasty, back-talking, competitive little beast 
she has feared and hated since her own girlhood? We Need to Talk About Kevin is 
a nightmarishly satirical vision of marriage and family life, a sceptical and 
deconstructive assault on the sentimental ideal of motherhood. Kevin himself is 
a compellingly unrepentant aggressor:Rosemary's Baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/22/rosemarys-baby-polanksi-horror> 
grown to adolescence.Released 21 October

Attenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/138627/attenberg>

A hypnotically weird and elegantly strange movie from Greece, directed by 
Athina Rachel Tsangari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/27/attenberg-dogtooth-greece-cinema>
, who produced cult arthouse favouriteDogtooth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/25/dogtooth-film-review>. Ariane 
Lebed plays Marina, a 23-year-old virgin with a fascination for British TV, 
including Monty Python and David Attenborough (the title mispronounces his 
name). As she nurses her desperately ill father, she experiments with sex and 
tries to get a female friend to teach her how to kiss with tongues. With 
Attenborough in mind, Tsangari brings an anthropologist's eye to it all.Out now

The Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142790/adventures-of-tintin>

Perhaps Belgians were hoping that Steven Spielberg would use the cream of 
their writing and acting talent for his massive new Tintin movie. As it 
happens, the director has gone for the best of British.Steven Moffat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/stevenmoffat>, Edgar Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/edgar-wright> and Joe Cornish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/joe-cornish> have written the script; 
Jamie Bell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/mar/13/jamie-bell-interview> plays 
Tintin himself;Andy Serkis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andy-serkis> is 
Captain Haddock and the cast includesDaniel Craig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/danielcraig>, Nick Frost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nick-frost> and Simon Pegg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/simonpegg>. The movie reportedly combines 
the plots of three separate Tintin tales and tells the story of his 
relationship with Captain Haddock.Released 26 October

Tabloid <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/138439/tabloid>

Errol Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/10/errol-morris-tabloid-joyce-mckinney>
's new documentary is a fascinating look at Britain's pre-web popular press, a 
world before the celebrity industry, before hackable mobile phones, in which 
big-spending, cheerfully irresponsible newspapers made stars of unsuspecting 
members of the public. In 1977, Joyce McKinney was an American beauty queen in 
Britain who chivvied a young Mormon into coming away with her to a secluded 
cottage for bondage sex games and found herself all over the British papers as
the lover of the "manacled Mormon" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/oct/12/tabloid-london-festival-joyce-mckinney>
. An extraordinary tale told with shrewd wit.Released 11 November

Sleeping Beauty <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141830/sleeping-beauty>

This bizarre film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/12/cannes-film-festival-sleeping-beauty-review>
 comes from Australia yet with a very European sensibility, directed by 
author-turned-film-makerJulia Leigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/10/cannes-women-directors-ramsay-kawase>
 and co-produced byJane Campion <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jane-campion>
. Emily Browning plays Lucy, a student who needs cash to pay her tuition fees; 
she has been a medical research guinea pig and even dabbled in escort work. Now 
she is dragged into a weirdo niche of high-end prostitution. In return for a 
colossal cash payment, she must agree to be drugged and let some billionaire do 
anything he wishes short of penetration – and she will remember nothing.
Released 14 October
 