
The Killing 2 and Borgen 

A subtitled Danish drama starring a woman who dresses mainly in wellies, 
cagouls and patterned knitwear doesn't sound like a sure-fire ratings winner. 
ButThe Killing <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00y4z22>, or Forbrydelsen, the 
latest addition to BBC4's library of classy European crime imports, took the 
channel by surprise earlier this year when it left viewers gripped – possibly 
even obsessed – with the exploits of super-cop Sarah Lund. Staying in on a 
Saturday night for two hours of dark, rainy shots of Copenhagen had never 
appeared to be such a brilliant idea. Danish seemed a must-learn language.
Expensive, chunky jumpers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/feb/21/jumper-is-star-the-killing>
 were fashion essentials. Now fans will undoubtedly cancel their social lives 
again for the return of Lund (Sofie Gråbøl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/mar/31/the-killing-danish-sarah-lund>
) this autumn, as she embarks on a second adventure sure to be dotted liberally 
with the red herrings that made the first series such brilliant – and at times 
frustrating – viewing. BBC4 are capitalising on the Danish TV love, with the 
10-part series Borgen <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/15/bbc4-bbc>, 
which will broadcast after The Killing has reached its conclusion. Made by the
Danish Broadcasting Corporation 
<http://www.dr.dk/Salg/DRsales/Artikler/20070621200020.htm>, which also made 
Forbrydelsen, the political drama marks something of a change of pace for BBC4, 
which has tended to focus on crime imports. Borgen – which translates as The 
Castle, the Danes' nickname for their parliament – stars Sidse Babett Knudsen 
as a 40-year-old party leader who wins a surprise election victory. BBC4 bosses 
are hoping it can prompt the same outpouring of praise as Forbrydelsen, which 
won a Bafta for best international programme earlier this year. Whatever else, 
it marks a continuation of an unlikely fondness for Danish – even European – TV 
that few people could have predicted.BBC4, October and December.

Downton Abbey 

If autumn ushers in the shouty horror of The X Factor to ITV, it also brings 
eight glorious episodes of Maggie Smith being icily brilliant in Julian 
Fellowes's alluring period drama. We return toDownton 
<http://www.itv.com/dramapremieres/downtonabbey/> midway through the first 
world war, with society on the brink of change. A two-hour Christmas special 
follows – with Fellowes already at work on a third series, set in the 1920s.
ITV1, September.

Pan Am 

A quick dose of 60s glamour for those missing their Mad Men fix – sadly, there 
is stilla while to wait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/29/mad-men-season-five> – Pan Am is 
set around the launch of the airline, with Christina Ricci donning the 
famous blue uniform and hat in this tale of pilots and cabin crew. Cocktails, 
slick suits and fabulous frocks will presumably be on the inflight menu as the 
US import lands on screens.BBC2, November. 

Top Boy 

Ronan Bennett, Hackney resident and Fields of Gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/jun/10/firstnight.broadcasting> writer, 
tackles gang culture in a four-part thriller, set on the fictional Summerhouse 
estate in east London, that has never looked more prescient. Having researched 
his script by talking to young people in his borough, Bennett tells the story 
of Dushane, a 19-year-old who runs a gang on the estate and has plans to move 
into drug-dealing.Channel 4, November.

Life's Too Short 

With a list of guest stars to rival Extras 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0070rj8> – the likes of Johnny Depp, 
Liam Neeson, Helena Bonham Carter and Steve Carell among them – expectations 
are already high for Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant's latest comedy, which 
centres on "the life of a showbiz dwarf".Warwick Davis 
<http://www.warwickdavis.co.uk/> stars as a fictional version of himself, 
running a talent agency, Dwarves for Hire, with the spoof documentary 
also featuring cameos from Gervais and Merchant.BBC2, October. 
 