
Degas and the Ballet: Picturing Movement 
<http://www.royalacademy.org.uk/events/exhibitions/degas-and-the-ballet-picturing-movement,1643,EV.html>

Curmudgeonly, antisemitic and exasperating, Degas was also a marvellous and 
radical artist. Though a fellow-travelling impressionist, he preferred to 
describe himself as a realist. He was devoted to dance and the ballet, and this 
exhibition brings together paintings, sculptures and drawings on the subject.

Royal Academy, London W1 (020-7300 8000), 17 September to 11 December

Postmodernism: Style and Subversion 1970-1990 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/postmodernism/>

Postmodernism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/feb/28/postmodernism-retrospective-london-v-and-a>
 generated turbo-charged theory, insubstantial art, sophisticated design and 
stultifying confusion. Will the V&A's survey of art, architecture, design, 
film, music videos and flim-flam get to the heartless core of it?

Victoria and Albert museum, London SW7 (020-7942 2000), 24 September to 15 
January

Pipilotti Rist 
<http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/find/hayward-gallery-and-visual-arts/other-art-on-site/tickets/pipilotti-rist-59671>

You have to be a miserabilist – and I admit I am a sucker for art's bleaker 
regions – not to take pleasure in Rist's warm baths of light and nature, her 
sunny uplands and repeated underwater rebirthings, her swoony songs and gleeful 
mischievousness . The Swiss artist,the critic Peter Schjeldahl has said 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/multimedia/2010/09/27/100927_audioslideshow_rist>
, is an "evangelist of happiness". She also takes feminine sexuality to places
Louise Bourgeois 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/may/31/louise-bourgeois-obituary-art>
 forgot to mention. We are, Rist has said, "permanently juicy machines", and 
you can't really argue with that.

Hayward Gallery, London SE1 (0844 875 0073) 28 September to 8 January

The Unilever Series: Tacita Dean 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/modern/exhibitions/unilever2011/default.shtm>

The 12th artist to take on the Turbine Hall at Tate Modern, Tacita Dean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tacita-dean> seems an unlikely 
choice. Her art, mostly in film, is essentially quiet, observational, and 
conceptually complex. Yet she also has a great eye for space, atmosphere, and 
above all, time. Unlike many of her predecessors here, her art eschews 
theatricality or the kinds of participation that have made the series as 
popular with the media as it is with the public.

Tate Modern, London SE1 (020-7887 8888), 11 October to 11 March

Wilhelm Sasnal <http://www.whitechapelgallery.org/exhibitions/wilhelm-sasnal>

Sasnal's art is sophisticated, abrasive, elegant and sometimes uncouth. His 
paintings can be as queasy as sunstroke, flat as a Polish winter. This very 
welcome large-scale show focuses on the last 10 years of the Polish painter, 
photographer and film-maker's work.

Whitechapel Gallery London E1 (020-7522 7888), 14 October to 1 January

Leonardo Da Vinci: Painter at the Court of Milan 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/leonardo-da-vinci-painter-at-the-court-of-milan>

This will be the most complete exhibition of Leonardo's paintings ever. he was 
a genius – but how good a painter was he? Complemented by drawings and works by 
his contemporaries, and theRoyal Academy's copy of Leonardo's Last Supper 
<http://www.bodyofart.com/news/leonardo-da-vinci-painter-at-the-court-of-milan/>
 and his preparatory sketches, this is the highpoint of the National's year. 
The Mona Lisa won't be coming, but there will be queues anyway.

National Gallery London WC2 (020-7747 2885), 9 November to 5 February
 