
10. Oliver! <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36273>

Historically, the British musical has been intertwined with British music, 
drawing on music hall in the 1940s and the pop charts in the 50s – low-budget 
films of provincial interest and nothing to trouble the bosses at MGM. In the 
late 60s, however, the genre enjoyed a brief, high-profile heyday, and between 
Tommy Steele in Half a Sixpence (1967) and Richard Attenborough's star-studded 
Oh! What A Lovely War (1969) came the biggest of them all: Oliver! (1968), 
Carol Reed's adaptation of Lionel Bart's 1960 stage hit and the recipient of 
six Academy awards.

It seems strange that Charles Dickens's dark tale of deprivation – our young 
hero Oliver Twist (Mark Lester) ends up in a den of thieves, run by the louche 
Fagin (Ron Moody), after being sold into child labour by the owner of a 
workhouse – began shooting during the summer of love, but Reed's lavish, 
cast-of-thousands approach does reflect something of the people-power concerns 
of the times, notably the "tribalism" of the Broadway musical Hair. The costume 
design too has elements of shabby chic; the boys have long, unkempt hair, and 
unlike David Lean's austere Oliver Twist of 1948, the snatch-and-grab-it world 
of Fagin's lost boys actually seems like fun.

Indeed, Moody has often claimed that his interpretation of Fagin, developed in 
the original stage version, ran counter to Bart's intention and went some way 
to reversing the perceived antisemitism of Dickens's novel. But for all the 
exuberance, not to mention those timeless songs – Food, Glorious Food; Consider 
Yourself and You've Got to Pick a Pocket or Two – Oliver! works principally as 
a love triangle, with the infatuated Twist powerless to save barmaid Nancy 
(Shani Wallis) from the vicious Bill Sikes (Oliver Reed). It is part of the 
magic of Reed's direction that while delivering the modernity and immediacy of 
Bart's book, music and lyrics, his film keeps intact the dark, brutal melodrama 
that kept Dickens's readers enthralled in the first place.Damon Wise

9. Tommy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36308/tommy>
 ROGER DALTREY Film 'TOMMY' (1975) Directed By KEN RUSSELL 19 March 1975 
SSO56144 Allstar Collection/PARAMOUNT **WARNING** This photograph can only be 
reproduced by publications in conjunction with the promotion of the above film. 
For Editorial Use Only. Entertainment Orientation Landscape Portrait looking 
ahead Film Still Photograph: Allstar/PARAMOUNT/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
The most excessive movie by the most excessive director of the most excessive 
decade of the 20th century, Tommy is the madly outlandish pinnacle of 70s 
rock-opera. It stars a sizable complement of British rock aristocracy – the 
Who, obviously, Eric Clapton, Elton John – under the insane generalship ofKen 
Russell <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ken-russell> in excelsis.

Russell was fresh off his Mahler biopic, in retrospect the last of his 
conventional (the term is elastic with Ken) musical biographies that began at 
the BBC with his profiles of Delius and Elgar, and continued on the big screen 
with Tchaikovsky in The Music Lover. By the time he came to make his movie 
about Franz Liszt in 1975, he had passed through the creative furnace that was 
Tommy and was making a whole different kind of movie. Russell adapted the Who's 
concept album himself, and gave free rein to his wildest instincts.

Tommy, the original album, was, like Pink Floyd's The Wall, a war baby's angry 
lament that never really made a lot of sense in narrative terms, but Russell 
found the showpiece songs and mounted many of them with extraordinary vitality 
and panache. Unforgettable moments include Pinball Wizard withElton John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/elton-john> in mile-high green bovver boots; 
Tina Turner's demented appearance as the Acid Queen, whose terrifying, 
Metropolis-style syringe-robot-sarcophagus fails to trip Tommy out of his 
deaf-dumb-and-blind catatonia (who the hellinjects acid, anyway?) and 
Ann-Margret, a loooong way from Bye Bye Birdie, as she imagines an exploding TV 
that ejaculates baked beans, chocolate and soap powder all over her writhing 
body, bringing to bizarre and unsettling life the artwork for The Who Sell Out.

Worth noting: Ken Russell. And Oliver Reed. And Keith Moon – all on the same 
movie set, a recipe for utter mayhem! John Patterson

8. West Side Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36234/west.side.story>
 From the 1961 film of West Side Story. Photograph: Everett Collection / Rex 
Feature 
Filmed in a New York City neighbourhood that no longer exists, and centred on 
racial tensions made quaint just a few years later by the civil rights 
movement, West Side Story ought to be an adorable relic. It asks us to believe 
that street gangs might dance ballet, that a fire escape could host a romantic 
moonlit tryst, that Natalie Wood with a tan passes as Puerto Rican. It embraces 
gooey ideas of love at first sight and retells Romeo & Juliet while backing 
down on the famous, bloody ending.

But West Side Story still feels more modern than any of the other 
Oscar-winning musicals of the 60s or, really, most of the others that have come 
since. From the orchestral overture over an abstracted New York City to the pop 
of Maria's red dress in the final scene on the playground, West Side Story 
embraces its leap to cinema as boldly as the Jets doing a tour jeté. Every 
musical uses its songs to express big feelings, but few go bigger than West 
Side Story, which embraces the passions of youth to make an epic out of a 
pointless turf war and a new love that gets tragically caught in the middle.

The music by Leonard Bernstein and lyrics from Stephen Sondheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sondheim>, largely unchanged from the 
Broadway production, run the gamut, from the witty wordplay of America 
(accompanied by Jerome Robbins's eye-popping choreography) to the achingly 
naive Something's Coming. No song that includes the word "daddy-o" ought to 
stand the test of time, but here stands Cool anyway. No movie with such a 
troubled production, and half its cast not even singing, ought to feel so 
authentic, but West Side Story still punches hard. Like a Rothko painting or an 
Eames chair, West Side Story is mid-century modernism that will never go out of 
style.Katey Rich

7. Bugsy Malone <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79726/bugsy.malone>

Long before it became a staple part of the schools and am-dram society 
production roster, Bugsy Malone was a very knowing screen musical with killer 
songs, a precociously talented young cast and real eccentricity. Only a madman 
could have come up with the idea of making a pastiche 1930s gangster musical 
populated entirely by children and shot in Britain in the mid-1970s.Alan Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker> was that madman. Having 
established himself as one of the country's hottest commercials directors, he 
was looking to move into film, only to find that every script he dashed off was 
accused of being too parochial. His response was to write one that was almost 
absurdly American – a tale of warring gangsters and the battle for Fat Sam's 
speakeasy. But here the guns fire custard rather than bullets, and none of the 
thugs has a five o'clock shadow.

Although Parker's pitch was met with bafflement from financiers ("'It's a 
fusion of two genres – the Hollywood musical and the gangster film,' I would 
enthuse. 'Except [nervous cough] the guns will fire custard pies and it will 
have a cast entirely of kids aged about 12'"), the budget was raised and 
shooting began at Pinewood after a year of casting. It's no surprise thatJodie 
Foster <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jodie-foster> should be so dazzling as 
Tallulah, Fat Sam's moll – she already had eight years' acting experience 
behind her at that point, including her role in Taxi Driver – but the rest of 
the cast are a delight, including future TV heartthrob Scott Baio as Bugsy, the 
down-at-heel boxing promoter. Credit should go also to the affectionate 
production design by Geoffrey Kirkland and the tone of whimsical amusement 
sustained by Parker.

But there can be no doubting the most seductive element: the songs by Paul 
Williams. He may be best known today for his recent contributions to Daft 
Punk's Random Access Memories, but since the 1960s he has been a composer and 
performer with a knack for the timeless earworm. From writing for the 
Carpenters, Barbra Streisand and the Muppets to starring in and co-scoring 
Brian de Palma's Phantom of the Paradise, he is a genuine legend. If he had 
done nothing but the songs for Bugsy Malone, that status would still be assured.
Ryan Gilbey

6. The Umbrellas of Cherbourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77848/umbrellas.of.cherbourg>
 The Umbrellas of Cherbourg (Les Parapluis de Cherbourg). Photograph: Ronald 
Grant Archive 
To watch Jacques Demy's 1964 musical is to gorge on colour. This is a world 
where a petrol station's neon lights are as dazzling and poignantly romantic as 
fireworks, and where turquoise is made to co-exist with orange as though it 
were the most natural union in the world. Incredibly, the film sounds even more 
striking than it looks.Catherine Deneuve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/catherinedeneuve> stars as Geneviève, the 
dreamer working in her mother's umbrella shop, whose romance with the mechanic 
Guy (Nino Castelnuovo) is cut short when he is drafted to fight in the Algerian 
war (though not too soon for her to fall pregnant by him). When he returns 
years later, everything has changed: she's in love with someone else, he's in 
love with someone else – but they're still singing.

The picture is filled wall-to-wall with music, though you'll hunt long and 
hard for verse or chorus here: Michel Legrand's sumptuous score has an 
abundance of melody, but the "songs" are dialogue set to music, with even the 
most casual exchange sung rather than spoken. Demy's writing is as fizzy as his 
colours: he can't resist popping lines as such as "I don't like opera – all 
that singing gives me a pain" into the mouths of his perpetually warbling cast. 
Deneuve, meanwhile, has devastating poise and beauty; it requires no 
imaginative leap to believe that grown men would be moved to burst into song at 
the sight of her.RG

5. Meet Me in St Louis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/77122/meet.me.in.st.louis>
 Talent on parade: Judy Garland in Meet Me in St Louis. Photograph: Courtesy 
Everett Collection/Re 
Released 69 years ago, on Thanksgiving weekend in November 1944, only six 
months after the seismic morale-boost that was D-Day, Meet Me in St Louis 
offered a suddenly more optimistic wartime America the chance to wallow in the 
sugary comforts of hearth and home, to take refuge in innocence and nostalgia. 
Can you imagine combat-weary GIs coming off some European or Pacific island 
battlefield in early 1945, returning to the rear echelon, and seeing this in 
the camp movie tent? It must have felt like a warm bath and a letter from home.

With its sumptuously vibrant, occasionally ominous Technicolor tones courtesy 
of George J Folsey (who also shot Million Dollar Mermaid and The Harvey Girls), 
its American songbook classics, including Have Yourself a Merry Little 
Christmas and The Trolley Song, and its evocation of an idyllic, untroubled 
fin-de-siecle St Louis that surely never existed until Vincente Minnelli 
dreamed it up, Meet Me in St Louis was the bona fide smash of the 1944-5 box 
office, and the personal favourite of its legendary producer Arthur Freed, 
whose musicals unit at MGM was and remains unsurpassed in its utter mastery of 
the genre.

This is also the movie on which Minnelli met his future wife, Judy Garland, 
who was initially not enthusiastic about the project. She recanted later, of 
course, and songs from the book remained staples of her night club act for 
decades afterwards.

The myriad familiar joys of the movie are etched in America's folk memory: the 
perfect parents in the form of Leon Ames and Mary Astor, Judy's unrequited 
affection for the boy next door, The Trolley Song sequence with its riot of 
brightly coloured 1900s gowns and hats. And Margaret O'Brien as 10-year-old 
Tootie, one of the greatest child performances ever – her hysterical sobbing as 
she smashes the snowmen in the yard is not soon forgotten.JP

4. My Fair Lady <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36253/my-fair-lady>
 My Fair Lady, film still Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/WARNER BROS 
The title of George Cukor's adaptation of George Bernard's stage play – the 
much more self-explanatory Pygmalion – has often eluded cinemagoers since the 
film's release in 1964. The likeliest explanation – and one that reflects the 
spirit of Shaw's sophisticated wit – is that it is a spin on Shaw's provisional 
title Fair Eliza (after Beethoven's Für Elise) and also the Cockney 
pronunciation of "Mayfair lady", which, after all, is the object of its leading 
man's boast – to be able to pass off common flower seller Eliza Doolittle 
(Audrey Hepburn) as a society duchess.

With book and lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner and music by Frederick Loewe, the 
partnership behind Camelot and Brigadoon, My Fair Lady achieved greatness by 
staying as mindful of Shaw's original play as Shaw was of Ovid's version of the 
Greek myth, in which a sculptor creates a beautiful statue that comes to life 
and causes him to fall in love with her. This fusing of romance and socialist 
principles gives the film its kick, with Rex Harrison hilarious as the elitist 
linguist Henry Higgins, who continues to dismiss Eliza as "this thing that I 
created out of the squashed cabbage leaves of Covent Garden" even as she is 
accepted into the loftiest echelons of the establishment.

Many off-screen controversies rage, such as whether Julie Andrews was robbed 
of a role that should have been hers from the stage play, and indeed whether 
Audrey Hepburn was robbed of an Oscar nomination – she was a notable omission – 
when it became known that her singing voice had been dubbed by Marni Nixon. But 
while debate continues to swirl around the mischievous last line – "Eliza? 
Where the devil are my slippers?" delivered after Higgins sings the 
surrendering I've Grown Accustomed To Her Face – the ambiguity adds to its 
timelessness. Rather than a walk into the sunset, Cukor's film ends with a 
scene of domestic detente that any couple will recognise.DW

3. Grease <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/158969/grease>
 Grease 
The elements that made Grease a smash hit in 1978 now seem impossible to 
account for: in the year the Sex Pistols imploded, a nostalgic stage show using 
faux 50s pop songs and featuring a cast with a median age of 30 playing 
teenagers became the highest grossing musical in the US, an honour it holds to 
this day. It sawJohn Travolta <https://www.theguardian.com/film/john-travolta>, 
a disco-dancing superstar after the phenomenon that was Saturday Night Fever, 
continue to reign supreme as world superstar, to be joined briefly by Olivia 
Newton-John, an MOR singer whose film career would almost immediately hit the 
skids.

The reason Grease has endured is because Warren Casey's and Jim Jacobs's 
original 1971 musical is a subversive celebration of the flipside of the era it 
recreates. The premise – tough guy from the wrong side of the tracks meets cute 
Wasp girl – is the living embodiment of the Shangri-Las' Leader of the Pack, 
and the story proceeds to imagine a parallel world in which all the cult fetish 
items of the real 50s are out in the mainstream. Flick-knives, beehives, 
rock'n'roll, juvenile delinquency, teenage pregnancy and smoking: though Randal 
Kleiser's slick movie version airbrushes many of those elements, they are still 
recognisably there, just beneath the surface.

Today it seems impossible to comprehend that such a family-friendly film 
contains not only so many double entendres, but so many references to sex, from 
Greased Lightning's celebration of the "pussy wagon" to Look at Me I'm Sandra 
Dee and its put-down of the cutesy star as "lousy with virginity". It's 
possible that Grease inadvertently stands as a testament to the studio system; 
Kleiser has said that he made the film for hire, didn't have much intuition 
about the music and was left alone by Paramount, who had bigger fish, such as 
Heaven Can Wait, to fry. The resulting lack of preciousness is undoubtedly what 
sells it; breezy and unpretentious, it will always rock the house.DW

2. Singin' in the Rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/86680/singin.in.the.rain>
 Gene Kelly performing Singin' in the Rain. Hollywood faked it: you don't have 
to. Photograph: Allstar/MGM/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
Singin' in the Rain's title song is perhaps the most famous musical sequence 
in the history of the genre (it was made doubly memorable after being 
psychotically repurposed as a murder ballad in A Clockwork Orange), and many 
put the movie up there with Bandwagon, Funny Face and Meet Me in St Louis as 
the high water mark of the mid-century American musical comedy. It's also, 
handily enough, an astute guide to the myriad technical problems that faced the 
Hollywood studios in the transition from silents to talkies, as well as an 
uproarious comedy.

Co-directors Gene Kelly and Stanley Donen had access to a catalogue of songs 
co-written over the years by their boss Arthur Freed. The title song had 
originally featured in The Hollywood Revue of 1929 – and others had first been 
seen in movies as diverse as the Mickey and Judy musical Babes in Arms and the 
early disaster movie San Francisco. The screenplay was by legendary songwriters 
Betty Comden and Adolph Green, who added one imperishable song of their own, 
Moses Supposes, in which silent stars and best friends Kelly and Donald 
O'Connor upstage their starchy elocution teacher in wild style.

The movie lives on the charm, energy and clean-cut appeal of its leading 
quartet: Kelly and O'Connor (next time you watch his frenetically energetic 
Make 'Em Laugh scene, bear in mind he smoked four packs of cigarettes a day!), 
and the delightfully effervescent pixie Debbie Reynolds as Kelly's girlfriend. 
She provides vocal overdubs for an unwitting Jean Hagen, who has a singing 
voice like a yapping dog but steals every scene she's in (key line, screeched, 
of course: "I got more money than Calvin Coolidge … put together!"). The very 
definition of perfect happiness rendered in movie-musical form, and in vivid 
Technicolor, of course.JP

1. Cabaret <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78485/cabaret>
 Liza Minnelli as Sally Bowles in Cabaret, which will be screened as part of 
the Berlin in the 20s and 30s weekend at the Royal Festival Hall, Southbank 
Centre. Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros/SportsPhoto 
The devil has all the best tunes, they say, and this 1972 musical used them 
all: satanically catchy, terrifyingly seductive. It is directed and 
choreographed with electric style by Bob Fosse, with songs by Kander and Ebb 
that lodge in your mind like poisoned barbs. Cabaret is drenched in the sexiest 
kind of cynicism and decadent despair: it is Nero's fiddle, scraping and 
squawking in the 20th century.

More than 40 years after the movie's release – and 70 since Christopher 
Isherwood's short story collections, Mr Norris Changes Trains and Goodbye to 
Berlin, which inspired it – Cabaret still looks like a brilliantly plausible 
reimagining of the national mood music in 1930s Germany, gradually acquiescing 
to the Nazi taint and accepting its evil destiny with a song, a shrug, a 
grimace of suppressed pain. It is the polar opposite of The Sound of Music 
which had been such a global sensation seven years earlier: that was a 
determinedly wholesome, idealistic account of Austrian resistance to Hitlerism. 
This is anything but. They both have superb songs. To me, the sinister and 
horribly authentic-sounding pastiche Nazi anthem Tomorrow Belongs to Me, with 
its jerky waltz-time, sounds worryingly like the ersatz-real Austrian folksong 
Edelweiss.

Cabaret is a thrilling indictment of evil's specious and banal glamour, and of 
foreigners' feeble and prurient and uncomprehending attitude to the growing 
European threat. Most of all it is a deeply pessimistic indictment of satire 
itself, a type of comedy that emerges as fatally ambiguous and parasitic, 
unable to make any real difference to what it is supposedly attacking. Is the 
Weimar cabaret scene an assault on Nazism? Or Nazism's minor symptom?

Liza Minnelli gives her career-defining performance as the nightclub singer 
Sally Bowles: entrancingly sexy, a free spirit, unlocatably and indefinably 
melancholy and damaged. Her unforgettable opening song, Mein Herr, about giving 
the elbow to a now tiresome lover, gives us a clear clue as to how the romantic 
storyline will play out. Michael York is Brian, the visiting British scholar 
who has a room in Sally's boarding house and falls in love with her; Max 
(Helmut Griem) is the wealthy plutocrat who befriends both and inveigles them 
into a menage-a-trois. And Joel Grey is the mysterious Master of Ceremonies at 
Sally's club who has no dramatic part to play and no backstory. His cabaret 
turns punctuate and comment on the story happening on the outside.

This grinning, elegant grotesque mocks the Nazis, sends them up, he appears to 
be the epitome of what the Berliners call Schnauz: nose, or snout: pure 
aggressive front. And yet his cynicism is rootless, jaded; he appears also to 
be satirising the idiots who have allowed the situation to develop, the idiots 
who are unsophisticated enough to be shocked or to care. The whole world is a 
panorama of contemptible idiocy to be dismissed with a sharp couplet, a snappy 
song, a sexy strut. What good is sitting alone in your room, he says, come hear 
the music play! The world is going to hell and we might as well enjoy ourselves.

The film belongs to Liza Minnelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/liza-minnelli>, whose poignant vulnerability 
is a counterweight to all the grim cynicism. Her saucer-eyed prettiness is 
almost shocking amid the squalor, and her voice is fascinating. She is capable 
of belting out showtunes with maximum force, yet also often has – while 
speaking or singing – a strange kind of swallowed gulp or sob. Her fragility is 
the nearest thing the movie has to an emotional heart. Sally's relationship 
with Brian is doomed. What on Earth happens to this American expatriate after 
the story is over and war is declared? What awful fate is in store for this 
strange innocent? This unanswered question hangs over the end of the film after 
the final chords have died away.Peter Bradshaw

More Guardian and Observer critics' top 10s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/top-10-films>

• Top 10 romantic movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/07/top-10-romantic-movies>
• Top 10 action movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/10/top-10-action-movies>
• Top 10 comedy movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/11/top-10-comedy-movies>
• Top 10 horror movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/14/top-10-horror-movies>
• Top 10 sci-fi movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/16/top-10-sci-fi-movies>
• Top 10 crime movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/18/top-10-crime-movies>
• Top 10 arthouse movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/21/top-10-arthouse-movies>
• Top 10 family movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/25/top-10-family-movies>
• Top 10 war movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/28/top-10-war-movies>
• Top 10 teen movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/01/top-10-teen-movies>
• Top 10 superhero movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/04/top-10-superhero-movies>
• Top 10 westerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/08/top-10-movie-westerns>
• Top 10 documentaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/12/top-10-documentaries>
• Top 10 movie adaptations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/15/top-10-movie-adaptations>
• Top 10 animated movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/20/top-10-animated-movies-films>
• Top 10 silent movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/22/top-10-silent-movies-films>
• Top 10 sports movies 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/filmblog/2013/nov/25/top-10-sports-movies>
• Top 10 film noir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/29/top-10-film-noir>
 