
What do you think of when you think of the cold war? The answer may depend on 
how old you are. For the young, it is history; for the elderly it is one of the 
times they endured in a whole century of extraordinary violence and upheaval; 
for the generations in between it’s a bit of both. But for almost everyone of 
any age, the cold war seems in retrospect somewhat nebulous: a war without a 
clearly defined beginning or end, when much of the action was clandestine and 
the ground rules were obscure; a war of mist and fog, perhaps.

The Long Room by Francesca Kay review – state surveillance leads to romantic 
snooping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/23/the-long-room-francesca-kay-review-novel>
That makes it an especially interesting war from the point of view of a 
writer. My novel,The Long Room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/23/the-long-room-francesca-kay-review-novel>
, is set in 1981, a time when it may have seemed that the gravest dangers of 
the war had already been averted, but which was still pervaded by a constant 
level of anxiety. As we now know, that anxiety was justified; as late as 1983, 
the Soviet leadership mistook a routine Nato exercise as cover for imminent 
nuclear attack.

Mutual misapprehension, fear, mistrust, the near-impossibility of telling 
reality from illusion – the features of that time make it the perfect setting 
for a novel that is about espionage but also about isolation and obsessive 
love. How lucky we are that the world survived the cold war and can afford to 
let it become history and fictive backdrop.

Dozens of books could have made this list. I have chosen some that seem to me 
to give a strong sense of what it felt like to be living through the cold war 
and of the fears that people had.

I realise that the list leaves out the Soviet point of view. If there is an 
account of how the conflict felt to an ordinary citizen of the USSR who 
believed the official rhetoric, I’d be glad to know.

1. Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/1984.html>
Orwell takes his place at the head of this list as the first writer to use the 
term “cold war” in relation to geopolitical conditions immediately after the 
second world war (inYou and the Atomic Bomb 
<http://orwell.ru/library/articles/ABomb/english/e_abomb>). Nineteen 
Eighty-Four remains the defining vision of totalitarian rule. It supplied us 
with a vocabulary we still use and is as relevant today as it was when Orwell 
wrote it. “If you want a picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a 
human face – forever.”

2. The Cold War by John Lewis Gaddis 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/cold-war-15.html>
An admirably lucid and comprehensive account of the nuclear-armed stand-off – 
its origins and causes, its end and what happened in between. Elegantly written 
for the general reader, it is an essential introduction.

3. HMSO Civil Defence Handbook No 10 (1963): Advising the Householder on 
Protection Against Nuclear Attack 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/civil-defence-handbook.html>
Whitewash your windows. Equip a fallout room. Use your reserves of water very 
sparingly. If you have to go outside, put on gumboots and a scarf. “But even 
then it is still dangerous.” Was there ever a scarier concept thanMutually 
Assured Destruction <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-17026538>? This little 
booklet, with its childish illustrations, makes Armageddon seem almost 
matter-of-fact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-cold-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdda1b7dd205a85f60074f9b8a2cf13d15af554d%2F0_0_2276_1517%2F2276.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20cold%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-cold-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20cold%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-cold-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdda1b7dd205a85f60074f9b8a2cf13d15af554d%2F0_0_2276_1517%2F2276.jpg>
 A still from the animated version of When the Wind Blows (1986) Photograph: 
Ronald Grant Archive/Channel 4 
4. When the Wind Blows by Raymond Briggs 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/when-the-wind-blows-2.html>
This graphic novel by the artist best loved for The Snowman might look as if 
it were meant for children. But any child who read it would soon be having 
nightmares. Here is what happens when the bomb actually falls and an elderly 
couple tries to put HMG’s advice into practice. “God almighty ducks! There’s 
only three minutes to go!” But all that laying in of supplies and whitewash is 
to no avail. “Ooh look, my hair’s coming out. I’ve got funny blotches on my 
skin.” Heart-rending.

5. The Secret State: Preparing for the Worst 1945-2010 by Peter Hennessy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/secret-state.html>
This fascinating account of secret government plans for combatting attacks on 
Britain is another side of the same picture. The updated edition covers the 
post-cold war period too: the threat of Armageddon did not end with the fall of 
the Berlin Wall. The section on “letters of last resort” is chilling.

6. The Spy Who Came in from the Cold by John le Carré 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/spy-who-came-in-from-the-cold.html>
Any of Le Carré’s cold war novels could have made the cut. But I think this, 
an early one, is the most effective. It brilliantly depicts a bleak, amoral 
world and it set the benchmark for the many other novels exploring the same 
material.

7. The Book of Daniel by EL Doctorow 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-of-daniel.html>
An extraordinary novel. Utterly unsparing, brutal and compelling, it 
fictionalises the Rosenbergs, the couple executed in 1953 for conspiring to 
pass US atomic secrets to the Soviet Union. Seen through the eyes of their son, 
it gives a view from another side of the cold war – that of the committed 
American left. But it is no polemic; instead, it enters completely into the 
heart of a damaged man and asks important questions about loyalty, betrayal, 
and political engagement.

8. The Crucible by Arthur Miller 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/crucible-6.html>
Paranoia about “Reds” led in the 1950s to the House Un-American Activities 
Committee and Senator McCarthy’s witch-hunts. Himself a potential victim of the 
purges, Miller wisely chose to protest against them indirectly, using the 1692 
Salem witch trials as metaphor. In doing so he delivered a masterclass in the 
creative use of history and wrote one of the most powerful plays of the 20th 
century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-cold-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4328171571ac0e6d650633678df9704419adf867%2F0_0_1753_2630%2F1753.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20cold%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-cold-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20books%20about%20the%20cold%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Ftop-10-books-about-the-cold-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4328171571ac0e6d650633678df9704419adf867%2F0_0_1753_2630%2F1753.jpg>
 Alex Guinness in the 1959 adaptation of Our Man in Havana, directed by Carol 
Reed. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/COLUMBIA 
9. Our Man in Havana by Graham Greene 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/our-man-in-havana-2.html>
The cold war as comedy. Wormald, a vacuum cleaner salesman and inadvertent 
spy, sends British intelligence into a spin with his scale drawings of the 
parts of “the Atomic Pile Cleaner”. Greene called this novel an entertainment, 
but like all the best jokes it has a serious side, and is a reminder that the 
cold war was not only waged between superpowers but also sucked in a lot of 
smaller nations.

10. On the Beach by Nevil Shute 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/on-the-beach-2.html>
Shute is an unfashionable writer now, but he was hugely popular in the 1950s 
and 60s. This 1957 novel, set in Australia, tells of the time after a global 
nuclear war. Week by week a radioactive cloud is sweeping southwards, bringing 
with it inevitable death. Slightly clunky, it would win no prizes for literary 
style – but its artlessness and proliferation of seemingly inconsequential 
detail somehow make this story of ordinary people waiting for extinction both 
credible and affecting.

 * The Long Room by Francesca Kay is published by Faber, priced £14.99. It’s 
available from the Guardian bookshop for £11.99, with free p&p 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/362415/s/the-long-room/>
.
 