
There was genuine excitement on the conference platform. At last a vote that 
was close enough to require a count rather than a unanimous show of hands. A 
vote to challenge the SNP’s anti-fracking commitment on the grounds that it 
wasn’t hardline enough. It was also something of a surprise, as there didn’t 
appear to have been any arrangements put in place for such an eventuality.

“Can we have some stewards please?” asked an astonished Susan Aitken, the 
session chair. Five minutes later some stewards appeared, and it was eventually 
agreed that the official anti-fracking position had been adopted. The extreme 
anti-frackers had been defeated.

Unbelievably, the same thing happened at the very next vote on the SNP’s 
resolution for radical land reform. This time the stewards were more prepared 
and the votes were counted in under 15 minutes; the apparatchiks at the heart 
of Holyrood had been sent packing by the radical radical land reformers. Nicola 
would need to have a rethink. “Wow,” said Aitken, “Who said the SNP don’t have 
genuine debates?” Her tone initially suggested this wasn’t entirely a good 
thing, but she recovered well. “See. We’re not just a love-in.”

There may be something quite surreal – not to mention cloying – about a party 
conference at which almost everyone agrees with everyone else about everything, 
but the Tories and Labour would kill right now to have such unity within the 
ranks. If there is any dissent, it is being kept well off stage behind the 
heavy black drapes that line the auditorium; the party is on a roll, support is 
growing by the day and the last thing it needs is a quarrel. Positivity with a 
positive vision is the positive order of the day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsnp-love-in-conference-tories-labour-would-kill-for-unity-shown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa39dc055f20a672fff9779f3007da050d30ea493%2F0_132_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tories%20and%20Labour%20would%20kill%20for%20unity%20shown%20at%20SNP%20love-in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsnp-love-in-conference-tories-labour-would-kill-for-unity-shown%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tories%20and%20Labour%20would%20kill%20for%20unity%20shown%20at%20SNP%20love-in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Foct%2F16%2Fsnp-love-in-conference-tories-labour-would-kill-for-unity-shown%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa39dc055f20a672fff9779f3007da050d30ea493%2F0_132_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Mhairi Black won a standing ovation before she had said a word and the 
five-minute speech rule was waived for her appearance. Photograph: Russell 
Cheyne/Reuters 
Not that there is much to argue about other than whether radical land reform 
should be more radical, as most of the debates have centred on the relatively 
uncontentious issues of fairness and equality for Scotland. The only irony – or 
coincidence, depending on how you choose to look at it – is that the only place 
where fairness and equality have gone awol is in the upper echelons of the 
party itself. There are stars, superstars and the also-rans.

This year, the MSPs, many of whom have been members of the SNP for years and 
have helped build the party into the most powerful political force in Scotland, 
are the also-rans. Whenever there is an event featuring one of the new 
Westminster MPs, the interest levels in the hall ratchet up a notch. The power 
of the new always beats the over-familiar.

For the MSPs, the mood is “been there, seen them, done them”. It must be hard 
for some of them to readjust to their new lower place in the pecking order. The 
nadir was reached with a meet the MSPs session, hosted byHumza Yousaf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/may/26/scottish-independence-labour>
 and Derek Mackay, who were determined to treat the gig as if they wereMike and 
Bernie Winters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/aug/26/mike-winters> on speed. 
“Just look at those crazee yellow boots,” the double act exclaimed. Angela 
Constance may be known for her eccentric dress, but there must have been 
something more interesting to say about Scotland’s education minister than her 
shoes.

As for the superstars, Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> is clearly in a league 
of her own, butMhairi Black  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/09/mhairi-black-interview>and 
Alex Salmond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> aren’t far 
behind. Black got a standing ovation before she had said a word and the 
five-minute speech rule was waived for her appearance. Ten minutes? That will 
do nicely. She is undoubtedly a class act and modest with it but she must find 
the attention she is getting somewhat overwhelming. Not something that could be 
said about Alex Salmond, who thrives on it. The former leader of the SNP hadn’t 
originally featured in the programme but, by popular demand, space was found 
for him to speak at an emergency resolution on Syria.

Salmond didn’t disappoint. He was funny, humane and correct on all the main 
issues. “We need a diplomatic solution,” he insisted. This from a politician 
not normally noted for diplomacy. The conference programme is splattered with 
adverts proclaiming the SNP’s support for the third runway at Heathrow. And 
what had Alex done earlier in the day? He had dumped on one of the conference 
sponsors by saying the SNP wouldn’t necessarily support Heathrow unless 
Scotland got a better deal out of it. Time and place, Alex. Time and place. 
Nicola will be having words later.
 