
Lars Boom’s cortisol levels have returned to normal, according to the Dutch 
rider’s Astana team, who claimed vindication of their decision to allow him to 
start theTour de France <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance>.

Mark Cavendish frustrated again on Tour de France stage five
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/08/mark-cavendish-frustrated-tour-de-france-stage-five>
Astana, the team of the defending champion Vincenzo Nibali, allowed Boom to 
take to the start of the opening stage on Saturdaydespite him returning 
cortisol levels under the normal level 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/04/astana-lars-boom-tour-de-france-vincenzo-nibali>
.

Although the 29-year-old had not failed a drug test, Astana are members of the 
Movement for CredibleCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> (MPCC) 
and under the organisation’s voluntary code he should have been removed from 
competition for a period of eight days. The MPCC responded by suspending Astana 
pending the next meeting of its board. Astana conducted their own tests and on 
Wednesday announced the results.

Astana ignore moral code by giving Lars Boom Tour de France green light
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/04/astana-lars-boom-tour-de-france-vincenzo-nibali>
“After two days of competition, Boom’s cortisol levels have returned to a 
physiologically normal state and show no signs of illness or health risk for 
the rider in the ongoing grand tour,” the team said in a statement.

“Astana Pro Team medical staff then conducted a physical medical exam of the 
rider and found him to be healthy and fit to continue.Astana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/astana> Pro Team stands by its decision to 
keep Boom in the race ahead of stage one in Utrecht on 4 July.

“Boom and Astana Pro Team have been, currently are and will remain strong 
supporters of anti-doping measures taken by the UCI and the MPCC.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftour-de-france-stage-five-highlights&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436379584130%2FKP_346765_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tour%20de%20France%202015%3A%20stage%20five%20highlights%20%E2%80%93%20in%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftour-de-france-stage-five-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tour%20de%20France%202015%3A%20stage%20five%20highlights%20%E2%80%93%20in%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F08%2Ftour-de-france-stage-five-highlights&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F8%2F1436379584130%2FKP_346765_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Day five highlights from the Tour de France. 
Astana made the decision to allow Boom to race as news of the test came too 
late for him to be replaced in their nine-man Tour squad, but the decision 
invited further scrutiny of their moral code.

Earlier this year the Kazakh-based team risked having their WorldTour licence 
revoked when the UCI asked its licence commission to take action after a number 
of anti-doping violations in 2014.

After five stages of the Tour, Boom sits 150th in the general classification, 
more than 36 minutes down on the yellow jersey holder, Tony Martin, although 
his role in the race is to support Nibali’s defence of the crown.
 