
Fang to rights

Tim Burton's Frankenweenie 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/oct/10/frankenweenie-review-london-film-festival-tim-burton?newsfeed=true>
 – a stop-motion, black-and-white ode to the horror films of his youth – opened 
the 56th BFI London film festival last week. It was bursting with every horror 
reference you could think of, as young Victor Frankenstein brings his dead dog 
Sparky back to life with an experiment for the school science fair.

Burton has lovingly crafted his references – doesn't everything in stop motion 
require hours of planning and thought? – but a little bat told me that he has 
actually overlooked one crucial aspect of film-making. In one scene the boy's 
parents are watching a horror movie on TV as he creeps back from the pet 
cemetery having dug up his dead pup. The parents (voiced by Catherine O'Hara 
and Martin Short) are cuddling on the sofa in front of what turns out to be the 
1958 Hammer Horror version ofDracula <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0051554/>, 
directed by Terence Fisher and starring Christopher Lee and Peter Cushing and, 
of course, restored by BFI and Hammer in 2007. However, I understand that 
Burton has not cleared the rights for the use of his two clips of Dracula.

My man with the garlic whispered to me amid the gothic caves of the opening 
night party: "It's hard to believe, but I'm sure the clearance has got lost 
between various different factions. One side leaving it up to the other as 
usual. But I can assure you, Hammer know nothing about it…" Oops.
 Bronson Webb, Agyness Deyn and Richard Coyle at the LFF gala screening of 
Pusher. Photograph: Dave M. Benett/Getty Images 
Agyness happiness

Former model Agyness Deyn is happily married to actor Giovanni Ribisi and 
loves living in Hollywood now. She was, however, thrilled to be back on her old 
stomping ground of Hackney for the premiere of the UK remake of Danish crime 
thrillerPusher 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/oct/11/pusher-review?newsfeed=true>, in 
which she plays, in her debut acting performance, a pole dancer with a heart, 
Flo. She does it very well – so well, in fact, that I hearPusher's original 
director, Nicolas Winding Refn, is writing a follow-up movie for her character. 
"I think she's brilliant," Nicolas told me. "There's much more to her inPusher 
that we had to leave out but she's so beautiful on screen. She could have been 
a silent movie star."

Despite moving to Hollywood, Agyness will often be back in Britain as the film 
parts roll in. She's shootingSunset Song for Terence Davies in January, 
opposite Peter Mullan, who will play her father in the adaptation of Lewis 
Grassic Gibbon's tough Scottish tale. I jokingly mentioned that this being a 
Terence Davies movie, she'd probably be roped into a pub singalong and she 
squealed: "Yes, we just did a script reading the other day, and there's a 
singalong. How did you know?" Some things are just so reassuring, don't you 
think?

Harvey's no free spirit



Harvey Weinstein <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harvey-weinstein> has 
promised to single-handedly stamp out internet piracy. In his tough-talking yet 
warmly delivered LFF keynote speech to the industry at BFI Southbank, Harvey 
swore that, after the US elections, he would be getting together with internet 
companies such as Apple and Google and, on what he said would be "a day 
of reckoning", would be making them "an offer they can't refuse".

Harvey likened the free availability of films and other content on the 
internet to going into a clothes store and taking some shirts, "because we 
believe in free shirts. It's a nonsensical idea." He then treated the audience 
to clips of some of his favourite movies, many of which featured John Wayne, 
includingRio Bravo, Fort Apache and They Were Expendable 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0038160/>.

Harvey also took a swipe at Clint Eastwood following the actor's recent 
appearance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/video/2012/aug/31/clint-eastwood-obama-gop-convention-video>
 at the Republican convention. "I love the man, but I just don't like his 
politics. He's got it wrong this time around. I liked his new movieTrouble With 
the Curve but," he said, referring to Eastwood's mock debate with an invisible 
President Obama, "maybe it should have been called 'Trouble with the Chair'."

Spike Island? Nice one

Spike Island brought the 1990s flooding back and had the LFF buzzing. Mat 
Whitecross's film about five lads trying to get into the famousStone Roses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/stone-roses> concert is a lively and 
enjoyable trip, and a welcome lads' subculture movie that isn't about football. 
However, I hear there are plans for subtitles, or at least an accompanying 
glossary, when the film hits America. Trash himself struggled with some of the 
Manc accents but I revelled in hearing those quaint old expressions from a 
memorable era when it was cool up north: sound, nice one, kecks, buzzin', draw, 
soz, tomoz – and the one I'd completely forgotten, rave on.

Five cool picks this week



No: Chilean maestro Pablo Larraín won Cannes's directors' fortnight with this 
brilliant study of Pinochet-era politics, starring Gael García Bernal as an 
ad man, and the great Alfredo Castro as his corruptible boss.

My Brother the Devil: tender, nimble and smart British urban debut from Sally 
El Hosaini, about two brothers navigating life on a Hackney estate.

The Central Park Five: stirring classic documentary-making from legend Ken 
Burns, focusing on five Harlem youths accused of raping a woman in Central Park 
in 1989.

The Manxman: the last of the BFI's nine Hitchcock silent restorations, 
this sweeping romance forms the archive gala, with live performance of Stephen 
Horne's new score for "piano, fiddle, viola, oboe and folk harp".

Horses of God: terrific, vibrant look at young radicalisation. Moroccan 
director Nabil Ayouch's film has a touch ofCity of God 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/oct/19/city-god-action> about it, but with 
a more unsettlingly relevant edge.
 