
A 21-year-old musician says he has turned down repeated invitations to 
reaudition for the reality TV showAmerican Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol> because he fears the 
show’s producers are seeking to exploit his transgender identity.

Ryan Cassata auditioned for the 2015 season last October but was unsuccessful. 
The producers told him his performance was not “contemporary enough”. This year 
a casting director got back in touch, inviting him to reaudition for the 2016 
season.

He has posted an open letter on YouTube, addressing the producers of the show, 
which he describes as “pre-casted”. In it, he says: “I’ve received many phone 
calls and emails begging me to try out in front of the executive producers of 
the show in the past couple of months.

“I’m not interested. Last year I was interested and I tried out but you didn’t 
want me … being transgender wasn’t such a hot issue in the media like it is now.

“I realise that you only want me because I’m a transgender person who happens 
to be a singer, not because I’m a singer who just happens to be transgender.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbOWFjLd-kf8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbOWFjLd-kf8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbOWFjLd-kf8&media=>
 Ryan Cassata’s open letter to American Idol on YouTube 
Cassata quotes phone conversations which he believes reveal American Idol’s 
motivation for getting back in touch: “You want someone that’s transgender and 
you don’t want someone ‘that people might make fun of’ or someone who ‘looks 
too much like they’re men who transitioned to women’.”

He points out the stereotyping is not limited to trans people: “You told me 
that American Idol wants ‘sexual blonde girls who are dumb’ and ‘black girls 
who are dramatic’.”

Since Cassata’s audition, the former Olympic athlete Caitlyn Jenner has come 
out as transgender in a high-profile TV interview, followed by a documentary 
series focusing on her transition. She won an ESPN courage award and is now 
nominated for a Teen Choice award. The profile of trans people has also been 
raised by Netflix’s Orange Is the New Black, which stars trans and non-binary 
characters played by Laverne Cox and Ruby Rose.

Cassata has a YouTube channel, with more than 23,000 subscribers, where he 
posts songs and talks about issues affecting the trans community.As well as 
live gigs and talks <https://www.facebook.com/ryancassata>, he appeared on 
several US TV shows in 2009-10 to talk about his transition and, he says, 
remind young people ‘there are other youth like them’.

But he did not tell the producers he was transgender and believes they found 
his prominent online profile before getting back in touch. He says he had to 
refuse the invitation to reaudition several times.

American Idol’s producers said in a statement: “American Idol searches far and 
wide to ensure that talent in any part of the country has a chance to audition. 
There are various ways for individuals to audition including our open , posting 
their auditions online, our east and west coast bus tours, through partner 
apps, etc.

“Our audition team has often reached out to former participants to audition 
again. Many find that their voice improves over a year and they have greater 
success in their second or third attempt. American Idol is about finding great 
talent and the show welcomes diversity in its participants. We will look into 
the veracity of the statements in Ryan Cassata’s open letter.”

Fox announced in May that the show, which used to top the ratings but has been 
in steady decline,is to be cancelled after 15 seasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/11/fox-cancels-american-idol>
.

The top comment on Cassata’a video is a message of support left by another 
trans YouTuber with a growing profile. Aydian Dowling received extensive media 
coverage after he entered andwon the public vote 
<http://www.menshealth.com/best-life/aydian-dowling-mens-health-guy> in Men’s 
Health magazine’s Ultimate Guy competition. The competition has a broad focus 
on “overcoming obstacles, maintaining a healthy lifestyle, giving back to their 
community and loved ones, and defining success”.


He writes to Cassata: “So glad you stood up for us and didn’t just take the 
role they wanted you to play.”

Cassata says he is not looking for an apology from American Idol, but is 
trying to raise awareness among trans people of the risks of being manipulated 
by the media. He told the Guardian: “We need to protect transgender people and 
part of that is positive and educational representation … I just want the media 
to be more honest.”


In his open letter he says: “I feel that American Idol would exploit me and 
maybe exploit the transgender community for the purpose of TV ratings and 
profit. That’s not the right reason to go on television and that’s not the 
right thing to do for my community.”
 