
Arriva, the bus and train operator, is being acquired by Germany's Deutsche 
Bahn in a £1.585bn deal that will create a major passenger transport firm.

Deutsche Bahn told the City this morning that it will pay 775p per share to 
take control of Arriva. Arriva's board has accepted the offer, which is a 34% 
premium on its value prior toDeutsche Bahn's first approach a month ago 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2010/apr/19/arrivabusiness>
. Shareholders will also get an 18p dividend.

Rumours of the deal were floating around the City last night 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/apr/20/arriva-faces-deutsche-bahn-takeover>
, and Deutche Bahn announced its success before trading began in London this 
morning.

The deal means that Deutche Bahn has triumphed over French rival SNCF, which 
had hoped to merge withArriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness>. It may trigger a wave of 
consolidation across the UK transport sector.

Arriva runs the CrossCountry rail franchise, as well as pretty much all the 
trains in Wales. It also operates bus services in Liverpool, Leeds, Leicester, 
Glasgow and Newcastle, as well as around a fifth of London's buses.

It also operates transport services in another 11 European countries, making 
it attractive to Deutsche Bahn, which is owned by the German state and keen to 
expand.

As Dr Rüdiger Grube, chief executive officer of Deutsche Bahn, put it:


Arriva's activities will strengthen Deutsche Bahn's strategic positioning in 
Europe, principally through Arriva's successful targeting of Europe's 
increasingly liberalised and fast growing transport markets which are of 
strategic interest to Deutsche Bahn. Arriva will give Deutsche Bahn the 
platform to expand in Europe and enhance its position as one of Europe's 
leading passenger transport groups.

There has been speculation of a rival bid from SNCF, but Sir Richard 
Broadbent, chairman of Arriva, said Deutsche Bahn's offer "fully reflects the 
value of the business".

In other City news this morning.... house builder Persimmon has said that 
sales are 20% higher 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10460715>
 than a year ago.

Sports Direct has said it is on track to hit earnings targets 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10460710>
 for this year after healthy trading over Easter.

And WH Smith has posted a 2% jump in profits 
<http://www.londonstockexchange.com/exchange/prices-and-news/news/market-news/market-news-detail.html?announcementId=10460744>
 in the last six months, and predicted that the UK flight disruption will not 
have a material impact on its trading.
 