
Take me there: Lido Bristol

Yes, we know the leaves are falling and there's a nip in the air, but at the 
glorious Lido Bristol it's forever summer. The pool, which emerged beautifully 
from a £2m refurbishment four years ago, is encouraging us not to pack away our 
swimming cossies just yet with an enticing Indian Summer Swim & Lunch offer. 
For £30 visitors will get full access to the pool, sauna, steam room and hot 
tub from 10am to noon, followed by a two-course lunch in the poolside 
restaurant. If it rains during your swim session, you get a free glass of 
bubbly. The offer is available until 31 October (0117 933 9530;lidobristol.com 
<http://www.lidobristol.com/>).

It's a good time to... go mushroom picking

It's autumn and the forest floors are alive with fungi. Delicious or deadly? 
You'll need expert guidance to be sure. Luckily there are events popping up 
(like mushrooms!) all over the place to help you tell your porcini from your 
puffball. The National Trust and the Forestry Commission offer guided mushroom 
walks in October. At Mottisfont Abbey in Hampshire, you can join the resident 
expert for a fungi foray in the grounds (booking essential, £5 plus normal 
admission charges, 29 October;
nationaltrust.org.uk/mottisfont/things-to-see-and-do/events 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/mottisfont/things-to-see-and-do/events/#iframeEvents>
), while the Forestry Commission will run a family-friendly walk in Kielder 
Forest (14 October, £6 adults,www.forestry.gov.uk <http://www.forestry.gov.uk/>
). Make a weekend of it with a Mushroom Foraging package at the Hotel du Vin in 
Poole on 12-14 October (hotelduvin.com <http://www.hotelduvin.com/>). The 
weekend includes a half-day foraging in the Dorset countryside, a cookery 
class, a mushroom-themed meal and two nights' accommodation, from £299pp.

Give me a break: The week's best deals

HOME Active half-term With the October half-term holiday looming, PGL is 
offering two for the price of one deals on selected children's activity breaks. 
Book a seven-night stay at Boreatton Park in Shropshire for one child for £445 
and a second child goes free. The offer is available for the weeks of 20 or 27 
October. Activities such as rafting, abseiling, quad bikes, zip wires and all 
meals are included (pgl.co.uk <http://www.pgl.co.uk/pglweb>)

AWAY Venice Simplon Orient Express Short break operator Kirker is offering 
some tempting discounts on the Venice Simplon Orient Express this autumn. A 
three-night trip including a night on the train from London with all meals, two 
nights' B&B at a three‑star hotel in Venice and the flight back costs from 
£1,999pp, a saving of £450pp. Based on an 18 October departure (
kirkerholidays.com <http://www.kirkerholidays.com/>)

Email Joanne O'Connor at magazine@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
 