
Take me there: the Faroes

Why go?
It all started with a jumper. The famous sweater worn by TV detective Sarah 
Lund inThe Killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/mar/10/the-killing-sophie-grabol-sarah-lund>
 was tracked down to this weather-beaten archipelago in the North Atlantic, 
instantly conferring on it the status of Europe’s new fashion frontier. But 
there’s more to the Faroes than knitwear. The vibrant local music scene is 
celebrated under the midnight sun at the hedonistic G! music festival in July (
gfestival.com <http://www.gfestival.com/>) and, from the same organisers, the 
newHoyma festival 
<http://www.gfestival.com/enskt/archive/article/?tx_ttnews[tt_news]=1469&cHash=b845dd3d02abe8b768daafd8c4e34eb8>
 in November which will see acoustic performances taking place in the homes of 
locals. Meanwhile, a handful of visionary chefs are transforming the islands 
into an outpost for the new Nordic cuisine.

What to do
The Faroes are heaven for hikers, though you’ll need to be prepared for 
unpredictable weather. The best way to flit between islands is by helicopter, 
which the locals use like a bus service. Streymoy is the biggest island and 
home to the capital Tórshavn, where you can pick up a Sarah Lund-style jumper 
at Guðrun & Guðrun (gudrungudrun.com <http://www.gudrungudrun.com/>), wander 
among the colourful wooden buildings on the atmospheric Tinganes peninsula or 
catch some live music at Café Natúr (1 Áarvegur).

Where to eat
Sample a Faroese take on the new Nordic cuisine at Koks in Tórshavn (koks.fo 
<http://www.koks.fo/>). For a more informal experience, Anna and Óli Rubeksen 
offer home-cooked meals in their farmhouse in Velbastaður (+298 20 61 00).

Where to stay
The Hotel Føroyar on a hillside overlooking Tórshavn is the closest the island 
has to a designer hotel (doubles from £190,hotelforoyar.com 
<http://www.hotelforoyar.com/>). The turf-roofed Gjáargarður Guesthouse on 
Eysturoy makes a great base for exploring the northern islands (doubles from 
£90,gjaargardur.fo <http://gjaargardur.fo/>)

Insider tip
Susanna Sørensen, of Visit Faroe Islands (visitfaroeislands.com) recommends, a 
visit to the Østrøm (ostrom.fo <http://ostrom.fo/>). “It’s a warehouse 
converted into a shop/café/events space and brings together fashion, food and 
homeware brands under one roof.”

Give me a break
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F03%2Ftravel-tips-faroe-islands-london-andalucia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F30%2F1406731895021%2Fea1a4d15-0d8d-4138-ba08-b85dfe284929-1776x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20the%20Faroe%20Islands%2C%20%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F03%2Ftravel-tips-faroe-islands-london-andalucia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20the%20Faroe%20Islands%2C%20%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F03%2Ftravel-tips-faroe-islands-london-andalucia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F30%2F1406731895021%2Fea1a4d15-0d8d-4138-ba08-b85dfe284929-1776x2040.jpeg>
 Summer in the city: Town Hall Hotel, Bethnal Green. Photograph: Ed Reeve 
Home: kids go free at top London hotel The ultra-hip Town Hall Hotel in 
London’s Bethnal Green is allowing one child to stay free for every two adults 
booking a room this summer. Rates for the Kids Go Free package start from £172 
per night and include an extra bed for a child up to 12, breakfast for three 
and use of an Xbox games console. The hotel is a short walk from the V&A Museum 
of Childhood and has a pool (townhallhotel.com/specials 
<http://townhallhotel.com/specials>).


Away: Andalucian cottage break
Stay at a traditional Andalucian cortijo perched on the edge of the turquoise 
Portillo lake, near Castril, for half-price this August with Under the Thatch. 
The newly renovated Casa Azul has just been added to the portfolio so there’s 
still availability, with prices from £234 for a three-night break. The cottage 
sleeps six and has access to a secluded beach – inflatable canoe and snorkel 
provided (underthethatch.co.uk <http://www.underthethatch.co.uk>).
 