
When is a children’s book not a children’s book? JK Rowling and Philip Pullman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippullman> have changed the answer to 
that question. If we see an adult reading one of their books we don’t think 
it’s a sign of regression. We think it’s proof of the new freedom to cross what 
used to be barriers.

And how does this affect our view of children’s books from the past? Do we 
expect the new dispensation will allow them to escape their categories as well? 
Treasure Island is an interesting case in point. When it was first published in 
1883,Robert Louis Stevenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-louis-stevenson> made no bones about 
it being a “boy’s adventure story”, and when he discussed its origin in other 
pieces of writing by other writers, he confirmed the impression.

By taking elements of his narrative from Washington Irving and Daniel Defoe 
(as well as lesser-known figures such as WHG Kingston, Captain Frederick 
Marryat and Charles E Pearce), he allied his own tale with others that were 
designed to make a specific appeal to younger readers. To this end, he 
cheerfully admitted, “Plagiarism was rarely carried further.”

He wanted to create an archetype, and he did. Nowadays all pirates (though not 
Somali pirates, interestingly) are in some sense a version of Long John Silver, 
even when they have got two legs – think of Captain Jack Sparrow. In the same 
sort of way, all stories of treasure-hunting have Jim Hawkins’ journey in the 
Hispaniola as their ghostly counterpart. That’s part of the appeal, of course: 
when we read Treasure Island we feel that we’re in at the beginning of 
something.

Yet in order for the book to keep working, it obviously has to be exciting as 
well as distinguished – and for that to happen, childhood impressions have to 
coalesce with adult ones. In my own case, this is tricky because I didn’t read 
Treasure Island as a child. Not because my parents and I had anything against 
it in particular – we weren’t much in favour of books in general. I read 
Beatrix Potter, pretended to read The Wind in the Willows, then closed my eyes 
for 10 years and opened them again to find I was doing my A-levels.

It was only when I got to university that I started to catch up and read a lot 
of things I might reasonably have been expected to know already – Treasure 
Island among them. I would have been 19 then and the book certainly passed the 
excitement test. In fact, I still find it impossible to read it (especially the 
opening chapters) without inventing a childhood I never had, and half-scaring 
myself now as I wish that I had done then. The isolated inn; the arrival of 
Billy Bones; Blind Pew tap-tapping through the mist; the unseen but unignorable 
one-legged man; the delivery of the Black Spot … Stevenson wrote the scenes 
very quickly (he wrote the whole first half of the book in about a fortnight, 
in fact) and the speed of his creating shows in brilliant ways. Everything has 
a feeling of rush and dash and hurtle – to the extent that Jim never has time 
to think about the consequences of any event. Things just happen, dreadful 
things – natural deaths, unnatural deaths – and then another thing happens. 
It’s a weirdly existential universe.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp1QThmO1J2E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp1QThmO1J2E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp1QThmO1J2E&media=>
 Watch this trailer for the 1990 film of Treasure Island starring Charlton 
Heston and Christian Bale 
To put all this another way: Treasure Island defies its original 
categorisation as children’s (or more specifically boy’s) literature for a 
number of overlapping reasons. Because the memories (for those who have them) 
of enthralled early readings survive into later life and become part of our 
adult fabric. Because the excitements created by the story have an archetypal 
and enduring resonance. Because Stephenson writes extremely well, with a speed, 
economy and eye for metaphor that appeals equally strongly (though possibly for 
slightly different reasons) to adults as much as it does to children. And 
because beneath the limpid surface of the prose, Stevenson maps some seriously 
interesting emotional states, which also speak as powerfully to adults as they 
do to children.

At the centre of them lies a complex story about father-son feelings – it’s no 
exaggeration to say that this operates as the secret engine of the book (and of 
many other books by Stevenson as well). Our narrator Jim’s actual father is 
already ill when the book opens, and dies shortly after the initial skirmish 
with the pirates: Jim has very little time to grieve for him (as he also has 
very little time for reflection of any kind in what follows) but once the trip 
to the island is proposed, he finds himself in a proxy-son relationship with 
the most complicated character in the book. With Mr Silver.

Looked at from one point of view, Silver is a murderer, a devilish deceiver, 
and violent demon – with a large blond face “like a ham”. From another point of 
view, he is resourceful, brave, canny, ingenious, clever in his manipulation of 
people, and a sociably minded good cook. No wonder Jim finds him attractive as 
well as alarming.

No wonder, too, that when Silver claims to recognise something of his younger 
self in Jim (“I’ve always liked you, I have, for a lad of spirit, and the 
picter of my own self when I was young and handsome”) we sense that he is doing 
more than simply getting Jim on side.

He’s noticing something in Jim’s own character that is acquainted with vice, 
with greed, with the idea of being fallen. Noticing, in fact, that everyone on 
board the Hispaniola, pirates and non-pirates, is an opportunistic “gentleman 
o’ fortune”. And as the action develops and the excitement builds, we realise 
that we are being presented at the same time with a very subtle portrait of the 
guilts and griefs – and the attractions and revulsions that flow from these 
things – that form the foundation of this and many other father-son 
relationships. Jim and Silver are bound together, whether they like it or not. 
“I’ll save your life,” Silver says to him at one point, “if so be as I can – 
from them. But, see here, Jim – tit for tat – you save long John from swinging.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2Ftreasure-island-long-john-silver-is-a-secret-father-figure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F25%2F1416921445780%2Fdb5bac87-2141-4518-ab7f-7b4a26eb24d0-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Treasure%20Island%3A%20Long%20John%20Silver%20is%20a%20secret%20father%20figure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2Ftreasure-island-long-john-silver-is-a-secret-father-figure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Treasure%20Island%3A%20Long%20John%20Silver%20is%20a%20secret%20father%20figure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F29%2Ftreasure-island-long-john-silver-is-a-secret-father-figure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F25%2F1416921445780%2Fdb5bac87-2141-4518-ab7f-7b4a26eb24d0-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Robert Louis Stevenson in Samoa in 1894. Photograph: Bettmann/CORBIS 
There are plenty more examples of such (as it were) “adult” themes 
incorporated into the (as it were) “young” adventure story. Themes that tend to 
cluster around various notions of uncertainty. Not just the uncertainty of the 
narrative (will the Hispaniola arrive safely, will various plots be discovered, 
will the treasure be there?) but uncertainty of a more fundamental kind. We 
find, for instance, that different kinds and classes of character are all made 
to speak in slightly different languages, so that communication between them is 
constantly on the verge of breaking down. (The squawking of the parrot, Captain 
Flint, is an extreme version of this.)

In the same sort of way, we find that animals are at one point dismissed as 
“dumb creatures”, only to see that people are continually presented in images 
that draw attention to their creaturely qualities: people are variously 
described as being “as conceited as a cock upon a wall”, or as filthy as rats, 
or as leaping like a cat upon a mouse, or as rising early like an early bird, 
etc. The effect is both to make us think that creatures are not so dumb after 
all, and also to suppose that the behaviour of the characters in the book puts 
their humanity at risk.

But never in ways that allow the undoubted darkness that lies below the 
waterline of Treasure Island to erupt and overwhelm the adventure-life that 
happens on the surface. Bad things happen, sure, and the island itself is a 
kind of poisonous nightmare (perhaps the nightmare of adolescence, in which Jim 
has to sort out his feelings about his dead father and find a responsible way 
to achieve his independence). The drive towards home and resolution, however, 
is never really in doubt. This, as much as the book’s subtleties is, of course, 
a part of its enduring appeal.

The adaptation about to be unveiled at the National Theatre in London  
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk>is the latest in a long line of reprintings, 
re-illustratings and adaptations for screen and stage. Yet the balance of its 
achievement is what makes this appeal so significant and impressive. As the 
lights come up and we see the silhouette of Treasure Island on the horizon, the 
thrill of our adventure can’t block out our memories of Marlow, in Heart of 
Darkness, staring from the deck of his own ship into the dark heart of the 
Congo wilderness.

• Treasure Island is on at the National Theatre.  
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/treasure-island>Andrew Motion talks 
about the work of Robert Louis Stevenson, whose novel Treasure Island inspired 
his own books, Silver and The New World, on 23 January, 5.30pm, Olivier 
theatre, London SE1,nationaltheatre.org.uk/discover/platforms/andrew-motion 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/discover/platforms/andrew-motion>
 