
I am standing stock-still on a twisting path high above Chamonix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/chamonix>, open-mouthed and agog. All 
around me are the soaring peaks of the Mont Blanc massif, but they are not the 
reason for my astonishment. Just ahead of us on the trail – which has risen 
thrillingly through cliffs, pinnacles and precarious paths – twoibex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/nov/03/goats-italy-dam-precipitous-heights>
 are mating, each notch of the male’s enormous curving horns lit up by the 
afternoon sun.

Wild alpine goats weren’t the only exotic creatures I met on the Tour du Mont 
Blanc <http://www.autourdumontblanc.com/en/>, one of the world’s greatest 
walks, a high-altitude trail around the entire massif that takes the hiker 
anti-clockwise from France to Italy to Switzerland, then back into France for a 
climactic ascent to the beautiful Lac Blanc. As well as jumping fish, lizards 
and snakes (one practically slithered over my boot), there were so many marmots 
I eventually stopped taking photos of them.

The TMB <http://www.autourdumontblanc.com/en/> is 170km long with 10,000m of 
ascent (that’s 1km more than climbing Everest from sea level) and is usually 
trekked in 11 daily stages. My sister Jackie walked the first day and a half 
with me and we arrived in mid-June, a week before it is deemed properly safe to 
go, given the risk of snow high up. Although it was still low season, Chamonix 
was gearing up for a party. This summer,the French town is celebrating the 
“golden era of mountaineering” <http://1865.chamonix.fr/en>, this being the 
150th anniversary of the year climbing literally reached new peaks: a whopping 
65 alps were conquered in 1865, seven on the Mont Blanc massif. There will be 
films, plays, books, paintings, photographs and commemorative climbs.

It seemed unlikely anyone would ever commemorate our exploits as we set off in 
drizzle from the start inLes Houches 
<http://www.leshouches.com/hiking,222,en.html>, just south of Chamonix, the 
spectacular views up the valley non-existent. But by the time we’d fixed up our 
poles and clacked into the gloom, the tips of the mountains enclosing us had 
begun to emerge, tantalisingly, through wisps of cloud. Only then did the sheer 
scale of what we were now in the heart of begin to dawn on us: this was an 
extraordinary, elemental new world, a place where the horizon had shifted 2km 
upwards.

Through pine-scented woodland we puffed, before bursting out at a fabulously 
shaky suspension bridge over the raging Bionnassay river 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Bionnassay+river&biw=1644&bih=1268&tbm=isch&imgil=l25Rb5__8GeomM%253A%253BmTszBNGTtsnMZM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fwww.corbisimages.com%25252Fstock-photo%25252Frights-managed%25252F42-47009745%25252Fbridge-over-the-bionnassay-river-near-mont&source=iu&pf=m&fir=l25Rb5__8GeomM%253A%252CmTszBNGTtsnMZM%252C_&usg=__v5s9zYUUsELF0QVUGSSN83LeyfY%3D&ved=0CCwQyjc&ei=nzuaVZH-JsTB7AaKlZzwAg#imgrc=l25Rb5__8GeomM%3A&usg=__v5s9zYUUsELF0QVUGSSN83LeyfY%3D>
. It’s fairly new, avalanches and floods having swept away its predecessors, 
something we tried not to think about as we crossed one by one, hearing and 
feeling the meltwater thundering by underneath. Then we turned right at a 
glacier and had our next big surprise, entering vast breezy meadows that seemed 
to be turning ever-richer shades of pink, yellow and blue, thanks to the sun 
now streaming down on the gently swaying flowers coming into bloom. “Let me 
tell you a secret,” an exhausted Swiss woman told me later as she undid her 
boots. “Many of us prefer the flowers to the summits.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437062963591%2F5aaca1fa-c00b-4c90-a5ee-2f591ec2d8ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F16%2F1437062963591%2F5aaca1fa-c00b-4c90-a5ee-2f591ec2d8ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The trail on the home straight, heading for Brévent then Les Houches. 
Photograph: Paul Boyd 
When the TMB stays high, people tend to spend the night in refuges that dot 
the route. Most are great and some are stupendous: what they lack in space and 
comfort, they make up for with food, booze, company, locations and sunsets. But 
when the trail dips into villages and hamlets, most hikers rough it in hostels. 
However, if you go unguided (the trail’s well marked) and carry your bag 
instead of having it transported (don’t go over 10kg), you’ll save a fortune – 
meaning you can treat yourself, as I did, to a fancy hotel or a charming B&B. 
After all, nothing gets you up an alp like a good sleep and a triple-red-berry 
tea infusion.

So on our first night, in the delightful village of Les Contamines-Montjoie 
<http://en.lescontamines.com/>, we stayed at La Ferme du Bon Papa 
<http://en.lescontamines.com/bed-breakfast-la-ferme-du-bon-papa.html> (doubles 
€75 B&B). This is a family-run B&B in a recently renovated yet gloriously 
rustic 17th-century farmhouse, still retaining its original timbers, with lots 
of old farming tools adorning the walls – and acorns, acorns everywhere.

I was glad I’d got fit because stage two was a 20km monster taking in the 
imposing peak of theTête Nord des Fours 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z_ow-A1qj4I>. One minute I was saying goodbye 
to Jackie and hiking past superb horseshoe ridges, heading for where snow still 
lay. The next, I was cowering in a tiny hut as a freezing wind howled outside, 
pulling on two fleeces, three pairs of gloves, a woolly hat and a waterproof. 
Then, as quickly as it had blown in, the blizzard blew off – and I reached the 
Tête.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437140304463%2Fd61e54e4-aad2-4582-9608-e51a0391133e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437140304463%2Fd61e54e4-aad2-4582-9608-e51a0391133e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The tavern-like Refuge des Mottets. Photograph: Alamy 
“Fancy some crackers and hummus?” a Californian called Duane asked me after we 
had descended, shivering, from the summit. As we tucked in, I could hear the 
clanking of cowbells rising up from the valley below. Then I gazed to the right 
of some peaks swaddling a distant glacier – and realised I was looking at 
Italy, tomorrow’s destination.

“Welcome to Refuge des Mottets <http://www.lesmottets.com/tour-du-mont-blanc/>
,” (from €43pp half-board) said a sign on the door of this former dairy farm 
where I was to spend the night. “We don’t have the phone.” What it did have, 
though, was a huge tavern-like dining area with a crackling wood-burner and a 
wonderful collection of dairy bric-a-brac hanging from the ceiling: pots, pans, 
flasks, vials, giant cowbells, chicken coops and even some old-fashioned 
underwear.

It was a fabulous introduction to the world of the refuge, fun and friendly, 
but it was nothing compared to the sublimeRifugio Elisabetta 
<http://www.rifugioelisabetta.com/> (from €37pp half-board), a mercifully easy 
three-hour hike away the next day (though I hung around the pass that separates 
France and Italy for ages, looking down in awe at valley after sweeping valley, 
and watching clouds drift across Mont Blanc, the highest mountain in western 
Europe, standing 4,810m tall).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437141149783%2Ff810eaf3-5436-461c-a3b4-1a891e2d69b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437141149783%2Ff810eaf3-5436-461c-a3b4-1a891e2d69b2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Path up to the Fenêtre d’Arpette, the TMB’s highest point. Photograph: Andrew 
Gilchrist 
Nestling in the shadow of the Aiguille de Tré La Tête 
<http://www.lesia.obspm.fr/perso/jean-marie-malherbe/Montagne/Val-Veny/refuge-tre-la-tete.jpg>
, which could be seen through the window from my bunk-bed, the refuge served us 
a herb risotto followed by pork and courgettes, before letting us loose on its 
grappa cabinet. I spent the night drinking with Britton, a bear-hunter from 
Montana. “That was two grappa,” said Mauro, the manager, as he totted up my 
bill in the morning. “I think it was three,” I said. “Actually,” he smiled, “it 
was four.”

A lake-lined Roman road threads down from Elisabetta and it’s a magnificent 
walk, a boulevard of buttresses, an avenue of aiguilles, so near the massif’s 
southern flank you can practically lean against it for a breather. And then it 
got even better: the route swung up a mountain to the right, rose sharply 
through a forest ringing with birdsong, then spilled out into meadows 
shimmering with golden flowers, every step upwards giving an even better view 
of the massif thrusting up into a perfect blue sky.

I’d arranged a terrific halfway treat for myself that night: a stay at the 
Auberge de la Maison <http://www.aubergemaison.it/en/index.cfm/hotel.html> 
(doubles from €159 B&B) in Entrèves, near Courmayeur. This is an outstanding 
hotel that oozes alpine atmosphere: paintings of mountains and mountain folk 
hang on every wall, giant ibex-horn chandeliers hang from every ceiling, the 
foyer has a larch-block floor that clacks softly as you walk across it, and the 
pool is overlooked by the broodingAiguille Noire 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aiguille_Noire_de_Peuterey>, as are its 
balconies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437140400524%2Fa04e3b6c-4521-48d8-8d95-bee7797dbe10-2060x1302.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437140400524%2Fa04e3b6c-4521-48d8-8d95-bee7797dbe10-2060x1302.jpeg>
 Andrew at the Fenêtre d’Arpette, Switzerland. Photograph: Paul Boyd 
“Put this on,” said Anna, the hotel masseuse, handing me a disposable paper 
thong. She then smeared me in spiced chocolate oil and, over the course of the 
next hour, smoothed my aches away. I floated into dinner afterwards, opting for 
ravioli and rack of lamb cooked to a perfect pink, rounded off with cheese and 
genepi, the digestif named after the mountain flower that provides its delicate 
flavour.

The best sunset of the trip arrived the following night, at Rifugio Bonatti 
<http://www.rifugiobonatti.it/?lang=en> (dorm beds from €25.50), reached via an 
intoxicating hike along theMont de la Saxe 
<http://www.walkingeurope.info/walks/walks/walk_descrip/6103/> that ended with 
me bounding through an enormous boulder field. “It’s as if the sky is on fire,” 
said an Italian woman as dark clouds spooled over the veins of snow topping the 
gloriousGrandes Jorasses <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grandes_Jorasses>. 
Named afterthe great explorer, Walter Bonatti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2010/jun/30/walter-bonatti-mountain-climber>
, who died in 2011, the refuge is stuffed with superb photographs of his 
adventures, from shinning up impossible pinnacles to diving off giant icebergs. 
That night, I slept in a mixed-sex dorm, sharing with an English couple (a 
neuroscientist and a philosopher) and a German who’d walked there from Slovenia.

Switzerland beckoned. Although lacking the pulse-quickening drama of the 
Italian side, the 20km trail toLa Fouly 
<http://www.myswitzerland.com/en-gb/home.html> is not without its delights. 
Bilberry, larch and alpenrose early on, while the ascent to the border is 
thrilling. Then – clank, clank – you’re back in cow country, meandering over 
and alongside delightful rivers. On reaching La Fouly, I stayed at theEdelweiss 
<http://www.ledelweiss.ch/Lafouly/index.php> (rooms from around £54), laden 
with window-boxes and with great views ofMont Dolent 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mont_Dolent>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe387c1aa27f2726c99374dc017a4eea0b0538aaf%2F0_121_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe387c1aa27f2726c99374dc017a4eea0b0538aaf%2F0_121_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Sunrise from the window of Rifugio Elisabetta. Photograph: Andrew Gilchrist 
My feet got so hot the following afternoon that I sneaked through someone’s 
back garden and stuck them in the river that cuts throughIssert 
<http://www.randonature.ch/sentiers-didactiques/valais/le-raccard-du-ble/raccard-ble-images/VUE-ISSERT.jpg>
, the third of three idyllic Swiss villages you pass through on the way to
Champex-Lac <http://www.myswitzerland.com/en-gb/champex-lac.html>, 1,466m up. 
Everywhere, there are slanting dark-timbered barns and ornate chalets huddling 
up the slopes.

That night my pal Paul met me at the Splendide <http://www.hotel-splendide.ch/>
 (from €61pp half-board), a family hotel in Champex with spacious rooms and 
commanding views over the valleys way below. After an excellent dinner of beef 
medallions, carrots and chips followed by a lap around the ravishing lake at 
sunset, we got an early night. Tomorrow was the big one.

We hit the Fenêtre d’Arpette 
<http://www.chamonix-mont-blanc-hiking.com/21fenetredel'arp.html>, the TMB’s 
highest-altitude point, at about 1pm, sweaty and exhausted, having poled 
through a magnificent yet punishing procession of forest, rock, crags, scree 
and snow in relentless sunshine for five hours. And now we were up at 2,665m – 
breathing the cool thin air, looking down on the Trient glacier, and trying not 
to fall to our deaths as we posed for photographs. “I’ll be thinking about this 
day on my deathbed,” said Paul, when we finally descended.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437140211577%2F82382fc9-674f-41e5-9450-a540ca2b0671-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trekking%20the%20Tour%20du%20Mont%20Blanc&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F19%2Ftrekking-tour-du-mont-blanc-the-alps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F17%2F1437140211577%2F82382fc9-674f-41e5-9450-a540ca2b0671-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Andrew on the final day of the trek, with Mont Blanc behind. Photograph: Paul 
Boyd 
Besides the pink church, the Auberge du Mont Blanc 
<http://www.aubergemontblanc.com/en/> (aubergemontblanc.com), the bustling 
hostel where we spent the night, is pretty much all there is in Trient. It’s 
famed for its tomato fondue but there was only one thing we were interested in: 
the sauna. I drank a bucket of water and lay in there till I felt soothed – 
which took a long time.

We crammed the last three stages of the tour into two days, crossing back into 
France for “the greatest short walk in the world”: the balcony trail that winds 
so steeply up to theRefuge du Lac Blanc 
<http://www.chamonet.com/accommodation/huts/lac-blanc-refuge-2352m-massif-du-mont-blanc>
 (€55pp half-board, +33 4 50 53 49 14) that there are metal ladders and rails 
fixed into the cliffs. This is the TMB’s magnificent grand finale, a 
sensational vantage point giving staggering views of the massif’s 25km-long 
northern flank.

After a superb dinner of pork in red wine, we went to bed and got up at 5am 
for the sunrise, watching as the morning light roused the slumbering massif, 
every inch of it perfectly reflected in the still waters of Lac Blanc. It is 
one of the greatest sights in the world and we sat there silent and spellbound 
for three incredible hours.

That night we stayed in Chamonix, at the bijou Hotel Le Faucigny 
<http://www.hotelfaucigny-chamonix.com/> (hotelfaucigny-chamonix.com), racing 
to catch the spa before it shut, having survived the knee-jolting 1,500m 
descent to Les Houches. I closed my eyes as the warm water bubbled around my 
throbbing limbs, still able to see the perfect white crest of magical Mont 
Blanc, my constant companion for 10 extraordinary, unforgettable days.

Way to go
Flights were provided by easyJet <http://www.easyjet.com/en/>, which flies to 
Geneva from 13 UK airports including Edinburgh, Manchester and London. 
Transfers from Geneva to Chamonix were provided byMountain Drop-offs 
<http://www.mountaindropoffs.com/> – €50 return. Tour of Mont Blanc by Kev 
Reynolds 
<http://www.cicerone.co.uk/product/detail.cfm/book/779/title/tour-of-mont-blanc#.VbIDnyrBzRZ>
 (Cicerone) is an excellent guidebook to the route. Essential: compass and the 
two waterproof 1:25,000 IGN maps that cover the route. Refuges, hotels and 
hostels provide picnic lunches andweather reports 
<http://chamonix-meteo.com/chamonix-mont-blanc/weather/>.
 