
England are set to appoint an Australian as their new head coach but it is 
Trevor Bayliss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss>, not Jason 
Gillespie, who is now understood to have accepted the position.

Six weeks before the first Ashes Test, in Cardiff on 8 July, the director of 
England cricket,Andrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>, has moved to recruit the 
New South Wales coach who was in the running for the job last year before Peter 
Moores was eventually appointed.

Since Moores was sacked this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/09/andrew-strauss-confirmed-director-england-cricket-ecb>
, and after Straussfailed to convince his former Middlesex team-mate Justin 
Langer to leave his role at Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/19/justin-langer-rules-out-england-job>
, the title-winning Yorkshire head coach, Gillespie, had become the frontrunner 
and met the England and Wales Cricket Board twice last week.

But despite positive feedback from those conversations, it has now emerged 
that Bayliss has agreed to take over, with contact between the 52-year-old and 
the ECB having stepped up a gear over the weekend. The board has confirmed 
merely that it is in “exclusive negotiations” with its “preferred candidate” 
but Bayliss is believed to be travelling to London from Sydney to finalise 
terms before the official announcement.

Bayliss was initially lukewarm to the approach but has been swayed by a 
package that would see him double the money he earns as coach of New South 
Wales and the Indian Premier League side Kolkata Knight Riders, with reports in 
Australia claiming he could earn as much as £300,000 a year.

As well as those two jobs, Bayliss has been working as an adviser to the 
Australia coach, Darren Lehmann, even leading the Twenty20 side in their series 
with South Africa last November. The pair are now set to face off in his first 
Test series in charge of England.

The former batsman’s previous experience in one-day cricket stacks up 
alongside Strauss’s target to compete for the 2019 World Cup on home soil after 
the disastrous campaign this year that saw them fail to make the knockout 
stages.

Bayliss led Sri Lanka to the final of the competition in 2011, losing to India 
in Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/apr/02/india-sri-lanka-cricket-world-cup>
, but has since won the Indian Premier League twice with the Knight Riders in 
2012 and 2014, as well as the inaugural Big Bash League with the Sydney Sixers 
in 2012.

In first-class cricket he has overseen two victorious Sheffield Shield 
campaigns during two spells in charge of New South Wales, having played 58 
first-class games for the state during a playing career that did not bring 
international recognition.

Bayliss has previously worked with England’s current caretaker coach, Paul 
Farbrace, too, with both men on the Sri Lanka team bus that came under fire 
during the 2009 terrorist attack in Lahore.

Farbrace, who left that assistant role in 2009 to take over at Kent before 
spells at Yorkshire and Sri Lanka, is now expected to be retained by Bayliss 
and return to the No2 job he occupied under Moores.

The news is a huge boost for Yorkshire as the club had been resigned to the 
fact that Gillespie, who led them to their first county championship title in 
13 years last summer, would be moving on. Plans were already under way at 
Headingley for life without the 40-year-old but he will now continue there, 
with his job set to be combined with a winter role at Adelaide Strikers in the 
Big Bash.

New Zealand captain Brendon McCullum has worked under Bayliss in the Indian 
Premier League and believes he will be appreciated by the England players.

“He’s a champion fella, very relaxed in the background and I’m sure he’ll have 
a good relationship with Alastair Cook in Tests and Eoin Morgan in one-day 
cricket,” said McCullum. “I enjoyed playing with him and I’m sure the England 
guys will too. If he’s in Leeds [for Friday’s Headingley Test] I’ll have a beer 
with him.”
 