
At the very start of this collection, in one of his characteristically lengthy 
introductions, Neil Gaiman apologises profusely for the lack of cohesion in 
genre, period, subject matter or any other connection between the several short 
stories included in Trigger Warning. It’s true, we really do have it all; from 
stories about dwarves on quests for cursed gold, imaginary girls turning up in 
real life, poems about furniture construction, to the tale of a man called 
Shadow and a black dog – there seems no end to Gaiman’s scope. Yet I would 
argue that thereis a trend running through all of these fables and fictions: 
Neil Gaiman’s unassailable skill at storytelling. It’s the moon-silver thread 
that binds all his writing together - this sometimes light, sometimes 
heart-hammering, always enthralling kind of tint to his way of using words and 
phrases, which makes them undeniablyhis. 

 So it may come as little surprise from that introduction that I enjoyed this 
book immensely. It’s far too often the case with short story collections that 
you find yourself horribly bored by a few. You have to slightly force yourself 
to trudge through before getting to the ones you love, not so much with Trigger 
Warning. Perhaps because the stories are all so individual and different from 
one another, as their reader I felt engaged and entertained throughout and 
found myself finishing long before I expected. Like many short story 
collections, it’s compulsively readable.

 I always marvel at good short stories, because it seems to me that it 
requires a certain kind of skill to cope with their… shortness. Worlds must be 
created in opening paragraphs, characters crafted within moments of reading, in 
less than around 5000 words, you must offer the reader a small glowing globe of 
narrative – it requires the careful kind of wording that can convey a page 
worth’s description in a sentence. I was so delighted by this series of 
shrewdly assembled micro-sagas, which allowed me to marvel to my geeky heart’s 
content.

Highlights for me include Nothing O’ Clock, a Doctor Who-based short story 
that made me nostalgic for Amy Pond’s presence on our television screens; Black 
Dog, which links to Gaiman’s book American Gods and reunites us with the ever 
loveable Shadow and an entirely unlovable psychopath; and The Sleeper and the 
Spindle which is an imaginative re-interpretation of two well-known fairy tales.

So I would definitely recommend it to anyone, especially if (like me) you are 
currently trying to cram little slivers of reading in between the tedium of 
last-minute revision.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/334346/s/trigger-warning-short-fictions-and-disturbances/>
Want to tell the world about a book you’ve read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 