
Beating Australia in England was the easy bit. England's cricketers will 
discover, in 15 months' time, that winning the Ashes over there is a trickier 
business altogether. Those involved in the 5-0 drubbing Down Under in 2006-07 
should need little reminding. Michael Vaughan said this week that victory in 
Australia would now be "the ultimate achievement" for Andrew Strauss's 
resurgent team.

The feat has been achieved all too rarely. England have won only four times in 
Australia since the controversial Bodyline series of 1932-33, and one of those 
was Mike Brearley's 5–1 win over what was essentially Australia's second XI in 
the Kerry Packer disrupted winter of 1978-79.Players from the successful tours 
– 1954-55, 1970-71 and 1986-87 – yesterday gave their advice to Strauss on what 
it will take to convert this summer's success into victory Down Under.

"To win in Australia you need a good captain and a balanced attack," Trevor 
Bailey, now 85, said from his home near Southend yesterday. "In 1954-55 we had 
a very good captain in Len Hutton. And then, for the first Test, we picked four 
pace bowlers – Brian Statham, Frank Tyson, Alec Bedser and myself. Spinners Bob 
Appleyard and Johnny Wardle played in the other four Tests and it made such a 
difference. We won three of them. Tyson was absolutely outstanding but we won 
the series because we had a first-class captain and a varied attack."

In Strauss England certainly have a first-class captain, and they will need 
James Anderson to make an impression if he flies out to Australia as attack 
leader. He emerged wicketless from the final two Tests of this summer after a 
promising start. "England can win there next year," said Bailey. "But we need 
to develop a class slow bowler and I don't see too many in county cricket. 
There are a few leg-spinners coming through but to do well in Australia a 
leg-spinner has to be very good."

Ray Illingworth, the captain in 1970-71, said: "England will have to be 20% 
better away than they were at home to beat Australia. That's to make up for the 
different conditions, ball and crowds.

"The most important thing for England – and this won't happen so I don't know 
why I'm saying it – is to go into the first Test prepared. In 1970-71 we had 
four tough state games. And the state sides were full of Test players in them 
days. Barry Richards and Doug Walters both scored double hundreds against us.

"I still felt we were a little short of match practice before the first Test 
in Brisbane, which is why I played the extra batter there. Generally, though, I 
went in with five bowlers in that series, which is what you need to have – a 
properly balanced attack."

Illingworth had two spinners, just as Hutton had 16 years earlier, and just as 
Mike Gatting had in John Emburey and Phil Edmonds in 1986-87. "It's very 
difficult for one spinner to do the job when it's turning," Illingworth said. 
"And even when it's not turning, spinners can give you control.

"Adil Rashid is coming on really well. Otherwise England may struggle to get 
two spinners in the side, thoughKevin Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> would be good if he was 
willing to put in the hours."

Emburey, who was a good spinner, thinks the batsmen hold the key. "I think 
getting runs up front is the most important thing. Illy's side had [Geoffrey] 
Boycott, [John] Edrich and [Brian] Luckhurst all getting runs. On Gatt's tour 
we had Chris Broad leading from the front, with three centuries. That made it 
easier for [David] Gower, Gatting and even Jack Richards to pile on the runs 
down the order. When your top order is firing you're controlling the game."

England have 15 months before they set out to retain the urn, and whereas the 
2005 winners went through an extended spell of congratulation, many of this 
year's squad will be brought down to earth by playing a one-day international 
against Ireland at Stormont tomorrow. The winter tour against the new No1 side 
in the world, South Africa, will also ensure players do not rest on their 
laurels and keep players focused on the long road to next winter.

For John Hampshire, winning in Australia is about self-belief. Hampshire, a 
batsman on the 1970-71 tour, said: "You need a strong captain, which we 
certainly had in Illy. You need your best players. But beyond that it is about 
filling your heads with strong positive thoughts. Illy made us feel we were 
going to win. And if you don't feel that there's no point in going."
 