
Post the EU referendum and Donald Trump’s unexpected victory in the US 
presidential election (Trump prepares for power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/barack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition>
, 11 November), this populist uprising might not end there, as several European 
countries go to the polls over the next few months. Next month Austrians go to 
the ballot box to elect a new president, with the vote expected to be close 
between Norbert Hofer of the anti-immigration Freedom party and Alexander Van 
der Bellen for the Greens. In March the Dutch hold their parliamentary 
elections, with the anti-Islamic Freedom party, led by Geert Wilders, standing 
on a pledge to “de-Islamify” the Netherlands and hold a Nexit vote. His party 
is running neck and neck with Mark Rutte’s Liberal party.

In May, the French go to the polls, with the presidential race seen as being 
between the far-right National Front, under Marine le Pen, running on an 
anti-EU, anti-immigration ticket, and the Republic candidate, who is still to 
be determined. In September the Germans cast their votes, with the backdrop of 
the immigration controversy. The far-right anti-immigration Alternative for 
Germany party is expected to make gains, thoughAngela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> is expected to win a fourth 
term if she decides to run again. This time next year Europe could look very 
different, with the future of the EU even more in doubt.
Alex Orr
Edinburgh

• Martin Kettle is correct (It is easy to hate the man, essential to learn 
from him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-voters-liberal-order>
, 11 November) that Trump will be the first president in recent times to be 
both anti-liberal socially but also economically. But he is not alone; the 
extreme right in Europe is going down the same electorally successful path with 
policies that are geared to both limit immigration and replace globalisation. 
They are filling the vacuum left by the failure of the Democrats and the 
centre-left in Europe to understand that it was not only economic insecurity 
that was the cause of voter dissatisfaction, so too was inadequately controlled 
immigration. Trump and Farage not only offered a solution to people’s worries 
about job losses with a promise to tear up trade agreements and oppose the 
TTIP, they also addressed widely held worries about levels of immigration.  

To have any chance of seeing off next year’s otherwise inevitable electoral 
rise of the extreme right in theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>, France and Germany will mean 
that the centre-left, continent-wide, will need to develop a vote-winning 
programme for tackling both economic insecurity and uncontrolled immigration 
between EU countries. It must begin by calling not only for managed migration, 
but also demand controls on the free movement of capital, goods and services to 
allow the rebuilding of national economies, and to bring an end to the damaging 
deification of open markets, which has bought us Trump and Brexit and maybe 
next year a President Le Pen.
Colin Hines
East Twickenham, Middlesex

• Your three commentators, Timothy Garton Ash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/populists-us>, Martin 
Kettle andJohn Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-brexit-us> 
(11 November) make fascinating reading on how to respond to Donald Trump. 
Garton Ash dissects Trump’s demonisation of “the other” and applauds Angela 
Merkel’s wish to work with him “on the basis of the values of democracy, 
freedom and respect for the law and human dignity”. Unfortunately, these 
principles ring hollow to “the victims of the 21st century’s callous model of 
capitalism” (Harris), not just in the US and UK, but also across Europe. Ask 
Greeks suffering from seven years of EU-dictated austerity; Spaniards with 20% 
unemployment; and the French with a stagnating economy and desolate industrial 
wastelands.

That’s why, if Merkel wants to counter nationalist populism, her first task is 
to junk the neoliberal economic dogmas that she, her finance minister Wolfgang 
Schäuble and the European Central Bank have imposed acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. As Kettle generously puts it, 
“the global liberal order has not worked well”. That is Trump’s key insight. 
Europe’s leaders need to recognise that fact and change policy fast. Otherwise, 
Le Pen, Wilders, and others will knock down the old order and sweep the EU away 
with it.
Jon Bloomfield
Birmingham

• Timothy Garton Ash’s article (The populists are out to destroy us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/populists-us>) is a 
rather wild rant of bile and hatred against a perceived fantasy concoction of 
racists, xenophobes and misogynists. As a result he does not advance any 
convincing discussion of the reasons for Trump’s victory and how we should 
respond to it - and learn from it. In contrast, Martin Kettle in his fine 
article responds calmly and sanely to Trump’s victory. He takes his readers 
through a very careful dissection of the reasons why the global failures of 
social and economic liberalism made Trump’s victory possible – and what we must 
learn from it.
Michael Batchelor
Swansea 

• Let’s pray Trump doesn’t confuse the nuclear codes with his Twitter account.
Suzanne Bosman
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 