
As the perks of a job go, persuading one of your favourite bands to reform and 
appear at a major arts festival you are organising isn't a bad start. For the 
British artistic director of this year'sAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> festival, David Sefton, 
it's the best part of his new role: "There's no question that, as festival 
director, you get an opportunity to play your own records," he says, with a 
hearty Liverpudlian laugh.

Sefton, who founded London's alternative music festival, Meltdown 
<http://meltdown.southbankcentre.co.uk/>, was a teenage fan of the 1980s 
Australian electronic music groupSevered Heads <http://www.sevcom.com/>. "They 
are cult artists and I played their records in my bedroom in my parents' 
house," he says. "I went to meet the lead singerTom Ellard 
<http://tomellard.com/> [now a university film lecturer in Sydney], and the 
first thing he said to me was: 'Just don't ask me to reform the Severed Heads.'"

But Sefton did, and the band now head the bill as one of the most anticipated 
acts at the March festival, a 17-day extravaganza of new and old music, 
theatre, dance and visual art, including big names such asNick Cave 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/feb/15/nick-cave-greatest-feat-artistic-honesty-retire>
,Van Dyke Parks 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jun/15/van-dyke-parks-return-musical-maverick>
,Laurie Anderson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/feb/13/laurie-anderson-landfall> and 
dancerSylvie Guillem 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2013/feb/10/sylvie-guillem-interview>.

With his reputation as a risk-taker, Sefton has been hired to shake up the 
festival's programme – in particular the music strand, as part of a push to 
address an audience that may not have attended the event in great numbers 
before. "I think there's an absolute responsibility to bring in younger people 
as well as a moral, ethical and cultural responsibility to widen the audience," 
he says. For the first time, the festival will partner with the Guardian, which 
will run daily coverage of events ahead ofthe launch of its digital Australian 
edition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2013/jan/15/guardian-launch-digital-australia-edition>
.

New music will play a big part: artists from the New York label Brassland 
<http://www.brassland.org/>, described as the heart of the Big Apple's "other" 
music scene, will also feature. So, too, will underground electronic artists, 
as part ofUnsound Adelaide 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/music/unsound_adelaide>, a new 
multidimensional electronic music strand. Sefton describes Unsound as one of 
the "most interesting things happening in music today".

Part of Sefton's strategy has been to show how established musicians have 
influenced younger performers: Van Dyke Parks (the one-time Beach Boys 
lyricist) worked withSilverchair's Daniel Johns 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nTIqHCf_uXo> on two albums, and the two will 
perform together in Adelaide – along with singer Kimbra (best known for her 
recent Grammy-award-winningduet with Gotye, Somebody That I used to Know 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8UVNT4wvIGY>).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOiykTknz51U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOiykTknz51U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FOiykTknz51U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OiykTknz51U>

"Van Dyke is still the go-to guy for this whole generation, even though many 
of them weren't even born when he started making records," explains Sefton. 
"He's an abiding force and you can hear his influence in lots of places. I like 
to make those links and draw out those connections."

In terms of visual art, Sefton's programme also juxtaposes old and new: a 
multimedia retrospective by Laurie Anderson will run alongsideTurner from the 
Tate <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/visual_arts/turner_from_the_tate>
, which makes its Australian debut in Adelaide.

Does Adelaide's small-town feel (population 1.2 million) and the fact it 
remains off the beaten track when it comes to most artists' international 
itineraries count against it? Not according to Sefton, who compares the event's 
pull to that of theEdinburgh festival 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/edinburghfestival>. "The thing about 
Adelaide is, you can't miss it when there's a festival on – it occupies the 
whole of the city. You can't create that sort of atmosphere in Sydney or 
Melbourne because they are both too big and splintered, and there's so much 
noise in the system," he says.

Sefton, who is already busy finalising his 2014 programme, comes to Adelaide 
at a critical juncture. Since its inception in 1960, the festival has run every 
second year; 2013 will mark the start of an annual programme. The festival has 
a history of pushing boundaries – sometimes too far. American opera director
Peter Sellars 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/nov/08/peter-sellars-interview> was 
briefly at the helm in 2001, but moved on after being deemed too avant garde. 
Will Sefton's ambitious, international festival programme alienate or engage?

"The city has a very strong ownership of this festival and you have to be 
aware of its long history," he says. "I've watched other people be parachuted 
into situations and not factor in the audience. But one of Adelaide's charms is 
that it has been responsible for introducing a lot of names people haven't 
heard before. Some people have been coming here for 40 years, and they've been 
coming to see things they've never heard of and to have their preconceptions 
challenged. That is very compelling."

• The Adelaide festival <http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/> runs from 1-17 
March. The Guardian's daily coverage starts on 1 March at
guardian.co.uk/music/adelaide-festival-2013 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/adelaide-festival-2013>, supported by Emirates.
 