
Good evening: So far the African Cup of Nations has - on the pitch at least - 
been a breath of fresh air. Teams hurtling forward with limited thought for 
defence, goals more important than clean sheets and the added prospect that 
Berti Vogts might again lose his job. It doesn't get much better than this.

Cameroon are, in a sense, the Sven's England of the African Cup of Nations. In 
the past two competitions they've been knocked out at the quarter final stage. 
Unlike Sven's England, though, they have a superstar striker in Samuel Eto'o 
who has just set a new all-time African Cup of Nations scoring record, and have 
proven pedigree having won the whole caboodle four times, including 
consecutively in 2000 and 2002.

Tunisia, according to Jose Mourinho - who has popped up on Eurosport to stick 
his neb in - are a well-organised team he likes the look of. Which means they 
have the sort of defensive qualities that have been lacking elsewhere. They won 
the competition in 2004 and have the better form going into tonight's game. But 
Otto Pfister, a man whose name wouldn't be out of place in the seedier 
districts of Amsterdam, believes his Cameroon side will prevail. "The worst is 
over for Cameroon, we have made the necessary corrections and now we have to 
play to our maximum," he reckons.

"I've seen much worse email addresses in my time," reckons Philip McGavigan. 
"Anyway how do you get a job where you can watch a game and jot down some funny 
remarks? I'd do it for free!" he adds, with uncanny knowledge of the GU 
remuneration system. Oh... he hasn't finished. "Anyway it's Â£40 on Cameroon and 
one girlfriend relegated to the bedroom with soap operas to entertain." Ah, the 
enlightenment.

On the pitch, the Cameroon team are singing their National Anthem with 
admirable tunelessness. No team news yet, I'm afraid.

Ah, here you go:

Tunisia: 1-Hamdi Kasraoui; 3-Karim Hagui, 5-Wissem Bekri, 6-Radhouane Felhi, 
15-Radhi Jaidi; 8-Mehdi Nafti, 7-Chaouki Ben Saada, 12-Joahar Mnari, 21-Medji 
Traoui; 9-Yassine Chikhaoui, 11-Francileudo dos Santos

Cameroon: 1-Idriss Carlos Kameni; 8-Geremi, 23-Andre Bikey, 4-Rigobert Song, 
5-Timothee Atouba; 10-Achille Emana, 11-Jean Makoun, 15-Alexandre Song, 
19-Stephane Mbia; 17-Mohamadou Idrissou, 9-Samuel Eto'o Referee: Koman 
Coulibaly (Mali)

We're off: Cameroon kick off and immediately charge into the Tunisian area. An 
over-hit pass goes out for a corner. Good attacking intent, which they'll need 
as the Tunisian defence is strong.

3 min: Idrissou hits a high cross into the area, which is easily cleared. From 
it, Geremi takes a long throw, aimed at Eto'o but there's a foul in the box. 
Neither team has settled here, unsurprisingly since we're only three minutes in.

5 min: Eto'o runs into the box but his cutback goes to no-one. Cameroon are 
trying to play one-touch stuff, which will make the game thrilling if it 
continues. Tunisia, for their part, are playing no-touch football since they 
haven't really got near the ball yet.

7 min: Eto'o chases down a lost cause, flicks it back to Geremi whose cross is 
met by the little man Makoun at the far post. He heads down into the ground and 
it bounces both over and wide. Tunisia take the ball into the Cameroon half 
then panic and hoof it aimlessly into the box.

9 min: Mbia goes in for a 50-50 ball with Chikhaoui - both go feet first and 
Mbia comes off worse. A minor bout of handbags ensues before Cameroon launch a 
free-kick Eto'o-wards. Still Tunisia have been barely touched the ball.

11 min: Tunisia have their first attack of the game. Chikhaoui nicks the ball 
of Geremi - the second time that happened to the Newcastle defender. The 
Tunisian striker dribbles into the box then, after a quick step-over, fires a 
shot across the face of the goal. Could have easily been a goal.

13 min: Bit shaky at the back from Tunisia. A ball is put into the Tunisian 
box and Idrissou attempts to stick it in, keeper Kasraoui gets in the way and 
eventually it's scrambled clear. It leads to a Tunisia break which Geremi (I 
think) proceeds to clear - from the halfway line - into row Z. A double donkey 
clearance.

15 min: Bekri runs up the left flank and puts a cross in but the Cameroon box 
is bereft of Tunisians. They really aren't throwing anyone forward at all. 
Minutes later Nafti commits a lunging foul that could have earned him a red 
card.

17 min: "Your email address sounds like the name of a current anime offering. 
By any chance do you have really large eyes?" asks Bill Mendelsohn. Only for 
you Bill, only for you.

Tunisia hit a good free-kick into the Cameroon area. Kameni punches clear to 
Eto'o, who races up the other end and wins a corner.

GOAL! Tunisia 0-1 Cameroon (Mbia 18): Mistake from keeper Kasraoui. He punched 
a corner out when he should have caught it. Cameroon swing a cross back in but 
Kasraoui again misses it, leaving Mbia at the far post to stuff it in the net.

21 min: Kasraoui really shouldn't have come for that, the goal goes down as a 
keeper error. Meanwhile Eto'o catches Nafti on the back of the ankle. He rolls 
about on the floor for a while but, on seeing the medical team, stretcher and 
ref bearing down on him decides that, after all, he's probably alright.

24 min: Cameroon look very comfortable and are playing at a frantic pace. 
Eto'o is very much the target man and Tunisia know it, which means a lot of the 
other Cameroonians are being unmarked. Emana makes the most of that space by 
lashing a shot wide from just outside the area.

26 min: Though the crowd are making all sorts of racket - there are horns, 
drums, singing and shouting - every time the camera pulls back it is to reveal 
an empty-looking stand. Odd. Tunisia attempt a ball over the top but dos Santos 
can't get onto it. Even if he had, there was no-one to pass it to. Tunisia are 
dead if they keep this defensive policy up. No wonder Mourinho likes them.

WONDER-GOAL! Tunisia 0-2 Cameroon (Geremi, 27): Cameroon win a free-kick 30 
yards out, in the middle of the pitch. They make it very clear what they have 
in mind when every single Cameroon player lines up behind it to take a pop. 
Geremi is the man who strikes it and it arcs over the wall and into the top 
corner. Goalie no chance - nor Tunisia at this rate.

30 min: A pre-emptive apology: the mice who run around in their wheels to 
power the mighty Guardian servers are looking a touch knackered, hence there 
may be one or two disruptions in service here. Meanwhile Cameroon are pressing 
home their advantage, giving the Tunisians no time on the ball whatsoever.

32 min: Tunisia get into the Cameroon half once more. Like a vertiginous man 
atop Everest, they panic though and the Cameroon defenders steal it from them 
with ease. "Was tommyturbo10 taken?" asks Gerry in Dublin. It was actually.

GOAL! Tunisia 1-2 Cameroon (Ben Saada, 34) How did that happen? Tunisia win a 
free-kick on the edge of the area. Kameni was so concerned about Ben Saada 
putting a cross in, that he left his near post uncovered, so the Tunisian just 
slotted it over the wall and into the back of the net. Another great free-kick.

37 min: Cameroon were cruising, that was a shocker on their front. Keeper 
error again, really. That's actually possibly why this tournament has been so 
entertaining - because the keeping has been on the iffy side, leading to all 
sorts of goal fests.

39 min: "Kudos to the Guardian staff for somehow managing to cut down on the 
'witch doctor' references when covering African soccer. I only saw one on the 
Guardian site today!," writes someone who calls himself Cool Rob, thus doubling 
the number of references to witch doctors. Kudos to you too. Corner to 
Cameroon, which they manage to hit several yards behind all their players.

42 min: My word! Dos Santos gets into the area and hammers a shot which slams 
back off the cross bar. It falls to Ben Saade who hits another fantastic shot 
from outside the area. It's a real scorcher, skimming the ground, which Kameni 
saves magnificently. I take that back about dodgy keeping. Brilliant stuff!

44 min: This game has really come alive now. Tunisia have worked out that the 
best way to win, is to have the odd pop at goal, while Cameroon's defence has 
started to look fragile. Kameni, meanwhile, follows up his great save by 
chipping a back pass straight to dos Santos in the area. Somehow the Tunisian 
man can't capitalise.

Peep, peep: Good fight back from Tunisia. The goal really brought them back 
into it and this is now a game of frantic attacking football from both sides. 
Eto'o has hardly had a sniff in the last 15 minutes of the first half, which 
means Tunisia will have to watch out for him in the second half.

Half-time: in which your MBM correspondent charges down to the canteen to 
discover it packed up and with only a solitary sandwich left. Hmmm, could be a 
hungry night.

Instead, let's feast on what Robin Hazlehurst says: "Maybe the thing with the 
keeping is that the saves are magnificent but sometimes the keepers' 
positioning is a bit off, leading to the goals. How many African keepers play 
in really top-level clubs where this would be cured? Of course it makes it 
better for us watching, unlike a lot of Eurofooty where the defences are too 
clinically efficient to be exciting. Wasn't it the same at the Women's World 
Cup, where dodgy keeping made the tournament much more exciting to watch?"

We're off again: The Tunisian team turned out several hours before the 
Cameroon one. In fact, so sluggish were the Cameroon players that referee 
Coulibaly virtually blew for kick-off while they were still struggling on.

47 min: Tunisia throw another ball into the box but it's well over-hit. It's 
been a little scrappy at the beginning of this half.

49 min: Cameroon play the ball through the middle, looking for Eto'o to run 
onto it. He doesn't read it and comes short. Meanwhile, I'm eyeing this 
sandwich. Goat's Cheese and Asparagus. Not a combo I've ever tried before ... 
or wanted to.

51 min: Bekri puts in a wonderful cross which just goes over dos Santos' head 
on the penalty spot. He was completely unmarked and between the two Cameroon 
defenders. Atouba clears behind for a corner, which comes to nothing.

53 min: Chikhaoui runs onto a brilliant through ball but Bikey just gets to it 
before the big Tunisian. He slides in as Chikhaoui was preparing to pull the 
trigger a couple of yards out. There's a half-hearted penalty appeal but it's 
laughed off. It's all been Tunisia so far.

55 min: This game is being played at 1000000mph. The Tunisia side on the pitch 
now appear to be the exact opposite of the one that started the game. Attacking 
and confident, they're making Cameroon - no slouches themselves on the 
attacking front - look positively defensive.

57 min: Mbia limps off, refusing to lower his dignity sufficiently to clamber 
into the golf cart that has accompanied him ever since he was chopped down. 
He's alright though, and runs back on. Binya is warming up in the touchline for 
Cameroon.

59 min: Cameroon have been forced deeper. It means that, when Eto'o gets the 
ball three-quarters of the way up the pitch, he has to play a slightly 
desperate ball which is eventually chased out for a goal-kick. It's the 
Cameroon side that need to find their attacking flair again now.

60 min: Eto'o gets a sniff at the Tunisian end but the defence holds strong. 
They play it through the middle to Ben Saada on the edge of the Cameroon box. 
He attempts to wrap his foot around the ball, aiming to bend it into the top 
corner. He makes a dog's dinner of it though and it's lucky to miss the corner 
flag.

63 min: Both Simon Garrett and Daniel Finucane have both emailed in, slightly 
suspiciously, at exactly the same time to ask exactly the same question: "How's 
Song playing?" Alright but nothing spectacular, is the answer, presuming you 
mean the Arsenal man. Epalle on for Emana.

66 min: Cameroon are in danger of sinking at the moment - their heads have 
gone down, despite their lead. There's definitely a Tunisian goal coming, so 
the Cameroonians would do better to try and score, rather than defend as it's 
not their strong point. Makoun off for Binya, the man who plays at Benfica and 
was banned for six games in the Champions League after that horror challenge.

68 min: The second half, in all honesty, hasn't quite matched the first so 
far. The pace has dropped, the balls are being hit long and the one-touch 
football has been replaced by a more contemplative game.

70 min: Song takes the ball in the D, he had two choices - to shoot or slip 
Eto'o in. Instead, he passes it into touch. Sorry Simon Garrett and Daniel 
Finucane. Meanwhile, Mbia gets a face full of studs - accidentally. Tunisia 
have upped the attacking stakes, by the way, they've replaced Nafti with 
striker Jemaa.

73 min: Eto'o races into the box, having given Jaidi the slip. He's stopped by 
a good challenge and it falls to Idrissou who can't quite dig it out of his 
feet. The Tunisians then charge up the other end and it takes a magnificent 
Rigobert Song challenge to prevent a goal. They've all woken up again.

75 man: Tunisia strike a free-kick into the box, which all the defenders miss. 
Fortunately the offside flag goes up as that could easily have been booted into 
the net.

77 min: Fradj puts in a cross from the halfway line. Kameni stands 
contemptuously laughing at it until Jemaa gets on the end of it. At which point 
he looks pleadingly at the linesman who obliges by flagging the striker offside.

79 min: Binya absolutely dumps Chikhaoui on his harris, quite a tasty tackle. 
Atouba, though, is given the yellow card. Perhaps for something else. Perhaps 
not. What do I know?

GOAL! Tunisia 2-2 Cameroon (Chikhaoui, 80): Stupidity from Atouba, he allowed 
a tame corner. From it, Tunisia work the ball to Chikhaoui, who slams a great 
finish into the net from the edge of the box.

83 min: That goal has been coming. It's not good news for your MBM 
correspondent however. With extra-time looming, it makes my actual job of night 
editing the site all the more difficult, since I'll be chopping out these 
little vignettes.

85 min: Idrissou hits a screamer of a cross across the Tunisian box. The 
onrushing attackerjust can't connect. Instead, he should have rolled it back to 
Eto'o who was free, unmarked, and would have saved me the pain of extra-time.

87 min: Chermiti replaces dos Santos for Tunisia - a striker for a striker. 
His first touch is to launch an incredibly ambitious shot from about 40 yards, 
which Kameni just about deals with. The game has returned to its first half 
status of all-out attack. Good stuff.

89 min: Eto'o strikes a corner into the penalty area which Bikey connects 
with. It was heading for the goal until it bounced off the back of one of his 
own players. This really is a thrillingly poised game now.

90min +1: There are two minutes of injury time to play and neither team look 
like scoring at the moment. They're saving themselves for extra-time here.

Peep, peep: That's the end of the second half. Extra time beckons...

Half an hour to go. This has been a great game. Admittedly it lulled in the 
middle of the second half but, if it had maintained its pace, all the players 
would have been finished by now. There's no silver or golden goal here, so it 
could be exciting. Tunisia are probably just shading it as the momentum is with 
them.

Sandwich update: bleerruughh.

Off we go again: Cameroon work it into the box, but it's hooked into precisely 
the spot where nobody is. If that makes any sense.

GOAL! Tunisia 2-3 Cameroon (Mbia, 92): Mbia gets his second of the game. A 
long throw from Geremi is not dealt with in the box, so Mbia fires a snap shot 
into the bottom right hand corner. Two minutes too late for your MBM reporter 
but good stuff nonetheless.

95 min: That was against the run of play but very much with the unpredictable, 
yet exciting run of the game. This has been such a fantastic tournament.

97 min: Epalle runs past Mnari, who brings him down, but the ref lets it go 
for some reason. Meanwhile, in the crowd, there's a man painted head to toe in 
Cameroon colours, wearing a pair of sunglasses Elton John would be proud of, 
with a football on his head. He's been standing pointing in front of him for 
literally the whole game. On the pitch, Mbia is a foot wide of his hattrick. He 
gets on the end of a long free-kick and glances his header just wide.

90+9 min: Tunisia launch a series of corners at Cameroon, the first of which 
causes panic until it's put behind, the second of which was about to land on 
Chermiti's head - but gets fumbled out. Kameni claims the third.

90+11 min: "Is it a Tun(isi)a sandwich Tom?" emails Patrick Lehane, which is a 
joke so bad that it only merits inclusion on here because mine are no better 
and there's a brief lull on the pitch to deal with a clash of heads.

90+13 min: Those IT gremlins I was afraid of have struck us down. Things could 
get a bit Blue Peter from here on. Cameroon, meanwhile, bugger about with the 
ball outside the Tunisian box. Rather than take the simple option and strike it 
at goal from no more than 20 yards, they work it back and have a pop from 50, 
with predictable results.

Peep, peep: Tunisia are now the side whose heads have gone down. Cameroon are 
shading this but, given the ebb and flow of this game, that means Tunisia will 
probably win the second half of extra time and score to force penalties and 
thus more stress for your over-worked correspondent.

And we're into the last 15 minutes: Rigobert Song gives away a dubious foul 
just outside the Cameroon box and Ben Saada stands over it. He scored from here 
in the first half but this time his shot hits the wall.

107 min: Jaidi earns himself a yellow card, and thus a suspension, for arguing 
with the ref after Atouba went down clutching his head. Jaidi seemed to think 
he was play-acting but the Cameroon man is replaced by Tchato to suggest he's 
not.

109 min: A Tunisian corner is whipped in and Chermiti miskicks, leaving the 
ball to dribble to a Cameroon defender. To make amends, Chermiti throws himself 
to the floor, rolls about a bit and, when he realises no-one is watching, dusts 
himself down and gets on with it.

112 min: Eto'o hits a long free kick into the area but Epalle tries to power 
his header into the net, rather than glance it. The ball balloons well over the 
bar. At the other end Tunisia waste a corner with a dreadful delivery. Still, 
they must be knackered.

115 min: Eto'o gets on the end of a long ball but the Tunisian defender steals 
it from him. Apparently irked by such footballing skill, Eto'o marches up to 
him and gives him a light headbutt on the nose. There wasn't much in it but, 
were the referee not so laissez-faire, that could have been a red. As it is, he 
waves play on.

117 min: As is customary to say at this sort of stage: there are a lot of 
tired legs out there. Most of them, it's fair to say, are on the Tunisian side. 
Eto'o still looks like a livewire but then he's done absolutely no tracking 
back and, instead, has spent the last ten minutes trying to annoy the Tunisian 
defenders.

119 min: Tunisia don't look much like scoring anymore, even though Jaidi is 
operating as an extra striker now. He gets on the end of a cross and is 
blissfully free in the box. The reason? He's about a mile offside. He looks 
absolutely defeated.

Peep, peeeeeeeeepppp: That's it! Cameroon are through to face Gaha, Tunisia 
are out. A terrific game and probably Cameroon deserve it. But only just.

I'm off: Thanks for all your emails. I'm now off to to stick a finger down my 
throat and get rid of the wretched sandwich I somehow managed to choke down.
 