
Turkey’s opposition parties have condemned the arrests of a dozen Kurdish 
officials including senior politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/turkey-arrests-pro-kurdish-party-leaders-mps>
 in a terror investigation, branding it an affront to democracy amid mounting 
outrage by Ankara’s western allies.


The Turkish lira fell to a three-month low against the dollar over fears of 
instability after midnight raids led to the detention of the two chiefs of the 
pro-Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic party (HDP) and at least 10 other party 
members, whom the government accuses of abetting the activities of Kurdish 
insurgents.

Turkey arrests pro-Kurdish party leaders amid claims of internet shutdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/turkey-arrests-pro-kurdish-party-leaders-mps>
Among the detainees was Selahattin Demirtaș, the charismatic Kurdish 
politician and an opponent of PresidentRecep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>.

“You can never bring peace to a country if you say, ‘I will apprehend those 
who came with elections, jail them, kill them, destroy them, shoot them and 
silence them in mafia-like ways,’” said Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu, the head of the 
Republican People’s party (CHP), the largest opposition bloc in parliament.

“If you defend democracy, then you should recognise that those who come to 
power with elections should go with elections,” he added in a speech on Friday. 
“If not, you will slaughter democracy.”

The HDP denounced the arrests, saying the “dignity of justice” was compromised 
in what the party sees as a politically motivated smear campaign. It called on 
the international community to respond to what it described as a coup by 
Erdoğan.

The detentions came against a backdrop of rising tensions in Turkey, months 
after a coup attempt in July shook the nation and prompteda broad purge of 
thousands of police officers, teachers, academics, army personnel and 
journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/datablog/2016/aug/19/turkeys-post-coup-crackdown-in-figures>
 accused of having links to Fethullah Gülen, a US-based preacher Ankara says 
masterminded the putsch.

A simultaneous crackdown has also targeted prominent Kurdish personalities and 
media organisations that the government accuses of fomenting propaganda on 
behalf of the Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK), a separatist group that has 
carried out attacks inTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and is 
designated as a terror group by the US.

Peace talks between the PKK and the government collapsed last year in mutual 
recrimination, and violence has since flared up repeatedly in Kurdish areas in 
the south-east of the country.

Turkey: deadly explosion rocks major Kurdish city of Diyarbakır
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/turkey-explosion-rocks-major-kurdish-city-of-diyarbakir>
Hours after the detentions began, the city of Diyarbakır was rocked by a car 
bomb outside a police building in attack the authorities blamed on PKK 
militants.At least nine people were killed and more than 100 injured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/turkey-explosion-rocks-major-kurdish-city-of-diyarbakir>
 in the attack in the majority-Kurdish city.

In a statement, the Turkish government said the detentions had been carried 
out after HDP MPs refused to testify in a terror probe. HDP is the 
third-largest party in the 550-seat Turkish parliament, with 59 seats. 
Parliamentarians in Turkey normally enjoyimmunity from prosecution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/erdogan-lifts-turkish-mps-immunity-in-bid-to-kick-out-pro-kurdish-parties>
, but that privilege was lifted earlier this year in a measure widely seen as 
targeting the HDP.

The prime minister, Binali Yıldırım, told reporters that elected officials who 
incite and encourage terrorism must face legal proceedings and that the MPs 
were detained because they had refused to give testimony.

“Politics cannot be a shield for committing a crime,” Yıldırım said. “Turkey 
is a state of law.”

“Those who come to power by elections but prefer to embrace terrorism will of 
course be held accountable by the law,” he added.

There were reported outages in social media services including Facebook, 
Twitter and Whatsapp throughout Turkey, which the country’s premier said was a 
security measure.

Rights groups and western officials also condemned the arrests.

Emma Sinclair-Webb, the Turkey director for Human Rights Watch, described it 
as an “outrageous step in the draconian crackdown”, andAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> said it was “the 
latest escalation in the onslaught on dissent”.

The US government said that it was “deeply disturbed” by the arrests, while 
the EU’s foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini, said they compromised 
Turkey’s parliamentary democracy.

“We expect Turkey to safeguard its parliamentary democracy, including respect 
for human rights and the rule of law, and we are conveying these expectations 
directly to the Turkish authorities,” Mogherini said in a statement with the 
EU’s enlargement commissioner, Johannes Hahn.


Germany’s foreign ministry said it had summoned Turkey’s chargé d’affaires to 
discuss the arrests.


Welcome to demokrasi: how Erdogan got more popular than ever | Christopher de 
Bellaigue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/welcome-to-demokrasi-how-erdogan-got-more-popular-than-ever>
Relations between Turkey and the EU are delicate. Officials in Ankara accuse 
their European counterparts of not showing enough support for Turkey in the 
aftermath of the failed coup, and bristle at criticism of the crackdown.

Meanwhile, a deal to limit the flight of migrants from Turkey to Europe in 
exchange for visa-free travel for Turkish citizens in the EU may fail in the 
coming weeks because Europe has not kept its end of the bargain.

A measure to reintroduce the death penalty in Turkey is also likely to be 
debated in the coming weeks in parliament, likely to end Turkey’s EU accession 
talks.

Turkey remains under a state of emergency, imposed after the failed coup 
attempt, which critics say has gone well beyond targeting the plotters. 
Thirteen staff from the opposition Cumhuriyet newspaper, including the 
editor-in-chief, were detained on Monday, further heightening strains in 
Turkish society.


Opponents of Erdoğan are likely to interpret the latest developments in the 
campaign as a move to further consolidate his power ahead of an expected 
referendum and parliamentary vote in the spring on constitutional amendments 
that would transform Turkey from a parliamentary democracy into a presidential 
system.
 