
The Turnbull government has launched a sweeping inquiry into political 
donations and raised the prospect of a new disclosure regime that would apply 
to all entities undertaking campaign activities.


As revealed by Guardian Australia on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/coalition-backs-inquiry-looking-into-australias-political-donations-system>
, the government has sent a reference to the joint standing committee on 
electoral matters, triggering a fresh look at Australia’s donations and 
disclosure system after negotiations with key Senate crossbenchers and the 
Labor party.

Coalition backs inquiry looking into Australia's political donations system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/13/coalition-backs-inquiry-looking-into-australias-political-donations-system>
The new reference requires the committee to assess the federal election and 
advise whether provisions requiring authorisation of electoral material to all 
forms of communication to voters were followed.

The committee has also been asked to assess the potential application of truth 
in advertising provisions to communication to voters – including third-party 
carriage services – a reform being sought byNick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon>, who was unhappy 
with some of the advertising directed at his party during the campaign.

Additionally, the inquiry will examine the options available to parliament to 
ensure consistent application of disclosure rules to, and the regulation of, 
all entities undertaking campaign activities – not just political parties.

In the wake of the controversy that prompted the Labor senator Sam Dastyari to 
step down from the Labor frontbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
, the committee has been asked to assess the extent of donations and 
contributions “from foreign sources, persons, entities and foreign-owned 
subsidiaries to political parties, associated entities and other third parties 
and entities undertaking campaign activities” – and present options to regulate 
these contributions.

The reference on donations more broadly is wide ranging. The committee will be 
required to look at the current level of donations, contributions and campaign 
expenditure, examine the disclosure regime, consider whether the disclosure 
rules are timely enough, and canvas “alternative approaches available to 
parliament”.

Tax deductibility is also on the table. The inquiry will examine “the extent 
to which fundraising and expenditure by third parties is conducted in concert 
with registered political parties and the applicability and utilisation of tax 
deductibility by entities involved in campaign activities”.

The reference also includes an examination of whether Australia can move to a 
system of electronic voting.

The special minister of state, Scott Ryan, said many of these issues, 
“including the possibility of future electronic voting and changes to federal 
political donations laws, are highly complex”.

“The most appropriate way of investigating all these issues is through JSCEM,” 
he said.

The terms of reference clearly allow the joint standing committee to examine 
Labor’s Medicare campaign during the poll, including the text message 
communications that enraged theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition>.

The Tasmanian senator Eric Abetz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/eric-abetz> welcomed the fact that 
the inquiry would look at the political activities of activist groups, with a 
view to applying regulatory curbs.

Unless Australia reforms political donations, the trust deficit will grow | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/23/australia-must-reform-political-donations-trust-deficit>
The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, and several senior ministers have 
flagged that any review of the system will have to look at pressure groups 
outside major party politics. The Coalition has been spooked by thesubstantial 
field operations mounted by the progressive parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/06/election-2016-cory-bernardi-liberals-labor-volunteer-army>
 during the campaign.

“The announcement from minister Ryan is welcome and I am very pleased that he 
has listened to the widespread community concern about organisations like GetUp 
who … seek to campaign for the left of politics while claiming independence,” 
Abetz said.

“GetUp’s grubby tactics in the 2016 election are rightly deserving of 
examination and I have confidence that the joint standing committee will 
consider these matters in detail.”

The inquiry will include participation by crossbenchers and micro-parties, 
after the NXT and One Nation made it clear they wanted to be part of it.
 