
Dancing on the Edge <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01qsd4k>
9pm, BBC2


With Jessie lying in a coma following her attempted murder, Louis still 
harbours suspicions about Julian, but continues with band engagements – 
including, mischievously, an appearance at the German embassy. Meanwhile, 
Stanley is peeved by the introduction of a new deputy editor at the Musical 
Express, fixated on an imminent era of "electronic music" a mere 40 years ahead 
of Kraftwerk. Stephen Poliakoff's drama is a stylish mix of period elegance and 
reactionary austerity with a bleak eye on the impending future.David Stubbs

Penguins – Spy in the Huddle
9pm, BBC1


It feels a bit sneaky hiding cameras inside false penguins 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01460gm> in order to spy on real penguins, 
particularly given the recent handwringing over undercover officers. 
Nevertheless, these animatronic interlopers do work, and soon ensconce 
themselves in groups of emperors in the Antarctic, rockhoppers in the Falklands 
and humboldts in the Atacama. The footage they turn in is remarkable – 
particularly when the determined humboldts have to run the gauntlet to avoid a 
vast colony of shirty sea lions.Ben Arnold

My Big Fat Gypsy Valentine
9pm, Channel 4


This return to the now-familiar world of Gypsy Weddings 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/big-fat-gypsy-weddings/episode-guide/series-4/episode-1>
 finds another batch of puffballed teenage brides preparing to be drowned in 
taffeta and netting and married off to their first boyfriend. Ina tried to keep 
her relationship quiet, but was "outed" by her uncle. And Danielle is preparing 
to marry Brendan the day after her 16th birthday. She waves him off on his – 
quite literal – stag trip, hunting in the woods. The programme tries to 
maintain an un-sneery distance, but doesn't always succeed.Julia Raeside

Miracle Rising: South Africa
9pm, History


South Africa is a country with many problems. As this documentary reminds us 
<http://www.history.co.uk/shows/miracle-rising-south-africa.html>, however, 
it's still an improvement on what it could have become following the collapse 
of apartheid. The film recalls South Africa's tumultuous transition and the 
surprisingly non-vindictive reckoning that ensued. It's just a shame that the 
producers felt obliged to decorate it with irrelevant celebrity cameos. Gillian 
Slovo and Albie Sachs have useful, hard-won insights to impart: less so Robert 
De Niro and Oprah Winfrey.Andrew Mueller

Spartacus: War of the Damned 
<http://sky1.sky.com/sky1hd-shows/spartacus-war-of-the-damned>
10pm, Sky1


The opening episode of the final series commences with a typically stylised 
bloodbath as Spartacus and his renegade army cut a brutal swath through the 
Roman forces – not even the commanders are safe. However, the devious, 
charismatic Crassus is grooming himself to lead a Roman counter-assault. 
Beneath its preposterous comic-book gore, gothic soundtrack, acreage of 
glistening flesh and stilted dialogue, Spartacus remains a gripping, 
intelligently crafted saga of powerplay and vengeance.DS

Storyville – Expedition to the End of the World 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01qnnqt>
10pm, BBC4 


For just a few weeks every year, a lesser-explored fjord system in Greenland 
opens up, due to global warming. In Daniel Dencik's beautiful film, a group of 
scientists and artists set sail to discover its secrets. (Artists and 
scientists together! They'll never get on!) So while the artists fret about 
their usefulness on the trip, the scientists mull over some big green questions 
– and all to a glorious soundtrack of Mozart's Requiem and thrash metal. 
Wonderful.Ali Catterall

Black Mirror <http://www.channel4.com/microsites/B/black-mirror/index.html>
10pm, Channel 4


There's nothing so showy as the PM getting cosy with a pig in this, the first 
of three new standalone stories from Charlie Brooker; rather, it's a sad and 
pensive look at love and loss, with that necessary dystopian twist. Martha 
(Hayley Atwell) is grieving following her boyfriend's death, until a friend 
signs her up for a virtual service that creates a version of him based on his 
online footprint. It is as much about people shaping each other as it is a 
nightmarish vision of the future, but it is no less compelling for that.Rebecca 
Nicholson
 