
BBC1's adaptation of Andrea Levy's award-winning novel Small Island began with 
5 million viewers, beating ITV1's terrestrial movie premiereBatman Begins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/batman-begins> last night, Sunday 6 December.

Small Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/dec/07/being-alan-bennett-small-island-review>
, starring Naomie Harris, David Oyelowo and Ruth Wilson, had a 21% share of the 
audience for the first of a two-part adaptation between 9pm and 10.30pm, 
according to unofficial overnight figures.

Batman Begins had 4.6 million viewers, a 20% share, between 8.30pm and 11.10pm 
on ITV1.

The Christian Bale movie lost more than half the audience it inherited from 
The X Factor semi-final, which averaged 12.7 million viewers, 46% of the 
audience, between 7.30pm and 8.30pm.

The X Factor, which saw the exit of Danyl Johnson ahead of next weekend's 
final, predictably had the better of BBC1's Countryfile, which averaged 5.6 
million viewers, a 22% share, between 7pm and 8pm; and the first half of 
Antiques Roadshow, which had 6.2 million, 22% of the audience, between 8pm and 
9pm.

Batman Begins was also beaten by BBC2's Top Gear, which had 5.4 million 
viewers, 20% of the audience, between 8.30pm and 9.30pm.

Channel 4's Mike Leigh terrestrial movie premiere Happy Go Lucky had 700,000 
viewers, a 4% of the audience, between 9pm and 11.20pm. Happy Go Lucky had 
another 113,000 on Channel 4 +1.

Channel Five's Clint Eastwood film repeat, Blood Work, was watched by 1.6 
million viewers, a 7% share, between 9pm and 11.10pm.

Both movies lost out to another showing for BBC2 sitcom Miranda, which had 2.1 
million viewers, a 9% share between 9.30pm and 10pm, and Match of the Day 2, 
which had 2 million viewers, 10% of the audience, between 10pm and 10.50pm.

Channel 4 and Five went head to head with another pair of films earlier in the 
evening. Channel 4's terrestrial premiere Son of the Mask had 1.2 million 
viewers, a 5% share, between 6.10pm and 8pm, narrowly beating another showing 
for Kelly's Heroes on Five, which had 1.1 million viewers, also 5% of the 
audience, between 6.10pm and 9pm. Another 123,000 saw Son of the Mask on 
Channel 4 +1.

Mark Lawson Talks To Alan Bennett, part of BBC4's Alan Bennett season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/dec/07/being-alan-bennett-small-island-review>
, enjoyed the highest audience of a night of Bennett-related programmes, with 
253,000 viewers between 9pm and 10pm, a 1.1% multichannel share.

Later, ITV1's South Bank Show about poet laureate Carol Ann Duffy had 400,000 
viewers, 5% of the audience, between 11.20pm and 12.20am.

BBC1's Ewan McGregor film repeat Down With Love, had 1 million viewers, 12% of 
the audience, between 10.55pm and 12.35am.

• This article was amended on 7 December 2009. The original used the spelling 
Mike Lee. This has been corrected.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 