
The TV upfronts presentations are where the networks present advertisers with 
their schedules for the fall season. While NBC put on a huge show at New York’s 
Radio City Music Hall – complete with performances by Dolly Parton and Neil 
Patrick Harris – it was certainly no laughing matter. That’s because the home 
of Friends, Seinfeld, 30 Rock, Parks and Recreation andMust-See TV 
<http://splitsider.com/2011/04/ranked-nbcs-must-see-thursday-night-comedies/> 
is backing away from comedy.

Later in the day, Fox held its presentation at the Beacon Theater with much 
fanfare from Ryan Murphy and the cast of his hopeful hitScream Queens 
<http://www.fox.com/upfronts-2015/programming>, but the biggest news was that 
American Idol will finally be coming to an end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/11/fox-cancels-american-idol>
.

NBC has only two comedies on its fall schedule, newbie People are Talking  
<http://www.nbc.com/people-are-talking>and a retooled version of middling hit 
Undateable, and only four comedies set to come in at mid-season. That means all 
four comedies introduced last year on the peacock network didn’t make the cut.

So, what are these fancy new dramas we have to look forward to? Seemingly, a 
lot of copies of other shows that have been successful either on NBC or network 
television in general. (Just wait for a companion to Chicago Fire and Chicago 
PD to premiere at mid-season. It’s calledChicago Med 
<http://www.nbc.com/chicago-med> and a bunch of doctors live steamy lives in a 
Chicago emergency room. In its past life it was called ER.)

Blindspot 
<http://www.nbc.com/blindspot/video/blindspot-official-trailer/2864906>, which 
gets the coveted position on Monday night behind The Voice, is about a Jane Doe 
who wakes up naked in Times Square covered in tattoos and each tattoo contains 
clues to a mystery. Ooh. Creepy.

On Tuesday nights after The Voice’s results show we find Heartbreaker 
<http://www.nbc.com/heartbreaker/video/heartbreaker-official-trailer/2864907>, 
a show about a world-renowned heart surgeon (Melissa George) with a racy 
personal life. Following that will be Neil Patrick Harris’ variety show Best 
Time Ever with Neil Patrick Harris and it stars Neil Patrick Harris in case 
there aren’t enough Neil Patrick Harrises in that title for you. It is based on 
thelove-it-or-loathe-it British format Saturday Night Takeaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/28/sorry-neil-patrick-harris-but-the-variety-show-is-dead>
.
 Heroes revival Heroes: Reborn will kick of NBC’s Thursday night line-up. 
Photograph: Isabella Vosmikova 
The long-awaited (by some) Heroes revival Heroes: Reborn 
<http://www.nbc.com/heroes-reborn> will kick off Thursday nights, but NBC says 
it is an “event series” which is what the networks call miniseries now (or at 
least things they’re waiting to see how well they do in their first season 
before deciding if they want more or not). It precedes hit The Blacklist, which 
should provide a good lead in forThe Player 
<http://www.nbc.com/the-player/video/the-player-official-trailer/2864909>, a 
new show starring Wesley Snipes as a security expert on whom rich people bet 
whether or not he’ll be able to stop crimes from happening. Don’t hate The 
Player, hate the game.

Friday night, traditionally a dumping ground for shows no one really cares 
about, is now the home of NBC’s only comedies. Undateable, the only returning 
sitcom which will now be shot live each week, kicks off the night followed by 
the only freshman comedyPeople are Talking 
<http://www.nbc.com/people-are-talking/video/people-are-talking-official-trailer/2864908>
, about two diverse couples who live next to each other and are best friends.

NBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/nbc> does have some other comedies it 
is holding for mid-season, including the much-derided reboot of Coach, parents 
living with grown kids comedy Crowded, Telenovela parody Hot and Bothered 
starring Eva Longoria, and Superstore where America Ferrara works at someplace 
that is suspiciously like Best Buy.

Oh, and what was Dolly Parton doing at the upfronts? She was announcing a 
movie based on her early life calledA Coat of Many Colors 
<http://www.people.com/article/dolly-parton-coat-many-colors-tv-movie-nbc>. We 
also learned that The Wiz Live would be working with Cirque du Soleil and cast 
Stephanie Mills, who originated the role of Dorothy in the musical on Broadway 
in the 70s, in the role of Aunt Em.

The big news over at Fox wasn’t any of the shows that would be debuting but 
that it was finally going toput sputtering karaoke juggernaut American Idol out 
of its misery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/11/fox-cancels-american-idol>
 and cancel it after the season that airs next year. The other big news is that 
TV’s latest rating juggernaut, Empire, will be back in the fall with an 
expanded 18-episode order that is being rushed into production to capitalize on 
the success it had this winter. Dependable vet Bones will move to Thursday 
night where it is being paired with the languishing Sleepy Hollow, which moves 
from Monday. Lots of reshuffling going on at Fox.
 American Idol: goodbye! Photograph: Fox via Getty Images 
What can we expect in the new series department? Fox only added three new 
dramas and two new comedies. On Mondays,Minority Report 
<http://www.fox.com/watch/443173955521/7766135808>, based on the Tom Cruise 
movie of the same name, will be a much better fit following last season’s hit 
Gotham than Sleepy Hollow ever was.

Tuesday staple New Girl has been shifted to mid-season to make way for some 
sitcom vets to return inGrandfathered 
<http://www.fox.com/watch/443046979935/7765767168> and The Grinder 
<http://www.fox.com/watch/443181123945/7765732608>. In the first show John 
Stamos plays a swinging bachelor who suddenly finds out that he has to care for 
his grandbaby. It’s One Man and a Baby! The Grinder sounds a bit more 
interesting. Rob Lowe isn’t a lawyer but plays one on TV. When his show is 
cancelled, he returns home to run the family law firm lead by his actual lawyer 
brother, played by Fred Savage.

Those two lead into Scream Queens 
<http://www.fox.com/watch/398870083835/7740238848>, Fox’s biggest bet of the 
season. It’s a horror comedy by Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk who are going to 
try to work their American Horror Story magic on network TV, and are even using 
AHS’s Emma Roberts and Lea Michele from Glee to try to make it happen. Of 
course a killer is after the members of a sorority, which should give these two 
all the ammunition they need.

The final drama, Rosewood <http://www.fox.com/watch/443053123679/7765713408>, 
is on Wednesday nights. Rosewood (Morris Chestnut) is a pathologist who teams 
up with a cop to help solve crimes. We’ve never seen a show like this before!

Fox is saving up some of its best goodies for 2016, including The X-Files 
event series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/19/return-of-the-x-files-mulder-scully-david-duchovny-gillian-anderson>
 (there is that term again) and Grease: Live, which will air on 31 January. 
It’s also saving a few new series like comic book-inspiredLucifer 
<http://www.fox.com/watch/443035203918/7766097408> which is actually about the 
devil,The Frankenstein Code <http://www.fox.com/watch/443228227506/7765920768> 
which is actually about a guy brought back to life like Frankenstein except he 
has super power and solves crimes unlike Frankenstein. There’s also two 
comedies: The Guide to Surviving Life, about a group of wacky college graduates 
who live together, andBordertown 
<http://www.fox.com/watch/443369539749/7765855488>, a cartoon about the culture 
clash in a town near the US/Mexico border. It is brought to you bySeth 
MacFarlane <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/seth-macfarlane>, best known 
for Family Guy and his nuanced, insightful, and stereotype-free takes on modern 
race relations. Well, at least one of those things is true.
 