
The official opening of David Mamet’s new Broadway play China Doll, starring 
Al Pacino <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alpacino>, has been delayed for two 
weeks – a move that sometimes suggests producers are anxious about a play’s 
readiness to face theater critics.

China Doll – the story of a billionaire played by Pacino “ready to walk away 
from it all to start a new life with his beautiful young fiancee” before an 
unexpected phone call interrupts his plans – was scheduled to open at the 
Gerald Schoenfeld Theatre inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> in just over a week.

Now the play’s official opening will be 4 December. It opened for previews on 
21 October.

In a statement to the Associated Press, producers Jeffrey Richards, Jerry 
Frankel and Steve Traxler said the delay “allows the creative team additional 
time to work on the play before its world premiere”.

Richards told the New York Times 
<http://artsbeat.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/11/09/delayed-opening-for-mamets-china-doll/?_r=0>
 that “new material is going in this week and new material went in this past 
weekend”. A call to Jeffrey Richards Associates by the Guardian was not 
immediately returned.

In theater, such moves are often viewed skeptically. One of the most famous 
recent examples of a delayed opening was an apparent attempt to shield critics 
from the disastrous 2011 production of Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark, directed 
by Julie Taymor with music by U2’s Bono and the Edge. The play staged 183 
preview performances, angering critics, who eventually broke the media embargo 
and reviewed the musical (the New York Times critic called the play “grievously 
broken”in his review 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/08/theater/reviews/spiderman-review.html?sq=brantley%2520spider-man&st=cse&adxnnl=1&scp=1&adxnnlx=1308002139-DUx5YIMgW8T+Kzco80z/Wg>
).

The New York media has circulated rumors about China Doll’s progress. The New 
York Post 
<http://nypost.com/2015/10/29/al-pacino-totally-lost-over-his-terrible-new-broadway-play/>
 reported that Pacino has had teleprompters hidden onstage to help him remember 
lines, and that director Pam MacKinnon has had trouble giving the star notes.

“I’m not your fucking puppet, Pam!” the actor allegedly yelled 
<http://nypost.com/2015/10/29/al-pacino-totally-lost-over-his-terrible-new-broadway-play/>
 to MacKinnon when she attempted to give him notes in Mamet’s absence.

Despite the doubts swirling around the play, it has maintained some of the 
best ticket sales onBroadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway>. 
Since previews began, China Doll has grossed more than $1m a week, with 
performances “virtually sold out”, the Associated Press has reported.

Mamet has been one of Broadway’s most formidable playwrights for decades, and 
his collaborations with Pacino go back almost as long. Pacino starred in the 
1983 revival of Mamet’s American Buffalo, the 1992 movie-version of Mamet’s hit 
Glengarry Glen Ross, and the 2012 Broadway revival. This is Pacino’s 12th run 
on Broadway.

Nevertheless, some have questioned Mamet’s hit-making powers in recent years. 
In 2012, as Glengarry Glen Ross starring Pacino was staged nearby, Mamet’s The 
Anarchist quickly failed (it was called a “turgid two-hander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/10/glengarry-glen-ross-review>” by 
the Guardian).

Previews for that revival of Glengarry were also extended, with producers 
reportedly fearing the play’s eventualtepid reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/dec/10/glengarry-glen-ross-review>.
 