
Torrential downpours associated with severe flash floods have left Vietnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/vietnam> devastated. Ahead of the arrival 
of Typhoon Sarika, at least 30 people have been killed and a further 30 
injured. More than 100,000 houses have been submerged and destroyed, but it was 
anticipated that the typhoon would cause further damage when making landfall 
this week, sustaining wind speeds in excess of 100mph.

Typhoon Sarika developed on 14 October and is the Pacific’s 21st named storm 
of 2016. On Tuesday it hit China’s southern province Hainan and by this 
Wednesday was pummelling a northern area of the Philippines. It had gained 
strength equivalent to a category 4 hurricane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Ftyphoon-sarika-100mph-winds-vietnam-china-philippines-us-hurricane-cyclone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7d5093c1dc7ea11abe6bceafc0d87f8db6fca87%2F54_227_4867_2921%2F4867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Typhoon%20Sarika%20barrels%20on%20with%20100mph%20winds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Ftyphoon-sarika-100mph-winds-vietnam-china-philippines-us-hurricane-cyclone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Typhoon%20Sarika%20barrels%20on%20with%20100mph%20winds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Ftyphoon-sarika-100mph-winds-vietnam-china-philippines-us-hurricane-cyclone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7d5093c1dc7ea11abe6bceafc0d87f8db6fca87%2F54_227_4867_2921%2F4867.jpg>
 Typhoon Sarika uproots street trees in Wanning city, Hainan province, China. 
Photograph: Xinhua//Rex/Shutterstock 
In the Atlantic, the post-tropical cyclone Nicole (formerly Hurricane Nicole), 
has been declared the longest-lived Atlantic tropical cyclone, since 1906, to 
have formed after the first day of October.

Vietnam floods: deaths reported, tens of thousands of homes destroyed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/vietnam-floods-deaths-reported-tens-of-thousands-of-homes-destroyed>
Wind speeds of up to 75mph were still prominent in the north Atlantic on 
Monday morning, but lost strength the following day out to the west of Maine. 
Nicole regained hurricane status twice, since initially starting up on 4 
October and lasting a total of 14 days. Coastal regions of Britain are now on 
flood alert following Atlantic sea-surge warnings.

Across north-western parts of the US, remnants of the Pacific typhoon Songda 
hit Seattle on Saturday, with some heavy rain squalls and gusts of 50mph. 
Though it had the potential for more a catastrophic impact, the Pacific storm 
unexpectedly split into two separate pressure centres, so weakening its 
intensity before landfall.

However, a further storm following on behind this, also brought, to Oregon, 
intense rainfall and a tornado. Both of these storms left thousands of homes 
without power, as trees and power lines fell.
 