
Amnesty is calling for the immediate release of Burmese human rights activist 
U Myint Aye, who is serving a life sentence for his alleged involvement in 
planning a bomb attack in the Shwepyitha Township in Yangon on 1 July 2008.

U Myint Aye, aged 61, from Yangon, has a long track record of peaceful 
political activism. He is a prominent member of the Human Rights Defenders and 
Promoters (HRDP) network, which he co-founded in 2002, and served as the vice 
chairman of the National League for Democracy (NLD) in Yangon, the opposition 
party led by Aung San Suu Kyi. He has been arrested at least six times since 
1988.

Amnesty believes his most recent arrest is based on fabricated charges and 
that he has been targeted as a result of his human rights activities. It 
followed a search of his home on 8 August 2008, during which the police removed 
a number of items and documents relating to his work to distribute aid to 
survivors of cyclone Nargis, which struck Burma in May 2008 and killed tens of 
thousands of people.

His trial, which started on 26 September 2008, fell far short of international 
fair trial standards. He was allegedly tortured in detention and the lawyers he 
engaged were subjected to intimidation and other human rights violations. In 
spite of a lack of incriminating evidence against him, Myint Aye was sentenced 
to life imprisonment plus eight years on 29 November 2008. He is being detained 
in Loikaw prison, Kayah State, more than 460km from his home town and wife and 
son â€“ a journey of 20 hours by car.

Amnesty will be campaigning for his release at the Edinburgh festival this 
year. To take action demanding U Myint Aye's release and to demand the release 
of all prisoners of conscience in Burma, go to theAmnesty UK priority action 
page 
<http://action.amnesty.org.uk/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1194&ea.campaign.id=15309>
.
 