
What happens next? 

Astana’s future is in the hands of the UCI licence commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/27/uci-licence-revoke-vincenzo-nibali-tiur-de-france>
, a four-man panel headed by the former Swiss supreme court judge Pierre 
Zappelli. They will look at the findings of the audit commissioned into Astana 
in December and examine evidence from the Padua doping inquiry in which Astana 
team members are mentioned. There is no timeline available for the process but 
it’s reasonable to expect them to take at least a few days to convene and more 
to examine the evidence. If Astana have to attend a hearing they will need time 
to sort their lawyers and put together their case. All of which means this will 
be a long process.

What does this mean for Astana? 

For the moment they will continue to race. If the licence commission rules 
against them, however and the verdict is upheld in the face of any legal 
challenge then they will be out in the cold. They may be awarded a Pro 
Continental licence – effectively relegation – in which case they could compete 
subject to invitation from race organisers. But their membership of theMovement 
for Credible Cycling <http://www.mpcc.fr/index.php/en/> – an umbrella 
organisation of teams that adhere to a standard anti-doping charter – could 
also be called into question, which would further muddy the waters.

Will Vincenzo Nibali defend his Tour de France title? 

That depends on the time scale, particularly if – in the event of the licence 
being revoked _ Astana appeal to the court of arbitration for sport, which 
could take several months. There is a possibility that Nibali could start the 
Tour with his team in legal limbo. IfAstana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/astana> were banned before the Tour, he 
would be free to sign with another team but that would depend on who needed a 
leader, who had the cash, and whether he was considered damaged goods – 
although he has denied any wrongdoing and there is no evidence that he is 
implicated in doping.

Why doesn’t the UCI just ban Astana now if it considers there is evidence 
against them?

Since the start of the process, the UCI president, Brian Cookson, has been at 
pains to point out that the governing body is playing a long game. As in 
December when the WorldTour licence was issued – albeit provisionally – the big 
fear is that banning Astana now would result in a legal challenge for restraint 
of trade that the UCI might lose. Cookson said last week that under his aegis 
the UCI is happy to take the fight to anyone or anybody implicated in doping, 
but only if it looks certain it can win.

Why haven’t teams faced bans before? 

They have, and they haven’t. When organisers enjoyed carte blanche over what 
teams they invited to their events, there were instances when squads were left 
out on ethical grounds, most notably Astana at the 2008 Tour de France. But the 
fight against doping has been dogged by the fact that no legal framework has 
been in place under which teams could be banned and even disbanded if their 
conduct was considered prejudicial to the sport. Riders could be sanctioned; 
teams “only” faced the court of public opinion and for some any publicity was 
good publicity. If teams can now face sanctions over doping that happens on 
their watch, that could be a game changer.
 