
In an unprecedented move the world governing body has requested that the Astana
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/astana> team, for whom Vincenzo Nibali won 
last year’s Tour de France, have their licence revoked.

The Union Cycliste Internationale’s move comes after an audit of the team’s 
anti-doping procedures carried out by the Institute of Sports Science at the 
University of Lausanne. The UCI was unwilling to comment on any time scale for 
the process.

Astana released a statement 
<http://astanaproteam.kz/en/page/news/6259-issul-audit-press-statement> on 
Friday night indicating that they intend to fight the ruling: “Astana Pro Team 
has received confirmation from the Union Cycliste International of their 
receipt of results from the recent audit by the Institute of Sport and Science 
at the University of Lausanne, and the subsequent transfer of those results to 
the Independent License Commission.

“Astana Pro Team will consult with its attorneys to prepare documents and 
testimony before the Independent Licence Commission. Astana Pro Team will 
reserve its rights pending due process at the Independent Licence Commission to 
appeal to the court of arbitration for sport following the scheduled procedure.”

If the licence commission complies, and any further legal proceedings end in 
the UCI’s favour, that could potentially mean the end of the team, sponsored by 
a consortium of Kazakh companies and headed by the controversial former cyclist 
Alexander Vinokourov. In that event it is possible that Nibali and other star 
riders, such as the Italian Fabio Aru, would be picked up by other squads.

A press release from the UCI  
<http://www.uci.ch/pressreleases/the-uci-requests-withdrawal-astana-pro-team-licence/>
stated: “After careful review of this extensive report the UCI strongly 
believes that it contains compelling grounds to refer the matter to the licence 
commission and request the Astana Pro Team licence be revoked. The UCI 
considers that the audit has, among other things, revealed a big difference 
between the policies and structures presented to the licence commission in 
December and the reality on the ground.”
 Nibali celebrates victory in the 2014 Tour de France with his Astana team 
manager Alexander Vinokourov, right. Photograph: Jean-Paul Pelissier/REUTERS 
The licence commission – a four-man panel, headed by a Swiss judge, which is 
independent of the UCI – will also take into account sections of a four-year 
long inquiry by Padua magistrates into alleged doping in Italy.

The Italian media alleged in December that members of the Astana team had been 
found to be involved.

The newspaper La Gazzetta dello Sport claimed that the report found that 
members of Astana – not including Nibali – had been working with Lance 
Armstrong’s former trainer Michele Ferrari. Ferrari has strongly denied any 
Astana link; the team have also denied the reports.

The UCI statement merely read: “As some evidence concerns Astana Pro Team 
members, the file has been passed to the licence commission as part of 
this referral.”

The ISSUL audit was ordered in December as a condition of Astana being awarded 
a WorldTour licence after two riders in the Astana WorldTour team – Valentin 
and Maxim Iglinsky – tested positive last August for the blood booster EPO, and 
an apprentice at the team, Ilya Davidenok, for anabolic steroids. Part of the 
brief was to assess the extent to which Astana as a team were responsible for 
the doping cases, as well as to see to what degree the team were implementing 
measures designed to ensure teams took greater responsibility for rider welfare 
and ethics.
 Nibali stands to attention on the Tour de France podium. Photograph: Kenzo 
Tribouillard/AFP/Getty Images 
The decision to award Astana’s WorldTour licence on that basis sparked a wave 
of adverse comment from cycling fans – and figures as diverse as Lance 
Armstrong and Sir Dave Brailsford – but at the timethe UCI president, Brian 
Cookson, told the Guardian that Astana were “very much on probation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/10/astana-provisional-2015-worldtour-licence-audit>
 – on a very short leash”. He added that there were other factors that could 
count against Astana such as the team’s history – other doping cases under 
different management teams, including Vinokourov’s blood doping positive in 
2007 – and the extent to which they co-operated with the audit team.

Cookson has publicly requested that Vinokourov should speak to the independent 
commission on reform in cycling which was set up to examine doping; it is 
unclear whether he has done so.

Speaking to reporters at the world track cycling championships in Paris last 
week, Cookson explained that the UCI’s priority had been to ensure that, if a 
case were to be made against Astana, it should be legally watertight, so that 
there could be no possibility of a repeat of the situation in 2012-13 when the 
Katusha squad were refused a WorldTour licence but won an appeal against the 
licence commission ruling at the court of arbitration for sport.
 