
Recent analysis of 50 worldwide banking apps by MyPrivateBanking 
<http://www.myprivatebanking.com/> found that the features customer most desire 
include: an account overview, online banking and a branch or ATM-finder. On 
that basis, the UK is a little hit and miss, with some apps falling short of 
offering full banking functionality and others failing to integrate branch and 
ATM-finders fully. Here we ru through five of the most popular UK banking apps:

Barclays Pingit 
<http://www.barclays.co.uk/PersonalBanking/P1242603570446?WT.mc_id=301RDpingit> 

What can you do? Once registered, you can check your balance, pay people, and 
locateBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> ATMs.

What's good about it? A simple five-digit Pin unlocks the app, meaning you can 
fire it up and be checking your balance within about 10 seconds, even with a 3G 
connection – as long as you can remember your Pin. Only needing someone's phone 
number in order to transfer money, is also a great feature. The branch and 
ATM-finders are a nice touch, especially as they include directions, Google 
street view and branch phone numbers. Handily it's available on iPhone, 
Blackberry and Android.

What's bad about it? It only shows recent transactions made using Pingit 
rather than all your transactions. At the moment non-Barclays customers with a 
current account can only receive payments, but the bank says they will soon be 
able to send money.

Overall mark 7/10.

First Direct 
<http://www1.banking.firstdirect.com/1/2/banking/ways-to-bank/iphone-banking-apps>

What can you do? It shows you the balance on your current, savings and credit 
card accounts, going back a week. There's a facility to make electronic 
payments to selected accounts, but you can't specify a hitherto unused 
destination – for that you have to log on to the full site.

What's good about it? It's simple and functional, and doesn't try to overreach 
itself. Hard for anyone to steal money from your account due to above 
restrictions on where you can transfer money to.

What's bad about it? Could offer more non security-essential functionality 
such as mortgage or loan rate information, calculators, etc. Available on 
iPhone only, although other phone users can register for its no-frills Mobile 
Money service.

Overall mark 8/10.

HSBC <http://www.hsbc.co.uk/1/2/ways-to-bank/mobile>



What can you do? The HSBC <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> 
"app" for iPhone and Android is a cheat: in reality it's just a desktop icon 
that takes you to the mobile version of the website – so you're still banking 
via your internet browser as opposed to a standalone app. But this does mean 
you can do everything you are able to do while internet banking on a desktop or 
laptop computer: view balances, make payments or transfer money, set up or 
delete standing orders, look at statements and so on.

What's good about it? It's as comprehensive as the normal online banking 
experience.

What's bad about it? It's really fiddly because the website isn't tailored for 
use on a mobile, so you constantly have to zoom right in to make sure you press 
the right links. An app should be self-contained and optimised to the available 
technology – this is just a loose work around that requires minimum 
technological input from the world's local bank. Very odd it hasn't bothered 
designing an individual app.

Overall mark 5/10.

Lloyds TSB <http://www.lloydstsb.com/internet_banking/mobile_banking.asp>



What can you do? Check your accounts, set up and make payments, transfer cash 
between accounts, request an overdraft extension and locate your nearest 
branches and ATMs.

What's good about it? It's attractive and cleanly presented – the set-up will 
be familiar to anyone who already uses Lloyds TSB's online banking service. You 
can go look at pages and pages of transactions, rather than being restricted to 
just the past week or month, and little arrows indicate whether the money is 
going in or out of your account. It's available on the Apple App Store, Google 
Play, BlackBerry App World and Nokia Store.

What's bad about it? Setting up a new recipient for a payment involves a bit 
of a juggling act, as Lloyds TSB will call you to authenticate your request and 
ask for a number that is on the screen of the phone it is calling you on 
(you'll need to write it down). You can't open new accounts – you have to 
follow the link to the desktop site – and the branch finder is a bit hopeless, 
as the phone number – one piece of info you might want while on the move – 
isn't listed. Logging out takes time – services that log you out too quickly 
can be annoying, but I found I was still logged in after a few minutes of 
inactivity, which seemed a bit of a security risk.

Overall mark 8/10.

NatWest 
<http://www.natwest.com/personal/online-banking/g2/mobile-phone-banking.ashx>



What can you do? Registered users can check account balances, pay people and 
bills, top-up designated mobile phones, and find the nearest cashpoints and 
NatWest branches.

What's good about it? An uncomplicated design means moving your money around 
is easy. Once logged in, with a five-digit Pin, making a payment or transfer 
between accounts takes just a few taps. If you're trying to watch the pennies 
then the service for setting up alerts is great, as it sends a notification 
when a self-set amount is reached. It is available on iPhone, Blackberry and 
Android.

What's bad about it? The mini-statement really is mini. You can only see the 
last six transactions, which is somewhat limiting. But this app is more for 
quick and immediate transfers than detailed account information.

Overall mark 8/10.
 