
The UK is leading a Europe-wide “race to the bottom” with Orwellian 
counter-terrorism measures that seriously threaten human rights, according to a 
comparative survey of security laws byAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>.

A 70-page report, entitled Dangerously disproportionate: The ever-expanding 
national security state in Europe 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/eur01/5342/2017/en/>, alleges that 
Britain has introduced powers in the name of national security that are “among 
the most draconian in the EU”.

Warning: Europe is entering a permanent state of emergency | John Dalhuisen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/europe-state-of-emergency-threat-terrorism>
 In more than half the areas of concern highlighted by the report 
<https://amnesty.app.box.com/s/i4hhh91ck1s124lvh2wa62tv2rx0hopl>, the UK is 
judged to be at one end of the spectrum in relation to regulations on “mass 
surveillance”, use of “diplomatic assurances” to deport people where there is a 
risk of torture, stripping people of their nationality, controlling their 
movement and detaining without charge or sufficient legal process.

Amnesty’s stark assessment is a response to widespread changes in 
counter-terror laws across Europe, enacted in the wake of numerous, Islamic 
State-inspired attacks. It follows the UK parliament’s vote for the
Investigatory Powers Act, nicknamed the snooper’s charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/snoopers-charter-bill-becomes-law-extending-uk-state-surveillance>
.


Amnesty’s report – based on research comparing 14 EU countries – is at odds 
with the latest annual report produced by the independent reviewer of terrorism 
legislation,David Anderson QC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/01/david-anderson-qc-step-down-independent-terror-review-role>
, who concluded: “The terrorism acts, as refined by parliament and by the 
influence of the courts, are a broadly proportionate reaction to the current 
threat.


“Based on my own observations over six years, the hostile narrative of 
power-hungry security services, police insensitivity to community concerns and 
laws constantly being ratcheted up to new levels of oppression is, quite 
simply, false.”

The Amnesty report, however, says that many EU countries have joined the ranks 
of surveillance states as new laws haveenabled intrusive mass surveillance 
powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/19/extreme-surveillance-becomes-uk-law-with-barely-a-whimper>
.

Kate Allen, the director of Amnesty International UK, said: “The Big Brother 
surveillance state that George Orwell warned of back in 1949 is alive and 
dangerously well in Europe today. Governments, including the UK, are not far 
off creating societies in which freedom is the exception and fear the rule, 
which should be of deep concern to us all.

“After a series of horrific terrorist attacks across Europe, EU governments 
have rushed through a raft of repressive laws. There is an obvious and urgent 
need to protect people from this kind of violence – protecting the rights to 
life, and to live, move and think freely are essential tasks of government, but 
they are not ones to be achieved by any means and at the cost of such rights 
themselves.

“These laws trample on hard-won freedoms that we have long taken for granted. 
The UK could have been a beacon of progress here, but instead it is leading a 
race to the bottom. Governments should be providing security for people to 
enjoy their rights, rather than restricting people’s rights in the name of 
security.”

A Home Office spokesperson said: “The current terror threat to the UK is 
severe, meaning an attack is highly likely. It is therefore vital that our 
counter-terrorism laws are effective, but also fair and proportionate.

“The Investigatory Powers Act protects both our privacy and our security and 
was the result of three independent reports, all of which concluded a new law 
was needed. The act was passed with cross-party support and is the will of 
parliament.

“The independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, David Anderson QC, found 
that the ability to collect data in bulk is a crucial tool used by the security 
and intelligence agencies to generate intelligence about threats that cannot be 
acquired by more targeted means. We will vigorously defend these vital powers 
that help to keep our families, communities and country safe.”
 