
As an uneasy truce holds in Kiev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/23/ukraine-protests-uneasy-truce-kiev>
, the Ukrainian novelist Andrey Kurkov has called on the international 
community to show solidarity with a country "abandoned" by the European Union.

Speaking to the Guardian after the Ukrainian branch of the writers' 
organisation International PEN 
<http://www.pen-international.org/centres/ukrainian-centre/> called for 
sanctions "against a regime that is violating human rights, including the most 
fundamental ones: the right to life and the right to freedom", Kurkov said that 
the situation was "moving in a very dangerous direction".

"We are about to enter the era of political prisoners," he said, "within 
several days."

The author, best known for his novel Death and the Penguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/thrillers/9781860469459/death-and-the-penguin>
, about a Kiev obituary writer and his pet penguin, hopes "people will listen" 
to the call to arms issued by Ukrainian PEN – "at least somebody", he said.

"Definitely Europe has abandoned Ukraine," he continued. "America is more 
interested in good relations with Putin … The French president is more excited 
by his own problems. Apart from the Polish president and the Lithuanian 
president, nobody else is taking events inUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> seriously."

The crisis has built steadily since President Viktor Yanukovych pulled out of 
talks over a planned association agreement with the European Union at the end 
of 2013, citing financial pressure and the need for closer ties with Russia. 
With at least three people killed in clashes between protesters and riot police
the crisis has begun to spread beyond the capital, with tensions building in 
Lviv and Rivne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/23/ukraine-protests-uneasy-truce-kiev>
.

According to the Ukrainian PEN statement, signed by Kurkov, his fellow PEN 
vice-president,Mykoła Riabchuk 
<http://www.opendemocracy.net/author/mykola-riabchuk>, and its president, 
Myroslav Marynovych <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myroslav_Marynovych>, the 
Ukrainian government has "crossed the red line that separates 
semi-authoritarian regimes from genuine dictatorships".

"They persistently tighten the screws, encourage lawlessness and provoke more 
confrontation and violence. They remain deaf to all moderate voices and calls 
for peace. They seem to understand only the language of force," write Kurkov 
and his fellow authors, calling on the international community "to use such 
language too".

"We call on our international colleagues not only to express their support for 
Ukrainian writers and journalists and their solidarity with the Ukrainian 
people. We call on you to mobilise your democratic societies and increase 
pressure on your governments to take a tougher stance against a regime that is 
leading its country to further violence and bloodshed," they write. "We call 
for sanctions against a regime that is violating human rights, including the 
most fundamental ones: the right to life and the right to freedom."

Kurkov said today that the situation in Ukraine was "not improving", and was 
"moving in a very dangerous direction".

The PEN statement focuses particularly on "police brutality aimed at 
journalists" in Ukraine, claiming that "all the evidence shows that the police 
forces not only ignore journalists' badges and vests but deliberately target, 
detain and beat them, break their cameras and destroy video materials".

International PEN said in a separate statement that it was also "deeply 
concerned by the attacks suffered by journalists covering events atEuromaidan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euromaidan>" and also by the recent introduction 
of "new, draconian legislation aimed at curtailing freedom of expression, 
prohibiting almost all protests and stifling dissent and debate".

"Ukraine is following Russia's lead in more ways than one: like Russia, 
Ukraine has now recriminalised defamation, providing punishments of up to two 
years in prison for violations. At a time when the current European trend is to 
move away from the criminalisation of speech offences, this law is a backward 
step and is clearly designed to silence dissent," said the writers' 
organisation, calling on the Ukrainian government to "amend these new laws to 
ensure that the fundamental right to freedom of expression is fully respected".

"Ukraine must comply with its obligations under the International Covenant on 
Civil and Political Rights <http://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b3aa0.html> to 
protect freedom of expression," said International PEN.
 