
Ulster pressed home their Heineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> ambitions with a bonus-point 
victory over Aironi in Monza.

Brian McLaughlin's men scored six tries on their way to a well-merited win, 
which puts them in pole position at the top of Pool Four ahead of next month's 
crunch clashes at home against Leicester and away to Clermont Auvergne.

Andrew Trimble, Tom Court, Craig Gilroy and replacements Robbie Diack and Adam 
Macklin were all on the mark for the visitors, while a first-half penalty try 
added to Italian woes.

The quality of opposition notwithstanding, it was a strong performance by the 
Irish province who dominated throughout. They should have had a try after just 
four minutes but Trimble, having done the hard work to evade Aironi's wide 
defence, inexplicably lost control of the ball when attempting to ground it 
with his right hand.

The Ireland winger made amends just a minute later, however, showing brilliant 
hands on the crash ball to touch down under the posts. Ian Humphreys converted, 
and Ulster were already on their way.

Aironi <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aironi> have both the worst 
defensive and attack records in the competition this season, and they offered 
little to inspire the home support, other than the place kicking of Luciano 
Orquera.

He traded penalties with Humphreys to leave the score 10-3 in Ulster's favour 
midway through the half. It was the forwards who took the plaudits for try 
number two, a penalty try awarded after a 15-metre rolling maul was dragged 
down just short of the hosts' line.

Humphreys again converted to make the lead 17-3. Oddly, Humphreys then opted 
for another three-pointer with Aironi on the ropes after a touchline surge from 
man-of-the-match John Afoa had torn their defence asunder.

But there was little respite for the hapless Italians, and the third try duly 
arrived before the break, Court this time crossing the whitewash following a 
series of pick and drives. Humphreys was once again on the mark with the 
conversion.

Leading 27-3, the challenge for Ulster was to maintain their intensity after 
the break, but it took them an age to regain their rhythm, Aironi finally 
playing with some conviction.

It was the Italians who struck first in the second period, the lively Sinoti 
Sinoti slipping in for a 56th-minute try after a period of sustained pressure, 
with Orquera adding the extras.

A game that was effectively dead at half-time burst into life when replacement 
Roberto Quartaroli sprinted home from 70 metres for Aironi's second try, 
narrowing the gap to 12 points with 20 minutes remaining.

With the travelling support becoming increasingly uncomfortable, Ulster 
finally woke up during the final quarter and Gilroy's try 10 minutes from time 
secured the bonus point â€“ the province's second of these back-to-back fixtures.

Aironi replacement George Biagi scored a late consolation try. But Diack and 
Macklin both touched down to finish off a workmanlike performance for Ulster, 
whose only concern was a knee injury picked up by young replacement Paddy 
Jackson.
 