
Record-breaking rain and flash flooding closed Uluru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/uluru> national park on Monday 
until further notice, Parks Australia said.

A deep low-pressure system moved slowly south-east across the Northern 
Territory <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> 
during the day, carrying locally destructive winds, heavy rain and the risk of 
flash flooding, according to the Bureau of Meteorology.

“Due to an extreme weather event, Uluru-Kata Tjuta national park 
<http://parksaustralia.gov.au/uluru/> has been closed until further notice,” 
Parks Austalia said in a statement. “Our rangers are checking the condition of 
the roads every hour in a bid to reopen as soon as it is safe to do so.”
ABC News 24 (@ABCNews24) 
Amazing footage has emerged after #Uluru 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Uluru?src=hash> National Park was closed today due 
to heavy rain. Please send us your photos if you're there!
pic.twitter.com/n1HyCcPn0I <https://t.co/n1HyCcPn0I>
 <https://twitter.com/ABCNews24/status/813255601887137792> December 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ABCNews24/status/813255601887137792> 
Kimberley residents braced for flooding and possible evacuation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/26/kimberley-residents-braced-for-flooding-and-possible-evacuation>
Almost 100 people were evacuated and many houses damaged in Kintore, a small 
community about 500km west of Uluru,the ABC reported 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-26/uluru-closed-homes-damaged-by-flashfloods-in-central-australia/8148430>
. On Monday 85 were still sheltering at a local school. All roads were 
impassable into Kintore from the Northern Territory and access was also 
difficult from Western Australia, local police said.

The weather bureau listed Yulara, north of the park, as a location that would 
be affected. Peak wind gusts reached up to 125km/h and the Walungurru district 
recorded 232mm of rain in 24 hours.

“We’ve only got about 15 years of records at that location, but it’s clearly 
well above previous totals,” the bureau forecaster Mosese Raico said.

The previous highest monthly total for December for that region was 161mm, 
recorded in 2003. The highest daily total for any time of the year was 127mm, 
recorded in March 2006.

Raico said the low was not expected to move into South Australia until Tuesday 
and heavy rain would persist.
 