
The United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> 
investigated and cleared four peacekeepers accused of rape and sexual assault, 
including the assault of a child, without passing the cases to national 
authorities, the Guardian has discovered, in a move which poses questions about 
the way the organisation handles rape allegations made against its staff.

The revelation comes after UN secretary general, Ban Ki-Moon called on 
countries whose soldiers are responsible for rape and sexual exploitation on 
peacekeeping missions to stop covering for their crimes and put them on trial. 
In aninterview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/stop-protecting-peacekeepers-who-rape-ban-ki-moon-tells-un-member-states>
, Ban said that countries whose troops commit offences should take “greater 
institutional responsibility” for prosecuting the crimes.

However, in four cases, accusations against peacekeepers were not passed on to 
the national authorities, with the investigations carried out by an internal UN 
body, the office of internal oversight services (OIOS) behind closed doors, 
with no reference to criminal authorities in the suspects’ home countries.

The allegations examined included rape and sexual assault. In each case the 
OIOS questioned UN staff, witnesses and victims before making a decision 
internally on the credibility of the allegations and whether or not they should 
be passed to the criminal authorities in the suspects’ home countries.

Once the suspects were cleared, they were free to return to work, with a UN 
spokesperson confirming: “If an allegation is determined to be unsubstantiated, 
no further action would be taken in connection with the subject of the 
allegations.”

The news is the latest in a series of scandals involving sexual abuse 
committed by UN peacekeepers in conflict-ridden countries across the world and 
highlights what many say are haphazard methods of dealing with sexual assault 
allegations.

The cases in question were exposed by the NGO Aids Free World 
<http://www.aidsfreeworld.org/>, which wrote to the UN to ask what action had 
been taken in 12 separate cases cited by the OIOS in its annual reports from 
2013 and 2014.

A response from the UN, sent to the Guardian by the office of Miguel de Serpa 
Soares, UN under-secretary-general for legal affairs, showed that only four out 
of 12 cases were ever passed on to the national authorities who have 
jurisdiction over the suspects for criminal investigation.

A further two were passed on to national authorities, only to be dropped at a 
later date, and another two are under review. After internal investigation – 
details of which the UN has not given publicly – the remaining four 
allegations, which included allegations of rape and the sexual assault of a 
child, were judged by the UN’s own investigators in the OIOS to have 
“insufficient evidence for the secretariat to refer the matter to the national 
authorities”.

The UN’s system for responding to sexual abuse is effectively doing what it is 
designed to do: protect the organisation

The OIOS gives few details about the cases in the reports, omitting names and 
locations from the scant details which they have made public on each case.

Asked what legal basis the UN has for conducting investigations into rape 
allegations internally, a spokesperson said the organisation was governed by 
staff regulations and UN-drafted legislation.

In its reply to the request, the UN reiterated its commitment to a 
zero-tolerance policy on matters of sexual abuse and insisted that no staff 
accused of the crime enjoyed diplomatic immunity to prevent them from facing 
prosecution.

Paula Donovan, from Aids Free World, said that by investigating and acquitting 
its own staff of sexual assault, the UN was making a mockery of its 
“zero-tolerance” policy.

“The UN has created a double standard with no legal basis: on the one hand, it 
has decreed ‘zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse’, and claims that 
the immunity that protects its staff, police, and experts from being subjected 
to normal legal processes simply doesn’t apply in such cases,” said Donovan.

“On the other hand, it effectively instructs civilians in peacekeeping 
countries to bypass local law enforcement if they’re sexually assaulted or 
exploited by anyone paid by the UN, and report those offenses instead to the 
accused’s employer – the UN. By doing so, the UN claims the right, as the 
employer of the accused, to assess each claim and decide for itself whether the 
alleged victim is credible, whether their reasons for reporting seem valid, and 
whether they can produce strong enough witnesses and supporting evidence to 
corroborate their claim.”

NGOs have spoken of a culture of impunity around allegations of sexual assault 
in UN peacekeeping missions,in recent months 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2015/5/29/code_blue_un_accused_of_giving>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fun-criticised-for-failure-to-pursue-allegations-against-staff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75e3bb0363cbc941fb179ce311ace16ceaae159a%2F0_0_4797_2878%2F4797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UN%20criticised%20for%20failure%20to%20pursue%20rape%20allegations%20against%20staff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fun-criticised-for-failure-to-pursue-allegations-against-staff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UN%20criticised%20for%20failure%20to%20pursue%20rape%20allegations%20against%20staff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F18%2Fun-criticised-for-failure-to-pursue-allegations-against-staff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75e3bb0363cbc941fb179ce311ace16ceaae159a%2F0_0_4797_2878%2F4797.jpg>
 A French soldier guards refugees in Central African Republic in 2014. French 
prosecutors have opened an investigation into claims that French peacekeepers 
sexually abused children during their mission in CAR. Photograph: Eric 
Feferberg/AFP/Getty Images 
An internal UN report earlier this year described sexual exploitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/mar/24/sex-abuse-un-peacekeeping-leaked-report>
 and abuse as “the most significant risk” to peacekeeping missions across the 
globe. Another leaked report obtained by the Guardian spoke of French 
peacekeepers raping street children in Central African Republic during heavy 
conflict in the country between December 2013 and June 2014.

Annual reports from the OIOS 
<https://oios.un.org/resources/2015/04/EbJWlHQJ.pdf> talk of allegations of 
sexual exploitation and abuse damaging the reputation of the peacekeeping 
efforts, with 35 allegations reported last year, 12 of which involved minors.

The 2014 OIOS report <https://oios.un.org/resources/2015/04/EbJWlHQJ.pdf> 
hinted at the problems around reporting sex abuse cases to UN peacekeeping 
missions. A section reads: “As long as victims see that their primary avenue 
for reporting is to walk through the armed gates of peacekeeping missions to 
file their complaints, the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy will not 
be seen as being credibly implemented.”

A UN spokesperson told the Guardian there are “several avenues through which 
victims are able to report allegations against UN peacekeepers”. Allegations 
can be reported to local leaders and local organisations, which report to the 
UN, or directly to the peacekeeping mission itself.

The UN is said to be under-going a “concerted effort to strengthen 
confidential mechanisms for reporting allegations without having to make direct 
contact with a mission”.

But NGO workers have told the Guardian that the mishmash of reporting 
mechanisms discourages victims from coming forward.

Sarah Taylor, advocate for women, peace and security at Human Rights Watch 
accused the UN of failing to be explicit, saying: “The persistent lack of 
transparency on these cases makes it very difficult to help victims seek 
justice.”

“With the UN historically providing few specifics on allegations, and so few 
troop- and police-contributing countries providing information on 
investigations and prosecutions, we don’t even have a clear idea of the scope 
of the problem,” she said.

Others have suggested that official figures for reported incidents are merely 
the tip of the iceberg. Brian Concannon, executive director at theInstitute for 
Justice and Democracy in Haiti <http://www.ijdh.org/>, an advocacy organisation 
which takes on human rights in Haiti, a country with a significant peacekeeper 
presence, said it is hard for victims to pursue claims against peacekeepers.

“The UN’s system for responding to sexual abuse is effectively doing what it 
is designed to do: protect the organisation and its people from accountability 
to the residents of the poor countries that host peacekeeping missions,” said 
Concannon.

“This is evident if you look at either the process – how hard it is for an 
assault victim to pursue a claim – or the results – a few dozen investigations 
each year for an organisation deploying hundreds of thousands of people.”
 