
The UN security council must take in new permanent members or risk becoming 
increasingly irrelevant on the international stage, former secretary general
Kofi Annan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kofi-annan> has warned.

In an interview with the Guardian, Annan said Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, China, the US, France and the UK 
should take advantage of the imminent 70th anniversary of the UN to modernise 
the pre-eminent global security body by welcoming in powers such as India and 
Germany.

“One should always take advantage of the accident of the calendar and really 
push for major reforms,” said Annan, who was secretary general from 1997 to 
2006.

“I firmly believe that the council should be reformed: it cannot continue as 
it is. The world has changed and the UN should change and adapt. If we don’t 
change the council, we risk a situation where the primacy of the council may be 
challenged by some of the new emerging countries.

“I think those in privileged positions will have to think hard and decide what 
amount of power they are prepared to release to make the participation of the 
newcomers meaningful. If they do that, they will get cooperation; if they 
don’t, we risk confrontation.”

The security council has been criticised for its failure to deal with crises 
such as the wars in Syria and Ukraine, and for its impotence in longer term 
issues, including the situation in the Middle East and the banning of landmines.

The current system, which gives only five countries – China, France, Russia, 
the UK and US – a permanent seat and veto in the council, has been widely 
criticised as an anachronism, setting in stone the global politics of 70 years 
ago. Among the longstanding proponents of reform areIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/jan/21/india.wto>, Germany, Japan 
and South Africa, all lobbying for a permanent seat on the council.

UN security council is failing Syria, Ban Ki-moon admits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/un-security-council-is-failing-syria-ban-ki-moon>
Annan compared the situation to the recent failure of the US to carry out 
long-planned reforms to the International Monetary Fund, which was sharply 
criticised by countries such asChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>. 
“We have seen an example in the financial area where there was resistance to 
reform in the IMF. The Chinese government is [now] putting out its own version 
of a fund. We risk doing the same with the council.”

Successive secretaries general have attempted to push through reforms but have 
metresistance from the sitting powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/jul/15/unitednations>, as well as 
stumbling blocks such as disagreement over whichcountries would be chosen to 
join <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/jun/11/foreignpolicy.politics> 
the current five permanent members. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/jun/11/foreignpolicy.politics> Any 
reform of the security council would require the agreement of all five, and at 
least two-thirds of UN member states.

A text setting out the basic framework for reform is being considered by 
member states, but experts are pessimistic about whether discussions will have 
any effect, given the lack of interest from the big powers such as the US and 
Russia.


Natalie Samarasinghe is executive director of the UN Association in the UK 
<http://www.una.org.uk/>, a group of UN policy experts. She doesn’t believe 
there is enough impetus for change within the council.

Russian vetoes are putting UN security council's legitimacy at risk, says US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/russian-vetoes-putting-un-security-council-legitimacy-at-risk-says-us>
“[Annan] is right in emphasising the urgency of change but I’m not sure I 
agree it will happen imminently or any time connected to the anniversary. The 
current text that is being discussed contains … the same positions that have 
been around for ages. Annan andthe Elders <http://theelders.org/> [group of 
former world leaders] have had lots of interesting ideas about how to break the 
deadlock but they are not being championed by prominent enough states. The US 
and Russia position is that they are just not talking about this.”

Annan resigned from his role as UN envoy to Syria in 2012, blaming “
finger-pointing and name-calling in the security council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/02/kofi-annan-resigns-syria-envoy>
”. Now, he says the international community is realising too late that it has 
to act. “I think the Syrian situation is a rather tragic and unique one. There 
were very serious miscalculations by many countries. Everyone thought their 
side was going to win in three months or so; and when you believe you are going 
to win, you are not really interested in sitting down and working out the nitty 
gritty of a peace agreement.


Vetoed! What's wrong with the UN security council – and how it could do better
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/un-security-council-failing-70-years>
“I think the situation was difficult but much more manageable in 2012 when I 
was involved. I pushed very hard, came up witha six-point plan and launched the 
Geneva communique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/30/syria-peace-plan-kofi-annan> in 
June 2012 and now the member states and the council are trying to build on it, 
but this is three years on and [many] people have died in the meantime.”

He says that, until the permanent members of the council can agree on a common 
strategy, there is nothing that the UN as an organisation can do to make peace.

“The secretary general and his staff cannot walk into situations like Syria 
when the member states are not interested, when the states are divided and are 
fighting each other. When people say the UN is useless I ask the question: 
which UN are we talking about? We have the UN that is a secretariat led by the 
secretary general and we have a UN made up of member states who give us our 
mandate. In a situation where [member states] are divided, what can we do?”
 