
The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon>, has admitted that the UN 
security council is failing Syria because of big power divisions which have 
prevented action to end a conflict that has cost hundreds of thousands of lives 
and driven the biggest refugee exodus in a generation.


The UN secretary general told that Guardian that Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and China should “look beyond 
national interest” and stop blocking security council action on the conflict in 
Syria as the flow of refugees to Europe reaches unprecedented levels.

“We need some solidarity, unity of purpose, particularly among the permanent 
members of the security council,” he said in an interview. “When they are 
divided, it is extremely difficult for theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> to deliver. That’s why I’ve 
been urging the members of the security council to look beyond national 
interest. We have to look for the global interest.

“When the security council members are united we have seen very speedy and 
tremendous impact in addressing the issues, as we have seen in the case of 
chemical weapon investigation inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>
.”

Although Ban did not name Russia and China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, the two countries have on several 
occasions blocked resolutions critical of the Syrian government, threatening 
sanctions or pressing it towards a negotiated settlement. Last year, Moscow and 
Beijing also vetoed a move backed by the 13 other permanent and non-permament 
members of the security council to refer the Syrian conflict for investigation 
by the international criminal court.

Ban had backed the referral to the ICC, saying the Syrian people “have a 
fundamental right to justice”.

He has previously spoken of his “shame” and “anger” at the international 
community’s “impotence to stop the war” in Syria, and said the UN’s credibility 
had suffered as a result.

There are various estimates for the death toll in Syria, extending up to more 
than 300,000, while about half the pre-war population of 22 million has been 
uprooted.

The UN high commissioner for refugees has described the exodus of people 
fleeing the fighting as the largest refugee crisis in a generation. About 4 
million people have crossed into neighbouring countries with almost half of 
those going to Turkey. Tens of thousands have made the difficult and often 
dangerous journey to Europe.


The UNHCR said nearly 350,000 Syrians had applied for political asylum in 
Europe <http://data.unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/regional.php> since the war began. 

In August, the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, said he was confident Russia 
would continue to back his regime.

“We have strong confidence in the Russians, as they have proven throughout 
this crisis, for four years, that they are sincere and transparent in their 
relationship with us,” he said in aninterview with Hezbollah’s al-Manar 
television network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/26/assad-confident-of-russian-support-for-syria-regime>
.

Assad described Russia as “principled”, while “the United States abandons its 
allies, abandons its friends”.

Last month, Barack Obama called on Russia and Syria’s principal regional ally, 
Iran, to “recognise that the trend lines are not good for Assad”.

Speaking to the Guardian at the start of an investigative series on the future 
of the UN as it turns 70 this autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/united-nations-70-years>, Ban 
acknowledged that growing demands within the UN for the security council to be 
reformed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fun-security-council-is-failing-syria-ban-ki-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f33d62d7afb4fa9864bf0ca192a3eaef2395aeb%2F18_1082_6323_3795%2F6323.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UN%20security%20council%20is%20failing%20Syria%2C%20Ban%20Ki-moon%20admits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fun-security-council-is-failing-syria-ban-ki-moon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UN%20security%20council%20is%20failing%20Syria%2C%20Ban%20Ki-moon%20admits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fun-security-council-is-failing-syria-ban-ki-moon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f33d62d7afb4fa9864bf0ca192a3eaef2395aeb%2F18_1082_6323_3795%2F6323.jpg>
 United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon walks into his office after an 
interview with The Guardian. Photograph: Bastien Inzaurralde for the Guardian 
“A lot of interesting ideas have been proposed by the member states and there 
is widespread feeling and opinion among member states that considering such 
dramatic changes in political and security field in the world, the security 
council should change also, in a more democratic way, transparent and 
accountable way,” he said.

While there is frustration that international action to try to end Syria’s 
deepening humanitarian crisis is being blocked by Moscow and Beijing, criticism 
of the permanent members’ use of the veto for narrow political interest is 
longstanding. The US has used its veto to protect Israel from criticism more 
times than the total number of vetoes cast by the other permanent members 
combined.
 