
Ryan Harris has spent six summers working in the Canadian Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> hunting the two most sought-after 
wrecks in marine history: the lost ships of British explorer Sir John Franklin. 
In those years, on remote islets to the west and south of the frozen wastes of 
King William Island, Harris and his team have found tantalising items including 
pieces of iron embossed with Royal Navy markings, which clearly came from 
19th-century sailing ships.

Everything suggested these could be parts of Erebus or Terror, the ships in 
which Franklin sailed, in 1845, to find the fabled Northwest Passage between 
the North Atlantic and the Pacific before vanishing with all his crew. However, 
the precise location of the shipwrecks eluded Harris’s team, despite their 
trawling more than 1,600 sq km of seabed with sonar detectors between 2008 and 
2013.

Then, in early September this year, Harris and his colleagues, who were 
working with “a substantial array of craft” in the region, hit pay dirt. “I was 
working in our ship, which was towing a sonar detector in order to survey an 
area of relatively shallow seabed around Queen Maud Gulf, one of the southern 
areas we had marked as promising search zones,” says Harris. “I was worried we 
were getting too close to an undersea ridge and had turned away from our 
monitor. Then I looked back and there it was: a clear image of a shipwreck with 
exposed beams lying on the sea floor. I just stabbed my finger on the screen 
and started shouting, ‘That’s it, that’s it. We’ve found it!’”

The sharply outlined image, which made headlines around the world when 
released a few days later, shows a relatively undamaged ship settled upright on 
the sea floor at a depth of about 11 metres. Subsequent dives by Harris and 
colleagues confirmed the wreck was in a good state of preservation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414749190377%2F48ea3438-5f2c-48d5-b8b0-0c65d480c7d4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncovering%20the%20secrets%20of%20John%20Franklin%E2%80%99s%20doomed%20voyage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncovering%20the%20secrets%20of%20John%20Franklin%E2%80%99s%20doomed%20voyage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414749190377%2F48ea3438-5f2c-48d5-b8b0-0c65d480c7d4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ryan Harris explains the find from the Victoria Strait expedition during a a 
news conference in Ottawa. Photograph: Sean Kilpatrick/AP 
As to the ship’s identity, Harris, who is senior marine archaeologist for 
Parks Canada, which manages the nation’s wilderness areas, is emphatic. “Erebus 
and Terror were bomb ships built to fire mortars and are often described as 
sister vessels. In fact, they were of different classes. From plans provided by 
the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich, we can tell – from the wreck’s 
length and breadth, and [the] positions of its main hatch and masts – that it 
is Erebus.”

Harris added that the reason Erebus, in which Franklin had sailed while his 
second-in-command, Francis Crozier, captained Terror, is well preserved has 
much to do with the cold and dark of the Arctic, which keeps biological and 
chemical processes in check on the sea floor. “We stand to find almost anything 
inside the wreck: leather, textiles – even paper and documents are a distinct 
possibility. And, of course, papers would be really useful. They might tell us 
exactly what happened to the expedition.”

Other clues to be sought when the Parks Canada expedition returns to the 
Erebus next year will include analysis of the ship’s rigging and propeller, as 
well as levels of coal and food on board. These will provide clues for 
archaeologists who want to know if the crew was trying to get closer to land in 
a desperate bid to hunt – and thereby supplement their dwindling provisions – 
or if they still had some distant hope they might be able to complete their 
journey to the Western Pacific. “That’s just two scenarios,” said Harris. 
“There are many more to be tested.”

Franklin had set off from Greenhithe in Kent with 129 men to find the 
Northwest Passage in well-provided sail ships that had been fitted with 
steam-driven propellers to help them manoeuvre in pack ice. The holds were 
filled with a three-year supply of tinned provisions. Franklin’s two ships were 
observed, by whalers, sailing into Lancaster Sound in late July 1845. They were 
never seen again. After several years of mounting concern for Franklin and his 
men, Britain became obsessed with his disappearance and more than 40 
expeditions were launched to find him. For each mission, his widow, Jane, wrote 
a letter to be handed to her husband on his rescue. Each time, it was returned 
unopened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414749295565%2F8148f98e-55f0-4979-98c3-15eb4c4c142d-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncovering%20the%20secrets%20of%20John%20Franklin%E2%80%99s%20doomed%20voyage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncovering%20the%20secrets%20of%20John%20Franklin%E2%80%99s%20doomed%20voyage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414749295565%2F8148f98e-55f0-4979-98c3-15eb4c4c142d-2060x1371.jpeg>
 Filippo Ronca explores cannon and timbers from the wreck of the Erebus. 
Photograph: Thierry Boyer/Parks Canada 
The truth was uncovered by the Scottish explorer John Rae in the 1850s. After 
interviewing Inuits, he learned that Franklin had died in 1847, two years after 
his ships became trapped in ice. Later, his men, by now starving, started to 
eat each other. Not surprisingly, Victorian society was appalled by the story 
and Rae was denounced in a campaign instigated by Lady Jane and waged by 
Charles Dickens as chief propagandist. Rae had no right to believe “a race of 
savages”, Dickens claimed. It was far more likely the Inuits had killed 
Franklin’s men themselves.

The issue was not fully resolved until 1997, when blade marks on the bones of 
crew discovered on King William Island were found to have cut marks consistent 
with the men having been cut up and eaten. Trapped in ice for years, and 
afflicted by scurvy, starvation and possibly lead poisoning from their poorly 
preserved tins of food, the men had died the grimmest of deaths.

The story is “a unique, unquiet compound of mystery, horror and magic”, as 
Franklin’s biographer Andrew Lambert puts it. The exact sequence of events 
remains a mystery. However, thanks to Harris and his team, it may soon be 
possible to outline the terrible chain of circumstances that eventually claimed 
the lives of Franklin and his men. “We always knew it would take years to find 
these ships,” said Harris. “However, this story is so embedded in Canadian 
culture, the task was irresistible. It wasn’t an obsession, however, just a 
matter of persevering.”

The work ahead will be anything but easy. Accessing the tight spaces inside 
the Erebus will be arduous for divers, for example. So would it be possible to 
lift the ship from the seabed? Harris is cautious. “It is one thing to raise a 
ship like the Mary Rose in English waters. This is the Arctic and the site is 
covered in ice for most of the year. We have only a few weeks access a year. On 
the other hand, the idea should not be ruled out of hand.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414749393211%2Fadcd9d04-d3c0-442f-b2ab-7b6328b0bd8f-2060x1339.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncovering%20the%20secrets%20of%20John%20Franklin%E2%80%99s%20doomed%20voyage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncovering%20the%20secrets%20of%20John%20Franklin%E2%80%99s%20doomed%20voyage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414749393211%2Fadcd9d04-d3c0-442f-b2ab-7b6328b0bd8f-2060x1339.jpeg>
 Francois Etienne Musin’s Erebus on Ice (1846). National Maritime Museum 
Photograph: National Maritime Museum 
One clear factor in the team’s favour is climate change, which has kept the 
Arctic clear of sea ice in summer for longer and longer periods as greenhouse 
gas emissions have inexorably warmed up the planet, though this year saw 
relatively high levels of sea ice return to the region. Nevertheless, most 
experts expect that ice cover to continue dwindling, easing search conditions.

One intriguing aspect of the discovery of Erebus in Queen Maud Gulf is the 
fact that its location fits in neatly with Inuit testimony about Franklin’s 
expedition. “Their stories about the expedition were vivid and detailed but 
were dismissed in the 19th century because Inuits were considered to be 
savages,” said Harris. “In fact, they were providing extremely accurate 
information, we now realise. The discovery of Erebus in our southern search 
area completely vindicates what they had been saying. The ship is exactly where 
they said it had sunk. They also reported that Erebus’s masts were still 
visible after it had gone down, and again that fits in with the shallowness of 
the waters in which the ship settled. That means we can re-examine their 
testimony in greater detail and be more confident of getting more clues about 
the fate of the rest of expedition.”

Then there is the issue of Franklin’s body. “It may well be on the Erebus,” 
said Harris. “He could be on board in a casket in the hold. That is certainly 
something we will be looking for when we carry out dives when we return to the 
site next September.”

Ryan Harris will be discussing his role in the search for Franklin’s ships at 
the British Library at 6.30pm on 1 December as part of the library’sLines of 
Ice exhibition 
<http://www.bl.uk/events/lines-in-the-ice-seeking-the-northwest-passage> (runs 
14 Nov-29 Mar 2015). The Search for Franklin’s Lost Ships will be chaired by 
the Observer’s science editor, Robin McKie. Inquiries: +44 (0)1937 546546 
boxoffice@bl.uk

The deadly hunt for the Northwest Passage
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414749926400%2F2de15de7-dc92-421b-aaf3-5598bad8e82b-1317x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncovering%20the%20secrets%20of%20John%20Franklin%E2%80%99s%20doomed%20voyage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncovering%20the%20secrets%20of%20John%20Franklin%E2%80%99s%20doomed%20voyage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fsecrets-of-john-franklins-doomed-voyage-north-west-passage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414749926400%2F2de15de7-dc92-421b-aaf3-5598bad8e82b-1317x2040.jpeg>
 Roald Amundsen. Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
The search for the Northwest Passage retains a mystique possessed by no other 
quest in modern history. Apart from the loss of Franklin’s expedition, the hunt 
to find a passage through Canadian waters to the Pacific claimed countless 
other lives and defied the best efforts of 19th-century explorers. In the end, 
its conquest had to wait until 1906 when Roald Amundsen sailed its length in a 
fishing boat, Gjøa, a task that took him three years to complete.

Only now, as global warming opens up Arctic waters, have archaeologists had a 
chance of uncovering this intriguing history, a story that will be outlined in 
Lines in the Ice: Seeking the Northwest Passage, at the British Library, which 
opens on 14 November .

The story of the hunt to find the passage, as seen through maps, books and 
other artefacts, is still one driven by riches, says exhibition lead curator, 
Philip Hatfield. “In Elizabethan days, it held out the promise of gold. Today 
it is black gold, oil from the Arctic seabed that is turning people’s heads,” 
he said.

An example, to be displayed at the exhibition, of how important the region was 
rated in the past is provided by a circumpolar map of the Arctic that was owned 
by Charles II. A 19th-century vision of the region’s worth is revealed in the 
words of Mary Shelley inFrankenstein, which begins with a ship’s captain 
dreaming of bringing “inestimable benefit to all mankind… by discovering a 
passage near the pole”.

“The idea that open waters existed near the pole divided expert opinion in 
those days,” adds Tom Harper, the exhibition’s co-curator. Some, such as Sir 
John Barrow, held that sea water could not freeze and that open seas must 
therefore exist beyond north Canada. All sailors had to do was persevere. 
Others, such as William Scoresby, a whaling captain and a veteran of the 
Arctic, argued vehemently that open sea water could freeze. He had seen it do 
so many times, he pointed out. The fact that Scoresby was ignored while the 
wrong-headed views of Barrow, a promoter of Franklin’s expedition, gained 
acceptance was just one factor in the chain of events that would lead Sir John 
Franklin’s expedition to its icy doom.
 