
Australia’s unemployment rate remained steady at 6% in June.

The total number of people with jobs rose 7,300 to 11.769 million in June, the 
Australian Bureau of Statistics said on Thursday 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6202.0>, which was better than 
expectations of a fall of 5,000.

Unemployment increased by 12,800 to 756,100. The number of unemployed persons 
looking for full-time work increased by 27,200 to 541,200 and the number of 
unemployed persons only looking for part-time work decreased by 14,500 to 
214,900.

The participation rate, which refers to the number of people either employed 
or are actively looking for work, remained steady at 64.8%.

Unemployment will keep growing for 'a little while', says RBA's Glenn Stevens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/13/unemployment-will-keep-growing-for-a-little-while-says-rbas-glenn-stevens>
New South Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> 
recorded the largest increase in employment with 11,300 new jobs, while South 
Australia lost 5,700 full-time jobs and and Victoria’s employment rate dropped 
by 5,500.

South Australia’s jobless rate is now the highest in the country at 8.2%, up 
from 7.6% in May.


SA’s employment minister, Gail Gago, said the state was “really struggling” 
with high unemployment.

“As we move from a reliance on traditional manufacturing industries, coupled 
with collapsing commodities prices, we see South Australian unemployment rates 
really struggling,” Gago said.

Budget plan to limit unemployment benefits for under-30s scrapped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-plan-to-limit-unemployment-benefits-for-under-30s-scrapped>
“This is not helped by the federal government’s withdrawal of support for our 
auto manufacturing and navy shipbuilding industries, not to mention severe 
federal budget cuts in the health and education sectors.”


The chief executive for Business SA, Nigel McBride, said unemployment had 
reached alarming levels.


“The state government must make job creation its highest priority,” McBride 
said.


“Even if it means going into debt the government must direct money towards 
infrastructure which creates long-term, sustainable economic growth.”

In Western Australia, the mining sector downturn has caused unemployment to 
rise to 5.8%, up from 5.1% in May.

“WA is feeling the brunt of the job losses in mining and probably dampening 
some of the few positives that are coming out of the other industries which are 
actually adding jobs,” CommSec’s Savanth Sebastian said.
 