
There has been some good news recently for social mobility. This year saw 
another increase in the number ofstudents starting university 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/statistics-on-higher-education-initial-participation-rates>
 and theOffice of Fair Access 
<https://www.offa.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/OFFA-RA-2015-10.6.15.pdf> 
has found that 90% of universities and colleges have either met, or are on 
course to meet, their widening participation targets.

But other research has found that universities’ efforts to widen participation 
are missing out some key groups: young carers, young people in care, and poor 
school pupils who happen to live in affluent neighbourhoods.


So let’s take a moment to pause before we put out the bunting. Welcome though 
the government’s and Offa’s findings are, the headline figures mask a much more 
complex picture when it comes to who is getting access to university and who is 
being left out.


Higher tuition fees are distorting the choices poorer students make
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/may/01/higher-tuition-fees-are-distorting-the-choices-poorer-students-make-lower-tuition-fees-could-see-poorer-students-applying-for-different-courses>
Part of the issue is the definition of “disadvantaged”. The widening 
participation benchmarks set for universities involve looking both at the 
proportions of students from areas of low participation and at their parents’ 
occupation. This may seem to be a reasonable definition on the surface, but
recent research with widening participation departments 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCYQFjAAahUKEwiB_P3w8unHAhWCuBoKHZaXATY&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww2.uwe.ac.uk%2Ffaculties%2FCAHE%2FDocuments%2FResearch%2FBRILLE%2FReport%25201%2520-%2520Institutional%2520Survey%2520-%2520June%25202015.pdf&usg=AFQjCNH7bwtw6yYN2J8Ev-veW3ryPxjxdg&bvm=bv.102022582,d.bGg>
 by the University of the West of England suggests that numerous young people 
miss out and that the targets even distort the overall picture.


Our education charity, Brightside, has seen this at first hand in the work we 
do in rural and coastal communities in Kent, Hampshire and West Sussex. These 
areas are perceived as relatively well-off, so the disadvantage is often 
hidden. But as a consequence, these areas miss out on many university outreach 
schemes.

It’s easy to understand the reliance on post code data – it’s readily 
available and relatively straightforward to collect. But it does mean that many 
young people who are clearly deserving of additional support aren’t getting it.


The Carers Trust <http://www.carers.org/> has also found that young people who 
care for relatives might not identify themselves as disadvantaged, and 
universities don’t ask for this information in their applications. Yet their 
caring commitments mean they may need greater support to get into and succeed 
at university.


Another group of young people who need more attention from universities are 
care leavers. While they can be targeted through their local authority, young 
people who become estranged from their parents after the age of 16 often go 
under the radar as arecent report from Stand Alone and Unite Foundation 
<http://www.unite-group.co.uk/binaries/375/674/unite-foundation-new-start-report.pdf>
 has pointed out.

Plus, a student finance system that primarily looks at parental income is 
tough for teenagers to navigate if they’ve lost touch with their parents.

Should unis use contextual data when considering student applications?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/oct/21/universities-student-contextual-data-admissions>
 It is really hard to reach all young people from disadvantaged backgrounds 
who, with some additional tailored and focused support, could thrive in higher 
education. But if we want widening participation to be a true exercise in 
widening social mobility, then we must rise to the challenge.

Free-school-meal data, for example, is a much more rounded measure of 
disadvantage. It is more difficult to collect, but we could start by making 
sure this data is shared much more readily with universities.

Universities themselves should broaden their focus and collaborate with 
third-sector organisations who can help them identify young people who could 
benefit from their outreach work. Specialist pastoral care, such as mentoring 
from other students who have overcome similar obstacles, should be available 
once young people reach university.

And just as importantly, the young people in question need to be made aware 
such support exists to encourage their applications in the first place.

So yes, hitting widening participation targets is crucial for the pursuit of 
social mobility, but let’s be sure that we are aiming in the right direction 
first.
 