
Universities Australia has called on the federal government to abandon a 
planned $3.2bn cut to higher education, saying the sector has suffered enough.


The call is contained in Universities Australia’s submissions to the higher 
education review ordered whenthe government dumped plans for full fee 
deregulation and delayed the scheduled 20% cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/government-claims-2bn-budget-saving-from-delaying-higher-education-changes>
 to per-student subsidies.

The cut was first proposed in the 2014 budget, but the 2016 budget delayed its 
introduction from 2017 to 2018.

The chief executive of Universities Australia, Belinda Robinson, has warned 
that a world-class university system designed to help transition workers to 
high-skilled jobs “cannot be achieved while making cuts on this scale”.

Universities Australia criticised the options paper 
<https://docs.education.gov.au/system/files/doc/other/he_reform_paper_driving_innovation_fairness_and_excellence_3_may_2016.pdf>
 for focusing “almost exclusively” on the objective of budget savings despite 
“years of policy uncertainty and ad hoc funding cuts”.

The universities’ peak body said it did not believe a defensible case for the 
$3.2bn cut over four years had been made, especially because it followed cuts 
in the 2011 and 2013 budgets that had saved $1bn a year.

Government claims $2bn budget saving from delaying higher education changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/government-claims-2bn-budget-saving-from-delaying-higher-education-changes>
It said the size of the cut was “at odds with the government’s ambition to 
reinvigorate the economy through education, research and innovation”.

Although its submission opposed the cut, it did recognise the need for savings 
through “careful policy adjustments in some areas”.

Universities Australia said fair adjustments could include:

 * debt recovery from all those who could afford to repay their university 
debts but currently did not; 
 * a reduction in the minimum repayment threshold for student loans; 
 * an increase in the student loan repayment rate for high-income earners; 
 * flexibility on the lifetime limit on student debt, allowing students to 
re-borrow to pay for further study after repaying some of their debt; 
 * and consistent loan fee arrangements for all student loans, which could 
increase loan fees for students on commonwealth supported places.

The submission suggests that Universities Australia will support the 
government’s plan to force graduates to repay their student loans when they 
start earning $50,638 rather than $54,126 at present,which Labor backed during 
the election campaign 
<http://www.skynews.com.au/news/politics/federal/2016/06/10/labor-will-back-govt-higher-education-changes.html>
.

The options paper canvassed the creation of “flagship courses”, which would 
allow universities to set their own fees for particular high-quality or 
innovative courses.

Universities Australia said the majority of its members opposed the concept on 
the basis of the complexity of implementing it, “the likelihood of perverse 
outcomes, the potential to devalue existing degrees, and the potential creation 
of a two-tier system”.

The Group of Eight universities also expressed caution 
<https://www.go8.edu.au/sites/default/files/docs/publications/go8_driving_innovation_response25072016.2-7_0.pdf>
 about flagship courses for similar reasons.

Speaking on ABC’s AM on Wednesday, the education minister, Simon Birmingham, 
said there had been “phenomenal growth” in higher education costs, which were 
to increase from $16bn to $18bn over the forward estimates.

Budget slashes program for university students from poor backgrounds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/04/budget-slashes-program-that-increased-number-of-students-from-poor-backgrounds>
He noted that some submissions encouraged students to “make a slightly greater 
contribution ... [through] the generous loans scheme”.

“I welcome the fact that a number of universities and their representative 
bodies are seeing opportunities to help us with the real task of budget 
repair,” he said.

The Universities Australia submission said that although the cost of 
commonwealth university grants had increased by 59% since 2009, “this has been 
driven mainly by enrolment growth, rather than by increases in per student 
funding”.

Robinson said Universities Australia’s submission struck “a responsible 
balance between financial prudence and securing a university system that meets 
the quality and accessibility expectations of students, families and the 
community”.
 