
Students in Australia have been protesting about a new higher education bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/28/christopher-pyne-changes-university-funding-fair-go-for-students>
 that will introduce deregulation of university fees, and require students to 
pay higher interest rates on loans. Although the cap on student numbers was 
removed two years ago, elite universities areunlikely to increase their student 
intake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/30/australias-top-eight-universities-push-for-higher-fees-fewer-students>
, and there are concerns that poorer andIndigenous students will find it harder 
to access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jul/10/australian-universities-do-not-value-indigenous-students>
 higher education. Education ministerChristopher Pyne has been blunt in his 
criticism of protesting students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/24/christopher-pyne-no-university-reform-could-mean-research-funding-cuts>
, saying they should “get some perspective”. Our anonymous academic takes the 
government to task.

Earlier this week I watched a current affairs programme where a 
vice-chancellor talked about the great things his elite university would be 
able to do in a deregulated Australian higher education sector.

Some of the initiatives sounded positive and equitable. But the night before, 
I had attended a meeting at the same vice-chancellor’s university where these 
ideas were raised. This was a high security public forum where 26 people with 
some connection to the university were able to speak for three minutes on 
issues related to the reforms. Almost all the speakers were against the 
reforms. Almost all the audience – staff, students, alumni and parents – were 
against the reforms. In fact the reforms were put to an unofficial vote, and 
the overwhelming response was that deregulation should not happen.

This was the community of a top-ranking university. If ever there were to be a 
group who might support the proposed changes, it would be these. But they 
didn’t.

All students spoke eloquently, (almost all) respectfully. They presented 
strong arguments, and spoke from the heart. They talked about the university’s 
history of access on merit, not privilege. That there was a need to redress 
that structural disadvantage that limited access for some students – for 
example rural, indigenous and female students. And that many students attended 
this university, not for the prestige, or the high-paying graduate job, but for 
the opportunity to use their education to improve society by working in lower 
paid positions in not-for-profit organisations.

I am confident in the future of our society, if these students become our 
future leaders.

Contrast this with disrespect shown towards students by our coalition 
politicians. Last week, around 500students protested 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/news/south-australia/protesters-rally-against-prime-minister-tony-abbotts-appearance-at-adelaide-university/story-fni6uo1m-1227032303490?nk=0fbe86102477d6a18ed8d6f6a80023f0>
 outside an Adelaide University building where prime minister Tony Abbott was 
speaking. Abbott joked about this event at Liberal party meeting two days later.

In a speech 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/tony-abbott-boasts-of-having-more-protesters-than-christopher-pyne/story-fncynjr2-1227034076129>
, with calculated comic timing, he commented that there were 400 of his friends 
inside and 500 of his friends outside, and “Thanks to the wonderful white 
horses of South Australian police, none of my different groups of friends met 
on that particular night … But I’ve finally drawn a bigger protest than 
Christopher Pyne.”

The tone of his speech reflected nothing of the seriousness of the event. 
Police horses forced the students back, and one student was trodden on by a 
horse and taken to hospital. No laughing matter for the students, or the police.

Pyne has also dismissed the concerns of students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/24/christopher-pyne-no-university-reform-could-mean-research-funding-cuts>
. He has suggested they are exaggerating the impact, and told them to get some 
perspective, with, “We’re not asking for their left kidney to be donated.” 
Unfortunately for students, with the apparent lack of any modelling by the 
government, and universities keeping their modelling under wraps, students 
really don’t know what they are up for.

In his TV interview the vice-chancellor spoke about the complicated nature of 
higher education funding. Agreed. And every university is able to take a 
different approach, so no-one can say that $xxx will be the cost of an 
engineering degree across the country, as they can in the pre-reform context.

While a number of people and organisations have undertaken their own modelling 
to show that student fees could double or more for some courses under the new 
proposals, I am unaware of any university that has released the outcomes of its 
modelling. Our universities have access to the best modellers in the country – 
but we need to ask why they haven’t released the results. I think we can guess. 
The figures would be tangible, concrete…and too horrible for words. But most 
importantly, impossible to dismiss or ridicule.

Everything that this vice-chancellor talked about sounded good, but his 
approach was to talk about what the university would do with its extra money. 
Never once did he mention where it would be coming from – our children, who 
have no idea how they will ever pay off their debt, who are struggling to make 
ends meet through university, and will be graduating into a far more uncertain 
job future than any of us did. And students have no assurance that any extra 
university funding will allocated to better quality teaching. In Australia, 
university research is underfunded and subsidised by tuition fees.

We need to ask ourselves, can we sit back, or do we help the young people get 
their message across in a way that will influence those in government, and 
university lobby groups?

We should demand that universities release their modelling so that students 
and politicians can see what this will really mean for our young people.

Students <https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> are not just 
stakeholders. They are the stakeholders who will bear the burden of all the 
increased costs, including the funding of scholarships for disadvantaged 
students – and their voices are being marginalised.

Where are the forums for their voices? We in the media, and in parliament, 
need to invite them in, to listen to their arguments. And when universities are 
forced to create a forum, reluctantly, but an effective forum nonetheless, why 
aren’t they listening?

So, vice-chancellor, given that it was your event, and there was overwhelming 
opposition to the new budget measures at the forum – what does it take for you 
to hear it? And if you did, how could you present the case you did the 
following day, without once mentioning that all the wonderful things you were 
planning would be paid for by the debt and interest on the loans we force our 
children to sign up for?

While student protests can show the mass of concern at this flawed policy, 
they provide a limited opportunity to convey well-reasoned argument. We need to 
provide opportunities for students to communicate with politicians in a way in 
which the value of what they say shines through.

This week’s anonymous academic is a lecturer at an Australian university. 

If you’d like to contribute an anonymous piece about the trials and 
tribulations of university life, contactclaire.shaw@theguardian.com 
<mailto:claire.shaw@theguardian.com>.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 