
A student’s chances of getting into a leading university to study languages 
have increased in the past five years, as interest dwindles and applications 
plummet, new figures suggest.

At Cambridge University, applications to study European languages dropped from 
580 in 2010 to 385 in 2014, meaning students now have a 44.2% chance of getting 
a place compared with 28.4% in 2010.


At King’s College London there were 1,165 applications and 150 acceptances in 
2010, an acceptance rate of 12.9%. In 2014 there were 575 applications and 125 
acceptances, taking the rate up to to 21.7%.

If the UK is to engage fully with the wider world, then many more young people 
need to be studying languages
Dr Wendy Piatt, Russell Group 
There is growing concerns among academics, politicians and business leaders 
about thedecline in modern languages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/08/modern-foreign-language-degrees-axed>
 in England’s schools and universities, and fears that more courses in sixth 
forms and higher education institutions will be forced to close.


A new analysis by the Press Association of statistics from the Universities 
and Colleges Admissions Service (Ucas) shows that as applications to study 
European language courses at Russell Group universities have dropped, 
competition appears to have eased and the proportion of applications that are 
accepted has risen.


Across all of the 24 Russell Group institutions there were 17,390 applications 
and 2,765 acceptances in 2010, a rate of 15.9%. In 2014 there were 14,075 
applications and 2,455 acceptances, taking the success rate up to 17.4%.


The statistics at Cambridge are particularly striking, with acceptances up 
from 165 in 2010 to 170 in 2014 despite fewer applications. The university’s 
modern and medieval languages department notes on its website that there were
two applications for every place 
<http://www.undergraduate.study.cam.ac.uk/courses/modern-and-medieval-languages>
 in 2014, making it a very attractive offer to would-be students; mathematics 
and medicine each attract six applications per place.


A university spokesman said: “Cambridge accepts only the brightest and most 
committed of language students. Our typical entrant for modern and medieval 
languages holds at least A*AA at A-level.


“Applicants selected to be interviewed at Cambridge also have to demonstrate 
exceptional academic potential. To have the best chance of getting into 
Cambridge, we advise all potential applicants to study hard, read extensively 
around your subjects and apply for the subject you love. Crude comparisons of 
admissions data give little sense of relative competition by subject.”

The Press Association’s analysis looked at applications made through the main 
Ucas scheme to study European languages, literature and related courses, and 
the resulting number of acceptances. Would-be students may apply for more than 
one course and an acceptance involves a university offering a place and the 
student taking it up.


The same pattern emerges at other universities. Bristol University had 1,860 
applications and 290 acceptances in 2010, an acceptance rate of 15.6%. In 2014, 
applications were down to 1,235 with 240 acceptances, increasing the rate to 
19.4%.


At Oxford, there were 580 applications and 165 acceptances in 2010, an 
acceptance rate of 28.4%; in 2014 there were 515 applications and 165 
acceptances, raising the rate to 32%. Oxford said its own admissions figures 
showed an application success rate for modern languages of 31.6% in 2009, 29.1% 
in 2010 and 33.4% in 2014.

There are some exceptions to the dominant trend. Warwick has seen applications 
rise, from 615 in 2010, resulting in 115 acceptances and an acceptance rate of 
18.7%, to 670 in 2014, with 85 acceptances, cutting the rate to 12.7%. Prof 
Sean Hand, of Warwick’s school of modern languages and cultures, said: “We have 
a strong offer for languages.”

Gender gap in university admissions rises to record level
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/21/gender-gap-university-admissions-record>
Ian Bauckham, headteacher of Bennett Memorial Diocesan school in Tunbridge 
Wells, said the number of applications for European modern foreign language 
(MFL) courses fell by nearly 20% between 2010 and 2014.


“Meanwhile, the average acceptance rate – so the proportion of applicants 
across the sample who were accepted on to courses – has risen from 15.9% in 
2010 to 17.4% in 2015,” he said.

“This is a smaller increase than you might expect from the reduction in the 
number of applicants, which indicates that the number of available places has 
almost certainly decreased. However, it is still true to say that it is 
marginally easier to get into a European language course in 2014 than in 2010, 
but only marginally.

QS world university rankings 2015: modern languages
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/ng-interactive/2015/apr/29/qs-world-university-rankings-2015-modern-languages>
“However, the biggest concern here is the 20% fall-off in applications in five 
years. If this trend continues for another five years at the same rate, then it 
is easy to see that numbers will have fallen very significantly over a 10-year 
period.

“The problem is that there is a ‘cliff edge’ – small- and medium-sized 
departments will go down beyond the point of sustainability and we will start 
to lose MFL departments in universities.”


Wendy Piatt, director general of the Russell Group, said its universities 
wanted to see more students studying languages at GCSE and beyond.

“If the UK is to engage fully with the wider world in business, diplomacy and 
academia, then many more young people need to be studying languages,” she said. 
“It is a real shame that so many students have missed out on taking languages 
over the last few years, and we hope to see entries increasing at GCSE and 
advanced level.

“However, it is important to remember that our universities have high entry 
requirements and they will only offer places to students who will flourish and 
succeed on their courses. Admission to university is and should be based on 
merit, and any decisions about admissions must also maintain high academic 
standards.”
 