
A tragi-comedy of unrequited love and misunderstanding has beaten tales of 
predatory women, sexual ambivalence and adultery to win the FosterGrant 
Romantic Novel of the Year Award.

First-time novelist Katharine Davies beat several acclaimed authors to scoop 
this prestigious literary prize, awarded in past years to popular writers such 
as Joanna Trollope, Rosamunde Pilcher and Cathy Kelly.

Davies, who taught English at schools in the UK and Sri Lanka before moving to 
Wales to write, beat off competition from a strong shortlist, which included 
celebrated novelistAndrea Levy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrea-levy>, 
to win the Â£10,000 award. Her book, A Good Voyage (Chatto and Windus), is 
loosely based on Twelfth Night. It was described by the judges as a "superbly 
constructed, magical story that brilliantly contrasts the timelessness of 
romance with the grittiness of reality".

"A Good Voyage takes readers back to the roots of romantic fiction in all its 
joys and turmoil," said chairwoman of the judges Danuta Keane. "It was a clear 
winner in a strong field of titles that ranged from domestic dramas to high 
politics. This is an astonishingly well-crafted first novel, peopled with 
believable, empathetic characters, and characterised by a poise and lightness 
of touch that evokes the magic and pathos of Shakespeare's lovers and losers. 
It is a wonderful illustration of romantic fiction at its best."

The winner was announced yesterday at a ceremony at the Savoy Hotel, attended 
by over 300 guests from the publishing industry. The award was established in 
1960 and is one of Britain's longest-running literary competitions. Its object 
is to recognise excellence in romantic fiction, one of the UK's most popular 
literary genres, and the award is open to any book first published in the UK in 
the last year which embraces romance in its widest sense.

Successful romance writers can expect to sell 10,000 copies of a book within a 
week of publication, with many past award-winners achieving considerable 
literary and commercial success.
 