
If anyone had told me 10 years ago that I would become a huge TV star, I’d 
have told them they were having a laugh. That little bit of wit came out 
instinctively. I can be a bit witty at times, I’m told, and I was later 
informed that was precisely why the BBC approached me. I still remember the 
first phonecall I had with a woman called Ruth from the BBC. “We’re looking for 
a successful British businessman to front a new reality game show,” she said. 
“But unfortunately we can’t find one. We did haveSir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/nov/21/topshop-philip-green-retailers-moaning>
 interested for a moment, but when he realised the filming would make him 
overrun his non-resident allowance and he would have to pay more tax, he turned 
it down. So we’re at a bit of a loose end in the hunt for the talent.”

Typewriter, you're fired! How writers learned to love the computer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/28/how-amstrad-word-processor-encouraged-writers-use-computers>
My initial response was to turn it down. I had had a fulfilling career making 
amplifiers and computers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/28/how-amstrad-word-processor-encouraged-writers-use-computers>
 that didn’t work very well and was now on to a nice earner knocking out 
satellite dishes for Sky. But my sidekickNick Hewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/nick-hewer> was down on his luck and 
needed the work, so I thought why not? “You’re on, love,” I growled. “But don’t 
call me the talent. I’m a businessman.”

You wouldn’t believe the amount of work that goes into the making of a TV 
series, and I really wouldn’t want to bore you with the details, but since 
there’s really nothing else to write about and I’ve got loads of pages to fill, 
I’ve got no choice. For each scene, there were at least eight cameras and the 
amount of time I spent sitting around doing nothing while some bloke fiddled 
with a sound switch was literally unbelievable. It really opened my eyes to how 
useless most people in telly really are. Apart from all those at Sky. I love 
watching Sky and I would always try to ensure my sequences didn’t interfere 
with a Sky football match I wanted to watch on Sky. The Sky engineers always 
said that reception through an Amstrad receiver was like actually being at the 
Sky game.

Alan Sugar: ‘I don't know the price of a pint of milk’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/03/lord-alan-sugar-british-poverty-out-of-touch>
Anyway, I was on my yacht in the south of France when I was sent the list of 
candidates for the first series ofThe Apprentice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/apprentice>. I picked up the phone 
and immediately got on to the director-general of the BBC to complain that 
having read their CVs, all the candidates looked like real numpties who would 
be lucky to get a job with even a third-rate operation like Amstrad. “That’s 
the whole point,” he said before rudely hanging up. I’ve always found that Sky 
have much better customer relations than the BBC.

The atmosphere was electric when we gathered the contestants in the boardroom 
for the first day of shooting. TheBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
had written out a script for me, but I told them where to get off sharpish. I 
wanted it to be more like Sky where you could shoot from the hip. “Here are the 
ground rules,” I said. “I’m a needy, insecure man with delusional tendencies so 
I want you to call me Sir Alan at all times. Second, the show is about me, not 
you. Third, the winner will get given a £100,000 job doing something I haven’t 
thought of yet and will almost inevitably leave well within a year. And lastly, 
I am going to send you out on some meaningless errands. Your task this week is 
to buy some flowers and try to sell them to someone else. Is that clear?”

As expected, most of the contestants were fairly dim, but after the first show 
was aired <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/feb/14/mondaymediasection15> 
it was evident we had a hit on our hands. By the end, in which some bloke 
called Tom had been declared the winner, we had already picked up aBafta 
<http://awards.bafta.org/award/2006/television/features> nomination. I 
literally fell off my seat when The Apprentice was declared the winner, but 
when I stood up to collect it, I was told to fuck off out of it as the award 
was for the people who made it. “You’d be nothing without me,” I snarled. Not 
that I hold grudges, but I would have liked a Bafta.

The second, third and fourth series were almost identical to the first and, 
though most of the winners went on to achieve very little, I was immensely 
proud ofKatie Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/media/katie-hopkins> for 
going on to become even more dislikable than me. Success did bring its 
problems, though. People would come up to me in the street and say: “You’re 
fired.” Well, I can tell you that’s not very funny. Even that idiot Piers 
Morgan tried it on me. When he got sacked from CNN, I sent him a tweet that 
read: “You’re fired.” As I’ve previously mentioned, I do have witty side.

For the fifth series we decided to shake things up. Margaret Mountford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/nov/24/margaret-mountford-the-apprentice-interview>
 decided she had had enough, so I brought in Karren Brady. It was the proudest 
moment of my life when I was able to introduce her to the House of Lords when 
she becameBaroness Brady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/06/lady-karren-brady-joins-low-energy-brunch>
 in recognition of her career in sex toys and porno publishing. I was also by 
now a Lord in recognition of my services to I’m not quite sure what, and I had 
to remind contestants to call me Lord Sugar. We also changed the prize but 
apart from that everything else has been kept pretty much the same. To be 
honest, I can’t believe I’m still getting away with it, but hopefully one day 
soon I will get the Bafta I deserve. And it will serve the BBC right if Sky 
have bought the rights to screen the ceremony.

Digested read, digested: You’re retired.

 