
Homebush West sits across the railway tracks from the giant Flemington market 
<http://www.au.timeout.com/sydney/shopping/venues/4110/sydney-flower-market#picture0>
 and this small strip of shops serves locals, market workers and shoppers. 
While the market and nearby food suburb superstar Strathfield gets most of the 
attention, this small group of shops along the intersection of The Crescent and 
Henley Road deserves a closer look.


The mostly Chinese, Vietnamese and Sri Lankan restaurants and food stores 
reflect the mix of residents of the community, which include fast-growing 
populations from India and Nepal. Fruit markets, spice merchants, dumpling 
sellers, butchers, bakeries and a bottle shop fill out the retail between the 
restaurants; most eating places are in one of the arcades or at the back of the 
parking lot behind the main stores.

Happy Snack Café House
 Happy Snack's bo kho, a slowly cooked beef-and-carrot stew. Homebush 
Photograph: streetfood.com.au 
This is one of the only Vietnamese restaurants in the area that doesn’t sell 
pho; instead look for bo kho 
<http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887323936804578227681483271650>
, a slowly cooked beef-and-carrot stew that is served with a crisp bread roll. 
Rip apart the roll and dunk away. Another variation is xúi mai trung or dip 
dip, a tomato-based soup with chicken meatballs, fried egg and toasted roll. 
For a quick lunch grab a pork roll, or relax and sit in with a selection of 
iced drinks and Vietnamese coffee.

104 The Crescent, 02 8746 0668

Rams Indian and Sri Lankan Food

Although advertised as eat in, Rams specializes in pre-prepared takeaways 
including short eats (small fried snacks), sweets, briyani, crab and goat 
curries as well as addictive devilled cashews.String hoppers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xliJm5WdMks> are also available, an essential 
side dish for mopping up the spicy curry sauces. Call ahead to pre order their 
most popular dishes that are only made in smaller quantitiessuch as lamprais 
<http://www.infolanka.com/recipes/mess1/144.html>, tempered rice with a curry 
side, chutney and boiled egg, packaged in one tasty meal. Located down an 
arcade off Henley Road, or enter via the car park at the rear.

Shop 17c, 16-20 Henley Road, 02 9763 1456

Mithu’s
 Mithu's Homebush West: thali and great vegetarian dishes Photograph: /Alison 
Byrne 
The banging sound of cleavers on metal gives away the preparation of the 
classic Sri Lankan dish of kottu roti 
<http://www.infolanka.com/recipes/mess1/135.html>, fast-chopped roti bread or 
string hoppers stir fried with meat and vegetables. Families gather here for a 
weekend lunch of curry rice, served as one dish with a selection of curries, 
dhal, rice and sambal on one plate, or for a thali with an eggplant curry 
shockingly deep and dark. The vegetarian selections here are wide, and there 
are halal options too. Don’t forget to crunch on the deep-fried and salted 
chilies for an additional smoky heat.

105 The Crescent, 02 9764 6450

Pho Toan Thang
 Pho Toan Tang: You'll spot it from the queues of people waiting for their 
soup fix. Photograph: Alison Byrne 
This Vietnamese in the arcade is easy to spot by the queues looking for a soup 
fix. The menu features Vietnamese and Chinese dishes, reflecting the cultural 
mix of the area. Go to dishes are a rare beef pho with a broth not overly 
killed by sweetness, or a ‘mix it up in the one bowl’ noodle dish ofbun thit 
nuong <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=STkMj5pGvyQ>. Grilled pork chops or 
fried chicken are served with either vermicelli noodles or the red-orange 
delight of tomato rice.


Shop 9, 90-95 The Crescent, 02 9674 3687

Supplies: Paddy’s Market

Making a trip to Homebush West on the weekend gives you a perfect mix of lunch 
and cheap fruit and vegetable shopping at Paddy’s Market. Cross the train 
station overpass and follow the crowds of shopping trolley-carrying bargain 
hunters. There are fruit and veg by the box at the outer stalls, or buy what 
you need by the kilo. Inside the covered market are at least eight kebab stalls 
if you are still feeling hungry. Look for the deli selling European style 
cheeses and cured meats and stock up on bulk tins of jalapeno peppers and large 
jars of pickles. Resist buying too much if you have to carry them back over the 
stairway.

How to get to there
Turn off Parramatta Road at Bridge Road and cross over the railway bridge. 
Turn right at The Crescent for a few blocks and you are there. Alternatively 
catch the train to Flemington Station, or hop on a free shuttle bus that loops 
around the suburbs surrounding Paddy’s Markets.

• You can read more from Alison on her blog at Streetfood.com.au 
<http://www.streetfood.com.au/>
 