
Originally planned by Walter Burley Griffin, Castlecrag on Sydney’s 
picturesque Middle Harbour, just 8km from the CBD, is known more for its 
historical than its culinary significance. A love of nature drew Griffin and 
his wife, Marion, to Sydney’s lower north shore in 1925, where they designed 
beautiful homes built from local stone. They named the suburb after a huge crag 
of rock overlooking the water, dubbed by locals “Edinburgh Castle”.

While Sydney’s north shore is rarely thought of as a dining destination, the 
inhabitants of Castlecrag are better served than most, with a united nations of 
restaurants close by.

Artusi Italian Restaurant <http://www.artusirestaurant.com.au/>
 Artusi’s calamari fritti with lime mayo. Photograph: Roberta Muir for the 
Guardian 
Artusi, run by Paola and Luca d’Adamio from Abruzzo, holds its own in a city 
that does Italian food very well. Exposed brick and Italian tiles create 
interest and warmth inside, while diners at outside tables enjoy the 
streetscape.

House-made grissini and bruschetta topped with spicy Calabrian nduja are a 
great start, as is calamari fritti with lime mayo. The pasta menu showcases 
regional specialties from around Italy, from vibrant green pesto trofie 
enriched with a non-traditional but thoroughly delicious chunk of burrata, to 
Puglian fusilli with cime di rapa, cacioricotta and chilli.

Risotto, always a difficult dish to get right amid the pressures of a 
commercial kitchen, is surprisingly good too. A simple tagliata of beef, cooked 
medium, cut into thin strips and served with radicchio, aged balsamic and 
roasted potatoes is typical of Luca’s approach to quality produce, prepared 
simply.

Desserts, including a nougat semifreddo with Ligurian honey, almond milk and 
candied almonds, are all made in-house and the short, Italian-heavy wine list 
contains a few gems.

2/122 Edinburgh Rd, Castlecrag, +61 2 9967 5371

Ganache French Patisserie <http://www.ganachepatisserie.com.au>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Funsung-food-suburbs-castlecrag-new-south-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408411176533%2F259f72b8-3a4c-4be3-9fef-5f6a4a71db06-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unsung%20food%20suburbs%3A%20Castlecrag%2C%20New%20South%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Funsung-food-suburbs-castlecrag-new-south-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unsung%20food%20suburbs%3A%20Castlecrag%2C%20New%20South%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Funsung-food-suburbs-castlecrag-new-south-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408411176533%2F259f72b8-3a4c-4be3-9fef-5f6a4a71db06-1020x612.jpeg>
 Master pâtissier Didier Sockeel’s almond croissants. Photograph: Roberta Muir 
for the Guardian 
It’s not unusual to find a queue out the door on busy weekend mornings as 
locals stop by to grab master pâtissier Didier Sockeel’s almond croissants, 
pain au chocolate and fruit danishes fresh from the oven.

Later in the day they’re after quiches with short pastry and fillings such as 
classic lorraine (ham and cheese), spinach, or blue cheese and caramelised 
onions; individual ones are great snacks, while the larger size is a mainstay 
of family picnics.

The sweets case is crowded with cold fruit flans and baked open tarts, 
beautifully decorated cakes and bite-sized treats as well as bags of biscuits 
including delicate tuiles and langues de chat. Crusty baguettes, meltingly soft 
brioche and great coffee complete the package.

85 Edinburgh Rd, Castlecrag, +61 2 9967 2882 

Flavours of Peking Chinese Restaurant
 Northern Chinese food worth crossing Sydney for. Photograph: Roberta Muir for 
the Guardian 
While Sydney has plenty of Cantonese food, it’s harder to find good food from 
China’s north. This unprepossessing restaurant tucked at the back of a small 
shopping centre attracts many Chinese families and others willing to travel for 
great noodles, dumplings and Peking duck.

The space is humble but the service is friendly and there don’t appear to be 
any double standards when it comes to what Chinese and non-Chinese speakers are 
offered. Everyone can enjoy falling-off-the-bone braised pork belly, large 
garlicky prawns steamed in lotus leaf, and deep-fried tofu in brown Peking 
sauce. Or make a meal of the excellent three-course Peking duck (pancakes, san 
choy bau and soup).

Northern Chinese specialties such as steamed, or pot-sticker, dumplings are 
among the best in Sydney, and the crisp, salty shallot pancakes and smoked 
vegetarian goose are moreish. Even more familiar dishes, such as salt and 
pepper prawns, are treated with respect, with fresh hot oil used to fry large 
meaty prawns in a thin crisp batter, finished with a scattering of fresh green 
onions and chillies.

Quadrangle Shopping Village, Shop 7/100 Edinburgh Rd, Castlecrag, +61 2 9958 
3288

Cyrus the Great Persian Restaurant <http://www.cyrusthegreatrestaurant.com.au>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Funsung-food-suburbs-castlecrag-new-south-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408411265051%2Fae8d7b5c-1530-4f47-95d8-f45c88e9ed9e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unsung%20food%20suburbs%3A%20Castlecrag%2C%20New%20South%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Funsung-food-suburbs-castlecrag-new-south-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unsung%20food%20suburbs%3A%20Castlecrag%2C%20New%20South%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Funsung-food-suburbs-castlecrag-new-south-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408411265051%2Fae8d7b5c-1530-4f47-95d8-f45c88e9ed9e-1020x612.jpeg>
 Music and food meet at Cyrus the Great Persian Restaurant. Photograph: Roberta 
Muir for the Guardian 
Persian food is also under-represented in Sydney, so it’s exciting to discover 
Cyrus tucked away behind Artusi.

It’s a large space designed for big groups who enjoy Persian music videos 
projected on to a giant screen dominating one wall, musicians and a belly 
dancer who keep things lively on Saturday nights, and generous banquet menus.

But earlier in the week it’s usually much quieter, perfect for couples or 
smaller groups to sample superb charcoal-grilled kebabs of chicken, minced or 
cubed lamb, or fish, alongside yoghurt or eggplant dips, fresh salad and big 
discs of charred Persian flat bread.

6/120-122 Edinburgh Rd, Castlecrag, +61 2 9967 0051 

Castlecrag Cellars 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Castlecrag-Cellars/175990312578240>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Funsung-food-suburbs-castlecrag-new-south-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408411384947%2F42e72014-9b3e-4dd3-a654-0cc3f87a8fe3-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unsung%20food%20suburbs%3A%20Castlecrag%2C%20New%20South%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Funsung-food-suburbs-castlecrag-new-south-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unsung%20food%20suburbs%3A%20Castlecrag%2C%20New%20South%20Wales&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Funsung-food-suburbs-castlecrag-new-south-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408411384947%2F42e72014-9b3e-4dd3-a654-0cc3f87a8fe3-1020x612.jpeg>
 Castlecrag Cellars, one of Sydney’s best independent bottle shops. Photograph: 
Roberta Muir for the Guardian 
Cyrus isn’t licensed and Artusi allows BYO early in the week so it’s handy 
that they’re either side of one of Sydney’s best independent bottle shops.

George and Anna Doukas at Castlecrag Cellars carry a great range of wines, 
including multiple vintages of the sought-after Moss Wood cabernet and Leeuwin 
Estate Art Series chardonnay. There are also single-malt whiskies alongside 
other spirits, liqueurs and beers, including some harder-to-find treats such as 
Cynar artichoke aperitif.

122 Edinburgh Rd, Castlecrag, +61 2 9958 1507 
 