
Up to 150 people have been detained in Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> after the morality police raided what 
has been described as a mixed-gender party near Tehran.

In the sweltering heat and as people spend more time outside, the authorities 
tighten their grip on social norms, cracking down on activities deemed 
un-Islamic.

Such restrictions have become a regular feature of Iranian life since the 1979 
Islamic revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2009/feb/03/iranian-revolution-archive>, 
as members of the morality police appear on the streets, or are deployed in 
vans at public places, to tackle women defying the compulsory hijab, men with 
non-approved hairstyles, or males and females partying together.


Mohsen Khancherli, a senior police commander, confirmed to the semi-official 
Tasnim news agency on Monday that the arrests had been made, but did not say 
whether any of those detained were still in custody.


“A while ago, we received a tipoff about a mixed-gender party at a garden in 
the vicinity of Islamshahr, in the west of the Tehran province,” he said. 
“[Police forces managed] to arrest tens of boys and girls during a joint 
operation with one of the relevant departments.”


Khancherli said police were closely monitoring gardens and public halls in the 
area, noting that their efforts had been stepped up during summer.


“In this garden, which was situated next to an unlicensed studio for recording 
underground music, nearly 150 boys and girls had gathered in a mixed-gender 
party under the pretext of a birthday celebration,” he said. “But all 
participants were detained by the police and subsequently referred to the 
judicial authorities.”


Many Iranians see these measures as an infringement on their private lives, 
especially when police interfere in wedding ceremonies or parties in private 
buildings. The crackdown has also helped engender corruption, because many 
people feel compelled to bribe police in order to protect their guests and hold 
a peaceful wedding ceremony.

The searches have proved costly for partygoers, with some being sentenced to 
lashes for consuming alcohol or prison for related crimes.


Afshin Naghouni, an Iranian-born painter based in London, was badly affected 
by one such incident in the years after the revolution. He fell and was left 
paralysed after escaping to the roof of a residential block, when the morality 
police raided a party he had attended. His ordeal was the subject of a 2014 
documentary film calledOut of Focus 
<http://iranianfilmfestival.org/all-date-list/out-of-focus/>, made by the 
Iranian film-maker Shahriar Siami.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fup-to-150-men-and-women-detained-at-party-in-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53b5e97076fed81cf995f8428cb3643cd610c3d3%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Up%20to%20150%20men%20and%20women%20detained%20at%20party%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fup-to-150-men-and-women-detained-at-party-in-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Up%20to%20150%20men%20and%20women%20detained%20at%20party%20in%20Iran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fup-to-150-men-and-women-detained-at-party-in-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53b5e97076fed81cf995f8428cb3643cd610c3d3%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Satellite dishes on a balcony in Tehran. Military units recently launched a 
crackdown on the illegal items. Photograph: Atta Kenare/AFP/Getty Images 
The Iranian president, Hassan Rouhani, has repeatedly opposed crackdowns on 
women’s clothing and called for people’s privacy to be respected, but his pleas 
have fallen on deaf ears. Police act independently of his administration and 
operate under the direct control of the supreme leader,Ayatollah Ali Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>.

With Iran’s presidential election taking place next year, the hardline 
judiciary and police appear to be defying Rouhani’s policies in an apparent 
attempt to undermine his social efforts. Although the president’s hands are 
tied in regards to policing and judiciary matters, critics have said he can do 
more to address the issues.


The morality police are particularly concerned about anything from 
loose-fitting headscarves, tight overcoats and shortened trousers for women, to 
glamorous hairstyles or necklaces for men. Walking dogs has also been added to 
the long list of activities that upset the authorities.


Earlier this week, the informal voluntary Basij militia, affiliated to the 
elite Revolutionary Guards, announced that they had destroyed 100,000 illegal 
satellite dishes confiscated from rooftops.

In recent months, 35 students were detained and subsequently flogged in Qazvin 
province, 62 were arrested at a mixed-gender party in Bandar Abbas, 23 were 
held at a party in Kerman and 70 were detained at a party in a restaurant in 
Tehran.


The question of morality remains a daily battle between police and ordinary 
citizens. Illegal satellite dishes have been multiplying, despite threats of 
reprisals, and the way millions of women dress in a constant pushback against 
the authorities is a clear indication of where Iranians stand on the matter.

 