
The surgeon general’s new report 
<https://addiction.surgeongeneral.gov/surgeon-generals-report.pdf>, Facing 
Addiction, is chock full of statistics intended to startle people into action. 
One in seven Americans will experience a problem with alcohol or other drug 
misuse in their lifetimes, and some 20 million have current substance use 
disorders. But with 78 people dying from overdose every day, only 10% of people 
with addictions ever receive any sort of help towards recovery.


Why we should de-criminalize all drugs | Maia Szalavitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/jul/05/why-de-criminalize-all-drugs-stigma>
 “For far too long, too many in our country have viewed addiction as a moral 
failing,” writes Surgeon General Vivek Murthy in his introduction. “We must 
help everyone see that addiction is not a character flaw – it is a chronic 
illness.”

Murthy hopes to spur revolutionary change the way his predecessor Luke Terry 
did, with his 1964report <https://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/ps/access/NNBBMQ.pdf> on 
smoking that galvanized Americans into confronting the clear link between 
cigarettes and lung cancer. But with Facing Addiction, he hasn’t produced a 
report that is radical enough to do so.

 Unfortunately, while it calls for welcome initiatives on many fronts – such 
as expanding access to harm reduction programs, including needle exchange and 
distribution of the opioid overdose antidote naloxone – it doesn’t go nearly 
far enough.

For example, while calling for “less punitive” treatment and more drug court 
programs, the report doesn’t recognize that we don’t treat other diseases with 
punishment or criminalization. While correctly noting that TV-style, 
in-your-face interventions and confrontational addiction treatment are not 
helpful, it doesn’t reckon with the fact that they are common.

And while demanding increased access to treatment supported by scientific 
evidence, it makes no attempt to address the contradictions inherent in 
labeling addiction a disease while the vast majority of treatment programs work 
to get patients to accept the prayer and surrender to a higher power involved 
in the 12 steps.

Avoidance of these issues has led to a report that is vague, which interferes 
with its usefulness.

This is most glaring for those concerned about opioid addiction. For instance, 
one of the “key points” emphasized in the report is “well-supported scientific 
evidence shows that treatment for substance use disorders – including 
inpatient, residential, and outpatient – are cost-effective compared with no 
treatment”. This will be used by expensive rehabs to justify insurance coverage.

 But this is not true for residential and outpatient treatment for opioid 
addiction that doesn’t include ongoing use of maintenance medications such as 
methadone and buprenorphine, which is the majority of residential care. In 
fact, astudy <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/add.13193/full> of the 
entire UK treatment system showed that people with opioid addiction who 
underwent residential or other types of treatment without maintenance 
medication had twice the death rate of those who stayed on meds.

 Another problem that results from vagueness in the report is its use of the 
term “medication assisted treatment” (MAT) to refer to all three medications 
currently approved for the treatment of opioid addiction. The report states: 
“MAT is a highly effective treatment option for individuals with alcohol and 
opioid use disorders. Studies have repeatedly demonstrated the efficacy of MAT 
at reducing illicit drug use and overdose deaths improving retention in 
treatment and reducing HIV transmission.”

 This, however, is true of only two of the medications, methadone and 
buprenorphine. There is no data suggesting that that the third, naltrexone, 
reduces overdose death rates (the oral or implanted forms were associated with 
an eight times greater risk of death in Australianresearch 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1360-0443.2004.00654.x/full> 
compared to deaths following methadone; there’s not enough research to know if 
the injectable long-acting version could have similar problems). Only long-term 
use of methadone or buprenorphine is linked with saving lives; this data should 
have been highlighted and these medications advocated as superior care.

Finally, the report doesn’t address the problems associated with a tactic 
called “12 step facilitation” (TSF), which is used in one form or another by at 
least 80% of all American treatment programs. This involves, as the report 
describes, promoting “acceptance” that abstinence is the only solution, pushing 
“surrender” to a “higher power” and urging “active involvement in a 12 step 
program”.

The report cites evidence showing that in the treatment of alcoholism, this 
approach is as effective as less problematic and more systematic treatments 
such as cognitive-behavioral therapy and motivational enhancement therapy. But 
what it doesn’t explain is why a treatment that has been ruled to be religious 
in every relevant court case should be used when there are good alternatives. 
And it doesn’t note that there is little evidence supporting it for opioid 
treatment particularly.

It’s highly unlikely that the public will be convinced that addiction is 
really a disease when the main treatment for it continues to involve admitting 
immoral behavior and making amends for it. And since you can attend 12-step 
groups for free in nearly every city around the world, I remain baffled as to 
why reports like this don’t call for the removal of 12-step content from paid 
professional care, even if only to avoid redundancy and save money.

This is not to say that 12-step programs aren’t helpful as support groups for 
some. I’m merely suggesting that a report calling for improvement of addiction 
treatment cannot sidestep the reality that they are not professional care and 
should never have been sold as such.

If addiction is to be seen as a disease like any other, it can’t be 
criminalized, and it can’t be the only part of medicine where being made to 
surrender to a higher power is legitimate therapy. Any report that doesn’t 
confront the contradictions in the way we moralize addiction while claiming to 
want to medicalize it, cannot produce the radical changes that Murthy – and 
everyone else concerned with addiction – knows are necessary.
 