
The first batch of secret service documents about Aaron Swartz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz> has been released amid a 
legal battle to publicly share the 14,500 pages the government has amassed in 
its investigation of the internet activist.

A report of his suicide, evidence documents and a memorandum of an interview 
with an unidentified acquaintance are included in the 104-page cachepublished 
by Wired's Kevin Poulsen on Monday 
<http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2013/08/swartz-foia-release/>.

Swartz was federally indicted on 13 charges including computer fraud, theft of 
information and wire fraud for downloading 4m articles from the JSTOR database 
through theMassachusetts <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/massachusetts> 
Institute of Technology computer network. He was facing up to $1m in fines and 
35 years in jail for these charges when he killed himself in January.

The documents 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/750523-aaron-swartz-usss-first-release-08-12-13.html>
 show that the secret service was interested in a document penned by Swartz and 
others calling for open information – the Guerilla Open Access Manifesto.Some, 
including a congressional aide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/mar/01/aaron-swartz-partner-us-delaying-investigation>
, believe this document was used to establish "malicious intent" in the 
government's case against him.

A considerable portion of the documents are evidence logs detailing the 
equipment seized by the government or handed over by Swartz, including 
computers, storage equipment and earnings statements from Google and Harvard 
University.

Swartz was present for at least one search of his Cambridge apartment, 
according to a February 2011 document that reads: "While the search was 
conducted, Swartz made statements to the effect of, what took you so long, and 
why didn't you do this earlier?"

Nearly every page included in the release is redacted in some way, primarily 
obscuring names of investigators or those who were interviewed by government 
officials about Swartz.

Two groups that have impeded the release of the documents, JSTOR and MIT are 
not mentioned in the released files.The groups are seeking approval 
<http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2013/07/mit-swartz-intervene/> to get an 
advance review of the documents, following a court order for the files to be 
released.

It is unusual for a private group to interfere in a request for government 
files, thoughMIT released its own report on Swartz two weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jul/30/mit-review-aaron-swartz-federal-prosecution>
. Poulsen, whose request for the files to be released initiated the court case, 
said his lawyers are in discussion with the two groups' lawyers.

The US secret service initially denied Poulsen's Freedom of Information Act 
request for files it had on Swartz, along with an appeal. With attorney David 
Sobel, Poulsen filed a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit against the secret 
service's parent agency, the Department of Homeland Security.

Poulsen is a former hacker and had worked with Swartz on the Deaddrop project, 
an open-source drop box for leaked documents unveiled in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/17/new-yorker-strongbox-aaron-swartz-data-privacy>
.

The government said it will take six months to process the documents, which 
are being released on a rolling basis.
 