
Officials from the United States Anti-Doping Agency will speak to senior 
figures in British Athletics this week after questioning Mo Farah for five hours
about his coach, Alberto Salazar, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/23/mo-farah-alberto-salazar-doping-allegations>
 on Saturday morning.

Mo Farah enjoys ‘amazing’ homecoming with 3,000m Anniversary Games win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/25/mo-farah-amazing-homecoming-3000m-anniversary-games>
Among those who are expected to be interviewed are the British Athletics 
performance director, Neil Black, and the organisation’s head of endurance, 
Barry Fudge, both of whom have worked closely with Salazar sinceFarah joined 
the Nike Oregon Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/11/london-2012-mo-farah> in the 
autumn of 2010.

Salazar was accused of a series of doping violations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/allegations-alberto-salazar-response>
, including giving Farah’s training partner Galen Rupp the banned steroid 
testosterone as a 16-year-old, by a BBC Panorama documentary last month but 
issued a forceful 12,000-word riposte denying all charges. There are no 
suggestions that Farah, who the Guardian revealed last monthwould face 
questioning from Usada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/27/alberto-salazar-inquiry-mo-farah-usada>
, has committed any wrongdoing.

In a pre-arranged meeting at London’s Grange Tower Bridge hotel Farah told the 
Usada investigator Bill Bock, who helpedbring down Lance Armstrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2014/jul/04/lance-armstrong-drugs-tour-de-france>
, he had never taken performance-enhancing drugs. The British runner, who was 
flanked by his lawyers during the interview, also told Bock he would split from 
Salazar immediately if it was shown his coach was involved in doping.

A source close to Farah told the Guardian: “Mo has got nothing to hide and he 
has always been happy to talk to Usada. The meeting was arranged several weeks 
ago.” It is understood Usada officials were happy to accommodate Farah’s 
request to speak to them beforehe flew to his training camp in Font Romeu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/25/mo-farah-hills-victory-olympic-stadium>
 on Saturday afternoon, where he will put the finishing touches to his 
preparations for the world championships in Beijing next month.

Another source close to the investigation said Farah was “just one of many in 
BritishAthletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> who would be 
talking to Usada over the coming days” and those figures will almost certainly 
include Black and Fudge. There is no suggestion either man has done anything 
wrong and they have always been open about the regard they hold for Salazar. 
Last month Black told reporters he went over to Portland to see Farah and 
Salazar “at least six times a year” as well as spending time with Salazar at 
training camps. Black also explained Fudge “has probably spent a year out of 
the last four years of his life living and working directly with Mo on a daily 
basis.”

Jessica Ennis-Hill sets three season’s bests in Anniversary Games
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/25/jessica-ennis-hill-beijing-rio-olympics>
Earlier this year Black praised Salazar as a “genius” and “one of the best 
people to work with that I have ever come across” and said that in the four 
years British Athletics had worked with him they had not had a falling out. 
“There are more than 10 different people, not just in the same country but 
across the Atlantic, involved,” he said. “An eight-hour time difference, five 
different training bases, constant variable travel and so on. But nobody has 
ever had a cross word.

“The reason why is to do with this: total trust, total belief, total respect. 
Alberto is so respectful of everyone else in the team, so knowledgeable of 
their contributions to the ultimate performance of the athlete that it becomes 
seamless. We have never had a challenge in all of the years we have been 
working together.”

British Athletics has refused to comment directly on the news Usada will be 
speaking to its staff but a spokeswoman said its independent review into the 
organisation’s relationship with Salazar would be reporting its findings and 
recommendations in early August.

Meanwhile Dina Asher-Smith, who delighted a capacity crowd at the Anniversary 
Games on Saturday by becoming the first British woman to break through the 
11-second barrier for 100m, hopes there is more to come but is not sure whether 
she is on the radar of the top Americans and Jamaicans yet.

The 19-year-old, who ran a stunning 10.99sec in the heats before finishing 
fourth in the final in 11.06, said: “I don’t know if they are looking at me, 
but I hopefully I can go under 11 seconds again soon. I have stuff to work on 
in each race because there were good bits and bad bits in different places, 
which is a bit annoying. But hopefully I can improve and use the performances 
and experience to take myself further.”

Asher-Smith was also delighted that Dafne Schippers, who won the final with a 
Dutch record of 10.92, had shown that Europe could compete with the two 
powerhouses of sprinting. “I am so happy that a European athlete won – no 
offence to everybody else but I am a bit biased,” she said. “For so long it has 
been America and Jamaica and finally Dafne showed that European girls can 
sprint. We all knew that but she has really done it in the Diamond League so 
many times.”
 