
App: ValueMyStuff 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/valuemystuff/id458332064?mt=8>

By: Tech work done by Webspiders.com <http://www.webspiders.com/>

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>

What is it?

An antiques valuation service.

What does it promise?

"ValueMyStuff provides valuations and appraisals for almost anything including 
medal valuations, jewellery valuations, painting valuations, furniture 
valuations, stamp valuations and so much more. All our experts have worked for 
Sotheby's, Christie's or one of the other major London auction houses." You 
upload a picture of something you want valued and, for a fee, those experts 
will take a look.

Is it easy to use?

I had some problems registering with the app to begin with – even when I 
registered successfully at the full website, the app claimed my work email 
address was invalid. I tried my personal email and it eventually accepted my 
registration. That aside, buying credits (one credit equals one valuation) 
works smoothly via PayPal and submitting items for valuation was also child's 
play.

I uploaded a photograph of a piece of jewellery my wife had inherited from her 
grandmother (we had thought it might be a Van Cleef & Arpels piece). The 
process was simple: you can upload four photos for each item, you then describe 
the piece and send the details to the company. The hardest part is parting with 
a not-inconsiderable £7.50 each time you want something valued.

Is it fun?

All the time that you have your fingers crossed that you're in possession of a 
priceless item, it's great fun. When you find out your "valuables" are next to 
worthless, less so.

Is it pretty?

The home screen is a calm sea of blue broken by a nicely rendered magnifying 
glass logo. There are crisp icons throughout, as well as illustrations and 
nicely integrated photo work.

Should you download it?
 ValueMyStuff QR-code 
The app does exactly what it promises. Within 48 hours I had a PDF sitting in 
my email inbox containing a full valuation that told me: "It doesn't look like 
a Van Cleef & Arpels piece". Shame.

I was pretty sure I had uploaded two photos of my item (one front, one back), 
but the valuer had written in the report how it was a shame he or she hadn't 
been able to see a picture of the front of the item, and only the photo of the 
back was included in the PDF. Also, £7.50 does seem a lot to spend on an in-app 
purchase, even if you are accessing expert independent opinion – although the 
price drops to £19.99 for three credits and £59.99 for 10 credits if you buy in 
bulk.

For most people, going to three different jewellers to get three free 
valuations would probably work just as well as using ValueMyStuff, but not all 
items are small, and if you have bigger and bulkier antiques you are unsure 
about this app could help make your mind up over whether to cash-in or keep 
them for sentimental reasons.

• If you aren't able to download the app but have some heirlooms you would 
like to get assessed, you might be able to get them valued for free by
ValueMyStuff.com <http://www.ValueMyStuff.com>. Send (in focus) pictures of the 
item, from several angles, tohomes.guardian@googlemail.com 
<http://www.homes.guardian@googlemail.com>, plus a close-up of any hallmark or 
signature. Please include any known information, such as how it was acquired 
and where it came from, and it may feature in our nextAntiques Slideshow 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/gallery/2011/apr/07/antiques-slideshow-value-my-stuff>
.
 