
Lurch dragged himself towards the lectern. Even with extra slap to give his 
cheeks a pink veneer,Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> has the look of a walking 
corpse. His eyes are sunken sockets, his stooped frame the sign of a man 
destined to be a pall-bearer at his own funeral. The chancellor has already 
bored himself to death many times over and he won’t rest until he has sucked 
the lifeblood out of everyone around him. A true vampire of the spirit.

Hammond is leading Britain into another lost decade | Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/03/brexit-tories-economy-philip-hammond-debt-targets>
“Thank you,” said the chancellor, raising a hand to acknowledge the polite 
applause that had greeted his arrival. If Lurch had left it at that, his speech 
would have gone down as one of his biggest triumphs. But he had more to say. 
Much more. And the Tory conference settled down for a painful dose of aural 
valium. On a couple of occasions, he tried to make a joke but he fluffed the 
punchline both times. Even the Autocue had had enough.

This wasn’t the easiest of gigs for Lurch. All his instincts – along with 
those of the City – tell him Britain should be pursuing the softest of Brexits, 
but he’s been outflanked by the Eurosceptics and will now have to steer the 
economy through what may well be a tricky few years. Already the pound was 
falling sharply and he’d long since had toditch his party’s promise of 
eliminating the budget deficit by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/03/philip-hammond-pledges-economic-pragmatism-during-brexit-process>
. One panicky eye opened and peered out through a hooded lid. “There will be 
some turbulence as a result of Brexit,” he warned. Put on your seatbelts and 
assume the brace position. Lurch would do his best to make things OK, but he 
wasn’t making any promises.

“Before you switch off ... ” he continued. It was a bit late in the day for 
that as most people had long since zoned out. But Lurch wasn’t a man to be put 
off by the sound of shallow breathing, so he plodded on. “I had no idea until a 
few weeks ago how much I didn’t know,” he continued. Better late than never. 
“And even less idea how much I wouldn’t be able to understand even once it had 
been explained to me.” This chancellor business was a bit trickier than he had 
been led to believe.

Another “Thank you” indicated that Lurch had reached the end of his monologue 
and the applause was a touch warmer than it had been when he had walked on. 
Mainly due to everyone’s relief at being put out of their misery, but also 
partly in appreciation. It takes a lifetime of practice to be that dull. 
Dullness is often an underrated virtue in a politician – it’s often confused 
with being a safe pair of hands – and Hammond has turned it into an art form.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fvampire-of-the-spirit-philip-hammond-takes-dullness-to-a-whole-new-level%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0910d4dbeb7148fe0cd5dc7e15e9bfd3c1053d17%2F0_0_2402_2449%2F2402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vampire%20of%20the%20spirit%20Philip%20Hammond%20takes%20dullness%20to%20a%20whole%20new%20level%20%7C%20John%20Crace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fvampire-of-the-spirit-philip-hammond-takes-dullness-to-a-whole-new-level%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vampire%20of%20the%20spirit%20Philip%20Hammond%20takes%20dullness%20to%20a%20whole%20new%20level%20%7C%20John%20Crace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fvampire-of-the-spirit-philip-hammond-takes-dullness-to-a-whole-new-level%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0910d4dbeb7148fe0cd5dc7e15e9bfd3c1053d17%2F0_0_2402_2449%2F2402.jpg>
 Andrea Leadsom, secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs, 
smiled a lot. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
If the morning was spent trying to persuade people that things wouldn’t be 
quite as bad as they feared, the afternoon was all about showing how much worse 
things could so easily have been. In a parallel universe,Andrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> could have been the prime 
minister and the warmth of her reception was all about the bullet that had been 
dodged. Leadsom’s grip on reality has always been tenuous at best – she’s still 
not entirely sure whether she was a cashier at NatWest or a lift attendant at 
Barclays – and her grasp of her brief as minister for the environment, food and 
rural affairs is minimal.

“There’s lots of badgers to kill and the countryside has inspired lots of pop 
songs,” she declared. Then she smiled. Leadsom does a lot of smiling. It gives 
her a chance for her words to resynch themselves with her lips. Then she smiled 
again. Just because she could. “Tourists are buying British bottled air at £80 
a go 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/man-sells-british-fresh-air-to-wealthy-chinese-elite-for-80-a-jar-a6857461.html>
,” she declared, as if ripping off gullible foreigners was the answer to the 
country’s problems.


She had nothing to say about contaminated meat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/revealed-mrsa-variant-found-in-british-pork-at-asda-and-sainsburys>
 or what was going to happen to the farmers she’d persuaded to leave the EU 
once their subsidies ran out. Above her pay grade. Smiling was so much easier. 
That and crossing the globe, flying the flag, banging the drum and mouthing 
platitudes. She was followed on to the stage by Liam Fox, whom the Tories 
considered to be an even worse bet than her as party leader. Imagine how that 
must make him feel.
 