
Hi Axel, what can you tell me about the museum?


The Van Gogh Museum <http://www.vangoghmuseum.nl/en> houses the largest 
collection of work by one of the world’s most famous artists, Vincent van Gogh. 
The collection encompasses 200 paintings, 500 drawings and almost his entire 
correspondence. The museum also collects paintings and works on paper by Van 
Gogh’s contemporaries, so we can place him in the wider artistic context of his 
time and show his sources of inspiration, as well as those whom he inspired.


It’s our mission to make the work and life of Van Gogh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/van-gogh>, and the work of his 
contemporaries, accessible to as many people around the world as possible, to 
enrich and inspire them.

What are the biggest challenges you face as a museum director?

One of our key challenges is the further diversification of our income stream. 
Our financial model is somewhat unusual in that we generate 50% of our income 
through ticket sales, with about 25% grant-in-aid from the national government 
and the remaining 25% coming from fundraising and commercial activities.

Given that roughly 85% of our visitors come from abroad, our dependence on a 
healthy tourist economy and growing tourism is considerable – and vulnerable. 
Government funding is also under pressure, so it’s critical for us to diversify 
our income streams further and seek new business opportunities.

Our dependence on international travel and tourism means that we’re also 
concerned about our immediate environment: the city of Amsterdam, which seems 
to be attracting ever-increasing numbers of tourists, but is limited 
logistically. It’s increasingly important to think abouthow to facilitate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jul/02/london-cultural-tourism-workshop-roundup>
 and manage the enormous stream of visitors, while keeping the experience 
pleasant and the city liveable.

This year marks the 125th year of Van Gogh’s death – how does a museum such as 
yours approach such a date?

It lends itself naturally to special attention. Of course, it’s not really a 
celebration, but rather a moment to reflect on the reception of Van Gogh and 
his significance today. This year also marks a milestone for the museum in 
terms of its development. In the runup to this special year, late in 2014, we 
fundamentally redeveloped the display of the permanent collection and launched 
a completelynew website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/14/-sp-design-van-gogh-museum-website>
. This year we’re also expanding our facilities by adding a new entrance hall, 
providing more than 8,000 sq ft of additional space.

How we designed the Van Gogh Museum website
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/14/-sp-design-van-gogh-museum-website>
What are the benefits and challenges of running a single artist museum?

It has a number of particular challenges. In our case, one of the great 
advantages is that Van Gogh is one of the most famous artists in the world. 
That means that the museum enjoys a natural and considerable flow of audiences 
and interest on a continuous basis. The concentration on one artist – albeit in 
our case, in combination with his contemporaries – also provides the museum 
with a clear focus in terms of its mission and programme. It’s a case of: you 
get what it says on the tin.

The flip side, however, is that our audience mostly expects to see Van Gogh, 
which means that we have to think carefully about how far we want to stray from 
the artist and his immediate environment in our exhibitions .

Clearly the biggest challenge is how to continue to find new topics and angles 
for our research and exhibition programmes, and by extension how to keep the 
artist “fresh” and relevant. Fortunately, interest in Van Gogh seems to grow 
unabatedly and it’s more a question of how to satisfy such enormous demand.

What can you tell me about the museum’s new commercial directions?

One of them is the new generation of extremely high-quality 3D-reproductions 
<http://www.vangoghmuseum.nl/en/about-the-museum/relievo-collection> of 
paintings by Van Gogh, which we launched a few years ago. These are being made 
with technology developed by Fujifilm and provide the first true-to-life 
reproduction of both the image and the surface texture of the paintings. They 
form the logical next step in the history of the reproduction of paintings.

Another enterprise we’re currently researching is the development of a 
consultancy based on the expertise the museum has developed over the years, in 
order to advise existing and new museums on a variety of issues, such as 
collections management, environmental sustainability, facilities management and 
so on.

Finally, in 2016 we’re planning to launch a Van Gogh “experience” – a 
multi-sensory, three-dimensionaltravelling educational display 
<http://www.vangoghmuseum.nl/en/about-the-museum/press/press-releases/van-gogh-museum-develops-meet-vincent-van-gogh-experience>
 to be shown in different parts of the world. It will not only be a way for us 
to respond to the considerable global demand for the artist without lending the 
collection, but a new source of income too.

What can you tell me about the campaign you’re spearheading to get more 
leading cultural figures on the boards of major businesses?

The Dutch government’s cuts to the cultural budget two years ago were 
accompanied by shockingly insulting and denigrating rhetoric. The sector was 
portrayed a being unprofessional, dilettante and catering to only a left-wing 
elite, thus completely ignoring the great steps that institutions have taken in 
recent years to become highly professionalised and target-orientated 
organisations.

This perception of the sector is also indirectly reflected by the fact that 
while almost every commercial CEO feels entitled and naturally qualified to 
serve on the supervisory board or board of trustees of any cultural 
organisation, hardly any leader of a cultural organisation – at least in the
Netherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> – is ever asked to 
serve as non-executive director of any commercial company.

The aim for cultural leaders to become commercial non-executive directors 
would be twofold: contributing their expertise to management issues in the 
commercial sector from a different vantage point, while also creating a greater 
understanding and respect for the professionalism and expertise that exists in 
the cultural sector.

What career tips would you give to an aspiring museum director?

 * Keep both eyes wide open: be aware of what it means to run a creative 
organisation and be certain that you are sufficiently interested in the more 
organisational aspects. 
 * Become part of the community: sometimes you see directors who only 
concentrate on their own organisations and move solely in their own artistic 
circle. Especially when you start somewhere, realise that no one has been 
waiting for you, but that it’s upon you actively to introduce yourself and show 
interest in your new (social) environment. 
 * Don’t be afraid of changing existing structures: museums are, by their 
nature, conservative and not always open to change. If you see the need, for 
example, to change the organisational structure, do it and do it swiftly. 
Axel Ruger is director of the Van Gogh Museum <http://www.vangoghmuseum.nl/en>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 