
 Vandals have sprayed yellow paint on a controversial sculpture known as the 
“queen’s vagina” which has just gone on display in the gardens of France’s 
Palace of Versailles.

Kapoor's vagina isn't shocking. French art has always been a hotbed of amour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/jun/04/anish-kapoor-versailles-vagina-not-shocking>
“Damage to the work, Dirty Corner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/04/anish-kapoor-versailles-vagina-controversy-france>
, was discovered Wednesday morning,” the estate’s management said. “It was 
lightly sprayed with paint. The work is being cleaned.”

The 60 metre-long, 10 metre-high steel-and-rock abstract sculpture by the 
British-Indian sculptorAnish Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kapoor> resembles a funnel. It faces 
the royal chateau, which attracts five million tourists a year.

Inside the palace itself is a smaller work: a cannon that fires red wax at 
white walls, symbolising a phallus and an ejaculation of blood.

Some French media outlets have expressed unease at the level of provocation 
unleashed by Kapoor, who has described the piece as “the vagina of a queen who 
is taking power”.

Kapoor – who has not said which queen he had in mind when he created the piece 
– has admitted that the work is “ambitious” but said it was not so over-the-top 
as the scale of the opulent Versailles.

He later seemed to step away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/10/anish-kapoor-dirty-corner-has-no-vagina-in-sight>
 from his description of the work as “the queen’s vagina” but said he did not 
see why it was problematic. “The point is to create a dialogue between these 
great gardens and the sculptures,” he told reporters on 5 June.

No one has claimed responsibility for vandalising the sculpture, nor were any 
complaints registered.

In a statement, local officials from the ruling Socialist party expressed 
their “indignation” over the vandalism, which they branded an attack against 
freedom of expression. It was “unacceptable that art, the compass of freedom, 
suffer because of the obscurantism of some people”, they said.

Kapoor’s exhibition is one of the most controversial at Versailles since the 
authorities in 2008 opened the palace and its grounds to contemporary artists.

That year Versailles hosted works by the American artist Jeff Koons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/jul/03/art2> and in 2010 by the 
Japanese artist Takashi Murakami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2010/sep/10/takashi-murakami-palace-versailles>
.

In October 2014 vandals in Paris’s landmark Vendôme square deflated a massive 
sculpture by the US artist Paul McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/20/paul-mccarthy-butt-plug-sculpture-paris-rightwing-backlash>
 that was shaped like a sex toy. McCarthy thendecided to take down the work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/23/paul-mccarthy-france-butt-plug-sculpture>
, which had both outraged and tickled Parisians.
 