



1. Is honesty the new Photoshop?

Two months ago, Leibovitz gave the Pirelli calendar a reality check 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/30/pirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year>
, swapping its usual taut, dewy-skinned aesthetic for an earthier vision of 
womanhood with wrinkles and soft rolls of fat on show. Now, the photographer 
brings realness to the Hollywood issue. The cover argues that age is no barrier 
to sequin-clad glamour, while the portfolio inside is “raw, intimate, and 
honest”,according to Vanity Fair 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/2016/02/hollywood-issue-jessica-diehl-annie-leibovitz#6>
, and “dismissive of the shackles of airbrushing and Picasso’d Photoshop 
manipulations”. In practice, this means artfully messed-up hair, visible crow’s 
feet and irregularities in skintone against a backdrop of frayed-edged, 
sludge-coloured fabric that looks like an American-civil-war-era carte de 
visite. Importantly, though, everyone still looks hot.

2. Are shoulders fashion’s most democratic body part?


Usually, when the fashion industry presents a new way to flash flesh – be that 
side butt or thigh gap or, recently, upper abs – it is met with a groan by all 
but the most confident and lithe. The industry’s recent fondness for bare 
shoulders, however, is truly democratic. According to Donna Karan, who has made 
a living fromthe cold-shoulder dress beloved of Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/sep/30/cold-shoulder-hillary-clinton-dress-fashion-lena-dunham>
, shoulders are the last place most of us put on weight or get crinkly. This 
cover would confirm that – it’s clavicles for miles.

3. Do older stars have more control over the way that they dress?

As far as Diane Keaton, 70, is concerned, the answer is yes. The actor’s 
signatureAnnie Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie-hall> style has 
morphed into something more Chim Chim Cher-ee in recent years; the outfit she 
wears here – military hat, cravat and overcoat, paired with cropped leggings 
and biker boots – is her own. That decision came about after a 45-minute 
conversation before the shoot,according to the stylist Jessica Diehl 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/style/2016/02/diane-keaton-hollywood-cover>. 
“Sometimes, when you get somebody like that, who has taken so much time to hone 
her personal style, you’re almost an idiot to try and improve upon that in five 
and a half minutes,” she said. Going mufti may well have landed Keaton the 
less-than-coveted over-the-gatefold slot, but it says a lot about her 
confidence in her look. Elsewhere, Jane Fonda rebels a little in a sequinned 
jumpsuit, while Charlotte Rampling has been allowed to wear tights.

Why Vanity Fair's Hollywood diversity cover fails to conceal industry prejudice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/feb/02/what-does-vanity-fair-star-studded-hollywood-cover-say-industry>
4. Will it ever be fashionable to smile?

Compare this cover with Vanity Fair’s 1995 issue 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/photos/2012/03/hollywood-cover-timeline-slideshow-201203>
, which featured a raft of twenty- and thirtysomethings in boudoir silk (Sarah 
Jessica Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sarah-jessica-parker> in a bra;
Uma Thurman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/06/uma-thurman-five-best-moments> in 
a lace negligee;Julianne Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliannemoore> 
in a mink-coloured slip), and it seems that fashion has moved on somewhat from 
its obsession with nudity and youth. One thing that has not changed, however, 
is the demeanour: they all look haughty and aloof, aside from Keaton, whose 
cheerful bearing only adds to the impression that she has been Photoshopped in 
from one ofGuy Ritchie’s Sherlock Holmes movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sherlock-holmes>. Her angst-free expression 
confirms that the actor’s sartorial humblebrag has won this cover. Keaton (who
recently started selling her own wine 
<http://www.people.com/article/diane-keaton-unveils-new-wine-served-over-ice-the-keaton?xid=socialflow_twitter_peoplemag>
, designed to be served over ice, of which she said: “It’s not fancy – but then 
neither am I”) knows the value of sticking to her ballgown-free brand.
 