
Vanity Fair is celebrating its 100th-year anniversary with its October front 
cover featuring actor and model Kate Upton in poses harking back to its first 
edition in 1913.

In a series of portraits taken by the renowned photographer Annie Leibovitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/annie-leibovitz>, Upton is pictured 
lounging on the moon in a pose that mimicks the original cover of Dress & 
Vanity Fair from 1 October 1913.

Vanity Fair editor Graydon Carter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/graydon-carter> − who began editing the 
title in 1992, the same year that Upton was born − writes in the latest 
edition: "In an age when nothing seems to last − not convictions, not even 
cities − a centennial, like the one Vanity Fair celebrates this year, makes me 
marvel at the simple fact of longevity."

To mark the centenary, the magazine asked 10 heavyweight writers − including 
the Downton Abbey creatorJulian Fellowes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/julian-fellowes> − to produce essays on 
the essence of each of the past 10 decades. It has also collected a series of 
the magazine's most recognisable images, including portraits by Leibovitz, 
Mario Testino, Bruce Weber and Edward Steichen.

In his editor's letter, Carter writes: "Magazines have 'bones' − the 
unchanging elements that give structure to creativity − as surely as gardens 
and houses do. Today's magazine is different in countless ways from yesterday's 
− as even the briefest excursion through this issue will show. But I like to 
think that if [Vanity Fair's first editor] Frank Crowninshield … could see the 
modern Vanity Fair, stripped of its logo and other identifying marks, he'd know 
in an instant what he held in his hands."

Alongside the print tribute to Vanity Fair's history − available from 
Wednesday in New York and Los Angeles and elsewhere from 10 September − the 
magazine has launched an online "anniversary hub" with more than 200 pieces of 
archive and original content, featuring interactive features and Spotify 
playlists.
 