
The Vatican and Argentina’s bishops have finished cataloguing their archives 
from the country’s dictatorship era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/pope-francis-argentina-orders-vatican-open-files-dictatorship>
, and will soon make them available to victims and their relatives who have 
long accused the church of complicity with the military rulers.

A joint statement on Tuesday said the process of digitizing the archives had 
been completed and that procedures to access the information would be 
forthcoming. No date was set, and the opening for now is restricted to victims, 
detainees, their relatives and the religious superiors of victims who were 
priests or nuns.

Official estimates say about 13,000 people were killed or disappeared in a 
government-sponsored crackdown on leftist dissidents during Argentina’s 
1976-1983 dictatorship. Human rights activists believe the real number was as 
high as 30,000.

The statement said the decision to open the church’s archives was taken at the 
express direction ofPope Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis>, “in the service of truth, 
justice and peace”.

Francis – then the Rev Jorge Mario Bergoglio – was the young Jesuit superior in
Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> during the military 
dictatorship, making his decision to open the archives all the more remarkable.

Many senior clerics were close to Argentina’s military rulers at the time and 
human rights groups have accused them of complicity with the regime.

Pope Francis: questions remain over his role during Argentina's dictatorship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/14/pope-francis-argentina-military-junta>
Francis himself had been criticized for not speaking out publicly about the 
atrocities, but he has also been credited with saving the lives of more than 
two dozen people, giving them sanctuary in his seminary and helping spirit them 
out of the country.

He had pledged to open the archives when pressed by relatives of Argentina’s 
desaparecidos, or disappeared, particularly the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, 
mothers of the disappeared.

The documents concern archives held in the Vatican secretariat of state, the 
Vatican’s Buenos Aires embassy and the Argentinian bishops’ conference. Most 
would normally never be made public, and in the case of theVatican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vatican> archives, they would only become 
available to academics starting around 2075.

The Vatican spokesman, Greg Burke, stressed that for now the archives would 
only be open to victims and their relatives, not academics. He suggested that a 
broader opening could come later.

Critics have argued that Francis was complicit in the terror campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/17/pope-francis-first-sunday-prayer>
 because of his public silence about the atrocities around him when he was in a 
position of authority within the Jesuit order.

But several books published since his election as pope have asserted that his 
public silence actually enabled him to save more lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/19/pope-francis-argentina-1970s>, 
using back channels to create a logistical network to save those who had been 
targeted for elimination by the military.

Activists say the church has yet to fully apologize for its human rights 
record, identify those responsible for the many violations the church knew 
about at the time, or lead Argentina’s justice system to bodies and to people 
who were stolen as babies from their birth families. Francis has said that when 
he ran Argentina’s bishops conference in the 1990s, no such evidence existed in 
church files.

The Vatican archives might yield information of more political interest. At 
the time of the regime, the Holy See was headed by the anti-communist Polish 
pope John Paul II, who later would launch a crackdown on the liberation 
theology that inspired many priests and religious sisters to side with the poor 
and oppressed across the continent.

Pope Francis's critics in Argentina say document suggests he betrayed priests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/17/pope-francis-first-sunday-prayer>
The most damning accusation against Francis himself is that as the military 
junta took over in 1976, he withdrew his support for two slum priests whose 
activist colleagues in the liberation theology movement were disappearing. The 
priests were then kidnapped and tortured at the Navy Mechanics School, which 
the junta used as a clandestine prison.

Francis said he had told the priests – Orlando Yorio and Francisco Jalics – to 
give up their slum work for their own safety, and they refused.

He testified as part of a human rights trial in 2010 that to save them, he 
persuaded another priest to fake an illness so that he could hold a private 
mass for dictator Jorge Videla and personally plead for the Jesuits’ release. 
They were set free in October 1976, left drugged and blindfolded in a field.

Yorio, who is now dead, later accused Francis of in effect delivering them to 
the death squads by declining to publicly endorse their work. But Jalics has 
said he and Francis have reconciled and that he considers the matter closed.

How an Argentinian man learned his 'father' may have killed his real parents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/argentinian-stolen-baby-guillermo-perez-roisinblit>
Francis’s decision to open the church’s archives raises the question of 
whether he will do the same elsewhere in Latin America, where some members of 
the church and Vatican hierarchy were seen as being aligned with rightwing 
military dictatorships that targeted leftists in El Salvador, Chile, Nicaragua 
and elsewhere, even while fellow priests were being targeted.

It also raises the question of when the Vatican will open its archives into 
its second world war-era pope, Pius XII, long criticized by Jewish groups as 
having stayed silent in the face of the Holocaust.

The Vatican usually waits 70 years after the end of a pontificate to open its 
archives. But it has been under pressure to accelerate the Pius catalogue so 
the documents can be made public before the generation of Holocaust survivors 
dies.

Asked if the Argentinian exception to the 70-year rule set a precedent for the 
Pius archives, Burke said to wait and see, suggesting a development was 
expected in the not-too-distant future.
 