
If Russian journalism has a patron saint, his name is Yasen Zasursky.

The 85-year-old headed the Moscow State University journalism department for 
more than 40 years before becoming its president emeritus in 2007.

A long list of respected journalists received their diplomas from him: Yuri 
Shchekochikhin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jul/09/guardianobituaries.russia>, an 
investigative journalist who died suddenly and mysteriously with symptoms 
resembling acute poisoning in 2003;Anna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/oct/09/guardianobituaries.russia>, the 
investigative journalist who was murdered in Moscow in 2006;Mikhail Beketov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/08/russian-journalist-campaign-highway-assault>
, the former muck-raking editor of Khimkinskaya Pravda, who died in 2013 of 
injuries suffered when he was savagely beaten in 2008; and many others.

But Zasursky is far from impressed by the work of many others who have taken 
his courses and are now stars of Russian state television under the government 
of President Vladimir Putin.

In an interview with RFE/RL Russian Service 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TWU9RhNIvWA&feature=youtu.be>, he says he is 
deeply disheartened. “It is unpleasant for me to see what they are conveying.

“It is pointless trying to get your information from television. Everything 
there is official announcements. There is nothing analytical, so you risk being 
turned into a person with blinders on. There isn’t one journalist there who has 
his own opinions,” he adds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Frussia-journalism-professor-yasen-zasursky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442921178935%2Fc5d0ac97-8bf9-45a4-a3b2-b5bf3da469cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Veteran%20Russian%20journalist%20slams%20media%20standards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Frussia-journalism-professor-yasen-zasursky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Veteran%20Russian%20journalist%20slams%20media%20standards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Frussia-journalism-professor-yasen-zasursky%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442921178935%2Fc5d0ac97-8bf9-45a4-a3b2-b5bf3da469cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Yasen Zasursky: ‘It’s pointless trying to get your information from 
television.’ Photograph: Alamy 
One of his former students, the state TV news presenter Ernest Matskyavichyus, 
recently declared <http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/2782318> that Russia is in the 
throes of an information war and journalists must reject formerly accepted 
international standards of the profession.

Matskyavichyus said: “Let’s remember how journalism was in 1942. Did they 
present both sides of the story? Interview one side and then the other in 
turns?”

In the interview, Zasursky says Matskyavichyus was “an excellent student”, but 
adds that he does not agree with the need to only cover only one side of a 
debate.

He says: “People are only disarmed when they have insufficient or incomplete 
information. Then we have surrendered even before the enemy attacks.”

Zasursky is also critical of another former student, Dmitry Kiselyov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/10/russia-west-trading-places-freedom-of-speech-sanction-eu-dmitry-kiselev-putin>
, who heads the Rossiya Segodnya state media conglomerate and hosts a weekly 
news round up on the state-run Rossiya television.

“He was an interesting journalist,” Zasursky says of Kiselyov. “Was.”

Zasursky adds: “He was a very smart young man. He wrote some very smart 
things. But now he is simply repeating various ideas. And that has nothing to 
do with journalism. A journalist must help people to understand events. He must 
not only convey information, but knowledge as well.

“I wouldn’t say [Kiselyov] is highly esteemed in the circles I move in,” 
Zasursky adds. “He is just a highly skilled propagandist.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Frussia-journalism-professor-yasen-zasursky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442921300930%2Fb765df59-914f-4ad8-bc06-e30d774b624c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Veteran%20Russian%20journalist%20slams%20media%20standards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Frussia-journalism-professor-yasen-zasursky%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Veteran%20Russian%20journalist%20slams%20media%20standards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Frussia-journalism-professor-yasen-zasursky%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442921300930%2Fb765df59-914f-4ad8-bc06-e30d774b624c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Russian TV journalist Dmitry Kiselyov after receiving a medal of friendship 
from the Kremlin. Photograph: Mikhail Klimentyev/AFP/Getty Images 
Zasursky is an admirer of the former Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/01/glasnost-perestroika-mikhail-gorbachev-soviet-writers-1988>
, whose glasnost reforms in the late 1980s resulted in a golden age for 
journalists. He is less enthusiastic about the former Russian presidentBoris 
Yeltsin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/jan/06/russia.iantraynor>, who, 
he says, was unable to bring Gorbachev’s reforms to fruition.

“At the critical moment, he was lost,” Zasursky says, adding that although 
Putin has accomplished some positive things, Yeltsin’s decision to name him 
successor was “not the optimal path” for the country.

Zasursky was born in 1929 and has lived in Moscow his entire life, except for 
the time he spent in evacuation in Barnaul, Siberia, during the second world 
war. He graduated from the Moscow State Pedagogical University in 1948, with a 
major in English. He got his doctorate in 1967 with a dissertation on 
20th-century American literature.

He joined the journalism faculty of Moscow State University in 1955 and served 
as its dean from 1965 until 2007.

He has had health problems in recent months and uses a wheelchair, but he says 
he is optimistic that he will be on his feet again by the New Year.

As for the fate of journalism under Putin’s government, he is less optimistic. 
He recalls how he worked as an editor for the Foreign Literature publishing 
house in the 1950s, when the firm gave translation work to Soviet poets who 
couldn’t be published for political reasons.

“Not all those poets were appreciated,” Zasursky says. “But it [the publishing 
house] was allowed to give them translations and they made a living on that. 
Maybe [journalists now] should do translations. I think it is possible to find 
some intellectual work.”
 