
The sigh of relief that followed Alexander Van der Bellen’s victory in 
Austria’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/04/italian-referendum-and-austrian-presidential-election-live?page=with%3Ablock-584464afe4b015a427f776bf>
 rerun presidential election on Sunday could be heard all over Europe. After 
the twin traumas ofTrump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/world-leaders-react-to-donald-trumps-us-election-victory>
 andBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/uk-voted-for-brexit-but-is-there-a-way-back>
, centrist parties, social democrats and liberals of all stripes had feared 
another triumph for the advancing forces of nativist populism represented by 
Van der Bellen’s rival, the far-right Freedom party’s Norbert Hofer.

Instead, Europe and its much-battered political incarnation, the European Union
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, have won a reprieve – although 
probably temporary. And Austria has escaped the odium of being the first 
modern-day democracy to pick as its head of state a political extremist whose 
party traces its ideological roots back to the strident neo-Nazism of its 
best-known leader, the late Jörg Haider.

Far-right concedes defeat in Austrian presidential election – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/04/italian-referendum-and-austrian-presidential-election-live>
Van der Bellen, a left-leaning, pro-Europe moderate backed by Austria’s 
Greens, was estimated to have won by an unexpectedly large margin of 7%. The 
initial contest in May gave him a 1% lead or less, an outcome that was 
challenged by Hofer.

The result will give a boost to likeminded politicians across Europe who also 
face potent electoral challenges from the far-right next year, notably inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>. “What happens here today has 
relevance for all of Europe,” Van der Bellen said before casting his ballot, 
pointing to Hofer’s strong anti-EU, anti-immigrant, nationalist stance.

As the projected result was declared, Sigmar Gabriel, the German 
vice-chancellor who leads his country’s centre-left Social Democrats, expressed 
agreement and heartfelt relief. “A load has been taken off the mind of all of 
Europe <https://twitter.com/sigmargabriel/status/805450534727585792?lang=en>,” 
Gabriel said. The result was “a clear victory for good sense against right-wing 
populism”.

Manfred Weber, leader of the largest centre-right grouping in the European 
Parliament, also read wider significance into the result. In effect speaking 
for Brussels, target of much nationalist ire,Weber said on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/ManfredWeber?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
: “Austrians send clear pro-European signal. The European right-wing populists’ 
party is off for now.”

Some even set the outcome in a global context – unusual treatment for Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria>, a minor EU member whose politics 
are largely obscure. Ulrich Kelber, a German minister, suggested the vote 
reflected a backlash against Donald Trump’s victory in last month’s US 
presidential election. “Perhaps Trump’s election was the turning point. The 
liberal majority pushes back,” Kelber said. That remains to be seen.

The Austrian president’s functions are largely ceremonial, unlike in France, 
where a successor to François Hollande, the Socialist president, will be 
elected next spring. The contest will pitFrançois Fillon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/francois-fillon-on-course-to-win-french-primary-to-be-candidate-for-the-right>
, a centre-right Republican, against Marine Le Pen, leader of the far-right 
National Front. The French left is in disarray. Le Pen endorsed Hofer and sent 
him a message of support as voting began on Sunday.

Austria rejects far-right candidate Norbert Hofer in presidential election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
Claims that his defeat represents the beginning of a liberal backlash will not 
worry her excessively. The FN appears confident that the feelings of alienation 
and disillusionment with the political establishment expressed by many French 
voters will translate into a strong if not decisive showing in the presidential 
poll.

Geert Wilders, the anti-immigrant, Islamophobic Eurosceptic who is currently 
riding a wave of support in the Netherlands, also backed Hofer. But he, too, is 
likely toplay down 
<http://www.dutchnews.nl/news/archives/2016/11/geert-wilders-pvv-back-on-top-in-latest-poll-of-polls/>
 the spillover effect of the Austrian result on the Dutch elections due in 
March.

By way of contrast, Germany, more closely related to Austria’s political 
culture and similarly troubled by issues of immigration and national identity, 
may see in Sunday’s outcome a sign of what to expect in next September’s 
federal elections, which will be contested by the populist Alternative for
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>.

Comforting though Van der Bellen’s victory may be for European progressives, 
the fact remains that slightly more than 46% of Austrian voters backed Hofer’s 
candidacy. That figure reveals a nation that is sharply divided, and overall, 
more rightwing and intolerant in its outlook than previously.

In this respect, similarities may be drawn with Britain, where the 
anti-immigrant Ukip has attracted increased support in recent years, and where 
52% of voters opted in June to turn their backs onEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the EU.

Year of electoral tests may end European Union as we know it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/year-of-electoral-tests-may-end-european-union-as-we-know-it>
Van der Bellen stressed the linkage with Brexit during his campaign. He 
predicted Hofer, if elected, would push for Austria to hold its own “Oexit” 
referendum. This prospect has been set back – but the idea will not go away 
entirely. Although the battle for the presidency is over, Austria’s larger, 
ongoing political struggle now enters its next stage.

With parliamentary elections due in 2018, the Freedom party is leading in 
opinion polls, with roughly one-third support. Van der Bellen has vowed to stop 
the formation of a Freedom party-led government, even if it were to win a 
general election. Such action could provoke a constitutional crisis.
 