
A year ago, we opened the National Videogame Arcade 
<http://gamecity.org/visit/> (NVA). We made a statement, creating a centre of 
gravity for the interpretation of games foreveryone by opening five floors of 
permanent space dedicated to them. It’s a home for videogames.


Now, supported by Arts Council England, we’re producing a new conference, 
Continue <http://gamecity.org/continue/>, aimed at bringing culture and 
videogames people together.

Even as I write that last phrase I squirm a bit. Videogames people are culture 
people, right? Videogames are culture! If anyone doubts this, you can prove it 
by pointing to the recent repositioning of them within the navigation of this 
very website.

The rise of videogames over the past 40 years has been as unstoppable and 
exciting as it has been confusing and chaotic. They can be potent and 
remarkable new modes of expression, as well as harmful intoxicants of our 
children.

Why do the culture and games establishments even need to talk to each other? 
Survival

This remarkable new artform – the offspring of pretty much every media form 
that preceded it – has found its way into almost every part of our lives. For a 
form that’s so ubiquitous, progressive and so loved by many, it seems 
extraordinary that we still need to make a case for videogames as a key part of 
modern culture.

And yet, few cultural institutions have a policy to address or support them. 
Is it a resistance to the very idea of games as culture?

Of course, for anyone who is immersed in the fringes of contemporary 
videogames practice, it seems ludicrous to be even flagging this as an issue. 
Artists/developers are reinventing what we thought games can be with increasing 
regularity, pushing them toward new kinds of expression, theme and intention.

The work of Tale of Tales <http://tale-of-tales.com/>, Stephen Lavelle 
<http://www.increpare.com/>, Jason Rohrer 
<http://hcsoftware.sourceforge.net/jason-rohrer/> and Numinous Games 
<http://www.thatdragoncancer.com/#home> have all recently confounded what we 
thought games could be. Curators such asMatheson Marcault 
<http://mathesonmarcault.com/> and David Hayward <http://ympt.co.uk/> have 
pushed forward public awareness of this work with their innovative conference 
and festival platforms.

As well as the NVA, heritage institutions have started to find great success 
and engagement in the development of videogames as an intrinsic part of their 
interpretation strategy, not simply as marketing widgets. The American Museum 
of Natural History, in particular, has been pioneering this in its brilliant 
companion apps <http://www.amnh.org/apps/>. 


How should we support creativity?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2016/feb/05/how-should-we-support-creativity-susan-jones>
So, why should we even bother? Why do the culture and games establishments even
need to talk to each other? There are many answers, but the most compelling is 
the simplest – survival.

I was recently in an arts strategy meeting where an international consultant 
made the point that the culture sector cannot stand idly by and observe 
videogames culture growing. Audience expectations are changing in terms of the 
level of engagement they expect, the stimulation they receive and the terms and 
schedule under which they can access it. The sector cannot just stand by and 
observe this, because as the commentator observed, Rome is burning.

Videogames must also grow. The most exciting opportunity for cultural 
commissioners is to bring the modes and vocabulary of videogames into their 
world. As with all creative work, it becomes more interesting in direct 
proportion to the diversity of voices making it. I don’t mean that purely in an 
inclusive, equality of access kind of way. Fundamentally, more diversity equals 
less boring. Complex creation equals complex interpretation.

With the conference we’re bringing together leading practitioners from both 
sectors to stimulate new discussions about collaboration and policy. It’s a 
meeting of minds to help people understand the breadth of experience that 
videogames occupy, the unique vocabulary with which they can speak and the 
ever-changing nature of their form.

But critical understanding is only part of it. Continue will also be pragmatic 
– about what videogames can do and how they can do it: how are they 
commissioned? How much do they cost? How long do they take to make? While 
programmers understand the pathway to the commissioning and curation of 
cultural artefacts of many kinds, knowledge around games remains thin.

Having spent more than a decade in the company of games creators, I can 
confidently report that the industry is teeming with intelligent, creative, 
provocative people, all of whom speak the plural languages of culture with 
enthusiasm and ease. There are large swathes of videogames makers who are 
making culture and self-identify as artists.


Videogames speak culture with ever increasing fluency. The problem is 
that cultural policy doesn’t speak videogame – yet.

Iain Simons is director of the National Videogame Arcade 
<http://gamecity.org/visit/> and GameCity Festival 
<http://gamecity.org/festival/>

Continue <http://gamecity.org/continue/>, for which the Guardian Culture 
Professionals Network is a media partner,
takes place at the National Videogame Arcade on May 25/26

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 