
Here's one from the man bites dog school of journalism, courtesy of Ted 
Ditchburn and his merry men and women atNorth News <http://www.northnews.co.uk> 
in Newcastle upon Tyne. It caught my eye because they emailed it under the 
headline: Village blighted by 20 buses every hour.

This is so much the opposite of the usual village/bus story (There are none; 
the last one leaves at 1pm etc) that you need to know more. The village in 
question isHowden-le-Wear <http://www.communigate.co.uk/ne/hlewhistsoc/> in 
county Durham and the people there are genuinely complaining about too many 
buses trundling through.

How come? First, the launch of Go North East <http://www.simplygo.com>'s OK1 
service (natty name) two weeks ago added to the 1 and 1b buses already run by
Arriva <http://www.arriva.co.uk>which pass through the village en route to 
Darlington. The new bus goes through West Auckland rather thanShildon 
<http://www.nrm.org.uk>, like the 1s, but all three unite at Howden.
 Our photographer colleague spotted this yesterday in Bolton. Isn't the North 
interesting? Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Now Arriva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> has announced 
a third service, intended to be quicker, and using yet another variant on the 
number 1 â€“ the exciting sounding X1. It puts me in mind of the silver swoosh 
buses which fly between Leeds and Harrogate or the witchy ones round Pendle and 
that part of Lancashire.

Anyway, this means that Howden gets 20 buses an hour, or one every three 
minutes, and this is what they have to say about it. Peter Parnell, for 
instance:

Surely someone can see the madness of this. It's not good for the village and 
while we welcome a good bus service, there is no need for so many that are 
basically covering the same route.

John Bailey, Durham county  <http://www.durham.gov.uk/>councillor for the 
neighbourhood, argues that the village is actually getting congested, 
especially when buses slip behind time, as they inevitably do. He says:

Something needs to be done to address the unfairness of this situation and the 
bus companies should work together to make sure all routes are well covered. 
There are people in part of my ward who now have no social life because the 
buses don't run, while here in Howden the congestion is bad enough without more 
coming through.

Martin Harris from Go North East counters that feedback on the OK1 has been 
very positive while Arriva's spokesman hails the X1 as great news for the 
community. If there is any sort of redistribution,Bishop Middleham 
<http://www.british-history.ac.uk/report.aspx?compid=42621> has held up its 
hand for consideration.

Gail Hardy who lives there says that she has to get two buses to reach the 
builders' merchants inDurham <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/durham> where 
she has worked for 35 years. Even that means the earliest service makes her 
arrive an hour late.

I am now in the stressful situation of having to beg lifts from friends, 
colleagues and family and don't know how I am going to get to work oneday to 
the next.

Bring on the BM1.

Next from North News, if I have time: NAKED MEN IN 3,000 MILE PEDALO CHALLENGE 
FORCED TO TURN BACK.

Goodness.
 