
Vince Cable <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable> has become the 
most senior member of the government to criticise the billionaire boss of Boots 
for not paying UK taxes.

The Liberal Democrat business secretary said Stefano Pessina, the acting chief 
executive of Boots, had lost moral authority, in a sharply worded intervention 
that contrasted with the position taken by his Tory cabinet colleagues.

Pessina’s personal tax status, and that of Alliance Boots, has been a focus of 
attention since the weekend, when Pessinaaccused the Labour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/01/labour-boots-stefano-pessina-chuka-umunna-tax-uk>
 of promoting policies that would lead the country into catastrophe.

Speaking on Wednesday, Cable said: “I am afraid that the head of Boots lost 
quite a lot of moral authority once it was discovered he was lecturing 
political parties from the standpoint of paying his tax inMonaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/monaco>.

“We do want people to be paying their taxes if they are here and running 
businesses here. Certainly my party has always taken a strong view on non-dom 
taxation, that the regime for non-doms is too generous.”

Pessina lives in Monte Carlo, with an estimated fortune of £7.5bn. Boots was 
criticised by tax campaigners when it moved its formal tax residence from 
Britain to Switzerland following Messina’s private equity-backed buyout in 2007.

Last year, after US pharmacy chain Walgreens took over Alliance Boots, an 
attempt to move the headquarters from Chicago to Switzerland for tax reasonswas 
abandoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/06/walgreens-buys-alliance-boots-9bn-pounds>
 in the face of intense criticism from US lawmakers.

In an interview at the weekend, Pessina said Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> policies would not be helpful for 
business or the country. His comments drew fierce retaliation from Ed Miliband, 
who said people wouldn’t take kindly “to being told how to vote by someone who 
doesn’t pay his taxes”.

Boris Johnson, the Conservative mayor of London, said it was refreshing to 
hear business figures speak out. He said: “I have to say I find it a little bit 
disappointing that he doesn’t cough up for Britain ... I think it is a good 
thing if companies that earn great sums in Britain should pay their taxes in 
Britain.”

However, the chancellor, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, took the unusual step of 
providing a direct quote highlighting Pessina’s comments, although the Tories 
insisted they had nothing to do with the businessman’s comments.

Differences around the cabinet table have also been highlighted by the varying 
tones from Cable and Osborne on Greece’s debt crisis. Osborne has said the 
standoff between Greece and its eurozone creditors was “fast becoming the 
biggest risk to the global economy”. But Cable said the Greek situation – and 
knock-on risks for the UK economy – were less serious now.

Cable said: “I think it is less serious than it was a couple of years ago and 
the evidence for that is that the bond-yields for the countries in southern
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – Italy, Spain – are at 
UK levels, which suggests that investors don’t see the risk of serious 
contagion. But it would be stupid to ignore the risks ... If Greece is forced 
to leave [the eurozone] there would be very serious consequences.”

Cable also said any solution to Greece’s economic problems would require 
further debt relief, as well as economic reforms and action to tackle 
corruption.

The business secretary was speaking on the sidelines of an event aimed at 
encouraging the UK’s biggest companies to appoint more women to their 
boardrooms. He said companies had to go further to meet a target that25% of 
FTSE 100 directors should be female by the end of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/04/cable-women-boardroom-mandatory-quotas>
; the most recent statistics show the level at 22.8%.
 