
App: Vinspired <http://vinspired.com/about-us/iphone>

By: V, the National Young Volunteers Service <http://vinspired.com>

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>, iPod 
touch <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipod> and iPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad>.

What is it?

An app connecting charities and organisations with young people looking for 
volunteering placements. What better app could we have chosen this close to the 
season of goodwill!

Who is it by?

The National Young Volunteers Service is an independent charity dedicated to 
helping young people volunteer "in ways that matter to them". Its mission is to 
make volunteering opportunities diverse, compelling and easy to get involved 
with so that volunteering becomes, "a natural lifestyle choice for 16-25 year 
olds in England".

What does it promise?

The app essentially takes what's on Vinspired.com <http://vinspired.com/> 
(over 6,000 volunteering opportunities at over 550 voluntary organisations) 
onto a mobile platform.

How does it work?

Launch the app and type in your postcode or allow the app to search for your 
current location. Results for nearby volunteering opportunities are displayed 
on a Google map via pins placed on office locations. Click on a pin and you are 
given further information about the organisation and the volunteering vacancies 
it has on offer.

Is it easy to use?

Yup, it's incredibly straightforward, with one exception. If you download the 
app without visiting the website, you'll suddenly find that you can't log-in to 
Vinspired to book your placement because you do not have an account. 
Frustratingly, there is no click-through option to do this via the app, so 
you're best off visiting the site first and registering before using the app.

Once I'd done this (having to fib about my age in order to see how the process 
worked), I searched for placements near Brighton, where I live. It threw up a 
charity in Hassocks,CCHF All About Kids <http://www.cchf-allaboutkids.org.uk>, 
which organises residential trips to the countryside for disadvantaged children 
. The charity was looking for a residential activity volunteer. The volunteer 
would be living on-site, with meals and accommodation provided, working with 
children aged 7-12, with full training and support offered.

I clicked to register my interest and received an email from the V team with a 
message from CCHF asking me to apply via its website. I also received an email 
from CCHF almost immediately, asking me to apply.

So access to organisations is quick and geo-targeted, but more traditional 
forms of application are still required.

Is it fun?

It's certainly interesting to discover the sheer range and breadth of 
organisations that require young people to help them out, from small charities 
to cricket clubs. If younger people really do want something interesting to do 
in between studies or at evenings and/or weekends, it must be great fun to be 
able to find something quickly and easily.

Not only will it fill time, but volunteering for an organisation in need will 
no doubt look great on a young person's CV too.

Is it pretty?

It's certainly uncluttered. Maps are integrated well and Vinspired's modern 
logo mixed with a vibrant, purple-dominant colour scheme makes for an appealing 
app.

Should you download it?

The app essentially mimics an existing web service but by making it mobile 
Vinspired has made the process of volunteering much simpler â€“ and as a result 
has tailored the service more directly to the young people it seeks to attract.

Some results lack specifics (a few of my results failed to offer a start date 
for placements, for example) but this is more of a quibble than anything that 
should prevent you from downloading the app.

If you're a young person, you'll be helping people out at an organisation 
close to home, while also getting something worthwhile to put on your CV. 
Parents might even want to download it too, to find something (anything!) that 
might get their offspring off the sofa and doing something worthwhile.

Recommended.
 