
With tea dresses and high-waist denim dominating British women’s wardrobes for 
the past decade, it might seem paradoxical to put a date on the enthusiasm for 
vintage clothing. But in the week when the pioneeringBritish vintage company 
Rokit <http://www.rokit.co.uk/>celebrates its 30th anniversary, for the first 
time it seems that trends on the catwalk and in vintagewear have converged.

It is a happy accident that Rokit’s anniversary has fallen at the same time as 
two looks currently dominate both menswear and womenswear:a new Gucci’s 1970s 
eccentricity <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gucci>and the sportswear 
referencing ofdesign collective Vetements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/mar/03/vetements-show-is-cathedral-of-raw-energy>
.

“For the first time we are seeing vintagewear set the agenda,” says Eibhleann 
McMahon, the head of creative at Rokit. “The catwalk doesn’t determine fashion, 
and vintage doesn’t determine fashion, but both are having an influence on each 
other.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fvintagewear-takes-over-the-catwalk-with-help-from-amal-clooney-and-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F556f39a7a201af52d5dc137291ecbac4b8994b5d%2F1081_192_1634_2043%2F1634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vintagewear%20takes%20over%20the%20catwalk%20.%E2%80%89.%E2%80%8A.%20with%20help%20from%20Amal%20Clooney%20and%20Alexa%20Chung&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fvintagewear-takes-over-the-catwalk-with-help-from-amal-clooney-and-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vintagewear%20takes%20over%20the%20catwalk%20.%E2%80%89.%E2%80%8A.%20with%20help%20from%20Amal%20Clooney%20and%20Alexa%20Chung&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fvintagewear-takes-over-the-catwalk-with-help-from-amal-clooney-and-alexa-chung%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F556f39a7a201af52d5dc137291ecbac4b8994b5d%2F1081_192_1634_2043%2F1634.jpg>
 Fashion historian and writer Amber Jane Butchart at London Fashion Week 
Photograph: Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
While Parisian brand Vetements might reference a more current look – 
“sportswear”, “oversized” and “1990s” being the buzzwords – the Gucci look has 
been in-store for years, but is only now mirroring what vintage shops have been 
selling for some time.

“The only difference,” explains McMahon, “is that rather than going the whole 
hog, people are buying a key 1970s piece – a shirt or trousers – to slot into a 
pre-existing outfit.”

For many customers with a keen eye on style rather than fashion, vintage shops 
have been a primary source for one-off pieces.

Amber Jane Butchart, a fashion historian who is working on a BBC Radio 4 
documentary on vintage clothes, thinks the 2000s marked a key time for what she 
calls “vintage acceptance”, when the look shifted from alternative to 
mainstream.

She cites Winona Ryder in vintage Pauline Trigére at the Oscars in 2000 and 
Julia Roberts in vintage Valentino in 2001 as pivotal moments. “Seeing A-list 
stars on the red carpet helped to transition secondhand clothes into vintage 
style,” says Butchart. Since then, Kate Moss andAlexa Chung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung> have championed vintagewear, 
bolstering the look in the UK.

William Vintage <https://williamvintage.com/featured>, a high-end supplier, is 
a case in point. Huge in the 2000s, it has experienced a resurgence thanks to 
Amal Clooney, its current muse, who regularly defers to vintage – she recently 
wore a William Vintage cream Balenciaga coat from 1964 to meet the Pope in Rome.

Rokit opened in Camden, north London, in 1986. Initially a market stall, it 
now has four shops and, arguably, a legacy that saw vintage shops selling old, 
used and pre-worn clothes grow from alternative to destination stores. Early 
sales relied on denim, although interest has been consistently high in the past 
30 years, with modern brands attempting to ape vintage styles from the last 
four decades. “Vintage denim collectors are obsessed with patina – the look of 
age,” explains Butchart. “This manifested itself in fashion in ‘distressed’ 
jeans created to look like they’ve already been worn. This reached extremes 
with high-contrast white face, and ready-ripped jeans or cut-off shorts.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fvintagewear-takes-over-the-catwalk-with-help-from-amal-clooney-and-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c427223796205f7ba7b42da6ca51bbd2565130f%2F577_451_2085_2604%2F2085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vintagewear%20takes%20over%20the%20catwalk%20.%E2%80%89.%E2%80%8A.%20with%20help%20from%20Amal%20Clooney%20and%20Alexa%20Chung&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fvintagewear-takes-over-the-catwalk-with-help-from-amal-clooney-and-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vintagewear%20takes%20over%20the%20catwalk%20.%E2%80%89.%E2%80%8A.%20with%20help%20from%20Amal%20Clooney%20and%20Alexa%20Chung&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fvintagewear-takes-over-the-catwalk-with-help-from-amal-clooney-and-alexa-chung%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c427223796205f7ba7b42da6ca51bbd2565130f%2F577_451_2085_2604%2F2085.jpg>
 Gucci Resort show, London Photograph: Pixelformula/REX/Shutterstock 
​The most sought-after pieces now at Rokit and Beyond Retro are currently 
bombers, military jackets, patchwork, denim and Champion sportswear, all of 
which are heavily referenced in Vetements. “People are looking for archetypal 
versions of what is in fashion now,” said Butchart.

Beyond Retro’s vintage clothing buyer, Scarlett Eden, agrees: “Branded 
sportswear is getting bigger and bigger,” she says, crediting the look to 
designers such as the Russian Gosha Rubchinskiy.

​Before this, vintage shops relied more on pockets of scene-based fashion. 
McMahon describes “all-black tailoring, rock’n’roll, post-war womenswear” as 
some of the more recent trends. But as we move into an age of Blitz Spirit 
fatigue, helped perhaps by the mainstreaming of these trends (with shops such 
as Joy and Oliver Bonas jumping on the bandwagon with their takes on 
pseudo-vintage – modern tea dresses ad nauseum), people are looking for a more 
authentic look. Butchart thinks this reversal has helped to extend the 
longevity of vintage. “Buying new products that have been made to look old or 
used is something of a fashion paradox that has been bolstered by the 
popularity of vintage.” In the light of this, it seems odd that vintage fashion 
is not experiencing a resurgence saleswise – on the contrary, as the trend for 
1940s printed pieces spiked last decade and the 1990s saw increased demand for 
60s and 70s modwear with the Britpop movement, “stock is now decreasing – 
obviously”, explains McMahon.

In a bid, perhaps, to rebrand themselves, some vintage shops have taken to 
“remodelling” pieces – using old fabrics to create new items. Still, while 
sales have plateaued, the vintage customer-base has expanded. Vintage shops 
were predominantly the preserve of women. Now, bolstered by these newer trends, 
it’s half men and half women.

“Now that we have customers looking for a specific thing, people are coming in 
for the first time,” says McMahon. “People don’t see it as dead people’s 
clothes any more.”
 