
This week kicks off with a couple of unexpected encounters. When the TV host 
Conan O’Brien offers to help one of his employeesto learn to drive 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Za8BtLgKv8>, she doesn’t expect his wacky 
road sense and disrespect for other drivers. The road trip gets even more 
bizarre when they pick up two passengers - Ice Cube and Kevin Hart. Viewers of 
a sensitive nature should look away …

Meanwhile the judges of American Idol were surprised when Kanye West turned up 
at the auditions <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mulvnLin22g&feature=youtu.be> 
in San Francisco with his pregnant wife Kim Kardashian. West rapped an a 
capella version of his hit song Gold Digger, which included a name drop for 
Jennifer Lopez. Lopez and her fellow judges Keith Urban and Harry Connick Jr 
gave him a golden ticket through the first round.

A newly released video of Taylor Swift celebrates her attendance 
record-breaking exhibition <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OGDkg3QiJmk>at the 
Grammy Museum with a performance of Wildest Dreams, from her fifth studio album 
1989, at the Clive Davis Theatre in September.

With Game of Thrones returning to the screen in April, it’s all ears to the 
ground for plot and character secrets for season six. Natalie Dormer talks to 
Jimmy Kimmel abouther role <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tb_6tlLcMco> as 
Margaery Tyrell and reveals she avoids spoilers by only reading the parts of 
the script that involve her character.

Finally, there’s nothing like a big finish and when rockers Mötley Crüe played 
their last show at the Staples Centre in Los Angeles audience members made 
plenty of recordings to capture the long goodbye, includingNikki Sixx says 
goodbye <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mjvlTjUjgg0>. Our chart features the 
moment when Tommy Lee’s Cruecifly fails, leaving him stranded anddrumming 
upside down <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yrihqSeaUKw>. Great musicians 
never miss a beat …
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmulvnLin22g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmulvnLin22g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmulvnLin22g&media=>
 Kanye West’s American Idol audition 
1) Ice Cube, Kevin Hart And Conan Help A Student Driver - CONAN on TBS 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Za8BtLgKv8>
The wrong steer

2) The Kanye West Audition - American Idol 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mulvnLin22g>
Rapping it up

3) Taylor Performs “Wildest Dreams” at the Grammy Museum 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OGDkg3QiJmk>
Swift success


4) Jack Sock v Leighton Hewitt. Sportsmanship at its absolute best 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q24vr-nwpbI>
Serves as a lesson

5) President Obama cries during gun violence speech 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ijFPMrptrwE>
Barack’s tears


6) Natalie Dormer Talks Game of Thrones Season 6 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tb_6tlLcMco>
Plotting but giving little away


7) Craig David ‘Love Yourself’ Justin Bieber cover Live Lounge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GzgDnoojFW4>
Garage pumped up

8) Samuel L. Jackson Tries Out Some New Catchphrases 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qXbI7NGc1_w>
I say! 


9) Tommy Lee’s Cruecifly Fail on Final Show 12/31/15 - Stops Working During 
Drum Solo Motley Crue <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yrihqSeaUKw>
Stick-y moment

10) Come Dine With Me Bad Loser <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5nboM946IB4>
Leaving a sour taste



 <https://www.youtube.com/user/CNN>


 <https://www.youtube.com/user/JimmyKimmelLive>


 <https://www.youtube.com/user/americanidol>


 <https://www.youtube.com/user/teamcoco>


 <https://www.youtube.com/user/RockRebelClothing>


 <https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCMtFAi84ehTSYSE9XoHefig>


 <https://www.youtube.com/user/whereswardie>


 <https://www.youtube.com/user/taylorswift>
 