
Virgin Radio has unveiled its presenter lineup, including former radio DJ 
Edith Bowman <http://www.edithbowman.com/about>, ahead of the station’s return 
to the airwaves next month.

Bowman has been signed up to front the digital station’s breakfast show, and 
is thought to be the only solo female host of a breakfast show on national 
radio.

“I feel honoured to be given the responsibility and can’t wait to get 
started,” said Bowman. “Being the only solo female breakfast show host on 
national radio is an exhilarating opportunity. Being back on the radio five 
days a week is going to be a lot of fun, and a place where I can share my 
passion for music and film with a wonderful audience.”

Virgin Radio, which is to launch nationally on 30 March, has also signed up 
former Big Brother winner turned broadcaster Kate Lawler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/06/bauer-purchase-planet-rock-affect-kerrang>
 who will front an afternoon show.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fvirgin-radio-announces-lineup-including-edith-bowman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e260f48c1cf050177eb839a0771adfdd3591151%2F53_55_1187_712%2F1187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Virgin%20Radio%20announces%20lineup%20including%20Edith%20Bowman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fvirgin-radio-announces-lineup-including-edith-bowman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Virgin%20Radio%20announces%20lineup%20including%20Edith%20Bowman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fvirgin-radio-announces-lineup-including-edith-bowman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e260f48c1cf050177eb839a0771adfdd3591151%2F53_55_1187_712%2F1187.jpg>
 Virgin Radio’s new lineup with Kate Lawler, Matt Richardson, Tim Cocker, Edith 
Bowman and Jamie East. Photograph: Virgin Radio 
The mid-morning slot will be fronted by Jamie East, founder of the now defunct 
gossip website Holy Moly 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=holy+moly+closes+guardian&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&gws_rd=cr&ei=U_W6VsLBB8KAU-7epPAF>
.


Tim Cocker, the former Xfm Manchester DJ who was replaced by Chris Moyles 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/whats-on/xfm-breakfast-presenter-tim-cocker-10002842>
 when the station was rebranded Radio X and taken national, will take on the 
evening show.


Matt Richardson, former host of ITV2’s X Factor companion show Xtra Factor, 
has been given the drivetime slot.

The Virgin Radio brand is making a return to the airwaves after UTV Media, 
parent company of TalkSport,struck a licensing deal with Richard Branson’s 
Virgin Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/29/virgin-radio-could-return-to-airwaves-in-digital-reboot>
.


The station is being launched by Sound Digital, which is owned by TalkSport 
parent UTV Media,Absolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> owner Bauer Media and 
transmission company Arqiva.

The Virgin Radio brand disappeared from the UK in 2008 when the station, once 
owned by Chris Evans, was rebranded Absolute Radio by its then new owner, the 
Times of India Group. The station has since been bought byBauer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer>.
 