
A number of Nigerian journalists were mugged - or rather they were victims of 
pickpockets and thieves - in Sekondi last Monday. Today it could be the turn of 
their footballers. IfNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team> lose to Mali, 
clubs such as Everton, Portsmouth, Newcastle, Lazio and Getafe will have the 
bonus of key players returning early - and Berti Vogts will be looking for 
another job.

Tempers became very heated in the new Sekondi stadium before Nigeria's opening 
game,a 1-0 defeat to Ivory Coast <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VEYoEztiYJM>. 
There was a shouting match in the press overflow area when paying spectators 
tried to claim seats taken by scribes, most of them following the Super Eagles. 
There was next to no crowd control in the press area - but there shouldn't 
really have been a crowd in there to control - and it was even worse down at 
the post-match press conference. "Some of us lost handsets, had money stolen 
because of the situation," one of the journalists complained in a bizarre CAF 
press conference yesterday, in which reporters made a long list of complaints 
about working conditions and CAF's head media man thanked everybody for their 
contribution. No one is expecting much in the way of improvement, be the 
problem transport, ticketing, freeloaders pinching seats, endless queues, lack 
of information, overcrowding or the inadequacies of the local organising 
committees.

The Nigerians appear, to a man (and the one woman I spoke to), to believe that 
the Super Eagles will win comfortably. For the bombasts among them, who are 
many, it is an easy prediction; but even the more considered, more thoughtful 
judges all seem to think victory is a foregone conclusion. I hope they're 
right, because a Ghana-Nigeria quarter-final would be unmissable (assuming 
Ghana manage to top their group, which, after yesterday's performance against 
Namibia, is not certain), and no tournament is the same without the Super 
Eagles. But they don't look so super this year and I fear the worst.

Every Nigerian seems to think he would be a better coach than Berti. The 
German put on a brave face yesterday but he knows he has to win not just 
today's game, but the Cup of Nations itself, if he is to appease his critics. 
It did not help that his boss at the Nigerian FA, Bolaji Ojo-Oba, said a month 
before this tournament: "There are absolutely no excuses for failure."

Berti will have to get his selection right this time. On Monday he started 
Kanu, which was unnecessarily risky, and wasted a key asset, John Utaka's pace, 
by playing him in the wrong position. The defenders played well, but the 
midfield were too weak and were given the runaround by Yaya Tour√©. Will they 
find a way past Seydou Keita and Mahamadou Diarra?

Given Ghana's long-held dislike of Nigeria, the local fans will be happy to 
see them go home. But they'd be even happier to send them on their way 
themselves, by beating them in the knockouts. It's a tough one to call - unless 
you're a Nigerian.
 