
As a wave crashes on to the bow of a US Coast Guard boat, three models strike 
a pose, gazing serenely across the choppy waters in barely there dresses. It's 
an arresting image, as is that of the National Guard delivering food parcels to 
a nearby hospital while supermodelJoan Smalls 
<http://nymag.com/fashion/models/jsmalls/joansmalls/> leans on an 
infrantryman's shoulder and shows off a Proenza Schouler leather crocheted 
jacket and skirt. This isAmerican Vogue's Storm Troupers  
<http://www.vogue.com/magazine/article/storm-troupers-hurricane-sandy-service-men-and-women/#1>
shoot, inspired by – and featuring – members of the emergency forces.And it has 
not gone down too well, 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2013/01/16/vogue_s_hurricane_sandy_first_responders_photo_spread_just_try_not_to_cringe.html>
 with many commentators calling it tasteless.

The editions of Vogue around the world have form for devising their 
photoshoots with, shall we say, "current affairs" in mind. There was the 2007 
Italian Vogueshoot inspired by the Iraq war, featuring models grappling with 
soldiers <http://www.mymodernmet.com/profiles/blogs/make-love-not-war-steven> 
in a scene that Guardian writer Emine Saner described as looking like
"prostitutes brought to an army camp as entertainment" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2007/sep/24/fashion.photography>. 
Italian Vogue was also responsible fora 24-page spread in 2010 that saw models 
doused in "oil" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/18/fashions-most-tasteless-moments>
, in the spirit of the Deepwater Horizon spill. That's not to mention the 
photoshoot inVogue Paris featuring children in makeup 
<http://fashionista.com/2011/07/is-this-gorgeous-10-year-old-french-model-the-next-big-thing-or-is-it-just-creepy/>
, orwomen being throttled by men 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2204521/Is-domestic-violence-Vogue-Anger-choking-cover-featuring-Stephanie-Seymour.html>
 in Vogue Hommes. So you see, with the Storm Troupers shoot they're just at it 
again, aren't they?

Or maybe not.

Of all the global disasters to choose from, the fashion industry has been 
particularly drawn to Hurricane Sandy. First, it's a relatively apolitical 
disaster. Celebrities risk nothing by coming out in support of the cause. The
Re/Create New York <http://www.recreatenewyork.org/> project, for example, 
offers "a charitable platform for creators to give back", which roughly 
translates as "the rich and the famous offloading their old trainers to be 
auctioned to the highest bidder". Marc Jacobs and Donna Karan are among the 
designers who have donated, as has Kate Moss,who signed a book about herself 
with the words "Fuck you, Sandy" (current bid $2,358 (£1,475) if you're 
interested) <http://www.recreatenewyork.org/kate-moss>. With its sleek, sober 
website featuring the handsome headshots of our planet's A-Listers, Re/Create 
didn't just come up with a way for celebrities to get involved in the cause 
without actually doing anything, they made itthe place to be seen.

Another reason the fashion world has been so drawn to Sandy is the American 
fashion industry's actual proximity to the hurricane's path, resulting in a 
number of initial drives to donate clothes or sales profit to the Sandy 
charitable funds.Fashion Girls for Humanity 
<http://fashiongirlsforhumanity.org/> raised more than $120,000, while the LVMH 
Group donated $1m to theMayor's Fund to Advance New York City 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/fund/html/home/home.shtml>.

Which brings us back to Vogue. Unlike previous controversial shoots, there is 
more meaning behind Annie Leibovitz's images than first meets the eye. They are 
not scenes of catastrophe with a model hitching her skirt in the general 
direction of devastation. That was left to Brazillian modelNana Gouvêa 
<http://latino.foxnews.com/latino/news/2012/11/06/sandy-supermodel-nana-gouvea-responds-to-photo-shoot-outrage/>
 , who looked out of the window, saw some crushed cars, thought: "Hello Mr 
Opportunity!", and staged an impromptu fashion shoot mid-disaster for the aptly 
titled online magazineEGO 
<http://ego.globo.com/famosos/noticia/2012/10/nana-gouvea-registra-em-fotos-danos-do-furacao-sandy-em-ny.html>
. As she found out in the subsequent furore, getting your pose on next to some 
wreckage will only make people wince.

But while photographing Karlie Kloss on the Bellvue neonatal ward might seem 
incongruous, the picture does at least include the medical staff who work 
there. All the pictures include members of the emergency services, and their 
stories about how Sandy unfolded for them.

The reaction to Vogue's shoot suggests that people think the fashion world has 
no business getting involved in a situation as serious as Sandy. But this isn't 
a drive-by interest on the part of Vogue; while working with the CDFA, the 
magazine helped to raise $1.7m (£1.06m) for the relief effort. If it wants to 
photograph the Air NYPD and put those men in its magazine, it has earned the 
right.
 