
This week, the US Department of Justice and the state of Texas started 
arguments in the first of what will be asummer-long dance 
<http://lubbockonline.com/local-news/2014-07-13/are-voter-id-laws-solution-or-problem-texas-court-takes-question#pq=SJxjWa>
 between the two authorities over voting rights. There are three suits being 
tried in two districts over gerrymandering and Texas’s voter identification law 
– both of which are said to be racially motivated. In its filing, the DoJ 
describes the law as “exceed[ing] the requirements imposed by any other state” 
at the time that it passed. If the DoJ can prove the arguments in its filing, 
it won’t just defeat an unjust law: it could put the fiction of “voter fraud” 
to rest once and for all.

These battles, plus parallel 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/07/06/us/college-students-claim-voter-id-laws-discriminate-based-on-age.html>
cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/06/north-carolina-voter-id-jim-crow-challenge>
 proceedingin North Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/09/north-carolina-voter-recalls-jim-crow-tactics-testimony>
, hinge on proving that the states acted with explicitly exclusionary intent 
toward minority voters – a higher standard was necessary prior to the Supreme 
Court’s gutting of Section 3 of the Voting Rights Act (VRA) back in January. 
Under Section 3, the DoJ had wide latitude to look at possibleconsequences of 
voting regulation before they were even passed – the “preclearance” provision. 
Ironically, because the states held to preclearance had histories of racial 
discrimination, some of the messier aspects of the laws’ current intentions 
escaped comment.


But meeting that higher standard of explicit exclusionary intent comes with 
the opportunity to show some of the many skeptical Americans the ugly racism 
behind Republican appeals to “fairness” and warnings about fraud. Progressives 
have tried, and mostly failed, to show the institutional racism underpinning 
the sordid history behind voter ID laws; that may have been too subtle. In 
courts in Texas and North Carolina, the DoJ will make the jump from accusations 
that laws have a racialimpact to straight-up calling voter ID laws racist.


This ought to be interesting. 


The DoJ filing in Texas lays it all out pretty clearly 
<http://www.justice.gov/iso/opa/resources/7472013822155117860058.pdf>, putting 
the voter ID law in context of a concerted legislative strategy to deny 
representation to the state’s growing Hispanic population, including 
Republicans advancing more and more aggressive voter ID bills over the years. 
The filing points to the anti-immigrant rhetoric that laced the floor debates 
over the law, and to the measures taken by the Republican-controlled state 
house to limit the participation of Democratic minority lawmakers in 
considering or amending the legislation (the bill was heard in front of a 
special committee selected by the governor, on an expedited schedule). And, the 
DoJ notes, lawmakers produced “virtually no evidence during or after enactment 
of SB 14 that in-person voter impersonation – the only form of election fraud 
addressed by the identification requirements of SB 14 – was a serious problem.”


Perhaps the most significant piece of context in the voter ID suit is how 
Texas’s voter ID law came on the heels of the redistricting that the DoJ claims 
was also racially motivated. In the redistricting cases, DoJ’s allegations of 
malicious intent have been helped along by the admission of the state that it 
had malicious political intent. The Texas attorney general, Greg Abbott, chose 
as hisdefense 
<http://sblog.s3.amazonaws.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/Texas-reply-on-Sec.-3-of-VRA-8-5-13.pdf>
 in that case what only can be called the Lesser Evil Strategy – stating up 
front that the state’s GOP legislators had ulterior motives, but not the ones 
that the VRA outlaws:

[R]edistricting decisions were designed to increase the Republican Party’s 
electoral prospects at the expense of the Democrats ... [They] were motivated 
by partisan rather than racial considerations and the plaintiffs and DOJ have 
zero evidence to prove the contrary.

Abbott’s smugness – and his apparent faith in partisanship as a permissible 
and distinct form of discrimination – will take center stage as the DoJ presses 
on with both suits. In court, Abbott will be asked to prove his ignorance of 
demographics for the very state in which he is currently running for governor. 
Out of court, other GOP defenders of the law will have to do more or less the 
same. And they will need to defend the outrageous details of the law – such has 
how a concealed carry permit is a permissible form of voter IDbut a 
federally-issued Medicare card carried by an elderly woman is not 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/texas-officials-won-92-year-old-texas-woman-voter-id-article-1.1799344>
.

Some people of Texas may support the kind of bullying Abbott has prepared to 
defend, and most progressive activists are hardened to it, but I think average 
Americans hate it. Putting malice under a national spotlight might be the best 
way to turn people against voter ID laws in general.


Right now, Americans support the idea of voter ID laws by huge margins: polls 
show favorable attitudes toward a generic “ID requirement” to be between70 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/206300-poll-70-percent-support-voter-id-laws>
 and80 
<http://www.newsmax.com/Newsfront/voter-identification-laws-poll/2014/03/25/id/561643/>
%. Approval exists across all demographic groups – even among black voters (51 
<http://newsone.com/3014390/poll-most-black-voters-support-voter-id-laws/>%), 
one of the groups that is, of course, disproportionately disenfranchised by 
these laws.

But the reasons that the public supports such laws aren’t the same as the 
GOP’s reasons for pursuing them: Republicans want to prevent specific types of 
people from voting; the American public wants voting to be fair. That’s why 
conservatives have had to hammer so hard on the false narrative of “voter 
fraud” – to convince everyone that it’s what the laws are really about.


Add context to the “ID requirement” poll question that Americans get behind, 
though, and public support changes dramatically. Asurvey 
<http://www.surveyusa.com/client/PollPrint.aspx?g=8c5c6269-5692-483a-a5f0-9662c4e5567e&d=0>
 in North Carolina (taken as the state was considering taking up an amendment 
on the issue) found initial support for voter ID to be 71%. Pollsters then 
drilled further down and came up with numbers that speak to a truly democratic 
impulse:

 * 72% say it’s wrong to pass laws that make it harder for certain people to 
vote.

 * 62% say they oppose a law that makes it harder for people of one party to 
vote.

 * 74% say there should be demonstrated problems before legislators apply a 
fix. 
If nothing else, these results suggests that Abbott’s argument that supposedly 
party-based redistricting isn’t the free pass – at least, from the public’s 
standpoint, if not the court’s – that he thinks it is.

In North Carolina, pollsters found that support for the law decreased 
<http://www.phillytrib.com/news/do-people-know-what-voter-id-means.html> as the 
2012 election neared and voters started to pay attention and become educated on 
the issue. Voting rights advocates filled yet another suit based on 
disenfranchising young voters, which could make afurther difference 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/catherine-rampell-republicans-are-cutting-millennials-off-at-the-polls/2014/07/07/c3bbd132-060e-11e4-a0dd-f2b22a257353_story.html>
. (Way to keep pissing off millennials, GOP! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/14/gop-self-destruction-millennials-conservatives-backlash>
)

That context effect is true nationwide. A different survey 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/david-c-wilson/public-opinion-on-voter-i_b_1683873.html>
 found that informing respondents that “Opponents of voters ID laws argue they 
can actually prevent people who are eligible to vote from voting” brought 
support for voter ID down by 12 points.

Pollsters have not publicly investigated whether Texan voters would show a 
similar shift, though it could be significant that support in the state for 
voter ID hasremained 
<http://www.texastribune.org/2014/02/26/uttt-poll-texans-narrowly-favor-immigration-overha/>
 at around 66% for thepast 
<http://www.texastribune.org/2012/10/31/uttt-poll-economy-immigration-top-texas-issues/>
 two years, less than its support nationwide. Of course, 77% of Texasbelieve 
<http://www.newswise.com/articles/texas-tech-survey-abbott-to-win-texas-governor-voter-id-law-didn-t-cause-problems-and-texans-split-on-gay-marriage>
 “voter ID laws are mainly used to prevent fraud,” an alternate-reality bubble 
that attention to these cases may just yet pop.

It’s the Department of Justice that’ll have to bring this to pass. The GOP has 
always easily waved away “systemic” racism charges, like those made under the 
non-gutted VRA, as either outright inventions or the result of looking for 
equal outcomes rather than equal opportunities. Making clear the racistintent 
of voter ID laws will bring the discussion back to where it belongs: on equal 
opportunities, in the voting booth.
 