
It was predictable that the sad death of the Sunday Mirror's defence 
correspondent Rupert Hamer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/10/afghanistan-journalist-rupert-hamer>
 would make headline news – he was the first British journalist to die in this 
Afghanistan conflict and also the first to have died on a foreign assignment 
sinceTerry Lloyd was killed in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/mar/24/broadcasting.guardianobituaries> 
in March 2003. His editor Tina Weaver wrote a warm eulogy describing him as 
"fine and fearless". What was astounding was the reaction of many journalists, 
who seem to have woken up for the first time to the grim toll of their 
colleagues dying every year in the cause of the citizens' right to know.

For many years the International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) has been 
publishing on the first of Januarythe list of journalists killed 
<http://africa.ifj.org/en/articles/2009-leaves-one-of-worst-records-for-targeted-killings-of-journalists-says-ifj>
 in the past year, but it's rare for commentators to show the slightest 
interest. Last year was one of the deadliest years on record, with the IFJ 
listing 137 journalists and media workers killed across the world. Only a few 
newspapers, among themthe Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jan/05/governments-urged-do-more-media-killings>
, bothered to report it. Imagine if these were killed politicians or killed 
policemen. In almost every corner of the globe, journalists continue to be 
targeted, brutalised and killed. Some say they may have been in the wrong place 
at the wrong time. But journalists have a duty to be on the spot when news is 
in the making.

Why is the British media so uninterested in this slaughter? Is it because the 
killed journalists are not, in their majority, British, or famous war 
correspondents? More than 300 journalists perished in the killing fields of 
Iraq – most of them local journalists. The global media community barely 
noticed their names, as they have become mere statistics. Another300 
journalists have lost their lives in Russia 
<http://www.ifex.org/russia/2009/06/24/partial_justice/> since 1993. Apart from 
the murder ofAnna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>, gunned down in 2006, 
which made the headlines as she was internationally known for her courageous 
journalism, the rest of the killed journalists are not even recognised 
statistics. With a death toll like this, one would expect newspapers to embrace 
the plight of journalists and publish one of those seminal front pages with 
mugshots and human stories.

The most authoritative account of killed journalists has been an investigation 
by theInternational News Safety Institute (INSI) <http://www.newssafety.org/>, 
a body set up jointly by the IFJ and international media organisations, which 
made a thorough analysis of deaths of journalists going back 10 years in 
conjunction with Cardiff University. It found that between January 1996 and 
June 20061,000 journalists and support staff have died 
<http://tinyurl.com/yd2lvoa> trying to report the news – an average of two a 
week. Contrary to common belief, most are not killed in war, and most are not 
foreign correspondents. Only one in four died in armed conflict and the great 
majority fell in peace time in their own countries, attempting to cover serious 
issues such as politics, crime or corruption. Two thirds of the fallen 
journalists were murdered – silenced because they tried to expose wrongdoings.

On Monday Audrey Gillan wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/jan/11/rupert-hamer-death-embed-risks>
 a moving comment about the death of Rupert Hamer and her experience of being 
an embedded journalist. She said "… his loss has sent shudders through the 
journalistic community and it may indeed provoke a reassessment of what it 
means to embed". Her piece may open a debate about the dangers of embedding 
journalists, something many unions and the IFJ have been warning against. But 
should not the debate be about the most shocking fact that killers of 
journalists almost always get away with it? The INSI's inquiry found that in 
two-thirds of the cases "killers were not even identified, and probably never 
will be", demonstrating that in many countries, murder has become the easiest, 
cheapest and most effective way to silence troublesome reporting.

Bob Ainsworth, the defence secretary, reacted to Hamer's death by praising his 
bravery and professionalism. But has any journalist asked Ainsworth what his 
government has done to help end this culture of impunity? The UN's security 
council itself unanimously passed resolution 1738 emphasising the 
responsibilities of governments to end impunity and prosecute those 
responsible. But since that resolution was adopted, it has been gathering dust 
in the face of total apathy from the council's members, including the UK. 
According to INSI, some 347 journalists and support staff have died around the 
world since the UN landmark call for action.

The slaying of 31 journalists 
<http://www.abs-cbnnews.com/nation/12/23/09/journalists-hold-demonstrations-maguindanao-massacre-victims>
 last November in Maguindanao province in the Philippines was well reported. 
But how many journalists made the connection between those murders and the 
rampant culture of impunity tolerated by the Filipino government? In all, 106 
journalists have met a violent death since President Arroyo was elected in 
2001. As journalists, we should all be demanding that the UK government takes 
what action it can to ensure that UN resolutions forcing governments to hold 
murderers to account are properly implemented.

No one should any more plead ignorance of the scale and ignorance of this 
slaughter. Is it too much to ask that British journalists should wake up and 
champion the cause of their colleagues who are killed in cold blood every year 
across the world?
 