
Train services across Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> will come 
to a halt on Monday as train drivers strike in a row over terms and conditions.


Members of Aslef at Arriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> Trains Wales will walk 
out for 24 hours, causing travel chaos on the first day back to work after the 
festive break.

The company said all its services were expected to be cancelled 
<http://www.arrivatrainswales.co.uk/> because of the strike and some early 
morning trains could also be disrupted on Tuesday.

Arriva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> said: “We deeply 
regret this disruption and continue to do all we can to avert strike action, 
however we are advising customers to make alternative travel arrangements for 
Monday January 4 and to check their travel plans for Tuesday morning, January 5.

“An indefinite train driver overtime ban is also currently in force which may 
impact some timetabled services until the dispute is resolved.”

Gareth Thomas, HR director for Arriva Trains Wales, said: “We are extremely 
disappointed that the train drivers unions have not accepted our latest offer 
of improvements to terms, conditions and pay for their members, and that they 
have opted to take industrial action, even though we submitted a revised 
proposal to them on December 23, following productive pre-Christmas talks.

“Directors at Arriva Trains Wales have been in contact almost every day with 
union officials in a bid to resolve this issue and stress the urgency of the 
situation if disruption to customers was to be avoided.”

The union denied company claims that a new offer had been made. 

Simon Weller, Aslef’s national organiser, who is leading negotiations for the 
drivers, said: “The company has not made a new offer. It has sent us a form of 
words. But it is not new and it is not an offer.”

Aslef said it was available for talks to resolve the dispute but added there 
was nothing at the moment to discuss. The pay side of the dispute has been 
accepted but Aslef claims the company is trying to “railroad through” changes 
to terms and conditions.
 