
Hi Graeme, what can you tell me about Wales Millennium Centre 
<http://www.wmc.org.uk/>?

It’s the national arts centre of Wales, built on an eight-acre site in Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/cardiff> Bay. WMC’s founding vision was to 
bring the best of the world to Wales and to showcase the best of Wales to the 
world – and this remains.

Poet Gwyneth Lewis’ inscription of the centre’s façade, Creu Gwir fel Gwydr o 
Ffwrnais Awen(“Creating truth like glass from inspiration’s furnace”) 
crystallises our role as a furnace of creativity.

The centre celebrated its 10th birthday at the end of last year – what’s been 
the key to its success?

It’s a fantastic building that people have taken to their hearts and we are 
very audience focussed; there’s a reason why we’ve been voted the UK’s most 
welcoming theatre twice. We have a diverse programme that includes the very 
best West End theatre shows, world-class opera fromWelsh National Opera 
<http://www.wno.org.uk/>, international dance and more. Perhaps most 
importantly, it’s a very well run business; public subsidy accounts for just 
18% of our income.

In what health is the arts and cultural scene in Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> right now?

There are incredibly talented people here. Wales is really on the cusp of 
something special. There’s a real DIY spirit that is perhaps most evident in 
the music scene, but it’s also embodied byNTW <http://nationaltheatrewales.org/>
, for example.


We do need to foster a more collaborative ethos, but this is true across the 
UK. Across the sector we need to ask ourselves what it would be like if we put 
audiences and young people first rather than our organisational self-interests. 
This is especially important for a national arts centre like ours.

I would like Wales to be bolder and more ambitious. There’s a big gap on our 
stages for homegrown product above the small to mid-scale, and we don’t export 
enough. Bafta-winning filmPride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/14/pride-film-review-mark-kermode-power-in-unlikely-union>
 was the sort of breakout Welsh hit on screen that we need to see more of on 
stage. This is where the we mean to make a difference.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVlXWPR7oPUE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVlXWPR7oPUE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVlXWPR7oPUE&media=>
 Silver Cities Rise: Derry~Londonderry UK City of Culture 2013 
What were the lessons you learned from heading up the artistic programme for 
Derry~Londonderry City of Culture 2013?


Derry~Londonderry had a particular set of opportunities and challenges, being 
on the periphery of Europe, with a very young population of only 110,000 and 
both a difficult past and a rich cultural history. The bid was won because the 
people thought it was time that its city changed the conversation about itself. 
The people therefore had to own the conversation. The biggest thing is to win 
them over – then you have to tell a big story.

This sounds obvious but it’s a very different thing to curating a festival or 
programming a venue; you can parachute a couple of things in but they need to 
fit a much bigger narrative. My job was to shape that across the year, but more 
than three-quarters of the programme was free and every single citizen had an 
opportunity to be in the show, even when we had international visitors such as
Hofesh Shechter <http://www.hofesh.co.uk/>. 

We vowed to take culture out onto the streets wherever possible and Derry was 
able to see itself on stage and invite the world to join in. By the way, after 
the galvanising effect of a bid process, people think that it’s all going to be 
rubbish. You have to ride that out and communicate – perhaps better than we did 
inDerry <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/derry>. I worked closely with Frank 
Cottrell Boyce. Expectations weren’t that high for the Opening Ceremony of 
London 2012. Thick skins are necessary.

What’s the power of the arts to regenerate and bring communities or places 
together?

This power was most evident to me during the City of Culture experience. Derry 
certainly emerged with greater confidence, pride and strength, and of course 
tourism increased. It’s increasingly difficult to make the case though when 
success is measured in metrics. How do you measure a “prosperous community” and 
how do you measure the confidence of a child? In an increasingly homogenised 
world, cities (and particularly capital cities such as Cardiff) need to tell a 
story about themselves that’s distinctive and exciting.

Culture is arguably the best weapon you have. While it may be necessary to 
disinvest to balance the books, we need to have a different conversation about 
culture and tell a different story. The onus is on artists and the creative 
sector as much as it is on the politicians and private sector. There is no 
business that doesn’t crave creative thinkers.

ETO general director: 'there is no traditional way of doing opera'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/feb/03/english-touring-opera-james-conway-interview>
What do you make of ETO chief James Conway’s comment that artistic directors 
who don’t know what money buys leave chaos in their wake?

I agree with James but his statement isn’t about just keeping your financial 
house in order. Particularly in an economic climate such as the one we’re in, 
it’s wrong to be less bold and ambitious. Nobody ever invested in a lack of 
ambition.Audiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/audiences> don’t 
give a monkey’s whether you’re having a hard time of it or not and don’t want a 
diet of two-handers on stage.

Your creative strategy should still drive the financial strategy because it’s 
the reason we’re all here. You need to be clever and get the balance right. Too 
often arts organisations count the pennies and then decide what to do with them 
rather than try to rally the money around big, exciting ideas.

What advice would you give to a young wannabe artistic director? 

At the outset in Derry~Londonderry, chief executive of the Culture Company 
Shona McCarthy pinned this on the wall: “We will achieve great things if none 
of us care who gets the credit.” It’s very hard but try not to by driven by 
your ego, especially if your job is an enabling one.

Get stuck in, volunteer and know that you don’t need permission to make things 
happen. I got involved initially in things where nobody got paid, but we got 
things done. Find kindred spirits too and help each other out. Stevie Wonder 
was probably a more talented musician than any of The Beatles…

As Muhammad Ali said: “Champions aren’t made in gyms. Champions are made from 
something they have deep inside them: a desire, a dream, a vision. They have to 
have last-minute stamina, they have to be a little faster, they have to have 
the skill and the will. But the will must be stronger than the skill.”

Have the will and be a tenacious git.

Graeme Farrow is artistic director of Wales Millennium Centre 
<http://www.wmc.org.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 