
The last time Aaron Ramsey wore a Wales shirt, he left the field to a standing 
ovation in Lille, euphoric after leading his country tovictory over Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/wales-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
 in the quarter-finals of Euro 2016 but devastated at picking up the yellow 
card that ruled him out of the last-four meeting with Portugal. Four months on 
and “Rambo” is back, not a moment too soon and with a glowing endorsement from 
Chris Coleman. “There’s not a team on the planet he couldn’t play for when he’s 
at his best,” the Wales manager said.

Ramsey, ruled out of the first three World Cup qualification fixtures after 
picking upa hamstring injury playing for Arsenal on the opening day of the 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/arsene-wenger-confirms-aaron-ramsey-is-struggling-with-his-hamstring-injury-arsenal>
, returns to the starting lineup against Serbia in a pivotal match for his 
country and with every Wales supporter hoping he can pick up where he left off 
in France, where his outstanding performances led to him being named in Uefa’s 
team of the tournament.

Jonny Williams will not film it if Wales celebrate a Scotland win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/jonny-williams-wales-scotland-film-england>
From Wales’ point of view, the timing could not be better. With two points 
squandered at home against Georgia last month andSerbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serbia>, the Group D leaders, arguably 
the biggest threat to their hopes of qualifying for the World Cup finals, Wales 
need their best players for a game that they cannot afford to lose.

Gareth Bale, as ever, will be the man Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> look to for inspiration in Cardiff 
on Saturday night as the Real Madrid forward closes in on Ian Rush’s 
goalscoring record (he is on 25, three behind), yet Coleman did not hesitate 
when asked whether Ramsey was “up there” when it comes to also being regarded 
as a world-class player.

“Oh yeah. Because I’ve seen him up close, in a tournament, I’ve seen the level 
he’s at,” the Wales manager said. “In my personal opinion there’s not a team on 
the planet he couldn’t play for when he’s at his best. That’s not a biased 
opinion because I’m a Welshman and we all love Rambo. I’m looking at it 
clinically. Playing in a tournament against the top teams, he was head and 
shoulders above. He could play for anyone.”

Coleman confirmed that Ramsey would start against Serbia but said he had a 
decision to make regarding how long he keeps the 25-year-old on the pitch, 
mindful of the fact that the player has started only once for Arsenal since 
returning from injury and not completed 90 minutes for club or country since 
Wales beat Northern Ireland in June. “He’s not played too much football for 
Arsenal,” Coleman said. “How long he’ll last, physically, we don’t know, but we 
do know he’s generally probably one of the fittest players playing football. 
Looking at the last two months, we have to see where he’s at.”

Gareth Bale still ‘one of the boys’ for Wales after £150m deal, says Joe Ledley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/gareth-bale-wales-150m-deal-joe-ledley-serbia>
Facing Serbia evokes bitter memories for Wales. They were beaten 6-1 in Serbia 
in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/sep/11/wales-serbia-world-cup-qualifier-report>
 on a chastening evening that left Coleman considering his future as manager 
and suffered a 3-0 defeat in Cardiff 12 months later – the last time Wales lost 
a competitive match at home. “That’s a scar – we can’t take it away,” Coleman 
said. “But I won’t be saying to the players we’ve got to make up for it; it’s 
gone. These are two different teams with different objectives and we’ve moved 
on.”

Wales, however, will look to the past in another respect. Ashley Williams, the 
captain, talked about trying to recreate the sort of atmosphere that carried 
themto a famous 1-0 victory over Belgium in June 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/12/wales-belgium-euro-2016-qualifying-match-report>
. “We understand that we need to give the fans something to go off and 
hopefully we can have another evening similar to that,” Williams said. “I still 
think maybe it was one of my best nights in football. The atmosphere was 
incredible – constant singing from the fans. They drove us on to get the win.

“Normally you are so involved in the game that you don’t take notice of what’s 
going on. But when they started to sing the anthem [in the second half] it was 
so loud that you had no choice but to just stop and understand what was going 
on. I remember at the final whistle Gunts [Chris Gunter] rugby tackled me to 
the floor and he was emotional. I thought: ‘I’ve never really seen this before 
on the pitch.’ That’s when I knew that night would be something I’d always 
remember.”

For Coleman, who seems likely to play Paul Dummett at centre-back in place of 
the injured Ben Davies, the visit of Serbia also represents a chance to sign 
off what has been a historic year in style. “We know how big it is,” he said. 
“We need to get the performance right and we need to make a statement because 
we don’t play again for a long time.”

Wales (3-4-2-1, probable): Hennessey; Chester, A Williams, Dummett; Gunter, 
Allen, Ledley, Taylor; Ramsey, Bale; Vokes

Serbia (3-4-2-1, probable): Stojkovic; Ivanovic, Maksimovic, Nastasic; 
Rukavina, Matic, Milivojevic, Tosic; Kostic, Tadic; Mitrovic

Referee A Mallenco (Spain)
 