
Wallabies coach Michael Cheika has called in Will Skelton and Matt Toomua for 
their first appearances of the year as he rejigs his second row and centres for 
the final Test against England in Sydney on Saturday.


With the Wallabies facing the prospect of a 3-0 series whitewash, locks Sam 
Carter and Rory Arnold have made way for Rob Simmons, who returns after being 
dropped for the second Test loss, and Skelton, who has not played for Australia 
since being injured early in last year’s World Cup.


England’s Maro Itoje in search of the perfect game for Eddie Jones’ invincibles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/22/england-maro-itoje-perfect-game-eddie-jones-australia-rugby-union>
Toomua replaces Samu Kerevi at inside centre as Cheika looks to add more 
playmaking and guile to his midfield for the Allianz Stadium Test after a lack 
of penetration in Melbourne last weekend.


Toomua makes his return after a six-week lay off due to a knee injury.


“Will Skelton and Matt Toomua are back to full fitness and have worked 
extremely hard for their opportunity this Saturday,” said Cheika.


Cheika named an extended nine-man bench which includes giant winger Taqele 
Naiyaravoro, who could get his first match for the Wallabies since debuting 
against the United States in a World Cup warm up match last season.


Western Force lock Adam Coleman also comes onto the extended bench and could 
become the first Tasmanian-born Test player in Australian rugby history if he 
is retained when Cheika finalises his 23-man match squad.


The Wallabies have been criticised heavily for the manner of their series 
defeat, with England nullifying the hosts’ running game with an iron-clad 
defence and composed match-management.

Cheika has said his team would stick to their game and they just needed to 
exploit their scoring opportunities when presented with them at Allianz Stadium.

“This Saturday’s match against England is a real opportunity for the Wallabies 
to show the character I know they have on the field, for all our fans to see,” 
Cheika said.

“We will continue to play rugby in our attacking style and we’ll be aiming to 
do it with more consistent quality than we have in the first two matches.”


Wallabies team: Israel Folau, Dane Haylett-Petty, Tevita Kuridrani, Matt 
Toomua, Rob Horne (vc), Bernard Foley, Nick Phipps, Sean McMahon, Michael 
Hooper (vc), Scott Fardy, Rob Simmons, Will Skelton, Sekope Kepu, Stephen Moore 
(c), James Slipper. Res: (one player to be omitted): Tatafu Polota-Nau, Scott 
Sio, Greg Holmes, Adam Coleman, Dean Mumm, Wycliff Palu, Nick Frisby, Christian 
Lealiifano, Taqele Naiyaravoro.
 