
After five years of writing about corruption, human rights abuses, the murder 
of journalists and electoral fraud, I have finally learned the Kremlin's true 
weak spot: dry-cleaning.

On Tuesday, I wrote a column about the horrors of getting dry-cleaning done in 
Moscow 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/apr/23/the-hell-of-russian-bureaucracy?INTCMP=SRCH>
. It was a cathartic expression of the frustration that comes from living in a 
city where the most menial tasks are often infused with the paper-pushing, 
stamp-stamping and time-wasting so loved by Russia's bureaucracy.

Many people were not amused, it turns out. Among them was Dmitry Peskov, 
longtime aide and spokesman toVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>.

"I am sorry to hear about Miriam Elder's experience at the dry cleaners, in 
which she lost her receipt and so had an hour of her time 'stolen' in providing 
the necessary personal details to retrieve her woollies," Peskov wrote in a 
letter to this newspaper. "But I am also amazed that this anecdote can be 
passed off as any sort of insight into the state ofRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> today."

Peskov went on to write that cutting red tape was a high priority for the 
government. And then the kicker: "Let me remind British readers of the 
thousands of hours that are 'stolen' from Russian citizens when they complete 
the UK's visa application forms, which are a whopping 10 pages. The time, 
money, effort and inconvenience that Russians face in obtaining UK visas put Ms 
Elder's ordeal into perspective."

Those wishing to understand the link between handing in dry-cleaning and 
applying for a UK visa would do well to look up "whataboutism 
<http://www.economist.com/node/10598774>". The term emerged at the height of 
the Cold War, used to describe a favourite tactic of Soviet propagandists. An 
article in a US or UK paper calls out the Soviet government for locking up 
dissidents? Well then, a Soviet paper responds: "What about the US campaign 
against the Black Panthers?" The practice is alive and well in modern Russia. 
Western papers upping their coverage of the protest movement against Putin's 
regime? Russia Today starts in with "What about the Occupy movement?"

It's a way of shutting down discussion, and is a key feature of the comments 
that flood a large number of western articles dealing with Russia these days. 
It's unclear what the commenters, or Putin's spokesman, would prefer. That 
western papers avoid writing about Russia until their countries solve their own 
problems? Or that each article about Russia includes the caveat that western 
countries have issues too.

I tried to reach Peskov several times today to ask him why of all the stories 
I have written, this is the one to which he decided to respond. Articles about 
widespread allegations of electoral fraud, which Putin's critics say helped 
propel him and his party to power in recent elections, have been met with 
silence. Reports on human rights abuses by government forces in the troubled 
Caucasian republics of Chechnya and Dagestan: silence. Articles on the 
inconclusive investigations into the murders of journalistAnna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya>, human rights campaigner 
Natalia Estemirova, lawyer Sergei Magnitsky: nothing.

Maybe it's just personal taste. Tony Halpin, Moscow correspondent for the 
Times, notes that in his five years in this post, the Times has received just 
one response from Peskov. The subject? The Swedish pop band Abba.

In early 2009, Tony wrote a light story about allegations that Putin had flown 
in an Abba cover band to play a private concert, doling out some Â£20,000 for 
the event.

"I don't know who their audience consisted of, but Vladimir Putin was not one 
of them," Peskov wrote in response. "He was actually working in his office that 
Thursday evening, meeting members of the cabinet.

"By the way," he added, "Mr Putin is more of a Beatles fan than an Abba one."

So maybe it's a matter of taste. Or maybe it's easier to engage in 
"whataboutism" regarding bureaucracy than it is regarding electoral fraud and 
the murder of journalists.
 