
Over the years I have managed to fool a number of people into thinking I am 
terribly well read. My secret – well, three secrets – are Radio 4'sBook of the 
Week <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qftk>, Book at Bedtime 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qtlx> and the Classic Serial, 
whose episodes I save up to devour all at once on iPlayer. These 
fabulous free audiobooks used to be awkward to listen to, involving balancing 
acts with laptops in steamy bathrooms.

My iPad has been a liberation. Using a tablet as a portable radio is by far 
the best way to access the internet's vast archive of free literary audio.

One hands-free route into classic fiction is Librivox <http://librivox.org>, 
essentially an audio version ofProject Gutenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/jan/14/project.gutenberg>. The 
website, recently given a makeover, offers around 7,000 free audiobooks read by 
(mostly American) volunteers. Like Gutenberg, it is a noble project that 
suffers from a lack of editorial control. While I'm sure there's great stuff to 
be found, there's an awful lot ofGreat Expectations read by Dick Van Dyke.

My top tips for literary-minded listeners are:

1) American broadcaster Michael Silverblatt's incomparable archive of author 
interviews. Name any famous novelist from the past quarter-century and I'll bet 
they've appeared on his radio show,Bookworm 
<http://www.kcrw.com/etc/programs/bw>. Highlights include chats with David 
Foster Wallace and Martin Amis.

2) The New Yorker Fiction Podcast 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2012/11/fiction-podcast-david-sedaris-reads-miranda-july.html>
, which gets a writer to read another writer's short story, sometimes resulting 
in unlikely pairings. I enjoyed hearingDavid Sedaris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/david-sedaris> somehow manage to make 
Miranda July a lot less irritating.

3) Lit Bits <http://litbits.co.uk/>, an intelligent and irreverent 
London-based programme where an academic and a literary journalist invite a 
guest writer to mull over subjects ranging from art to football to sex.

Now, I advise you to cancel all social engagements and run a hot bath.
 