
Greg Maddux went the distance for the Atlanta Braves, shutting out the Rockies 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/boxes/COL/COL199408110.shtml> at Colorado’s 
old Mile High Stadium. Ken Griffey Jr hit his league-leading 40th home run 
against the A’s, a grand slam thatpowered the Seattle Mariners to a victory 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/boxes/OAK/OAK199408110.shtml> on the road in 
Oakland.Tony Gwynn had three hits 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/boxes/HOU/HOU199408110.shtml>, raising his 
batting average to .394 in hispursuit of hitting .400, 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24589975/did-the-1994-strike-cost-tony-gwynn-a-400-batting-average>
 helping his San Diego Padres to victory at Houston inside the Astrodome.

All in all, there were nine games on 11 August 1994 – a 10th in Boston was 
rained out. And although we didn’t know it at the time, that day, 20 years ago 
today, would ultimately become the last of what President Clinton called the 
most exciting baseball season in 40 years.

Baseball’s latest labor war had brought an eighth work stoppage in 23 years. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/08/12/us/baseball-no-runs-no-hits-no-errors-baseball-goes-on-strike.html?module=Search&mabReward=relbias%3Aw%2C%7B%221%22%3A%22RI%3A11%22%7D>
 The players – backed by what was, and arguably still is, the strongest union 
in North America – walked out on the job because they were sure the owners 
would unilaterally implement a cost containing salary cap in the coming 
offseason. Bud Selig represented the 28 owners as the acting commissioner of 
Major League Baseball, and said at the time:


There is no doubt in my mind the players are united, as always, and the owners 
are united this time for a significant series of reasons. But having said that, 
now we have to figure a way to solve this thing.

They did solve it, or at least a court ruling did, the following April. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/05/27/sports/baseball/27sandomir.html?module=Search&mabReward=relbias%3Aw%2C%7B%221%22%3A%22RI%3A11%22%7D&_r=0>
 By then, baseball had cancelled the season and blown up its crown jewel. For 
the first time since 1904, there was no World Series played.


It would take time, but baseball would recover. Drug-fueled home run binges 
helped the league set attendance records and sign enormous TV deals. New 
revenue streams, including the domestic MLB cable Network and the global 
MLB.com, came into being. More than 20 new or renovated stadiums came online, 
and franchises became so valuable that theLos Angeles Dodgers were sold for $2bn
 
<http://espn.go.com/los-angeles/mlb/story/_/id/7745566/los-angeles-dodgers-selling-team-magic-johnson-group-2b>
, while even the lowly Tampa Bay Rays are now said to beworth close to $500m. 
<http://www.forbes.com/fdc/welcome_mjx.shtml> If success is defined purely in 
financial terms, well, MLB’s revenues are currently up around the $9bn mark.
 The 1994 labor dispute between Major League Baseball players and owners meant 
that the Montréal Expos never got their shot at a title. Photograph: Paul 
Chiasson/Canadian Press/AP 
Add in unprecedented post free-agency labor peace between the owners and 
players, Interleague Play, instant replay, additional playoff teams and 
meaningful changes in the way the game deals with PEDs, and these past 20 years 
have been some of the most eventful and profitable in baseball, a sport where 
change was traditionally ushered in at a slower pace.


However, little of this matters to fans of one team in action 20 years ago, 
because they no longer have their team to root for.


The Montreal Expos were in Pittsburgh, getting shut out by the Pirates 4-0 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/boxes/PIT/PIT199408110.shtml> in what was 
just their third defeat in 23 games. The ‘Spos wereyoung, loaded, had the best 
record in baseball <http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/MON/1994.shtml>, 
and were six games ahead of the Braves, a team in the early stages of NL East 
dynasty.

For the first time since the Gary Carter, Andre Dawson and Tim Raines teams of 
the early 1980s, the Expos had a chance to win, with an offense built around 
the robust bats of Moises Alou and Larry Walker. A consistent starting rotation 
that featured Ken Hill, Jeff Fassero and, of course, a22-year-old Pedro 
Martinez. <http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/m/martipe02.shtml> An 
airtight bullpen had two legitimate closers in Mel Rojas and John Wetteland.

Their manager, Felipe Alou, had them humming during their best season in 
franchise history – but then suddenly, it was over. Thanks to the labor 
dispute, the 1994 season would be frozen in time after just 114 games, never to 
be thawed.

The play-by-play announcer Gary Thorne once said that Montreal could have 
expected to earn at least $20m during that postseason; instead they took out 
loans for roughly $20m. When the 1995 season began, theExpos began liquidating 
their best players. 
<http://www.canadianbaseballnetwork.com/articles/review-ecstasy-agony-1994-montreal-expos/>
 Hill, Wetteland and Marquis Grissom were dealt, while Walker left via free 
agency. A season later, Alou took the same route. The team finished fifth in 
1995, and the slow bleed that would eventually lead MLB’s first Canadian team to
relocate south to Washington 
<http://sports.espn.go.com/mlb/news/story?id=1891484>after the 2004 season was 
under way. Wetteland, who would go on to close for the 1996 World Series 
champion Yankees, told the Guardian:

It’s never been reconciled in my heart. It’s never been reconciled. In 1994 we 
had a product on the field that would win a World Series … we understood that 
that was the beginning of the end in ‘94, and that was tough. I just can’t get 
over it, we could have had many world championships here because we were all 
young. But that’s life.
 The 1994 Montreal Expos team was honored at Olympic Stadium in March before 
the Toronto Blue Jays faced the New York Mets. Photograph: David Lengel/The 
Guardian 
John Kerrigan was the pitching coach for a team that had the best team ERA in 
the National League.


I think you can start the domino effect from ‘94. From that point on it was 
just a matter of time … the pain that it caused was just too much to overcome 
to the fans.

The strike meant that the Expos had lost their chance for a World Series 
title, and in hindsight, an opportunity to secure the long-term future of their 
franchise. Now, over three decades of baseball history has been reduced to 
memories, and a small traveling band of diaspora trying to keep their flame 
alive. On a warm July afternoon in New York,a fan group called Expos Nation 
<https://www.facebook.com/ExposNation> have organized themselves in the upper 
deck of Citi Field. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EzF-8KymFFU> About 100 
supporters ofNos Amours are watching the Mets take on the Marlins wearing Expos 
jerseys, cheering for a team the no longer exists, lamenting what could’ve been.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1Ow7uW7XDd4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1Ow7uW7XDd4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1Ow7uW7XDd4&media=>
Matthew Ross heads up Expos Nation <https://www.facebook.com/ExposNation>, and 
recalled the city’s initial blasé reaction to the work stoppage:

At the time people thought, well, it’s kind of crappy but we’ll get going when 
we get going. Nobody paid much attention to it, you know we thought it would 
just happen, and we would get over it, and that’s it, but as we know it didn’t 
happen that way.

The season was shelved on 14 September 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/09/15/sports/baseball-the-season-owners-terminate-season-without-the-world-series.html?module=Search&mabReward=relbias%3Aw%2C%7B%221%22%3A%22RI%3A11%22%7D>
 after the only thing players and owners could agree on was their reaching an 
impasse. In Montreal, that casual reaction quickly turned to rage. Conspiracy 
theories even included Major League Baseball using the strike to prevent a 
Canadian team from winning the World Series for a third consecutive season - 
the Toronto Blue Jays had won in 1992 and 1993. Ross estimates that 15-20% of 
the fan base never went back to the Olympic Stadium.

Two decades later, another group, the Montreal Baseball Project, 
<http://montrealbaseballproject.com/en/> headed up by former Expos outfielder 
Warren Cromartie, is in the business of getting a MLB team back in Montreal. In 
March, they helped bring the Jays and Mets together for a pair of pre-season 
games at Olympic Stadiumthat attracted more than 96,000 fans, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/30/major-league-baseball-brief-return-montreal-runaway-success>
 a weekend that registered clearly in MLB’s offices on Park Avenue.

John McHale Jr, MLB’s chief information officer and executive vice-president, 
was in attendance and told reporters:

There is a fire that burns brightly for Major League Baseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> and that’s a message I’ll be proud 
to carry to the commissioner.

Could MLB really return to Montreal? Well, the popular yet simplistic belief 
is that the Tampa Bay Rays, a team with a sub-par venue in a small market, 
could beripe for moving to Quebec, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5BEjkKsMtpM>
 but Ross believes expansion is a more likely avenue for a team to return to La 
Belle Province, although MLB currently have no plans to expand.

Two new teams, one in the American League and one in the National League, 
would allow Interleague Play games to be played in certain periods over the 
season rather than the less popular everyday model recently put in place. It 
would also raise money for owners in lucrative expansion fees. Before then a 
new stadium would need to be built to replace the Stade Olympique, and of 
course, owners with deep pockets would be required – two big asks.

The Expos move, and the cancellation of the World Series, came on the watch of 
outgoing commissioner Bud Selig, but his comments at the all-star Game about 
the success of the recent exhibition games hit home in Montreal. Now there’s a 
feeling that the city has an legitimate shot to come full circle, and one day 
return to avenge 1994.

I think they would be an excellent candidate in the future. No question about 
it. That was very impressive. They have much work to be done. There’s certainly 
in my case no hard or angry feeling toward Montréal. We tried to keep a team 
there. It’s a long story now. But I thought that was marvelous.
 