
Arcade Fire’s fourth album Reflektor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/27/arcade-fire-reflektor-review> is 
a sprawling, 75 minute double album featuring James Murphy, Jonathan Ross, 
voodoo, disco, dub reggae,bobbleheads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/24/arcade-fire-bobblehead-mask-stolen-reflektor>
 and disco balls. To debunk, or perhaps further demystify the album released in 
2013, the Canadian group have createdThe Reflektor Tapes 
<http://thereflektortapes.com/>, a film that arrives in cinemas in north 
America on 23 September and worldwide on 24 September 
<http://WWW.THEREFLEKTORTAPES.COM>.

Arcade Fire: Voodoo rhythms, dance music and David Bowie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/24/arcade-fire-reflektor-voodoo-dance-david-bowie>
Directed by 2013 Sundance Grand Jury Prize for Short Films winner Kahlil Joseph
 <http://www.pulsefilms.com/director/kahliljoseph/uk>, and produced by 
award-winning studioPulse Films <http://www.pulsefilms.com/work/film> (20,000 
Days on Earth, Shut Up And Play The Hits) and What Matters Most, it is a hybrid 
of documentary, music and art which explores the making of Reflektor. Using 
personal footage and interviews tracing back to its initial beginnings in 
Jamaica, to the recording sessions in Montreal and an impromptu gig at a 
Haitian hotel on the first night of carnival, the film also takes a peek behind 
the curtain of their tour, capturing footage from their arena dates in Los 
Angeles andLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/17/arcade-fire-live-review-roundhouse>
.

Arcade Fire said of the film: “There were parts of the Reflektor tour where I 
think we,Arcade Fire <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire>, came the 
closest in our careers to putting on stage what we imagined in our heads. We 
were insanely lucky to have Kahlil Joseph documenting from the very beginning.”


Below is the trailer. Let us know what you make of it. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1xfUCKIQHUg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1xfUCKIQHUg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1xfUCKIQHUg&media=> 