
There are a multitude of extracurricular activities that might be keeping 
Kanye West from finishing a new album: hisnew baby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/05/kim-kardashian-kanye-west-baby-son>
, hisclothing line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/12/kanye-west-fans-queue-adidas-yeezy-350-boost>
 and hispotential run for US president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/25/kanye-west-album-nowhere-near-ready-serious-presidency>
 being just some of them. Now he can add one more preoccupation to add to his 
list: auditioning for American Idol.

The rapper’s satirical Idol journey – apparently one of the many surprises the 
show has in store for its final season – was previewed in a 30-second clip of 
his audition.
Kim Kardashian West (@KimKardashian) 
It's YEEZY season! Can't wait for you guys to see Kanye on @AmericanIdol 
<https://twitter.com/AmericanIdol> in January! #Idol 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Idol?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/zhRtQH5Ti9 
<https://t.co/zhRtQH5Ti9>
 <https://twitter.com/KimKardashian/status/679525848605540353> December 23, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/KimKardashian/status/679525848605540353> 
“My name is Kanye, I’m from the south side of Chicago,” West tells the judges 
in the clip shared by his wife, Kim Kardashian, on 23 December.

“I’m originally a producer. I always wanted to rap and no one really believed 
in me, so I wanted to try some things out, ya know?”

While the preview doesn’t show performance footage from the rapper’s audition, 
reports say West delivered an a cappella version of his song Gold Digger for 
the judges.

There is still no sign of the rapper’s long-awaited album SWISH. It is, he 
says, currently in the process of being created. In a bid to be left 
undisturbed,he recently asked 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/675934047332261888> his Twitter 
followers, and anyone else who was listening: “DON’T ASK ME FOR ANYTHING TILL 
AFTER I’M FINISHED WITH MY ALBUM.”
 