
App: Water Water Everywhere 
<http://itunes.apple.com/app/water-water-everywhere/id442677007#>

By: Caffeine Concepts

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>

What is it?

An app showing locations across the UK where users can ask for free tap water, 
designed to encourage people to move away from bottled H20. The app has an 
unintended money-saving angle, with users able to locate drinking fountains and 
outlets where they can drink water for free instead of paying 50p-plus a bottle.

Who is it by?

The app is the brainchild of Ben Kay <http://whois.ben-kay.com/>, an author 
and blogger. Kay blogged asking for help to create an app to make tap water 
freely available to as many people as possible.Caffeine Concepts 
<http://caffeineconcepts.com/> answered the call and created the app, with some 
design help fromCrystal Lee <http://cargocollective.com/misstiny>.

What does it promise?

Users can find cafes and fast food outlets near them (or anywhere on a 
Googlemap) where they can ask staff to fill their bottle with water. The app is 
also calling for users to populate the map with the locations of free drinking 
fountains.

How does it work?

Launch the app and let it pinpoint your location and look for outlets or 
fountains near you where you can fill up.

Is it easy to use?

As simple as drinking water from a tap.

Is it fun?

It certainly offers a challenge – the app has only just launched so there are 
few drinking fountains listed, meaning the majority of outlets listed are the 
likes of Eat and Burger King where you will have to ask staff to fill your 
bottle.

Is it pretty?

The logo features words created from taps and water droplets that, as a whole, 
form a nifty blue glass – quality.

Should you download it?

As the app has only just launched users will have to be confident enough to 
ask for a refill from staff at a McDonald's, Starbucks, KFC, Pret A Manger or 
Costa Coffee (among others) if there is no drinking fountain nearby.

On his blog, Kay said he successfully got a refill 
<http://wweverywhere.com/2011/05/what-happens-when-you-ask-for-tap-water-in-the-chain-restaurants-of-london/>
 at every big brand outlet he tried, but it might not work for everyone, and 
one of Kay's blog readers has questioned whether staff would stray into legal 
or health and safety issues by refilling bottles.

But the more popular the app becomes the greater number of drinking fountains 
will appear on the map, and it is an undeniably good idea, executed well. Water
Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> Everywhere offers users a 
unique opportunity to crowdsource something of real value – helping to stop 
damage to the environment caused by the manufacture of bottled water, while at 
the same time saving users money by helping them to fill reusable bottles with 
free tap water.
 