
Ndeye is a feisty 13-year-old girl. Her sparkly green top and skinny jeans are 
worn with a confidence that outshines her peers. When asked what she wants to 
be when she's older, without hesitation she says, "President of the Republic of 
Senegal." All the other girls giggle but they all have grand career 
aspirations: doctor, midwife, accountant and teacher.

Ndeye lives in the village of Sor Diagne just a few kilometres outside Saint 
Louis. In the past few months she, along with a group of children from her 
school, have taught her village about recycling, organised a weekly rubbish 
collection, cleaned up the nearby salt flats and helped to get the first 
toilets installed. If she can do all this at 13, perhaps becoming president 
isn't such a crazy dream.

These children took part in a radio project organised by Plan International 
called Radio Gune-Yi. At the start of July this year, children from Ecole 
Mamadou Charles Niang were trained to use portable radio equipment, wrote 
scripts, prepared interviews, practised dramas and songs. At the end of the 
three days they recorded an hour-long radio show in front of family and friends 
from the village, which was then broadcast on Sud FM St Louis, one of the 
country's largest private broadcasters.

The topic chosen was the environment and sanitation. Ndeye explained the 
reason it was chosen was because people were throwing rubbish on the salt flats 
next to the school. The rubbish was also polluting the river where the 
villagers collect water. As a result many children were becoming sick with 
cholera and tuberculosis.

On the radio programme they expressed all their worries and interviewed local 
elders, a health clinic worker and government officials to see what could be 
done. At the end of the programme they proposed that a weekly rubbish 
collection be set up.

The local government official, Cheikh Oujmane Diop set to work putting all 
these plans into action. "The horses and carts move around the district picking 
up rubbish. Often the children help around the house and it would be their job 
to collect the rubbish so it is important that they are informed. Also, people 
know that there are things that we can recycle and reuse."

The only hurdle the children faced was persuading each household to pay 400CFA 
(less than 50p) every month to get their rubbish collected, rather than dumping 
it. This was a challenge as the average income of these 6,000 villagers is 
13,000CFA a month (around Â£16), among the poorest quarter of the 12.5 million 
population of Senegal.

The poverty is especially striking in the heat of the afternoon as we walk 
around the village. Women take refuge in the shade of trees, dusting sand away 
from food they are preparing for the evening meal. Children play in buildings 
that have been left half-finished for years. There are no men to be seen. We're 
told many have gone to find work in the capital, Dakar. It's hard to be 
optimistic that they've been successful at securing jobs: unemployment is high 
in Senegal, with some figures putting it at 48%.

As we drive to another village, the radio blares out from the front of the 
jeep. In Africa the radio is immensely powerful. With less than 40% of the 
population able to read and write, it is accessible for everyone. Through Radio 
Gune-Yi, Plan International uses children to influence people's opinions and 
attitudes to controversial and taboo topics.

The village of Diama Thiaguel is off the beaten track, quite literally. One 
minute we were driving along a wide, tarmaced road and the next we took a sharp 
right into what seemed like the wilderness.

After driving for 10 minutes we see civilisation and realise the entire 
village has come out to greet us. We are ushered into the centre of the group 
to watch a drama the children have been working on since they produced a radio 
programme about the importance of the education of girls.

Each character is highly overdramatic which makes for a very funny production. 
The story told is of an aunt and uncle who care for their niece and refuse to 
send her to school with their sons. Neighbours drop in one by one until they 
are persuaded she should be given the opportunity to attend.

One of the reasons given by the uncle as to why she cannot attend school is 
that it would be too expensive. Education in Senegal is free up to the age of 
16 so on inquiry it seems he is referring to the cost of hair braiding and 
extensions. It seems girls cost their parents more the world over.

Since the radio programme was broadcast a few months ago, the children have 
seen big changes in the attitude of parents. One girl said, "Our parents are 
now supporting us. We have less problems now because people no longer say, 'You 
don't need to go to school.' They encourage us to go to school."

Radio Gune-Yi seeks to work out article 13 of the United Nations Convention on 
the Rights of the Child, which says, "The child has the right to express his or 
her views, obtain information, make ideas or information known, regardless of 
frontiers." These radio programmes ensure their voices are heard by their 
village and across cities.

Moctar Diop is referred to as a Gorgui, an affectionate term of respect for 
elders. He believes that the future for Senegal looks bright if the children's 
radio programmes are anything to go by. He says, "Politics can be something 
very disgusting because politicians are liars. Never believe them! It is easier 
to believe children!"
 