
This might be a good time to be a kid whose parents or teachers have the means 
and inclination to buy theatre tickets. Venues and artists seem more excited 
about challenging young audiences – from the Royal Court's teen-leaning 
adaptation ofLet The Right One In 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/let-the-right-one-in> to 
Complicite's first children's show. Lyn Gardner is among those arguing that it's
time our culture took children's theatre more seriously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2013/oct/23/why-childrens-theatre-matter>
 and Purni Morell, artistic director of the Unicorn,recently told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/nov/26/purni-morell-unicorn-theatre-interview>
: "plays for children should be judged the same way as plays for adults."

But what of the theatre that happens inside our schools? For many, it remains 
a lethal cocktail: exam-focused trudges through 'classic' texts, rickety 
productions of bland musicals and – greatest horror – visiting educational 
theatre companies who bastardise humanity's ultimate forum for reflecting on 
itself, to teach you something about chemistry or French.

Don't blame the teachers; they're drowning in a culture of curriculum 
relevance and learning objectives. Theatremakers? Approach many a writer or 
actor about working in a school and they'll recite something about theatre's 
wonderful educational potential, while privately wondering if their bank 
balance is healthy enough to say no.

But my experience over the past few years at Company of Angels 
<http://www.companyofangels.co.uk/> has convinced me that schools can be both a 
starting point, and setting, for extraordinary acts of theatre. A compelling 
idea is taking root: that the only theatre in education really worth making is 
where art comes first, and education is a happy accident.

Ask Steven Bloomer, whose first plays were produced by HighTide festival 
<http://www.hightide.org.uk/> and the Factory theatre company 
<http://www.factorytheatre.co.uk/>, what distinguishes meaningful theatre from 
misguided 'educational' work, and his response is simple: "Good plays ask 
questions rather than give answers."

Avoid relevance

Bloomer is one of 10 writers to have taken part in The Commissioners 
<http://www.companyofangels.co.uk/the-commissioners/>, our programme in which 
professional playwrights are taken into schools where young people 'commission' 
them to write a new short play. The thinking is simple: young people get a 
writer who can articulate what they're thinking about; writers get access to a 
roomful of young minds.

The main instruction to Commissioners playwrights is: avoid relevance – 
characters need not be their audience's age, nor locations limited to teenage 
bedrooms or fast food joints. Stewart Melton set his play in a menacing 
dystopia where women are rewarded for producing four or more children; the 
playwright-poet Katie Bonna had a young audience enthralled as a grown woman 
struggled (in verse) to rebuild her identity after learning that her father had 
started another family.

For Bloomer, whose work with teenagers at Southwark College yielded Holes, a 
moving account of a girl leaving London for the first time to attend the 
funeral of a father she never knew, the greatest benefit was "the visceral 
sense of being in the room with the young people". As well as "open-ended 
conversation," Bloomer had his commissioners write him anonymous letters in 
which they shared insights they might not have voiced in front of their peers.

As part of the process, writers return to their group with a draft – the young 
people become script editors, demanding rewrites where anything lacks the ring 
of truth.Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> have confirmed 
that despite ticking no single curriculum box, work like this has clear 
educational benefits. Participants speak and write what they feel; they are 
taken outside the usual milieu of teachers, timetables and learning objectives, 
working alongside professional artists. Their ideas and experiences inform the 
playwright's work and they can rightly feel ownership of the resulting play.

But these benefits are the fortunate collateral of the programme's main 
objective, which is to enable playwrights to take the pulse of a generation and 
reflect it in their work. When we stage the play for the young people who 
commissioned it (and as many of their peers as timetables permit), it is always 
with professional actors. Subsequently, though, we grant the school rights to 
the script – pupils mount their own versions; teachers gain a new classroom 
text.

'Schools are where the future rehearses itself'

We're not alone in our thinking. For almost a decade, playwright Fin Kennedy 
has been a fixture at Mulberry School for Girls 
<http://finkennedy.co.uk/The-Mulberry-School-connection>, a forward-thinking 
secondary school in London's Tower Hamlets. He's written plays for pupils to 
perform, taught scriptwriting courses to young people and teachers, and is now 
bringing in a stream of other writers, whom he's training to develop similar 
relationships with other schools.

When I speak to Kennedy, he is gearing up to write a play for Mulberry to take 
to the 2014 Edinburgh fringe, a follow-up to their 2009 collaboration, which 
won a Fringe First. "It's inevitable that education takes place," he says. "In 
the years we go to Edinburgh, exam results for English and drama shoot up. 
There's a buzz in the school. Soft outcomes are hard to measure but it's 
blindingly obvious when you see it up close."

But his motivation goes beyond an uplift to drama teaching. "Teenagers are 
exciting to write for," he says. "And schools are where the future rehearses 
itself. If you want to see what the future looks like, go to a secondary 
school. It's the cutting edge."

Kennedy speaks of a "critical mass" of talented new writers "waiting tables" 
between commissions. "Get them into schools," he says. "Give them an appetite 
to create theatre in a socially aware and engaged way."

Real theatre, not educational theatre

They might also look up Ned Glasier, artistic director of Islington Community 
Theatre <http://www.islingtoncommunitytheatre.com/>, which provides 
out-of-school theatre training for 200 young people aged nine to 21.

"Theatre helps us explore what it means to be human" he says. "Doing this with 
young people, who are just starting to understand themselves as social, 
independent beings, has extraordinary potential. But you need experienced 
artists to help young people develop and stretch their skills. That's why I 
work with professional writers. And that's why I call what we do real theatre, 
not educational theatre."

So, yes, this is a plea for art for art's sake, even – especially – in 
schools. At a time when our government seems hell-bent on engineering a 
generation of engineers, it has never felt more necessary.

Adam Barnard is co-director of Company of Angels 
<http://www.companyofangels.co.uk/> – follow it on Twitter @angelscompany 
<https://twitter.com/angelscompany> and Adam @adamoflondon 
<http://twitter.com/adamoflondon>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 