
The US Congress is more deeply unpopular and useless than ever. The American 
public is slogging through the summer of its own discontent. Polls show a 
“throw the bums out” attitude more widespread than ever. Yet the bums remain. 
In both the House and Senate, incumbents aren’t just hanging on, they’re having 
a better-than-average year.

After Lamar Alexander hung on in Tennessee on Thursday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/08/lamar-alexander-wins-tennessee-primary>
, incumbent Senators are now 20-for-20 this primary cycle, even though between 
1946 and 2012 they lost their primariesan average of 4.6% of the time 
<http://www.centerforpolitics.org/crystalball/articles/an-above-average-year-for-incumbents/>
. House incumbents are on track to beat their post-war re-nomination 
performance – already a stunning 98.4% success rate – as well. As of this 
morning, it’s 1.02%.

That Scott DesJarlais, the Tea Party’s pill-pushing, abortion-providing serial 
philanderer 
<http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/2014/08/01/voters-look-beyond-desjarlais-past/13462555/>
, was even in the race at all speaks to the power of incumbency. Come to think 
of it, promoters of the theory that Americans are hungry for political change (
It’s the year of the “angry voter”! 
<http://online.wsj.com/articles/year-of-the-angry-voter-1407329403>) really 
have only anecdotes and Eric Cantor on their side. NotwithstandingDavid Brat’s 
flukey upset over Cantor in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/11/david-brat-win-eric-cantor-house-majority-leader>
 and Chris McDaniels’s zombie campaign in Mississippi, complete with this week’s
binders full of protest 
<http://www.jacksonfreepress.com/news/2014/aug/07/mcdaniel-challenge-more-questions-answers/>
, incumbent politicians are actually doing a lotbetter than usual.

Of the three congressmen who lost their nominating contests prior to Thursday 
night, only Cantor’s loss has even the most superficial relationship to the 
mere fact of his incumbency: Rep Kerry Bentivolio (R-Michigan),who lost on 
Tuesday 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/08/05/kerry-bentivolio-primary_n_5652124.html>
, was an “accidental Congressman” and Santa Claus impersonator who won in 2012 
when incumbent Thad McCotter was found to have falsified signatures on his 
petition to be on the ballot. The cycle’s other loser was Rep Ralph Hall 
(R-Texas), who, at 91,was the oldest member of Congress 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_the_oldest_living_members_of_the_United_States_House_of_Representatives>
.

DesJarlais’s campaign is a perfect counterpoint to the lesson anti-incumbency 
theorists (many <http://talkingpointsmemo.com/livewire/fleming-cantor> of them 
incumbent Republicans themselves!) tried toglean 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2014/06/eric_cantor_loses_to_tea_party_s_david_brat_the_house_majority_leader_defeat.html>
 from Cantor’s defeat.Brandishing 
<http://www.theamericanconservative.com/articles/how-immigration-topples-gop-incumbents/>
 immigration policy as a symbol of Cantor’s establishmentarianism, the 
professional thumbsuckersargued 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/210816-gillespie-casts-cantor-loss-as-a-plus-for-his-campaign>
 that votersrejected 
<http://www.rawstory.com/rs/2014/06/12/ted-cruz-defeat-of-eric-cantor-shows-the-conservative-base-is-alive-and-well/>
 the former majority leader as a creature of Washington. (“Eric Cantor is the 
poster boy for the problem of DC interests!” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/13/us/politics/incumbents-fear-cantors-loss-will-fill-tea-partys-sails.html?_r=0>
 Or, Cantor’s loss“sends a message to the cosy world of party bigwigs and 
donors”! 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/dd2114ac-f227-11e3-9015-00144feabdc0.html#axzz39kASksjW>
)

But DesJarlais clawed his way back into voters’ good graces by latching onto 
establishment figures 
<http://www.nationaljournal.com/politics/why-are-republicans-raising-money-for-a-scandal-plagued-congressman-20130318>
 and adopting the protective coloring that defines “creature of Washington”. He 
became a part of Rep Darrell Issa’s government oversight chorus – I mean 
committee. He gave a (self-described) “grilling 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0IQOJiic6s>” to the IRS commissioner, he sang 
the Hillary-knew tune about Benghazi 
<http://www.clevelandbanner.com/view/full_story/25127853/article-DesJarlais--Benghazi--IRS-scandal-stokes-public-s-cynicism->
. (Of course Issa did a fundraiser for him.)

But why did this almost work? If the Beltway is such poison, why aren’t more 
careers dropping dead?

Traditionally, analysts have pointed to the “but he’s my asshole” theory of 
government relations: Congress as an anonymous whole is unpopular, but 
individually, voters mostly like their own representative. Certainly, polling 
still reflects this myopia (or is it far-sighted-ness?):According to Gallup 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/168998/ahead-midterms-anti-incumbent-sentiment-strong.aspx>
, only 22% of respondents say that members of Congress in general “deserve to 
be re-elected” – the lowest-ever measure for an election year. But when asked 
about their own representative, 50% of voters say he or she deserves to be 
re-elected. The paradox is a perverse form of chauvinism: the only thing worse 
than your own Congressman is someone else’s.

Still, those kinds of numbers should amount to lots of upsets, in primaries as 
well as the general election. As Gallup notes, the other times that Americans 
were as unenthusiastic about re-electing Congress – either generically or their 
specific representative – were in 1992 and 2010, bothtrue anti-incumbent 
cycles. In 1992, four times as many sitting House members lost their 
nominations as usual. And in 2012,12% of sitting senators lost their primaries.

I suspect our clear dissatisfaction isn’t translating into losses at the polls 
because there’s a difference between disgust and outrage, between despair and 
anger. For better or worse, disgust and despair can be swallowed, only anger 
moves us to change – to the extent the Tea Party (or any anti-incumbent 
movement) has been successful, it’s been in capitalizing on fury.

Most Americans, on the other hand, are not angry. They are just tired. They 
are struggling. They don’t have time for the dubious luxury of justified 
resentment; they have to work. Indeed, if there is resentment involved, it has 
to do with Congress not doing its job, while Americans do theirs … or look for 
a job to do.

The Tea Party’s inability to gain momentum in the primaries speaks to the 
limits of anger as a motivation, and suggests that the general election will be 
just as kind to incumbents. What may have feel like a narrow escape for the GOP 
establishment is probably closer to a last chance for redemption: it has a 
chance to stop listening to the chorus of alarmists who say that the Tea Party 
is taking over, but they could stop tacking right out of primary-fight fear. 
They could get to work.
 