
Why, despite the acclaimed National Music Plan 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/180973/DFE-00086-2011.pdf>
 in 2011 and the subsequent establishment of themusic hubs 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/413107/Music_in_schools_what_hubs_must_do.pdf>
 in 2012, are we still struggling to establish a 21st-century music education 
system in this country that not only reflects the pursuit of excellence, but 
also meets the needs of young people and their contemporary cultural landscape?


The launch of Arts Council England’s cultural education challenge 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/cyp/cultural-education-challenge-find-out-more/>
 last week provides a welcome focus on the importance of partnerships in 
delivering a consistent, high-quality cultural education for all young people. 
This approach is something we at the Barbican and Guildhall School of Music and 
Drama strongly endorse; it reflects theapproach 
<http://www.culturaleducation.london/initiatives/east-london-cultural-education-partnership>
 we’re taking with our East London Cultural Education Partnership.

However, alongside the lack of high-quality education partnerships across the 
country, I’d argue that a major reason for inconsistency in provision, 
particularly in classical music, is that we still do not have a strong enough 
workforce of professional “portfolio” musicians. As 21st-century professional 
practitioners, a musician must not only excel as a performer, but also as a 
teacher, leader and creative collaborator across a range of styles and genres.

Music education is out of tune with how young people learn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/oct/01/music-education-how-young-people-learn-exams>
I’m talking about a workforce that is capable of reaching the widest possible 
public through inspirational performanceand giving people from all walks of 
life the ability to engage with and play music of the past and present with 
confidence and joy. A critical part of a professional musician’s portfolio is 
to be able to encourage musical curiosity in participants, equipping them with 
the skills to create the music of the future.


Artists and musicians are increasingly engaging with people, places and 
digital technology, creating different types of environments for creation and 
performance, with ever-greater blurring of boundaries between artforms.


However, the professional development of classically trained musicians still 
primarily focuses on the pursuit of excellence in relatively narrow terms: 
interpreting and performing great works of the past at the expense of 
experimenting and progressing musical skills relevant to the needs of today’s 
society.


Highly trained classical musicians bring an artistic, educational, social and 
economic value to our society. The skills and expertise they gain through years 
of specialist coaching and training are of the highest order and easily 
transferrable. But we still struggle to articulate and quantify the genuine 
value, joy and inspiration these specialist practitioners bring to people and 
society at large. It feels that we are somewhat bound by an unspoken hierarchy 
of what constitutes excellence and a “real job” in the classical music sector.

We need to get beyond the notion that classical musicians who don’t make it as 
performers must take the “second/third-best” option as a teacher, community 
musician, creative workshop leader, music therapist, music administrator or 
even a career pathway outside the music/arts sector.


These roles are essential to the wellbeing and mental health of our society 
and should be celebrated. Doing this would also highlight just how employable 
classically trained musicians are and what an important contribution they make 
to our thriving creative and cultural industries, as well as the economy at 
large.

Conservatoires, from which hundreds of highly trained musicians graduate each 
year across the UK, have a core business of training students primarily as 
performers or composers.

As part of this core business, I believe students should learn how to teach 
from the outset of their training, how to pass on their knowledge and engage 
with musical discourse on as many levels as possible.

It shouldn’t be seen as a distraction or compromise to music-making. Instead 
it should be seen to enhance the development of one’s overall musicianship. At 
the Guildhall School and Barbican Centre we are continually looking to support 
this, including through our newBA honours degree 
<http://www.gsmd.ac.uk/youth_adult_learning/creative_learning/study/ba_hons_performance_creative_enterprise/>
 in performance and creative enterprise, which encourages artists from a range 
of music and theatre backgrounds to develop their performance, production, 
collaboration and leadership skills for employment in the arts industry.


Training a musician to pass on music to others by playing, singing, leading 
ensembles, improvising, composing and even dancing makes them not only more 
employable, but also more fulfilled and confident about how their skills can be 
deployed in a variety of contexts.


In many ways JS Bach was the ultimate portfolio musician of the 18th century. 
Employed primarily as a teacher, he – as we all know – also found time to 
compose and perform. This quote about Bach by musician and music theorist 
Johann Nikolaus Forkel says a lot:

Besides Bach’s great merit as so accomplished a performer, composer and 
teacher of music, he had also the merit of being an excellent father, friend 
and citizen. His virtues as a father he showed by the care for the education of 
his children, and the others by his conscientious performance of his social and 
civic duties. His acquaintance was agreeable to everyone.

Would Bach’s Mass in B Minor, Brandenburg Concertos or Art of Fugue have been 
any better without the “distraction” of his other commitments? I’d say: highly 
unlikely.


Sean Gregory is director of creative learning at the Barbican 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/education> and 
Guildhall School of Music and Drama <http://www.gsmd.ac.uk/about_the_school/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 