
On 1 April a shelter for abused women will officially open in the small 
hillside town of Gclilma in Kwa Zulu Natal,South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>. It will accommodate 27 women 
and children fleeing domestic violence.

South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> has a problem when it 
comes to such violence. Police statistics are limited, but 15,609 murders and 
64,500 reported rapes in 2011–12 point to massive levels of domestic abuse in 
South African homes. Yet despite the urgent need to protect women from such 
harm, it’s the only safe house of its kind in the entire district.

Two-thirds of women in Papua New Guinea suffer domestic abuse – how can it be 
stopped?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/16/women-domestic-violence-abuse-papua-new-guinea>
The remarkable thing is that this beacon of hope, in a country where domestic 
violence is so prevalent, is a light born from the flash of an improvised 
explosive device – more often referred to as an IED.

Five years ago, the right-wing Norwegian extremist Anders Behring Breivik 
killed 77 people in a bombing and gun massacre that shocked the world, as he 
had intended. On the morning of the attack, Breivik parked a van in the centre 
of Oslo and lit the fuse on950kg of homemade explosives 
<https://www.stratfor.com/weekly/20110727-norway-lessons-successful-lone-wolf-attacker>
, before setting off to the island of Utoya, where he then shot 69 people.

One of the eight people killed by the IED that Breivik left behind him was a 
30-year-old woman called Hanne Løvlie. In a profound act of love and memory, 
her family has used the compensation money they received from the Norwegian 
state to open the shelter, along with additional funds raised through networks 
and friends.

The IED is the scourge of the modern age. In the first two months of this year 
alone, at least 6,793 people were reported killed or injured by explosive 
weapons around the world. Of these, 3,581, or 53%, were killed by IEDs, the 
catch-all term for home-made bombs – 123 bombings that claimed an average of 29 
victims per explosion.

Why it is time to act fast on the rise of the suicide bomber
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/23/suicide-bomb-stop-attacks-time-to-act>
Last year an Afghan resolution on IEDs was adopted by the UN General Assembly. 
Afghanistan’s government called for greater global awareness of the threat, 
asked for more security information sharing, and sought the increased 
involvement of the UN Secretary General on the matter.

Inevitably, though, the quotidian response by states has all too often been to 
fight fire with fire. Aerial bombardments and military strikes are seen as the 
quick-route to beating into submission groups that use IEDs, such as Islamic 
State. Whether this approach works is highly debatable. The websiteAirwars.org 
<http://airwars.org/> has charted more than 1,000 civilian deaths 
<http://airwars.org/news/more-than-1000-civilians-now-estimated-killed-in-18-month-coalition-air-war/>
 in the 18-month Coalition air war in Syria and Iraq; one can only imagine the 
effect such a death toll has had in recruiting more to the black flag of ISIS.

My sister wanted to help the women of South Africa... This shelter is 
something she would have to wanted to do
Jørgen Løvlie 
Hanne’s shelter is a rare moment of hope among the endless violence caused by 
the IED. She had spent time as a student in Durban, at the University of 
KwaZulu Natal, where she been exposed to the issue of violence against women in 
South Africa. It deeply affected her, and Hanne’s shelter was the Løvlie 
family’s way of responding to the explosive violence of terror.

At an opening ceremony a few days ago her brother, Jørgen Løvlie, told the 
audience: “My sister wanted to help the women of South Africa as she had spent 
time here as a student and understood the problems they faced when it came to 
domestic violence. This shelter is something she would have to wanted to do and 
we can fulfil this wish for her. She loved life and if she was here now she 
would want you all to be happy and to enjoy life too.”

States will all too often seek to combat the threat of IEDs through blunt 
force. Individuals, however, can respond to the horror of terrorism through 
love. Imagine for a second if every single one of the 32 people killed in the 
recent suicide attacks in Belgium (or Pakistan, or Baghdad – the list is 
endless) were remembered in a similar way. You would then have not just Hanne’s 
shelter, but many more refuges and hospices named after other victims of terror.

Domestic violence in Bangladesh - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/mar/15/domestic-violence-in-bangladesh-in-pictures>
These peoples’ lives, so abruptly ended, could be remembered with dignity by 
the tens of thousands of people such shelters would impact. It would, in a 
profound way, show terrorists that their acts of hatred are worthless when 
framed against mankind’s immense capacity for love.

We should follow in the footsteps of the Løvlie family. We should actively 
seek to remember those who die from the nameless horror of an unexpected bomb 
through shelters and hospices, charities and centres. For how else to beat 
terror but to sow hope where a terrorist would seek to plant fear?

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 