
Ricardo Amunjera and Marc Themba are credited with being Namibia's first gay 
married couple. Thoughhomosexuality is criminalised 
<http://www.globalequality.org/component/content/article/166> in Namibia, the 
pair tied the knot in South Africa and returned to Namibia to become prominent
LGBT rights campaigners <https://www.theguardian.com/world/lgbt-rights>.

Amunjera, 31, says he believes "the best way you can help somebody is by 
telling them your story". His activism has earned him the title ofMr Gay 
Namibia 2013 
<http://www.gaystarnews.com/article/mr-gay-namibia-proudly-marries-his-husband-botswana150413>
 and is he is the process of setting local support group in his home town, 
joining a countrywide support network for LGBT. His work is not without its 
risks; another winner of the Mr Gay Namibia title,Wendelinus Hamutenya, was 
attacked as he walked home 
<http://www.advocate.com/news/daily-news/2011/12/12/mr-gay-namibia-assaulted> 
days after winning the competition. According to the rights groupOutRight 
Namibia <http://www.osisa.org/lgbti/namibia/outright-namibia>, LGBT people in 
Namibia encounter homophobia and transphobia on a daily basis.

In a film about their lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/may/16/namibia-first-gay-married-couple-video>
, made by theInternational HIV/Aids Alliance <http://www.aidsalliance.org> and 
Positive Vibes <http://www.positivevibes.org/who_we_are.html>, the couple 
discuss their activism, their religious beliefs and their experience of 
conducting a loving relationship in a country where being gay is against the 
law. It also shows Amunjera fielding calls and texts, and using social media, 
to answer questions and comments from people seeking support around the country.

Amunjera and Themba will join the Guardian Africa Network for a live Q&A from 
1pm - 2pm BST on Tuesday 20 May, to answer your questions about living as an 
openly gay activist inNamibia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/namibia>. What 
would you like to ask? Post your questions in the comments below.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F16%2Fnamibia-first-gay-married-couple-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F16%2F1400235641199%2FIts-all-about-love-Meet-N-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20all%20about%20love%3A%20meet%20Namibia's%20first%20gay%20married%20couple%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F16%2Fnamibia-first-gay-married-couple-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20all%20about%20love%3A%20meet%20Namibia%27s%20first%20gay%20married%20couple%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F16%2Fnamibia-first-gay-married-couple-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F16%2F1400235641199%2FIts-all-about-love-Meet-N-017.jpg>
Q&A highlights
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> Guardian contributor
RicardoAmunjera  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> 20 
May 2014 1:03pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35895363>  
This comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the 
debate 
Hi Everyone 

Hope all is well. My name is Ricardo, Marc's Husband and we are writting from 
our boardroom in Walvisbay :)
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241902> Guardian contributor
MarcThemba  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241902> 20 May 
2014 1:04pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35895440>  
This comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the 
debate 
Hi Maeve, it is a pleasure to join into the web chat. 
Im seating right next to Ricardo in my office's boardroom as Ricardo is off 
work today in order to participate in this web chat...
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241902> Guardian contributor
MarcThemba  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241902> 20 May 
2014 1:16pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35896007>  
This comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the 
debate 
We met through a mutual friend on Facebook. The guy did the introduction, we 
then exchanged numbers, long international phones calls started followed by 
long Skype sessions. Eight months after that we got married and i relocated to 
Namibia to live with Ricardo
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> Guardian contributor
RicardoAmunjera  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> 20 
May 2014 1:19pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35896138> 
On Facebook..... Facebook gave me the love of my life. I need to send Marc an 
email :)
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> Guardian contributor
RicardoAmunjera  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> 20 
May 2014 1:28pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35896631> 
The advocacy spectrum is broad and covers everyone evenly.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241902> Guardian contributor
MarcThemba  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241902> 20 May 
2014 1:24pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35896413> 
Hi Traveller23, 

I 'd say that Bisexuality issues are mostly overlooked or ignored as there is 
more need to address the intense and escalating Gay & Lesbian matters worldwide.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241883> enriquerestoy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241883> 20 May 2014 1:39pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35897151> 
Hello, if you let me get into your conversation, I think your question is 
really good. Many people think that LGBTI rights are some sort of special 
rights for 'gays', while in fact it is about LGBTI people to be able to enjoy 
the very same rights everybody else has. A very good strategy in this regard is 
to try to get allies from wider civil society about non-discrimination on any 
ground, especially around election time, when governments tend to reduce the 
space for civil society to dissent and demand accountabilty.The International 
HIV/AIDS Alliance's member organisation in Namibia, Positive Vibes, supports 
the country's biggest LGBTI network, Outright Namibia, which advocates for 
health and human rights, another important avenue to fight discrimination.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13245116> Clinton Light  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13245116> 20 May 2014 8:00am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35882576> 
Delighted to hear this but having lived in Namibia for 6 years I know that 
this must be hard. How have people reacted to this?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> Guardian contributor
RicardoAmunjera  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> 20 
May 2014 8:59am <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35884392> 
Not at all. Our Namibian goverment never really openly spoke about their 
stance on homosexuality although elements within the goverment voiced their 
opinion and as far as Iam concerned those are opinions and hatred that they 
will ahve to deal with while I live the best life in a country that I call my 
home.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12247861> Andrew Green  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12247861> 20 May 2014 11:48am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35891843>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
I lived an openly gay lifestyle in Namibia in the early 90's and I was never 
discriminated against. My partner and I have been together for 20 years now and 
married for 6. For the first year that gay marraiges were legal in SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> we could not find anyone willing to 
marry us!! Nevertheless, we have never been discriminated against and most 
people we meet comment about our love, which we are blessed to have.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1851104> daisybeast  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1851104> 19 May 2014 6:30pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35863591> 
Do you feel threatened often by the homophobia you face? And if so, how do you 
and your family cope with that?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> Guardian contributor
RicardoAmunjera  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> 20 
May 2014 8:55am <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35884247> 
Not at all. Somehow all these individuals throwing hateful comments never 
actually materialise. I have come to terms that people will hate and try to 
break you to feel more secure about their own situation. I simply dont give to 
much attention to that.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241883> enriquerestoy  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241883> 20 May 2014 1:33pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35896839>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Hello, I am the Senior Adviser on HUman Rights at the International HIV/AIDS 
Alliance (who made It's all about love with Marc and Ricardo). I just wanted to 
first, congratulate Marc and Ricardo on being so brave. We shouldn't 
underestimate what it is like to come out and defend human rights for all, 
includng LGBTI people these days. In Africa alone, more and more countries are 
introducing or enforcing anti-homosexuality legislation, like in Nigeria or 
Uganda. And in many more, politicians are venting their homophobia openly, 
fueling stigma and discrimination at every level of society.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12369518> ellatynemouth  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12369518> 19 May 2014 11:48am 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35844473> 
How do you feel about the plight of other gay people in Africa? 

Do you feel angry about the American evangelical Christians who've caused the 
new wave of homophobia in some other African countries?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> Guardian contributor
RicardoAmunjera  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> 20 
May 2014 8:53am <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35884164> 
Iam angered by the fact that our people are killing their own but more so iam 
dissapointed that we havent realised the hidden agendas of the American 
Evangelican Christian groups come with. They speak about peace and what the 
bible stands for yet all i see is a path left behind filled with the blood of 
innocent people.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11028739> Guardian staff 
MaeveShearlaw  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11028739> 20 May 
2014 1:10pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35895707> 
On Facebook Pablo Castaño asks: 


My question would be how do they avoid arrest or legal action, and how do they 
carry out their activism under the constant threat of homophobia from anti-gay 
activists and law enforcement? Lastly, congrats on being married and having so 
much courage in such a dangerous situation!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> Guardian contributor
RicardoAmunjera  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13241901> 20 
May 2014 1:15pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35895958> 
Our goverment never really voiced their stance on homosexuality. Although 
forces within the goverment have a strong negative attitude towards human 
rights for all. I live in a beautiful country where not everyone share the same 
views but iam relatively safe.
 