
The Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
government is now slamming its foot down on the accelerator to help a private 
company build the biggest coalmine Australia has ever seen.

“We can see the end of the tunnel and now we are accelerating towards it,” the 
state’smining minister, Anthony Lynham, said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/09/carmichael-mine-to-be-given-essential-status-in-sign-of-palaszczuksupport>
.

The massive Adani Carmichael coal project in the state’s Galilee basin has 
been given “critical” status by the government 
<http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2016/10/9/queensland-government-steps-up-to-progress-adani-mine-project>
, in the hope that removing a few bureaucratic hurdles might speed things up a 
little bit.

Carmichael mine to be given 'essential' status in sign of Palaszczuk support
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/09/carmichael-mine-to-be-given-essential-status-in-sign-of-palaszczuksupport>
What’s at the end of Lynham’s tunnel one can only imagine, but given the 
climate-changing gases that will come from burning all that coal, we can make a 
couple of guesses.

Are we being driven headlong, for example, into a concrete wall several metres 
thick?

Is there a precipitous cliff edge at the end of this dark tunnel, at the 
bottom of which is a hellish mix of dead coral, flooded cities and discarded 
soft porn tapes starring Donald Trump?

Lynham’s choice of analogy (or cliché – I’m not sure) works on so many levels 
to illustrate the attitude of state and federal governments to supporting the 
further exploitation of coal.

Where would this tunnel lead us, if the rest of the world took the same high 
speed attitude to liberating fossil fuels as the Queensland government?

The government’s announcement came just days after it was confirmed that the 
Paris climate agreement to keep global warming “well below 2C” would now enter 
into force.

By the time representatives from more than 190 countries gather in Marrakech 
next month for the next major United Nations climate talks, the Paris deal will 
be active. Approving massive coalmines is not part of the plan.

First, let’s just consider the scale of the Adani project. 

In court cases brought to challenge the mine, both Adani and environmental 
groups have agreed on a set of numbers. The mining, transportation and burning 
of the coal will emit the equivalent of 4.7 gigatonnes of CO2 into the 
atmosphere over the life of the mine.

That’s 4,729,988,241 tonnes, to be exact.

Once those gases are in the atmosphere, they remain there for a century or 
more, helping to increase temperatures, raise sea levels and acidify the oceans.

Adani has successfully argued in court that its mine doesn’t contribute 
directly to global emissions because the power plants in India would just get 
their fossil fuel from somewhere else.

In the latest federal court finding 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/FCA/2016/1042.html>, a judge also 
accepted an argument that international agreements like the one made in Paris 
would mitigate any greenhouse gas emissions from the mine. The judge wrote:

I found that direct and consequential greenhouse gas emissions associated with 
the [Carmichael mine] will be managed and mitigated through national and 
international emissions control frameworks operating in Australia and within 
countries that are the import market for coal from the project.

Carmichael coal mine: politics, activism and the search for truth | Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/08/carmichael-coal-mine-politics-activism-and-the-search-for-truth>
So, the existence of an international agreement designed to get countries 
around the world to use less fossil fuels is somehow being used as an excuse 
for them to use more?

That case, brought by the Australian Conservation Foundation, is being 
appealed.

Adani has been granted its mining leases and environment approvals on the 
assumption that the mine will be operating for about 60 years.

Given that we can expect a whole unsavoury suite of climate change impacts in 
the coming decades, you have to wonder how a coalmine might be viewed in the 
year 2050, especially one with a license to keep digging for another 20 years.

The Queensland government needs to be pulling on the handbrake and reversing 
out of this long dark tunnel, for everyone’s sake.
 