
This week sees the release of the film A Dangerous Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/22/a-dangerous-game-edinburgh-2014-review-golf-donald-trump>
. It’s about Scotland andDonald Trump 
<http://www.scotsman.com/what-s-on/film/film-plan-for-donald-trump-s-golf-course-battle-1-3529105>
. What an upsetting combination. We’re being dumped by one and dumped on by the 
other. I’ve been bored, bored, bored by the Scotland palaver for months, but 
now it’s nearly over and they may be leaving us for ever, I feel rejected and 
left in the lurch. They’ll be away singing “I’m all right, Jock”, and we’ll be 
left stuck down here with the Tories, off to hell in a handcart.

“I don’t see why you expect the Scottish people to do you a favour,” says 
Fielding. “Why should they like the English? I don’t. I’ve had enough of all 
these effing public schoolboys.” What a fool. Does he think there’ll be any 
difference? It’s just the same up there. Rich bogeymen versus everyone else. 
It’s not just a favour I want. I’m thinking of the Scottish too. Perhaps the 
Scots ought to watch that film and be warned. They could soon be stuck in the 
same old ordure: billionaires, toadying politicians and environmental damage, 
versus locals, biodiversity and beautiful natural landscape, just like England. 
Scotland could end up blanketed in golf courses and dotted with 90-year-old 
women having to schlep all their water in by bucket, like the elderly lady in A 
Dangerous Game, because Mr Greedy Developer has cocked up her water supply. Who 
helped Trump to get his wicked way? Yes, Mr Salmond, who over-ruled 
Aberdeenshire council’sdecision to refuse his golf course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/blog/2011/sep/13/youve-been-trumped-scotland-golf-course>
.

I suppose this could be sour grapes, but Rosemary will miss them too. “I feel 
proud ofScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>,” says she 
romantically. “I like to boast about it when I go abroad: the lochs and 
castles, the pine forests, islands and mountains. My Grandma was an orphan 
there …”

That boasting will have to stop. Scotland might not be hers anymore. United we 
used to stand, divided we may fall. “I think we’ve fallen already,” says 
Fielding. For once, he may be right.
 