
Liberia's national squad refused to train yesterday and threatened to boycott 
the African Nations Cup, which they are due to open in a match against the 
hosts Mali on Saturday, in a row over money.

"I am sitting here with the cones and the balls but there are no players," 
said George Weah, Liberia's technical director and now a player for Al Jazira 
in the United Arab Emirates. "The players are refusing to train and threatening 
to pack their bags. We might face a big problem for the championship. Some of 
them have already packed their bags to leave."

Weah said the squad had demanded $15,000 (Â£10,700) apiece to participate but 
they have been offered only $6,500.

"We want them to be patriotic and nationalistic," said the Liberian FA's 
deputy secretary-general Napoleon Jaeploe. "They must be sincere and dedicated. 
That amount, $15,000, is not feasible. The FA does not have that amount."

Liberia's players say that they are entitled to recompense as they have had to 
take time out from their clubs to represent their country.

"As the technical director I think the players have to get what they need to 
play," Weah added. "If the government can go some way further to meeting the 
needs of the players, they might be satisfied."

Real Madrid have taken the unlikely step of opening a youth academy in 
Barcelona, the Catalan capital and home of their arch-rivals. It is the 
eight-times European champions first non-Madrid base and was chosen because of 
their high level of support in the region, said the former Spain and Real 
striker Emilio Butragueno at its inauguration.

"It is an honour for someone from Real Madrid to come to Barcelona to 
inaugurate a football academy," he added. "The development of such academies is 
important for the club and it is particularly important in Catalunya because of 
the number of supporters we have here."

Barcelona, meanwhile, have rejected claims made by Michael Reiziger's agent 
that the unsettled Holland defender is of interest to Manchester United. "The 
player is a Barcelona player and I don't recall any contact or negotiations 
with Manchester United," said a spokesman for the Catalan club.

Reiziger's agent was quoted in a Barcelona-based newspaper yesterday saying: 
"Michael knows that Manchester are interested in him and I know the club have 
been in contact with Barcelona."

Tottenham's goalkeeper Kasey Keller will rejoin the United States team for the 
Concacaf Gold Cup. Keller will compete with Brad Friedel for the No1 shirt. - 
Reuters
 