
The British army officer and Arctic explorer Frederick Spencer Chapman was in 
Greenland <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/greenland> on 28 March 1933. 
“Face very sore today. I always suffer more from sun and snowburn than from 
frostbite. Glorious day, 11°F, no wind and burning hot. We all set off towards 
the glacier at the head of the fjord,” he wrote.

He told his story in Watkins’ Last Expedition (1934), in which the leader of 
theGreenland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greenland> expedition, Gino 
Watkins, disappeared in 1932 while in his kayak. “High cirrus clouds dapple the 
intensely blue sky above the main glacier of Kangerdlugsuatsiak [in east 
Greenland]. This great river of ice is several miles wide where it meets the 
fjord in a chaotic vertical wall a hundred feet high, reflecting all imaginable 
shades of blue and green. The glacier winds its way mysteriously into the hills 
with many tributary glaciers joining it.

“If we can only get up the first bit the rest should go fairly easily. The sun 
has thawed the crust in places, so the dogs sink in a bit, but the going is 
still pretty good. While still a mile from the ice wall we meet a high pressure 
ridge running right across the fjord. The glacier flows all winter and masses 
of ice continually break from the terminal wall as in summer. Since the fjord 
is frozen, the debris cannot get away, so its accumulation pushes back the sea 
ice, making a few hundred yards of the most impossible going I have ever 
encountered.”

His frostbitten toes were insensitive. There was even worse news. “Very bad 
toothache today – an exposed nerve which reacts violently to heat or cold. Face 
peeling too, so am none too happy.”
 