
Weiner review: an unsparing portrait of politics and a gift that keeps giving
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/24/anthony-weiner-review-huma-abedin-documentary>
A name of a man is a mind-numbing blow from which he never recovers,” says a 
prefatory title from Marshall McLuhan as this vertiginous political documentary 
begins. That was not always true for awkwardly named seven-term US congressman
Anthony Weiner <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner>. He always 
grasped the issue of his penile-soundalike surname, so to speak, with both 
hands. “Who does John Boehner think he’s fooling?” he’d often ask audiences. 
Weiner was a gifted street fighter, a loudmouth, at a time when Democrats had 
assumed a collective defensive crouch, and you have to think that name was 
among the things that toughened him up.

But there was always a glibness, a narcissism, an excess of amour propre, to 
Weiner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/weiner>. And people called him “cocky” 
not knowing the half of it. His fall came in 2011, when his many sexts and 
sub-belt selfies came to light, and the more he denied it, the more women came 
forward bearing their damning, nocturnally emitted contradictory proof.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dlj0SRNtXquo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dlj0SRNtXquo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dlj0SRNtXquo&media=>
Josh Kriegman and Elyse Steinberg’s Weiner could be subtitled Tragedy Of A 
Ridiculous Man, so heartbreaking and so grimly funny is its portrait of 
Weiner’s failed attempt at a comeback in the New York mayoral race of 2013. 
It’s a tragedy, certainly, for his stoic wife Huma Abedin, senior 
aide/surrogate daughter to Hillary Clinton, who abides her husband’s serial 
idiocies, but looks fit to burst at some moments. The ridiculous part? Well, 
start with the name and it snowballs from there. As many dick jokes as I am 
capable of conjuring, I’m no match for the Murdoch-owned New York Post, which 
outdid itself with, among other things, “WEINER: I’LL STICK IT OUT!” and “OBAMA 
BEATS WEINER”.

Weiner: 10 political lessons from the warts-and-all documentary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/anthony-weiner-documentary-political-lessons>
As the campaign escalates, and as surprisingly appreciative crowds turn out 
for Weiner, the local and then the national media feasts on every nuance and 
fresh disgrace. It’s toe-curlingly funny, and then it’s just horrible. What you 
realise is how much of Weiner’s problem is down to the obverse of that thick 
hide – a lack of self-awareness and introspection. Asked by the film-makers why 
it’s hard to talk about his emotions, Weiner glacially asserts that, by 
definition, the “fly-on-the-wall” doesn’t talk to its subject. After a flaming, 
flailing exchange on MSNBC, he constantly rewatches his performance to cheer 
himself up, even as Abedin tells him it’s a campaign-killing meltdown.

The final proof of this is Weiner itself, the full-access doc, which shows 
Weiner is addicted to any attention he can get – even the most ruinous kind.
 