
What makes a sex scandal stick? How come some politicians philander then 
flounder, while others get a free pass? Gary Hart, the Democrat who was a
shoo-in for the 1987 Democratic presidential nomination 
<http://www.radiolab.org/story/i-dont-have-answer/>, was caught in an affair 
and had to quit 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/21/magazine/how-gary-harts-downfall-forever-changed-american-politics.html?_r=0>
. Similar allegationsdogged Bill Clinton in the 1992 race 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1998/03/21/us/testing-president-other-woman-flowers-acknowledges-earning-500000-scandal.html>
. He ducked, weaved and made it to the Oval Office, where apparently someother 
shenanigans <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lewinsky_scandal>took place.

Today those scandals – despite all the hurt, the betrayal, the dry cleaning 
costs – feel quaint. They were played out in an era when TV news still had time 
slots, when theworld’s first website <http://info.cern.ch/> was only a few 
months old. The stories developed, the details emerged, slowly.

On 27 May 2011 married New York congressman Anthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner> logged into his Twitter 
account and publicly shared a link to a picture of his erect penis, clad in 
grey boxer briefs. He had meant to send the snap to a 21-year-old female 
college student he had been in contact with. The photo was quickly taken down, 
but it had already been copied. The press hounded him, Weiner claimed he had 
been hacked, more photos emerged, more online confidantes were discovered.

Weiner: 10 political lessons from the warts-and-all documentary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/anthony-weiner-documentary-political-lessons>
On 6 June, he apologised 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2011/POLITICS/06/06/new.york.weiner/> (“I have not been 
honest with myself, my family, my constituents, my friends and supporters, and 
the media ... to be clear, the picture was of me, and I sent it”). Ten days 
later, after condemnation from the president and a raft of headlines from 
tabloids runny with puns (“Weiner Exposed”, “Weiner: I’ll Stick it Out”, “Obama 
Beats Weiner”)he told Congress he would resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/16/anthony-weiner-resigns-twitter-scandal>
.

The Weiner scandal was sensational for its speed and – given he had not 
physically had sexual relations with that woman – the volume of the outrage. 
But the story was extraordinary because, two years later, as the politician 
made a comeback bid by running for mayor ofNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City, the same scandal broke 
again. And this time, a camera crew was there to film it.

“Anthony had this experience in the first scandal of having his whole life 
being reduced to a caricature, a punchline,” says Elyse Steinberg, who – with 
her co-director Josh Kriegman (Weiner’s former congressional chief of staff) – 
has madeWeiner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/weiner>, a revelatory account 
of not just this politician’s story, but the state of American politics to boot.

“Going into this mayoral race there was a hope that, by allowing a camera in 
and showing private moments, maybe a different version of his story could be 
told to the one that played out in the New York Post,” she says. “That was his 
intention and that was our intention as well: taking someone who had been 
ridiculed and reduced and offering a more complex portrait.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fanthony-weiner-sexting-scandal-new-york-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa1c93651f722318f6d1c8ca5f4be5048f55d08f%2F0_85_1431_1982%2F1431.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Weiner%20%E2%80%93%20how%20a%20film%20about%20a%20political%20sex%20scandal%20suddenly%20got%20more%20intimate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fanthony-weiner-sexting-scandal-new-york-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Weiner%20%E2%80%93%20how%20a%20film%20about%20a%20political%20sex%20scandal%20suddenly%20got%20more%20intimate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fanthony-weiner-sexting-scandal-new-york-documentary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa1c93651f722318f6d1c8ca5f4be5048f55d08f%2F0_85_1431_1982%2F1431.jpg>
 Anthony Weiner with his wife Huma Abedin (now a senior Hillary Clinton aide) 
in New York in 2011.
Photograph: Sipa Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
The pair thought they would be telling a redemption story. They filmed Weiner 
in the home and on the stump, campaigning alongside his wife,Huma Abedin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/06/huma-abedin-hillary-clinton-anthony-weiner-documentary>
 (now vice-chair of Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign) to gradually win 
back the trust of voters.

In the opening act of the film Weiner, defiant, showboats for crowds at the 
New York Gay Pride Parade. His opponents are booed at town hall meetings for 
bringing the scandal up. His mum, Fran, cheerily answers the phones in his 
campaign office, which is staffed by enthusiastic young volunteers. A version 
of the Russ Ballard song New York Groove blasts from the soundtrack. The man is 
on a roll.


Then, reality pulls the rug from under everyone’s feet. In July 2013 more 
explicit messages emerged, delivered by Weiner under the alias “Carlos Danger” 
to up to 10 women. The explicit material was sent in the months after his 
resignation from Congress.

Kriegman and Steinberg filmed as Weiner plummeted down the polls, watched as 
his staff, desperately hurt by his lack of candour, wrestled with the decision 
over whether to quit (his campaign manager, Danny Kedem, did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/28/anthony-weiner-campaign-manager-quits>
) and kept shooting as he stuck it out to polling day. Having been the 
frontrunner, he came in fifth, with 4.9% of the vote.

“It’s interesting watching him soldier through it all and decide not to quit 
amidst worldwide ridicule,” says Kriegman. “To be in the middle of all that and 
witness his decision to refuse to step aside. It struck some as naive or 
stubborn, but in other ways there’s something admirable about it. There’s 
something about that brash boldness, even if it’s a hopeless effort.”

Everyone has an opinion about Anthony Weiner. He is, says one opponent, “a 
glib narcissist”.“What’s wrong with you?!” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u9XscqOhKOA> hollers MSNBC host Laurence 
O’Donnell in a live TV interview that descends into a shouting match. In a 
masterstroke, Kriegman and Steinberg show this exchange mainly from Weiner’s 
point of view. He sits in an empty TV studio with an earpiece in and O’Donnell 
on a screen berates him for mistakes in his personal life via satellite link. 
Weiner shouts back at nothing. Surprisingly, he comes across rather well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fanthony-weiner-sexting-scandal-new-york-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5839ad093df2247b25bbb63dc3926417e04fadb4%2F0_137_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Weiner%20%E2%80%93%20how%20a%20film%20about%20a%20political%20sex%20scandal%20suddenly%20got%20more%20intimate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fanthony-weiner-sexting-scandal-new-york-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Weiner%20%E2%80%93%20how%20a%20film%20about%20a%20political%20sex%20scandal%20suddenly%20got%20more%20intimate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fanthony-weiner-sexting-scandal-new-york-documentary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5839ad093df2247b25bbb63dc3926417e04fadb4%2F0_137_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Constituents call for Weiner to quit in June 2011. Photograph: Michael 
Nagle/Getty Images 
We get lots of Anthony. Abedin, described as “a daughter” by Clinton at Abedin 
and Weiner’s wedding, remains resolutely focused on the job. The couple’s real 
fight, about whether to continue with the marriage, happened before filming, 
behind closed doors. Any disagreements we see are over how to handle damage 
control. At one point Weiner is asked if he thinks she loves him because of his 
impulsiveness. “In spite of it,” he mumbles.

“Some of the qualities that made him successful before his scandal are the 
same qualities that contributed to some of his behaviour that lead to his 
undoing,” says Kriegman. “He talks about, as a politician, being wired in some 
way to need attention – thriving in a world of transactional and superficial 
relationships. These are qualities that he was rewarded for.”

This, say Kriegman and Steinberg, is their message. That political discourse 
has shifted to a world of talking points, messaging and theatrics. Back in 
1987, when Gary Hart was facing down a media obsessed with his sex life, he 
started to question the ferocity with which the press – even the quality press 
– went after the details of his personal life. Today, invasion is a given. 
Asked why the New York tabloids have gone for him so hard, Weiner says: “I lied 
to them, I’ve got a funny name and they don’t do nuance.”

Weiner review: an unsparing portrait of politics and a gift that keeps giving
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/24/anthony-weiner-review-huma-abedin-documentary>
It’s maybe inevitable that Weiner’s qualities as a politician are subsumed 
beneath the chatter about his poise as a glamour model. His voting record – 
pro-gay rights, pro-drug reform, pro-environment – was progressive. He was 
fiery and passionate in debate,a firm believer in voting for what you thought 
was right, rather than what would benefit your party 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/anthony-weiner-erupts-at-republicans-for-rejecting-9-11-responders-health-bill/>
. In the hopeful half of their film Kriegman and Steinberg show many female 
voters championing his stance on women’s rights over his failings. None of 
these things matter in the end. One man’s campaign, his weaknesses and the 
nature of the politics he was engaged with got impossibly tangled.

“It says something about our political system that goes well beyond Anthony’s 
story,” says Kriegman. “You get to see how much the political conversation in 
the US is driven by spectacle, sensationalism and this insatiable appetite for 
what’s entertaining, rather than what’s substantive. That was almost exactly 
Anthony’s experience.

“It does speak to where we are today with someone like Donald Trump, who 
understands – perhaps better than anyone – how to speak the language of modern 
media, to create a spectacle. I think that’s something Trump and Weiner share. 
While being very different people and very different politicians, they both 
have a kind of sixth sense for how to put on a show in a way that gets rewarded 
in the political process of today.”

Their challenge then was to take a step back and try to show this politician 
as a person: idealistic, driven, absolutely flawed. As New Yorkers headed to 
the polls on 5 November 2013, Kriegman and Steinberg claim they were so busy 
capturing the final moments of their story that they were too busy to vote. 
Would they have voted for Weiner, given everything they knew? They still don’t 
know.

• Weiner is released in the UK on 8 July
 