
West Ham United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> have been 
cleared to continue their FA Cup campaign at West Bromwich Albion next week 
after Fifa opted to fine and reprimand the east London club for fielding Diafra 
Sakho in their fourth-round victory at Bristol City.

Sakho, a 57th-minute substitute, scored the only goal at Ashton Gate last month
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/25/bristol-city-west-ham-fa-cup-match-report>
 even though West Ham had declared the striker unavailable to play for Senegal 
at the Africa Cup of Nations, which is still going on in Equatorial Guinea, 
because of injury.

Fifa rules state that unless there is prior agreement with a national 
association players cannot appear for their clubs during the period they should 
have been released, andSenegal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal> 
duly took their complaint to world football’s governing body.

Its disciplinary committee then found the club guilty of violating the 
regulations but chose to fine them £71,000(CHF100,000) and reprimand club and 
player. The sanctions fall well short of the punishment detailed in Fifa’s 
rules, which read: “If a club refuses to release a player or neglects to do so, 
theFifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> players’ status committee 
shall furthermore request the association to which the club belongs to declare 
any match(es) in which the player took part to have been lost by the club 
concerned.”

Bristol City, responding to the decision, said they are disappointed 
<http://www.bcfc.co.uk/news/article/club-statement-2248213.aspx> and will be 
considering their options.

Fifa confirmed in a statement: “The Senegalese FA was informed by West Ham 
United that Sakho was prevented from playing and travelling by plane due to 
injury and thus he did not join the Senegal team.

“The Fifa disciplinary committee has found the club and the player to have 
violated … the regulations in relation to the match played by Sakho on 25 
January. The club has been fined 100,000 Swiss francs and issued with a 
reprimand, while the player has been sanctioned with a reprimand.”

West Ham had argued that the 25-year-old’s Sakho’s back complaint prevented 
him from flying. Instead, having sought advice from a specialist, he had been 
driven by limousine to Bristol for theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> tie.

Senegal were eliminated from the tournament in Equatorial Guinea two days 
after his decisive intervention at Ashton Gate. The club, who omitted the 
forward for Saturday’s 2-0 Premier League defeat at Liverpool having been made 
aware of the Fifa investigation, had been so unnerved by the controversy that 
they had attempted to placate Senegal via an intermediary.

Yet they will now be able to field Sakho in both league and cup for the games 
ahead. They issued a brief statement on the matter, confirming: “The club and 
the player have received the decision and will now be focusing their 
concentration on the game against Manchester United on Sunday.”

There is no indication that the FA has the power to eliminate anyone from the 
competition based on Fifa’s judgment.
 