
Alongside provocative national interest language 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/02/uk-aid-strategy-national-interest-uneasy-bedfellows>
 and missed opportunities on the theresults-ownership balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/03/effective-aid-projects-teamwork-not-templates-jonathan-glennie>
, prosperity is mentioned 20 times in theUK’s new aid strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/478834/ODA_strategy_final_web_0905.pdf>
 (pdf).

Promoting economic development and prosperity in the developing world with a 
view to reducing poverty and strengthening UK trade and investment 
opportunities is one of the four strategic objectives of UK aid, along with 
strengthening global peace security and governance, strengthening resilience 
and response crises, and tackling extreme poverty. As with national interest 
and results-ownership, the debate is about the spirit of this objective rather 
than the words themselves.

Effective aid projects are the result of teamwork, not templates | Jonathan 
Glennie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/03/effective-aid-projects-teamwork-not-templates-jonathan-glennie>
Taken plainly, who could be against economic development and prosperity? 
Certainly not the world’s poorest countries, which are desperate for the kind 
of economic development and prosperity seen in the west and, increasingly, 
experienced by many traditionally developing countries. Nor the poorest 
communities in those countries for whom prosperity is surely the main aim, not 
just lifting themselves out of the most extreme forms of poverty.


Most agree that economic growth has been one of the main factors behind 
poverty reduction in recent decades. In its absence, it is hard to see how 
poverty can be sustainably reduced.


Prosperity is also quite closely associated with the sustainable development 
goals (SDGs), which are self-consciously not just about focusing on the 
poorest. Prosperity is about building countries’ abilities to respond to their 
own problems through improved, growing economies.


On the one hand, the clear shift in rhetoric from the UK government in recent 
years, epitomised in this latest document, is to be welcomed. It fits pretty 
neatly with a new era of development where the focus is on the sustainability 
of change rather than just responding to urgent need.


Many are concerned about this language, however, and they’re probably right to 
be. We may be witnessing a gradual return to economic growth as the sole focus, 
with no emphasis on distribution of the fruits of that growth, more 
characteristic of previous eras of development thinking. The question we should 
be asking is: whose prosperity?


This is because, while the past few decades have taught us that economic 
growth is a necessity, they have also shown that it is a means to an end rather 
than a goal in itself. Without a raft of other measures in place, it can be 
fairly meaningless to the poorest people, and often in tension with their 
rights.

Aid and national interest needn't be uneasy bedfellows if the balance is right 
| Jonathan Glennie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/02/uk-aid-strategy-national-interest-uneasy-bedfellows>
If the UK government had really got with the programme set out by the SDG 
process – in which David Cameron at one time played a leading role – then the 
document would at least namecheck certain issues. Yet there is nothing on 
sustainable consumption and production, environmental sustainability, 
increasing conflict for limited resources including land, and – above all – 
inequality. This might be taken to imply that, rather than building on the 
evidence and thinking behind the SDG process, the UK aid strategy is indeed 
part of an ideological realignment towards the bad old days of growth first, 
development later.


This is certainly an area to be closely monitored. But we should not go back 
to the binary analysis of previous generations, whereby a focus on economic 
growth was considered threatening.Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> and other types of 
international public finance (loans that may not count as aid if not 
concessional enough, for instance) should absolutely be used to help economic 
growth where appropriate, in support of the development plans of sovereign 
governments. Infrastructure like roads, ports, energy generation and telephony 
are critical in making poverty reduction sustainable.


Everything the strategy says about economic growth and prosperity is eminently 
sensible. Nonetheless, a balance needs to be struck between growing the cake 
and distributing it, recognising the unique role aid can play in the latter. 
The details of economic growth plans are critical.


There is nothing wrong, for example, with trying to extend basic financial 
services (bank accounts and micro-financing solutions) to all people including 
the poorest. But overemphasising the idea that poor people can work themselves 
out of poverty may mean insufficient emphasis is placed on the development of 
decent jobs in a growing manufacturing sector.


Those worried about the direction of the UK government should fight for the 
kind of growth and prosperity they want to see, rather than allowing the debate 
to focus on words that all should readily appropriate as fundamental to the 
development agenda. The kneejerk rejection of growth and prosperity language, 
which still exists in many development movements around the world, needs to 
give way to more nuanced debate – not about whether, but about how.
 