
What is Activate?

On 16 and 17 January 2014 a host of influential and inspirational figures from 
across Southeast Asia and the rest of the world will gather inSingapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore> to discuss the 
role the open internet has to play in transforming the way we do business and 
the way we shape the world's future.

From the new economics of content and the impact of entrepreneurial 
enterprise, to the realities of regional governance and the challenges of 
global development, digital technologies continue to fundamentally transform 
all areas of the world in which we live and work.Activate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate> is the Guardian's platform 
for individuals and organisations working across all sectors who are using 
these technologies to disrupt, innovate and change.

For our inaugural Southeast Asian Activate, we have built an exciting 
multi-disciplinary programme of presentations, debates and lightning pitches to 
look at a number of key themes, including:

• How will the next phase of the web and the next wave of web entrepreneurs be 
funded?

• How can the internet provide education to the whole world?

• What role will mobile technologies have to play in the world's future?

• How can technology help to stimulate growth, innovation, inclusion and 
equality in cities?

• How is tech-led innovation reshaping our public services, governance 
strategies and civic engagement at a regional and global level?

• How can we drive business innovation, growth and change through big data and 
the cloud?

• How is the global, digital economy disrupting the creation, management, 
distribution and monetisation of content?

In addition to the Activate Summit in Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore>, we will be 
hosting theActivate Tech Talent day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/sep/20/activate-tech-talent-day-startup>
 on 16 January 2014. This year, we are looking for 10 tech startups (global and 
regional welcome) with world changing ideas to pitch themselves and their 
companies to our group of venture capitalists, angel investors and industry 
experts. Entry criteria can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/sep/19/tech-talent-pitching-process-criteria>
.

Who speaks at Activate?

We balance the programme to ensure we provide a platform to the grassroots 
innovators and stars of tomorrow, as well as the big name thinkers and doers.

Click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/sep/19/activate-singapore-speakers-lead>
 to view the latest speaker lineup for the Activate Singapore 2014.

Past Activate speakers include:

Eric Schmidt, executive chairman, Google

Reid Hoffman, founder and executive chairman, LinkedIn

Arianna Huffington, founder and president, Huffington Post Media Group

Pierre Omidyar, founder, eBay

Ev Williams, co-founder, Twitter

Werner Vogels, CTO, Amazon

and many, many more…

Click here to book your place >>  
<https://www.eventsmicrosite.com/theguardian/activatesingapore/>
 