
We will be spending a lot of time in the car during the summer holiday, 
driving our three children aged six, eight and 10 to visit relatives. They 
could each watch a DVD but we'd rather have a story that we could all enjoy. 
Are there any audio books which would work for such a wide age range – and keep 
us entertained too?

Long car journeys can be transformed by good family listening – and by the 
conversations about the books afterwards. Think of yourselves as going back to 
the time of storytellers who told stories to whole communities together, 
assuming that everyone would get something out of them.

Now, as then, all ages can be held spellbound by the same story even if they 
each take something different from the story they have heard.

The combination of a dramatic story (which everyone can understand) and an 
important underlying truth (which may become more comprehensible and meaningful 
as you get older) lies at the heart of most folk and fairy stories going right 
back to Aesop's Fables. None of them were written with an age-specific audience 
in mind.

While your six-year-old may not get all the points in a story, because you 
have all been listening, any gaps can easily filled by the rest of you.

Superficially at least, listening is less demanding than reading so all three 
children can be getting to grips with a story which may be slightly beyond 
their reading capacity or stamina.

One obvious advantage of audio books on car journeys is that the listeners are 
a captive audience; with nothing else much to distract them they are likely to 
be willing and able to listen to a story for far longer than they would read to 
themselves.

That being so it could be a good time to choose a classic, which are likely to 
have far longer descriptive passages before anything exciting happens than 
anything written today.

If you are going to be driving anywhere in the country Frances Hodgson 
Burnett'sThe Secret Garden 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846071102>
 brings nature alive vividly and will encourage listeners to start looking more 
closely.
The power of the garden to transform poor unhappy Mary will cast its own spell 
and make looking at birds, flowers and trees more interesting.

Kenneth Grahame's The Wind in the Willows 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9789626342770>
 also goes close up to nature specifically on the river bank. His famous 
characters Ratty, Mole, Badger and the outrageous Mr Toad are given tremendous 
personalities in multi-voiced recordings.

For some understanding of British history, Rosemary Sutcliff's The Eagle of 
the Ninth 
<http://theaudiobookbay.com/audio-books/the-eagle-of-the-ninth-rosemary-sutcliff/>
 brings the story of the missing Roman legion vividly to life, in a story which 
is as human and heart-warming as it is dramatic. Sutcliff's Roman Britain 
sequels to this, or any of her other stories set in long-ago Britain, will give 
visits to anywhere in the UK added interest.

For contemporary stories, US Children's Ambassador, Kate di Camillo's Because 
of Winn-Dixie <http://www.audiobooks.com/audiobook/because-of-winndixie/160122>
, the story of a lonely little girl who adopts a dog, would be a perfect 
choice. Told in the first-person, the book opens: "My name is India 
Opal-Buloni, and last summer, my daddy, the preacher sent me to the store for a 
box of macaroni-and-cheese, some white rice and two tomatoes, and I came back 
with a dog". Listening to Cherry Jones, the US narrator on the audio version, 
gets to the heart of this touching story.

Ian McKellen is equally brilliant in his reading of Michelle Paver's Wolf 
Brother <https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/wolfbrother> and its sequels. 
Set 6,000 years ago in a powerfully imagined and treacherous countryside of 
mountains and forests and icy, fast running rivers, it tells of the struggle 
for survival of the boy Torak and his wolf companion who are on a mission to 
save the world.

For an inventive world of a different kind, Cressida Cowell's best-selling How 
to Train your Dragon series, is irresistible. Starring the unlikely hero Hiccup 
Horrendous Haddock III, who turns out to be an amazing dragon whisperer, the 
rambunctious Viking world is first introduced inHow to Train Your Dragon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781840329698>
. In David Tennant's reading of the stories the drama and the dottiness are 
both captured perfectly. You can also download a Guardian podcast of Cressida 
Cowell reading fromHow to Train Your Viking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2014/feb/20/train-your-viking-cressida-cowell-podcast>
.

Michael Morpurgo is best known for War Horse but his many other books include 
adventures set both in the past and the present, in the UK and abroad and about 
humans and animals. Grouped together inClassic Collections 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007336463>
 the boxed-sets of audio books read by a star-studded cast of actors, including 
Tim Piggott- Smith, Ian McKellen, Jenny Agutter and Michael Morpurgo himself, 
makes each story different and special.

We also have some fantastic free audio downloads on the Guardian children's 
books site includingMichael Morpurgo on why we should remember the first world 
war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2014/jul/01/michael-morpurgo-world-war-podcast>
 andJo Nesbo on why he's obsessed with farting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/audio/2014/may/21/jo-nesbo-doctor-proctor-podcast>
 – findall our podcasts here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/childrens-books-site+content/audio>
.

And may you never hear the whine: "Are we there yet?" again.
 