
With operations in more than 190 countries and territories, a roll call of 
celebrity ambassadors stretching fromDanny Kaye 
<http://www.unicef.org/people/people_danny_kaye.html> to Katy Perry 
<http://www.unicef.org/media/media_71241.html>, and a Nobel prize 
<http://www.unicef.org/about/history/index_56072.html> under its belt, the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (Unicef) <http://www.unicef.org/> is among the UN
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>’s most high-profile and 
well-known organisations.

The United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund, as it was 
originally known, was founded in 1946 to tend to the millions of children 
facing hunger and disease in Europe after thesecond world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/secondworldwar>.

According to its figures 
<http://www.unicefusa.org/stories/8-photos-8-things-you-never-knew-%E2%80%94-about-how-unicef-saves-lives/19131>
, Unicef has helped provide nearly 2 billion people with water; immunised 40% 
of the world’s children, helping to save 3 million lives a year ; and has 
helped reduce the number of deaths of children under five by 50% since 1990.

Unicef, which is funded by voluntary contributions from governments, NGOs, 
foundations and private individuals,spent $4.8bn last year 
<http://www.unicef.org/publications/files/UNICEF_Annual_Report_2014_Web_07June15.pdf>
, with most of its direct programme money going on health, followed by 
education and water, sanitation and hygiene.

As well as working on long-term development programmes, Unicef deals with 
humanitarian emergencies.

In 2014 it responded to almost 300 emergencies in 90 countries, including the 
aftermath oftyphoon Haiyan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/typhoon-haiyan> 
in thePhilippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>, the 
continuing conflicts inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and Central African Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/central-african-republic>, the 
intensification of the civil war inSouth Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan> and the Ebola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola> crisis in parts of west Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>.

The fund has shown itself to be prepared to speak out. In June this year, its 
executive director, Anthony Lake,tried to focus the world’s attention on South 
Sudan <http://www.unicef.org/media/media_82319.html> amid reports that boys 
were being castrated and left to bleed to death, girls as young as eight were 
being gang-raped and murdered, and other children had been thrown into burning 
buildings. “The details of the worsening violence against children are 
unspeakable,” he said. “But we must speak of them.”

Like his predecessors in the top job, Lake – previously a national security 
adviser to Bill Clinton – is an American; theUS is the largest single donor to 
the New York-based organisation <http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c26c.html>.

The fund has found itself the object of criticism. In 1995, Unicef reported 
that fraud and mismanagement in its Kenyan office over the previous two years 
had lost it as much as $10m 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1995/05/26/world/unicef-says-fraud-cost-10-million.html>
.

It has admitted that it and others in the international community are still 
failing many of those they are charged with protecting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/23/unicef-68-million-children-under-five-die-2030-preventable-causes-report>
.

Earlier this year, Unicef warned that while the millennium development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/millennium-development-goals> 
had yielded significant achievements in reducing child and maternal mortality 
and improving access to drinking water, they had failed millions of 
disadvantaged children and even increased levels of inequality in some 
countries.

Unless the world is bolder and better at helping the most vulnerable people in 
the planet, it has said in areport 
<http://www.data.unicef.org/resources/progress-for-children-report>, almost 70 
million children under five will die by 2030 from mainly preventable causes.

 * Now we want to hear from you. If you’ve been involved with the UN in some 
way, we’d like to hear about your experiences – or if you’d just like to share 
your views – then please use the form below. We will be using the most 
interesting contributions in our reporting.  