
On any given day, the World Food Programme (WFP) <http://www.wfp.org/> 
operates 70 aircraft and 20 ships, and has 5,000 trucks bumping along some of 
the world’s most axle-threatening roads to deliver food to remote communities.

The world’s largest humanitarian agency delivers food and other relief 
supplies to about 80 million people in more than 80 countries every year. 
Funding in 2014 was$5.38bn  
<http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/communications/wfp274971.pdf>
, 27% higher than in 2013, and its internal structure – radiating out from the 
headquarters in Rome – would rival that of the most complex conglomerate. It 
has more than 11,300 staff and works with thousands of NGOs in the field.

Last year alone it helped 42 million people in emergencies; it distributed 
3.2m tonnes of food; it worked on six simultaneous emergencies – west Africa’s 
Ebola epidemic, Syria, Central African Republic, South Sudan, post-typhoon 
Philippines and Iraq; and it provided specialised nutritional support to 7.3 
million malnourished children.

That is just a taste of what the oft-maligned frontline relief group does. If 
you thought it was just about sacks of food, think again.

Within months of its creation in 1962, the WFP had to deal with an earthquake 
in Iran, a hurricane in Thailand and the return of 5 million refugees to the 
newly independent Algeria. Today, it prides itself on being the go-to agency in 
an emergency, able to set up communications hubs, build landing strips for 
carriers packed with life-saving supplies, and train government staff.

The image of WFP-stamped food sacks being loaded off trucks is a staple of the 
media’s coverage of disasters, but today the agency wants to draw more 
attention to its resilience-building activities, such as supportingsmallholder 
farmers <http://www.wfp.org/purchase-Progress>or providing cash or vouchers 
<https://www.wfp.org/cash-and-vouchers> for people to buy food and support 
local markets.

This chimes well with a new world order in which Live Aid-type “saviour” 
projects in developing countries are criticised for being outdated, 
condescending and even insulting. Food aid – the most visible handout – is 
often tarred with the same brush, although the millions of hungry people left 
destitute after natural or manmade disasters would see it differently.


Perhaps because of its ubiquity, which itself is the natural result of its 
logistics expertise and ability to respond quickly, the WFP often finds itself 
in the headlines for the wrong reasons. It came under intense scrutiny in 
Somalia after allegations that food aid was being stolen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/aug/16/somalia-food-aid-thefts-rejected>
; and there was consternation this year when photos circulated on social media 
showingWFP food being distributed from boxes bearing the logo of Islamic State 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2015/02/05/us-food-aid-un-analysis-idUKKBN0L90CH20150205>
. There have been some PR gaffes, involving celebrities: Christina Aguilera’s 
rendition ofTwinkle, Twinkle, Little Star in Rwanda  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/14/christina-aguilera-rwanda-feed>
and a subsequent, rather self-centred, magazine article spring to mind.

Notwithstanding sometimes well-placed criticism, the reality is that the WFP 
is still the best-placed, best-resourced global agency for distributing food 
when disaster strikes. If it needs to build bridges and roads, it can. If it 
has to drop food out of planes, it will. Its staff have even used elephants, 
yaks and donkeys to fulfil what remains its core mission:to deliver food into 
the hands of the hungry poor <http://www.wfp.org/faqs>.

In praise of …

In July 2011 at the peak of the Horn of Africa drought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/20/somalia-famine-refugee-camp>, an 
18-month-old Somali boy, Sadak Hassan Abdi, was fighting for his life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fbest-bit-un-united-nations-wfp-world-food-programme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F756de0715a2650eb6b9e8ff31af16f6f01708aa5%2F458_172_3862_3036%2F3862.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20best%20bit%20of%20the%20UN%3F%20No%203%3A%20the%20World%20Food%20Programme&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fbest-bit-un-united-nations-wfp-world-food-programme%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20best%20bit%20of%20the%20UN%3F%20No%203%3A%20the%20World%20Food%20Programme&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fbest-bit-un-united-nations-wfp-world-food-programme%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F756de0715a2650eb6b9e8ff31af16f6f01708aa5%2F458_172_3862_3036%2F3862.jpg>
 Sadak Hassan Abdi and his mother, Hukun. Photograph: WFP 
Fleeing famine in Somalia, he had travelled by foot and donkey cart to the 
border with Ethiopia. At aWorld Food Programme <http://www.wfp.org/> (WFP) 
reception centre, Sadak’s mother, Hukun, had a bleak message for UN officials: 
“I am afraid my child will die.”

Sadak was immediately taken to hospital and when he grew stronger, his mother 
took him back to the WFP centre in Somalia, where she was given supplies of 
fortified supplementary foods and a ration card to provide regular supplies to 
her family. In time, Sadak made a remarkable recovery.

Looking at the pictures of her child before and after treatment, Hukun 
reflected on the impact of the help she received from WFP: “I see two 
pictures,” she said, “the one behind me has war, drought, no rain and no help 
in a hopeless area. But in front of me I see another, one of expectation and 
the restoration of life.”

 * Now we want to hear from you. If you’ve been involved with the UN in some 
way, we’d like to hear about your experiences – or if you’d just like to share 
your views – then please use the form below. We will be using the most 
interesting contributions in our reporting.
 