
In the current furore over migration into Europe, it’s an often forgotten 
irony that the UN refugee agency, theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> high commissioner for 
refugees (UNHCR), was founded to help displaced Europeans. At the end of the 
1940s millions of people were still trying to find their way home, or find a 
new home in Europe. The UNHCR’s groundbreaking work in Europe won it a Nobel 
peaceprize in 1954.

Since then it has helped millions of people.

The UNHCR moved into Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> in the 
1960s as decolonisation brought the large-scale movement of vulnerable people. 
Crises in Asia and Latin America later saw it put the 1951 convention on 
refugees into practice on a global scale.


While the international media focus on the dangerous journey of refugees 
across the Mediterranean, it is in thevast camps of Africa and the Middle East 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/mar/24/dadaab-refugee-camps-living-in-crisis>
 that the UNHCR works with the largest numbers of people. Developing countries 
host more than 86% of the world’s refugees. Since the beginning of 2014, 
190,000 Sudanese refugees, mainly women and children, have arrived in 
south-western Ethiopia. It is in these forgotten pockets of suffering that the 
UNHCR carries out vital work, housing and educating those refugees who have 
been displaced so longthere is no “home” for them to go back to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/17/dadaab-refugee-camp-closure-risk-350000-somali-lives-amnesty>
.


There are 50 million people displaced around the world and global leadership 
on the issue is needed more than ever. The UNHCR campaigns for what it calls 
“durable solutions”, the three most common being repatriation, local 
integration orresettlement overseas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/22/un-urges-wealthy-countries-to-take-one-million-syrian-refugees-in-next-five-years>
. But ithas not been able to persuade the EU to offer places to significant 
numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/13/theresa-may-uk-eu-migrant-resettlement-scheme>
 of Syrians, let alone to refugees from other countries.

The agency is particularly keen to move on from the idea of camps. Thehigh 
commissioner for refugees, António Guterres, questioned why the UNHCR was 
colluding with host states in restricting the freedom of movement of refugees. 
Since then there has been acommitment towards encouraging refugees to settle 
alongside local communities <http://www.unhcr.org/pages/4b0e4cba6.html> in 
urban and rural settings where they can access work more easily.

But huge challenges lie ahead for the UNHCR. Its vision of durable solutions 
for large numbers of the world’s displaced peopleis simply unpalatable to the 
majority of countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/worst-refugee-crisis-since-second-world-war-report-middle-east-africa-syria>
 that could provide those solutions.

In praise of...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fbest-bit-un-unhcr-united-nations-high-commissioner-for-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6efb4eb13b83ed7602097ff924256c895c11331%2F67_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20best%20bit%20of%20the%20UN%3F%20No%201%3A%20the%20UNHCR&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fbest-bit-un-unhcr-united-nations-high-commissioner-for-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20best%20bit%20of%20the%20UN%3F%20No%201%3A%20the%20UNHCR&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Fbest-bit-un-unhcr-united-nations-high-commissioner-for-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6efb4eb13b83ed7602097ff924256c895c11331%2F67_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Omar, a Syrian refugee in Lebanon. 
Eight-year-old Omar is a Syrian refugee in Lebanon embarking on a new life in 
Finland, thanks to the UNHCR resettlement programme. He is incredibly excited 
about his first journey on a plane.

“It goes above the clouds? Above the rain?”

Omar and his sister Majid have a growth-hormone deficiency. Neither can grow 
without continuous hormone and vitamin treatment, which they can’t afford since 
they fled Syria. As well as looking forward to starting school again, Omar 
wants to grow bigger.

“I need treatment so I can become tall, become a man and get married. And you 
know how children hit me now? When I start growing up, I can defend myself.”

 * Now we want to hear from you. If you’ve been involved with the UN in some 
way, we’d like to hear about your experiences – or if you’d just like to share 
your views – then please use the form below. We will be using the most 
interesting contributions in our reporting.  