
Born out of the ashes of the first world war in 1919, the creation of the 
International Labour Organisation (ILO) was inspired by the idea that social 
justice was crucial to world order and peace. It was also a recognition that 
the world was changing, with the mass exploitation of workers in rapidly 
industrialising nations, the influx of a generation of war-damaged young men 
back into the workplace and the need for cooperation in establishing labour 
rights in nations competing for rapidly globalising markets.

In recognition of this, the ILO was designed as the first truly tripartite 
labour organisation, giving equal voice to governments, workers and employers 
in its executive bodies. Its aims were ambitious: to create a framework of 
worker rights, protection against exploitation and slavery and ensure the 
freedom to form unions.

In 1969, the year of its 50th anniversary, it was awarded the Nobel peace 
prize for its work pursuing decent work and justice. By 1996 its membership had 
boomed to 186 member states, who jointly published the first Declaration on the 
Fundamental Principles of Rights at Work, putting a legal responsibility on all 
members to collectively work towards ensuring the free association of workers, 
the elimination of forced and child labour and the end of workplace 
discrimination.

To date the ILO has passed and ratified 189 labour rights conventions. Some 
are genuinely groundbreaking. For example, the 2011 domestic workers convention 
is a recognition that the world’s 53 million domestic workers are often in 
private households unprotected and excluded from legislation protecting other 
workforces. As well as imposing weekly working hours, time off and other basic 
rights, the convention also obliges ratifying member states to protect domestic 
workers from abuse, stop child labour in domestic work and regulate employment 
agencies recruiting domestic workers.


Yet since its inception in 1919, the ILO has been accused of being lumbering 
and out of touch, mired in bureaucracy and failing to ensure that its 
conventions and guidelines are taken seriously by ratifying member states. When 
pushed, the ILO will publicly condemn ratifying member states for breaches, 
such as last year when it spoke out against Qatar allowing forced labour to 
continue in its construction industry. However, there is no real indication 
that this makes much difference to those being exploited.

An assessment by the UK’s Department for International Development 
<http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_152533/lang--en/index.htm>
 in 2011 painted a dismal picture of the ILO’s capacity to follow through on 
the ground, rating its performance as “poor” in many key criteria. It concluded 
that the UN body was not effective at country level and lacked the technical 
and delivery capacity to match its policy advocacy successes. It also said that 
not enough of its resources were spent on lower income countries, where labour 
abuses still flourish.

Another key area of activity for the ILO – data and statistics on labour 
conditions – continues to provide a valuable insight into the working 
conditions of millions. Its data on forced labour and modern-day slavery, which 
estimates that 21 million people are trapped in some sort of labour 
enslavement, is still considered by many to be the most reliable source. Yet 
the ILO admits that such statistics are at best conservative estimates, as it 
struggles to find ways of evaluating the true state of a global workforce that 
is now constantly moving and evolving.


In a world of complex supply chains, increasing global deregulation of the 
labour market and mass movement of workers across borders, it is unclear 
whether the ILO can keep pace.


In praise of...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbest-bit-un-ilo-international-labour-organisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23f211928be0fb24af10d10d0a0f2964e373f315%2F0_0_1620_1080%2F1620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20best%20bit%20of%20the%20UN%3F%20No%208%3A%20International%20Labour%20Organisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbest-bit-un-ilo-international-labour-organisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20best%20bit%20of%20the%20UN%3F%20No%208%3A%20International%20Labour%20Organisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fbest-bit-un-ilo-international-labour-organisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23f211928be0fb24af10d10d0a0f2964e373f315%2F0_0_1620_1080%2F1620.jpg>
 Farzana Islam carries out a factory inspection. Photograph: Shafiqul Alam 
Kiron/ILO 
My name is Farzana Islam. I work for the department of inspection for 
factories and establishments (DIFE) in Bangladesh as a labour inspector. I 
received training from the ILO and now I work closely with both workers and 
factory management.

As a woman this profession is a challenge but it is an honourable job. I help 
workers if they have problems, like if their salaries are not being paid, and 
we tell them their rights. We also help management with compliance.

In the past, some factories were good while others were not, but now the 
picture is changing. I think our garment sector can get better in the future.

 * Now we want to hear from you. If you’ve been involved with the UN in some 
way, we’d like to hear about your experiences – or if you’d just like to share 
your views – then please use the form below. We will be using the most 
interesting contributions in our reporting.  