
Set up in 1948, the World Health Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation> has grown to more 
than 7,000 people working in 150 countries.

Its most celebrated success was the eradication of smallpox. The last recorded 
case was in Somalia in 1977. Infectious diseases have been the priority for 
most of its history. A huge collaborative effort against polio has rid all but 
two countries of endemic disease and record numbers of children around the 
globe are vaccinated against common killers such as diphtheria and rotavirus.

In the 1970s and 80s, it led the global crusade for better understanding and 
treatment of mental health. At the end of the 1990s, it took on the tobacco 
industry, leading eventually to the groundbreaking WHOFramework Convention on 
Tobacco Control <http://www.who.int/fctc/en/> adopted in 2003. Its work has 
helped bring down child mortality by 53% since 2000, although short of the 
millennium development goal of two-thirds, and maternal mortality has halved.

But the Ebola epidemic in Sierra Leone and the other small and impoverished 
west African states of Guinea and Liberia has shown up the WHO’s inadequacies – 
its grindingly slow bureaucracy and its deference to political leaders even in 
the face of an epidemic that knows no national borders.

It is also facing a budget crunch, like many other UN agencies. Over the past 
50 years, core funding – the mandatory contributions from all member states 
that it can use for whatever it thinks fit – has eroded. Itsapproved programme 
budget <http://www.who.int/about/finances-accountability/budget/en/> for 
2014-15, as of April, was $3.98bn, of which only 23% was automatic 
contributions from member states. The rest is from voluntary contributions tied 
to specific projects.

The US government is the biggest voluntary donor, followed by the Bill and 
Melinda Gates Foundation <http://www.gatesfoundation.org/>. Among the 
initiatives they fund arepolio eradication <http://www.polioeradication.org/> 
andmalaria <http://www.who.int/topics/malaria/en/> and child 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs178/en/> and maternal mortality 
<http://www.who.int/topics/maternal_health/en/> programmes.

The WHO employs some dedicated and brilliant people, and much of its work 
setting standards and advising on subjects ranging fromsugar intake 
<http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/guidelines/sugars_intake/en/> to 
what drugs each country should stock 
<http://www.who.int/medicines/publications/essentialmedicines/en/> is vital and 
sound. Most critics agree that the WHO must be the body to lead in improving 
health worldwide, though calls for reform are mounting.

Now we want to hear from you. If you’ve been involved with the UN in some way, 
we’d like to hear about your experiences – or if you’d just like to share your 
views – then please use the form below. We will be using the most interesting 
contributions in our reporting.
 