
Versions of Alan Bennett have been hard to escape over the last six months. 
First came Nicholas Hytner’sfilm of The Lady in the Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lady-in-the-van>, featuring three depictions 
of its author –Alex Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/02/alex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview>
 as both “Alan Bennett”, a diffident north London resident in the 70s and 80s, 
and “AB” the observing writer, plus a present-day cameo from Bennett himself.

Besides his 2015 diary in the LRB 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v38/n01/alan-bennett/what-i-did-in-2015>, edited by his 
friendMary-Kay Wilmers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/24/marykay-wilmers-interview-nicholas-wroe>
, subsequent sightings have included a regional revival of the autobiographical 
playUntold Stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jun/11/untold-stories-review-alan-bennett-leeds>
, and the Radio 4 comedyBoswell’s Life of Bennett 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b076bc7j>, in which the time-travelling 
biographer (Miles Jupp <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/milesjupp>) 
repeatedly urges the Yorkshireman (Alistair McGowan 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0569607/>) to reveal his secrets – “the cream 
cracker under the settee” – only to be told “Don’t be daft”.

Next up is Nick Hornby’s TV reworking (starting on Friday on BBC1) of Love, 
Nina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/16/nick-hornby-writes-first-tv-drama-love-nina>
,Nina Stibbe’s droll epistolary account of her time as Wilmers’s nanny 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/love-nina.html>, in which another “AB” 
continually pops up as a supper-sharing dispenser of practical domestic tips. 
Yet, for whatever reason – Stibbe has wryly inferred he was “mardy because 
I exposed him as a handyman” – the book’s AB becomes Jason Watkins’s Malcolm, 
a bald, vain Scottish poet, and its Wilmers is Helena Bonham Carter’s Georgia 
(the pair do, however, remain bookish Camden neighbours, and Wilmers’s home 
setup and job are unaltered).

Bennett’s near-ubiquity has a paradoxical quality: a playwright who made his 
name with studies of shy, lonely and socially invisible people (who he clearly 
identified with) has become significantly more high profile than peers such as
David Hare <http:> and Tom Stoppard <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard>
, and arguably among the most famous British authors ever. How has this 
happened?

It helps if you are also a performer, and consequently your face and voice 
have long been recognisable (Beyond the Fringe 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0138957/>, including Bennett’s vicar sketch, was 
recorded for TV in 1964). Subsequently he has appeared regularly in other 
writers’ work, often as the academic he once was (Hugh Trevor-Roper inSelling 
Hitler <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0124256/>, Lord Pinkrose in Fortunes of War 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0092353/>), as well as creating, and in some cases 
playing, characters that clearly reflect aspects of himself, from his bevy of 
50‑plus women to gay or latently gay figures such as Graham in his TV series
Talking Heads <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0092462/>, Anthony Blunt in A 
Question of Attribution <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0105204/> and Hector in 
The History Boys.

What helps too is other people portraying you. ITV’s Spitting Image 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0086807/>, in which Bennett’s puppet (voiced by 
Steve Nallon <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0620575/>) could usually be found 
taking tea withThora Hird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/mar/17/guardianobituaries.media>’s, both 
confirmed his celebrity status and magnified it tenfold. And during its run 
from 1984 to 1996 appeared a breakthrough work that saw him writing about 
himself directly for the first time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fwhat-happened-to-alan-bennett-in-nick-hornbys-love-nina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9430b1ae2e7260ce879c55241e83dfbedb500dea%2F0_0_3504_2374%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happened%20to%20Alan%20Bennett%20in%20Nick%20Hornby%E2%80%99s%20Love%2C%20Nina%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fwhat-happened-to-alan-bennett-in-nick-hornbys-love-nina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happened%20to%20Alan%20Bennett%20in%20Nick%20Hornby%E2%80%99s%20Love%2C%20Nina%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F14%2Fwhat-happened-to-alan-bennett-in-nick-hornbys-love-nina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9430b1ae2e7260ce879c55241e83dfbedb500dea%2F0_0_3504_2374%2F3504.jpg>
 Alex Jennings as Alan Bennett and Maggie Smith as Miss Shepherd inThe Lady in 
the Van (2015). Photograph: Allstar/BBC Films 
Writing Home <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/writing-home.html> (1994) was a 
bestselling collection of diaries and other prose (includingThe Lady in the Van 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lady-in-the-van-2.html>) that can be seen not 
as a riposte to hisSpitting Image image, but as complementing it; the latex 
lampooners teased him as twee and tweedy, and he sent himself up as timid and 
fastidious. Other Bennetts emerge too, though, that aren’t so cosy, and he has 
frequently signalled unease that these spikier selves tend to get forgotten.

Writing Home led to the playwright appearing as a stage or screen character, 
first in the1999 theatre adaptation of Miss Shepherd’s story 
<http://www.londontheatrearchive.co.uk/archive/secure/archivereviews/ladyinthevan99.htm>
, and to a more general loosening up whereby the once-wary Bennett began 
offering opinions and freely discussing his private life.

Alex Jennings on playing Alan Bennett: 'He wanted me to be tougher'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/02/alex-jennings-lady-van-alan-bennett-maggie-smith-james-corden-interview>
This incremental acceptance of greater exposure makes it all the harder to 
guess whyLove, Nina’s makers felt they had to leave him out. Possibly the 
book’s AB was perceived as a variant form of cosyfication, as Stibbe sensed. 
But it could be that Bennett saw in her book a kind of claim-jumping: his 60s 
TV seriesOn the Margin <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0396354/> (best known 
through theMark Boxer cartoon strip about the Stringalongs it inspired 
<http://www.adropofart.com/Exhibition/524/london/the-caricatures-and-cartoons-of-mark-boxer>
) anticipated it by almost 50 years in spoofing a Camden set of intellectuals 
and media types.

Or the solution to the puzzle is even simpler: Bennett was “much funnier than 
I tell”, Stibbe has also said, perhaps sheepishly aware that she shows 
sensible, stolid AB being repeatedly outshone by MK’s pithy witticisms. 
If Bennett did object to being depicted by her as unfunny, he has paid a cruel 
price – the character who replaces him is a humourless bore.
 