
What’s the story?

The 70th meeting of the United Nations general assembly is set to open in New 
York – a key moment for the UN during an important anniversary year. And it’s 
not just the birthday celebrations that make this a high-profile get-together. 
This general assembly will see the adoption of the post-2015 development 
agenda, the follow-up to the UN’smillenium development goals 
<http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/> which were set in 2000 with a completion 
date of this year.

What is the UN general assembly?

The UNGA (pronounced “unger”, like hunger without the h) is the democratic 
heart of the UN, a forum for decision-making where all 193 member states each 
have a single vote. Unlike the security council, which is dominated by the five 
permanent members – Russia, UK, US, France and China – every country is invited 
to send a representative to the general assembly. It was established as a 
founding institution of the UN in 1945 as the “deliberative, policymaking and 
representative organ of the United Nations”.

The general assembly has a range of vital decisions to make within the UN 
system, including appointing the secretary general, electing the non-permanent 
members of the security council and approving the UN regular budget.

Most importantly, it is the main global forum for discussing international 
political cooperation, threats to peace and economic development, as well as 
the huge range of social, humanitarian and cultural issues that come under the 
remit of theUnited Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhat-is-the-un-general-assembly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37b6fac2d3f5dbabd8e7d8763a574699455b17c2%2F0_133_3258_1955%2F3258.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20UN%20general%20assembly%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhat-is-the-un-general-assembly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20UN%20general%20assembly%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhat-is-the-un-general-assembly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37b6fac2d3f5dbabd8e7d8763a574699455b17c2%2F0_133_3258_1955%2F3258.jpg>
 George W Bush addresses the UN general assembly on 19 September 2006. 
Photograph: Stan Honda/AFP/Getty Images 
Does it meet only once a year?

No. Although there is great fanfare around the big gathering of nations each 
autumn, the discussions that begin at the main general assembly continue 
throughoutthe year within six committees <http://www.un.org/ga/maincommittees>. 
The UNGA allocates items to the committees by subject, from disarmament to 
climate change and everything in between. Once the committees have met, smaller 
working groups are formed to hammer out details.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhat-is-the-un-general-assembly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd73a9d36f10afc80377a0f658938c6d787ddd9ae%2F0_8_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20UN%20general%20assembly%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhat-is-the-un-general-assembly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20UN%20general%20assembly%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhat-is-the-un-general-assembly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd73a9d36f10afc80377a0f658938c6d787ddd9ae%2F0_8_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Binyamin Netanyahu, the prime minister of Israel, points to a graphic of a 
bomb while discussing Iran during an address to the UN general assembly in 
September 2012. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty Images 
What sort of decisions does it make?

The general assembly discusses and makes decisions on just about anything you 
can think of. The 69th assembly, which is coming to an end, has discussed how 
to further economic development in Africa, the situation in the occupied 
territories of Azerbaijan and the role of diamonds in fuelling conflict. Most 
recently the assembly approved aset of principles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/11/debt-campaigners-hail-un-vote-as-breakthrough>
 to resolve disputes between bankrupt countries and their creditors, which 
comes after years of lobbying by Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> and Greece for a debt 
restructuring process that would shield them from draconian cutbacks 
threatening their political and economic stability. Unlike security council 
resolutions, decisions of the general assembly are not binding, although they 
do carry political weight.

Is every country represented at the general assembly – and who represents them?

Once a year, heads of state attend the general assembly for the annual debate. 
The occasion of the UN’s 70th birthday is expected to draw a more senior level 
of attendee than before, with Russia’s Vladimir Putin expected to make his 
first appearance at a general assembly alongside other heads of state. At other 
meetings, countries are usually represented either by their ambassador to the 
UN or someone less senior.
 UN general assembly’s greatest hits 
While every country will be represented at the main general assembly in the 
autumn, only the well-resourced nations such as the UK or United States will be 
able to have a representative at the meetings throughout the year. Smaller 
countries will group together regionally or by matters of interest, often 
signing joint statements rather than sending a representative to every 
discussion.

How is it financed?

The general assembly is funded out of the UN regular budget which is paid for 
by member states, based on a scale relating to their ability to pay. The 
regular budget for 2014-15 was $5.4bn (£3.5bn) with $663m allocated for the 
general assembly, economic and social council and conference management.

If countries fail to pay their dues they may have their vote taken away. Yemen 
is banned from voting because it is in arrears, while another four countries in 
arrears – Comoros, Guinea-Bissau, São Tomé and Príncipe and Somalia – have been 
allowed to vote until the end of 2015.

At the end of 2014 the state of payments towards the UN was described by a 
senior UN offical as “alarming”, with afunding gap of more than $950m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/10/un-member-states-owe-debt>. 



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhat-is-the-un-general-assembly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68ce69fd002a6ab14972f3e3d680eba0d6a07692%2F0_50_4248_2548%2F4248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20the%20UN%20general%20assembly%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhat-is-the-un-general-assembly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20the%20UN%20general%20assembly%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fwhat-is-the-un-general-assembly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68ce69fd002a6ab14972f3e3d680eba0d6a07692%2F0_50_4248_2548%2F4248.jpg>
 Pakistani education advocate Malala Yousafzai with the UN secretary general, 
Ban Ki-moon, at an event marking 500 days of action for the millennium 
development goals at the UN headquarters. Photograph: Xinhua News Agency/REX 
What is on the agenda for the coming year?

Central on the agenda for the general assembly in 2015-16 are the sustainable 
development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sustainable-development-goals> 
(SDG), which replace the millennium development goals. World leaders are 
expected to adopt a draft resolution on the SDGs at the end of September. A 
raft of other issues will be discussed and voted on in the coming year, 
including how to protect the climate, the treatment of Palestinians in the 
occupied territories, disarmament and global food security.


Where can I learn more?

The Guardian’s special investigation into the United Nations looks at how the 
UN works more generally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/united-nations-70-years>. We are 
tweeting using the hashtag #UNfuture. A special animation guides youfrom the 
birth of the UN through 70 years to the present 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/sep/08/how-did-the-un-get-so-big-rachel-weisz-video>
.

The general assembly’s president tweets at the handle @UN_PGA. The UK mission 
to the UN in New York is@UKUN_NewYork <https://twitter.com/UKUN_NewYork/>, 
while the US ambassador, Samantha Power, uses the handle @ambassadorpower.

The Global Policy Forum <https://www.globalpolicy.org/> is an independent 
policy forum that has produced a huge amount of researchon UN finance and 
decision-making processes <https://www.globalpolicy.org/un-finance.html>.


The former secretary general Kofi Annan’s autobiography Interventions: A Life 
in War and Peace <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/index.php/interventions.html>
 offers an illuminating insight into the high-stakes world of international 
peacemaking.

And if you are interested in the real detail of what the general assembly has 
been discussing since 1946,you can find the agenda for every year here 
<http://research.un.org/en/docs/ga/quick/regular/69>, providing a historical 
insight into the issues that preoccupied member states.

 