
Ideas please, for new uses for a brand-new bus stop and shelter which has gone 
up in countyDurham <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/durham> on a route 
where buses no longer run.

The muddle threatens to add £5,180 to the bills faced by the Labour-controlled 
county council <http://www.durham.gov.uk>, which is having to make cuts of 
approaching £190 million as its part of the current national austerity measures.

This could be unnecessary, though, if the people of Framwellgate Moor  
<http://www.dmm.org.uk/colliery/f012.htm>– or helpful outsiders – come up with 
alternative uses for the spanking new glazed booth with its timetable board and 
litter bin. The latter could obviously be useful just by staying where it is; 
maybe the timetable could be replaced by local notices and small ads, and the 
main structure adopted as a greenhouse for communal veg, as inIncredible Edible 
Todmorden 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/the-northerner/2011/sep/26/incredible-edible-todmorden>
 which theNortherner featured last year. Or for an unusual exotic entry for 
Britain in Bloom <http://www.rhs.org.uk › Gardening › Community gardening>'s 
villages category.

Or does the nearby Salutation pub need a smokers' bothy which might be rented? 
Imagination in such matters can be inspiring, as the use of the redundant phone 
booth at as the verysuccessful mini-visitor centre 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/the-northerner/2011/dec/06/scotland-flodden-bannockburn-northumberland>
 for Flodden battlefield in Northumberland recently proved.

Failing such a rescue, removal of the shelter will cost an estimated £1800 
plus £3,380 to re-erect it elsewhere. The county is currently replacing a 
hundred-odd old brick shelters with the new design, so it would find a home.

As for the muddle, the county says that it kept in close touch with Arriva 
North East <http://www.arrivabus.co.uk/north-east> and was told on two 
occasions that buses still ran. Arriva echoes the keeping in touch line but 
acknowledges "there may have been a misunderstanding as we have not used this 
stop for some time." Local Liberal Democratcounty councillor Mark Wilkes 
<http://markwilkes.mycouncillor.org.uk/> got an email from the transport 
section in August saying:

The shelter near the Salutation is no longer serviced therefore I cannot 
allocate any funds to this shelter and it will be pulled out of the scheme.

But that appears to have been too late.

It's over two years since the last bus called at the stop, according to local 
residents who are astonished at the waste of money. Colin Hillary, chairman of
Framwellgate Moor Community Association 
<http://communityforce.natwest.com/project/1846>, says:

While our community centre is under threat, it seems a shame that they are not 
coordinating their works a little better to put money where it would be 
usefully spent.

It will be interesting to see if other uses can be found. Or even better, 
maybe buses might be laid on again.
 