
The American opioid epidemic claimed another victim, the midwest medical 
examiner’s office confirmed on Thursday. On 21 April, at his suburban 
Minneapolis compound,Prince <https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince> Rogers 
Nelson died from a self-administered fentanyl overdose.

The cause of Prince’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/02/prince-died-opioid-overdose-tests>
 raises the profile of one of the most dangerous but little-known drugs fueling 
opioid deaths.

Fentanyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/04/fentanyl-drug-heroin-new-hampshire-mexico-cartels>
 is a synthetic opioid or painkiller, first developed in the 1960s. It’s about 
100 times more powerful than morphine, and between 30-50 times more powerful 
than heroin.

“It is so potent and so deadly that even a microgram amount can kill someone,” 
said Drug Enforcement Agency spokesman Rusty Payne.

Doctors prescribe it to cancer patients and others experiencing severe pain, 
often in the form of lollipops and patches, but more illicit forms are now 
proliferating.

It’s also a driving force behind a sweeping drug epidemic, which claimed 
47,000 deaths in 2014, according to the most recent estimate by the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention. That was before fentanyl started to take hold 
of the nation.

A deadly crisis: mapping the spread of America's drug overdose epidemic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ng-interactive/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-overdose-deaths-map>
In recent years, the drug has been illegally manufactured in labs in Mexico 
and China. It’s often used to cut heroin without buyers’ knowledge, resulting 
in lethal consequences.

The illicit fentanyl can also be taken in the form of geltabs, nasal sprays, 
and pills,often designed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/10/fentanyl-drug-overdoses-xanax-painkillers>
 to look like other pharmaceutical medications such as Xanax and OxyContin.

“Some are abusing fentanyl knowing what it is, some are abusing heroin laced 
with fentanyl, some are taking fake OxyContin pills,” Payne said.

What form of fentanyl Prince used is unclear so far. 

Where does fentanyl come from?

There was a fentanyl scare in the midwest between 2005 and 2007 in which about 
1,000 people died, but all of those cases could be traced to a single lab in 
Mexico. Once the Drug Enforcement Administration shut down the lab, the 
fentanyl problem stopped too.

The first warning from the DEA of a growing epidemic came in March 2015 in a 
nationwide announcement that fentanyl seizures had increased.

Fentanyl production had spread out between multiple labs and countries, and 
the product was crossing the border in the wake of an executive decision at 
Purdue Pharma to redesign the powerful painkiller OxyContin to make it harder 
to abuse, and a subsequent uptick in heroin use.

Payne said that since fentanyl is so powerful, dealers are able to make 
greater profits selling fentanyl than they are heroin while still utilizing 
trafficking patterns set up by the heroin trade.

How prevalent is it in the US?

In some states, fentanyl makes up a major proportion of escalating opioid 
death tolls. In 2015victims in more than half 
<http://www.mass.gov/eohhs/docs/dph/quality/drugcontrol/county-level-pmp/data-brief-overdose-deaths-may-2016.pdf>
 of the 1,319 opioid-related deaths in Massachusetts had fentanyl in their 
system, and 283 fatal drug overdoses involved fentanyl in New Hampshire.

“Fentanyl is what is killing our citizens,” Manchester’s chief of police, Nick 
Willard, testified before Congress earlier this year.

While the north-east is one of the areas that’s seen some of the more dramatic 
increases in death, Payne said the epidemic is by no means exclusive to the 
area: “We’re not seeing places where it’s not a problem.”

Minnesota has seen relatively few fentanyl deaths compared to other states: 36 
people died from fentanyl overdoses in 2015, according to state data. Meanwhile 
in Ohio there were 1,245 fentanyl seizures in 2014, the most of any state 
according to the CDC.

National data on fentanyl is incomplete. Not every medical examiner’s office 
is able to distinguish between types of opioids when a person dies.

But public health officials have noted that just seizures of the drug have 
spiked from fewer than 500 in 2013 to nearly 6,000 in 2015, according to a
recent presentation 
<http://www.slideshare.net/OPUNITE/rx16-federal-tues2001gladden2halpin3green>.

“If this were Zika we would be calling a public health emergency,” said Traci 
Green, deputy director of Boston Medical Injury Prevention Center, and one of 
the presenters of the data.

On 15 April the DEA issued another report, this time to warn that hundreds of 
counterfeit oxycodone pills that turned out to be fentanyl were seized in the 
Otay Mesa Port in San Diego.

Similar incidents involving fake Xanax and Norco pills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/10/fentanyl-drug-overdoses-xanax-painkillers?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
 that were actually fentanyl, were reported around the country around this 
period as well.

Reports compiled by epidemiologist Steven P Kurtz, director of the Center for 
Applied Research on Substance Use and Health Disparities, shows that a variety 
of fentanyl pills pressed in the form of other substances, were appearing in 
California, Florida, and through the middle of the country from Wisconsin, and 
Ohio to Mississippi.

What’s the response to fentanyl?

Figuring out how to manage the opioid epidemic has been a challenge for law 
enforcement and health officials. In October 2015, Chinabanned certain kinds of 
fentanyl analogues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/synthetic-opiates-drug-laws-w-18-fentanyl>
 at the request of US law enforcement, to which chemists responded by changing 
the structure of the fentanyl slightly, and concocting research opioids which 
have never been tested on humans, in an attempt to eschew the law.

“It could be that by playing whack-a-mole with drug policy we just create more 
moles,” said Michael Gilbert, an epidemiologist who specializes in harm 
reduction. “It could well be the best approach to reducing morbidity and 
mortality is not to crack down harder but to better understand why they are 
using it as their drug of choice.”

Payne said the DEA’s mission is to eradicate illegal fentanyl entirely. “There 
is no such thing as a safe amount of fentanyl,” said Payne.

Many states are improving access to Naloxone, a drug that can reverse opioid 
overdoses, and creating good samaritan laws, so those reporting an overdose 
won’t be charged.

Some states, such as New Hampshire, have responded by pressing murder charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/09/new-hampshire-heroin-fentanyl-drug-dealers-murder-charges>
 against individuals found guilty of providing users with lethal doses of 
fentanyl. Prosecutors in Minnesotaregularly charge drug dealers 
<http://www.mprnews.org/story/2013/01/23/regional/murder-charges-overdose-cases>
 with third-degree murder as well.
 