 "So," I say to Pam as we tramp through the fields in our boiler suits and 
wellies, coils of rope and carabiners swinging from the harnesses at our waists 
and helmets tucked under our arms, "what's the best thing about caving?"
"When it's all over and you're back out in the open air again," she says 
without hesitation. I look at her, astounded. "Why don't you just go for a nice 
walk, then?"

"Well, you don't appreciate it nearly as much if you haven't spent hours 
getting cold and wet, crawling about in the dark."

"You're not selling it to me, Pam ... "

We were in the Mendip Hills in Somerset on a dampish day in early spring. The 
countryside was all green and sparkly and full of birdsong, but I was about to 
leave it all behind and descend into the underworld.

We came to what looked like an old brick outhouse at the side of a river. 
There was a narrow triangular hole in the floor which looked too small for a 
jack russell to squeeze through, and the cacophonous sound of rushing water. 
"This is the entrance to the cave," says Pam. "Shall I go first?"

Pam has been caving for 25 years. She and her husband Tim are among the top 
cavers in the country. They are passionate about the world hidden beneath our 
feet and they were to be my instructors and guides on my first ever foray below 
ground that didn't involve getting on the tube.

When the BBC asked if I would be interested in doing a film about underground 
Britain and learning to cave, I didn't know how to answer. On the one hand, it 
seemed a great opportunity to try something completely new; on the other, I had 
simply no idea how I would react to being underground. "Are you 
claustrophobic?" I was asked. The truth is I didn't really know. I hate being 
in a lift with too many people, or in an overcrowded room. When a train stops 
in a tunnel or a plane sits on a runway with the doors shut but doesn't move, I 
begin to feel a creeping sense of panic that may be claustrophobia, but may 
equally be the frustration of being in a situation I have no control over.

Friends weren't helpful. "Oh, I couldn't do that. What if you get trapped? 
It'll be terrifying. You could be buried alive!" And when the programme's 
producer started telling me about some of the things he was hoping we might 
film, my palms broke out in a sweat and I started to feel very queasy indeed. 
But still I was curious. It was going to be one hell of a challenge, but 
everyone needs one of those every now and then. I said yes, and the next thing 
I knew I was in a torrent of freezing water, lowering myself down a crevice 
which didn't seem much wider than a slot on a toaster.

In my mind, caving was going to consist entirely of crawling about in dark 
passages, some of them smaller than others. But navigating a cave system can 
involve everything - climbing, abseiling, wading, swimming, free diving, 
contorting your body into extraordinary positions.

Tackling a cave is like doing a puzzle, it's not just a question of walking or 
crawling or slithering. My brain was racing all the time: how do I do this? How 
do I conquer the fear that I will never get through this or over this or under 
this, and if I do, will I ever be able to get back again? I had to find 
solutions, work out how to push, pull and stretch my body to get through gaps 
or past obstacles my mind was telling me were insurmountable. I got myself into 
places so uncomfortable, so alien and so bloody ridiculous that all I could do 
was dissolve into hysterical laughter.

I experienced terror, wonder, incredulity and pure adrenaline-charged joy, all 
in the space of a couple of hours underground. I discovered that my body could 
do things I had no idea it was capable of, and the sense of achievement after 
completing a particularly challenging section of cave was intoxicating. But 
more than that, I discovered just how much jaw-dropping beauty you miss if you 
don't go underground. Water does extraordinary things to rock, sculpting it 
into a weird, Dali-esque place where stone can take on the appearance of a 
frozen chocolate fountain, and curtains of pencil-thin straws grow down from 
the roof to shine pale and luminescent in the light of a head torch. I felt I'd 
been given the key to a whole new world and I loved it.

But Pam was right. When you do emerge, mud-covered, cold and blinking into the 
daylight, there is no better feeling than to lie flat on your back looking up 
at the sky with a big, hot cup of tea.

Caving

Thrill rating 8/10


Danger rating 8/10


Fitness rating 8/10


In a nutshell ...

"Otherwordly" is the word best used to describe this adventure sport. Caving 
involves climbing, squeezing and squirming your way into openings in the 
earth's rocks to discover the many fascinating, sometimes very large (and 
beautiful) caverns under the surface. Despite its rather dangerous image 
(courtesy of television programmes like Casualty), Andy Sparrow, who runs a 
range of caving sessions in the Mendip Hills, says the sport has an excellent 
safety record so long as you go with a qualified instructor or caving club. 
Wearing a helmet and waterproof clothing (and dodging the odd bat), you're 
privy to a hidden world of stalagmites and stalactites, may have to wade 
through torrential underground rivers and negotiate thunderous waterfalls. 
There's a conservation message, too, because caves are a very fragile 
environment. All cavers are encouraged to "take nothing but photographs and 
leave nothing but footprints".

What's the buzz?

Not only is caving a well-kept secret, it's also one of the purest adventure 
sports in the UK, allowing you - like the beer - to reach parts of the country 
other adventurers cannot reach. In all, there are reckoned to be more than 300 
miles of explorable cave passages in Britain. The element of discovery is mixed 
with climbing, abseiling and bouldering, so expect to be physically and 
mentally flabbergasted (not to mention knackered and sore) by the end.

Thrill a minute?

The challenge of entering the unknown in the pitch dark can be, let's face it, 
pretty terrifying, so choose your location carefully. Andy Sparrow takes small 
groups of beginners to Swildon's Hole in the Mendips. This is the longest cave 
system in the area, with large and easy chambers to climb through. It's a fun 
taster day out; if you like that you can progress to a two-day group cavers 
course and learn about cave rescue, navigation, cave formation and conservation.

Adrenaline peak

Hardened cavers can head to Ogof Draenen in south Wales - the second longest 
cave system in Britain. The system was thought to be only 20 metres long until 
it was excavated in the early 90s. Now there's nearly 50 miles of passage 
waiting to be explored, but it's by no means an easy walk: there are loose 
boulders to negotiate and, because it's so long, you'll need to bring extra 
lamp batteries (you really don't want to run out in here).

Where to do it

The Yorkshire and Derbyshire Dales, the Mendips in Somerset and the Brecon 
Beacons in south Wales, plus the metalliferous mines of north-west Scotland, 
are the main areas recognised by the British Caving Association.

Who can do it

Clubs set a minimum age limit of 16. It also helps to be fit, tolerant of 
small spaces, with a not-too- overactive imagination in the dark.

What to take

Old, warm clothes, a waterproof jacket, over-trousers and walking boots - 
trainers won't do!

Typical prices

One of Andy's day-long beginners' courses costs Â£210 per group (maximum eight 
people).

Impress your pals

Cave exploration used to be called "spelunking". But during the 1960s the word 
picked up negative connotations (can't imagine why), and became a derogatory 
term to describe inexperienced cavers who are likely to need rescuing.

YouTube searchwords 'caving, kate humble'

Good links

trycaving.co.uk <http://www.trycaving.co.uk>

showcaves.co.uk <http://www.showcaves.co.uk>

mendipnet.co.uk <http://www.mendipnet.co.uk>

outdoorinstruction.co.uk <http://www.outdoorinstruction.co.uk>

Potholing: the tightest squeeze of all ...

Not to be confused with those pesky pockmarks in the road or, indeed, with 
caving, potholing is the most adventurous and, to most of us, frankly 
terrifying strand of the whole poke-around-in-dark-places sporting world.

It involves abseiling or climbing down ladders into vertical fissures in the 
earth. There is no going up, sideways, over or around - there's only one 
direction you're headed and that's down, down, deeper and down into the very 
capillaries of the earth (Status Quo were clearly potholing mad).Potholers have 
to fit into even tighter "squeezes" than cavers, so anyone who feels even 
mildly horrified at the thought of being buried alive 100 metres under the 
earth, look away now.

The narrow flues ("pots") beneath the earth's surface are formed by water 
erosion. These underground networks can be found all over Britain, but the 
limestone moors of the Yorkshire Dales are prime potholing territory. In the 
Three Peaks area of the Dales, Gaping Gill - a yawning abyss engulfing 
Britain's highest unbroken waterfall, Fell Beck - is probably the most famous 
cave system in Britain.

Potholers will have a field day here, shimmying their way down the 110-metre 
main shaft into the majestic main chamber, or negotiating any one of the six 
other principal entrances: Bar Pot, Flood Entrance Pot, Stream Passage Pot, 
Disappointment Pot, Henslers Pot and Corkey's Pot, all of which unite 
underground. And if you think those names are bizarre, take a trip to 
Goatchurch Cavern in Somerset's Mendip Hills, with its evocatively titled 
potholes the Maze, the Drainpipe, the Coffin Lid and (in case you were still in 
any doubt) Bloody Tight.

Clearly potholing isn't for everyone (particularly the unfit and not overly 
svelte). But regardless of age or size (most organisations will take children 
aged eight and above), if you can overcome your fears and fancy shimmying down 
a dark, dank and, at times, suffocating underground drainpipe, you're a braver 
person than most.
 