
There’s an invisible link that unites Yvette Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper> and Liz Kendall and Andy 
Burnham. That connects them to Ed Miliband and Ed Balls and Tony Blair. To 
David Cameron and George Osborne and Nick Clegg. To 12 members of the current 
cabinet. And 12 members of the current shadow cabinet.

Who should I vote for in the Labour leadership election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2015/aug/13/labour-leadership-candidates-comparison-burnham-cooper-corbyn-kendall>
In fact, it’s not invisible at all. It’s right there on their parliamentary 
bios and their Wikipedia pages and yet the word that links all three is so 
ubiquitous, so commonplace, that in weeks of campaigning it has barely merited 
a single mention or raised a single eyebrow. All three areOxbridge graduates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/05/private-school-oxford-cambridge-educations-over-represented-parliamentary-candidates>
.

Cooper, Kendall and Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2015/aug/13/labour-leadership-candidates-comparison-burnham-cooper-corbyn-kendall>
 may have grown up in different parts of the country and represent diverse 
constituencies, but if it’s hard to separate them in your head, it may be 
because it’s hard to separate them on paper: they all spent a critical moment 
in their lives at either Oxford or Cambridge, an experience that furnished them 
not just with a degree, but with friends and allies and future colleagues. A 
unifying experience that inducted them into an elite club and set them down the 
path their adult lives have taken, propelling them to the thinktanks (Cooper, 
Kendall) and special adviser positions (Burnham) that were the stepping stones 
to the safe seats they occupy today.

This week their fellow leadership candidate Jeremy Corbyn drew attention to 
one aspect of the issue,saying that Labour should set up a fund to help people 
on low incomes become MPs 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/jeremy-corbyn-will-set-up-a-fund-to-help-people-on-low-incomes-become-labour-mps-10468820.html>
. “It is not enough to be for working people,” he said. “We have to be of 
working people as well.”

But the Oxbridge connection is more invidious than this and if it hasn’t been 
considered worthy of comment during the leadership contest, it’s in part 
because in Britain most people who do the commenting also went there. Oxbridge 
doesn’t just dominate the Palace of Westminster but an entire political class. 
From the politicians and the special advisers to the political editors, pundits 
and thinktankees, there’s a homogeneity of experience, of thinking, of 
networks, of power and of influence that has led to an in-crowd that doesn’t 
even recognise it’s an in-crowd. There’s arguably more that unites our 
political elite than divides them. The last election was a battle between one 
OxfordPPE <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philosophy,_Politics_and_Economics> 
graduate (Cameron) and another Oxford PPE graduate (Miliband).

And, yes – what a hypocrite! – I did too. Of course, I did. I work in an 
Oxbridge-dominated industry

Of course, if you believe Oxford and Cambridge are simply our two finest 
universities, that they take the brightest and the best, and it’s a matter of 
the natural order of things that their graduates should go on to govern us, 
none of this is a problem. But how can this be true? Just7% of the population 
go to private schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/aug/28/elitism-in-britain-breakdown-by-profession>
 and yet they take 44% of the places at Oxford, and 38% at Cambridge. What are 
we saying? That rich people are cleverer than the rest of us? That they’re more 
able? That they deserve to rule?

If Oxbridge were just about education, perhaps this wouldn’t matter: wealthier 
children get to study in smaller classes, in more scenic surroundings, with 
better facilities, and more resources when they’re at secondary school. We 
accept this as fair and right (or at least not so wrong and iniquitous as to 
make any government look at the charitable tax status of private schools that 
makes this possible). So what if they enjoy the same advantages for their 
university degrees?

But Oxbridge is the springboard into public life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/mar/16/highereducation.news>. It’s 
the means by which a privately educated elite consolidates its stranglehold on 
power, wealth, the City and the professions – and pretty much everything else: 
82% of barristers went to Oxford or Cambridge, as did 78% of judges, 53% of top 
solicitors, and 45% of leading journalists,according to the Sutton Trust 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/04/ST_MilburnSubmission.pdf>
.

And, yes – what a hypocrite! – I did too. Of course, I did. It’s almost a 
given. I work in anOxbridge-dominated industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/30/open-door-guardian-oxbridge-graduates>
, and since, to my knowledge, nobody else from my alma mater,Radyr Comp 
<http://www.radyr.cardiff.sch.uk/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1>, has ever 
become a national newspaper journalist, I doubt I’d be pontificating here 
otherwise.

Oxford and Cambridge need colleges exclusively for state school pupils | Lorna 
Finlayson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/24/oxford-cambridge-colleges-exclusively-state-school-pupils>
Cooper was a comprehensive school girl too: the system allows a few of us 
through. (Though not many: between them, Eton and Westminster send almost twice 
as many students to Oxbridge as the whole of Wales.) But the problem with this 
is that it nurtures a dangerous myth: that we live in a meritocracy. It 
promotes the fallacy that Oxbridge is a means of channelling talent, rather 
than shoring up an iniquitous status quo. For those who get in, it’s easy to 
believe we live in a country where hard work pays off.

Oxbridge, privilege and the perpetuation of unhelpful stereotypes | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/27/oxbridge-privilege-and-the-perpetuation-of-unhelpful-stereotypes>
But it simply doesn’t. And Oxbridge is both a symbol and an enabler of that. 
Politicians and pundits have pat little phrases about “falling social mobility” 
and “increasing inequality”, but this doesn’t even touchwhat it feels like to 
be locked out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/09/blair-corbyn-islington-north-london-labour>
. Almost an entire generation has been excluded from the life chances most 
occupants of the Palace of Westminster enjoy. Even within Labour, the Corbyn 
campaign noted this week, twice as many MPs went to a private school as come 
from a working-class background.

The party’s former communications chief, Alastair Campbell, has argued for 
anyone but Corbyn. But in reality what’s happening is the rejection of an 
entire political class. It’s not anyone but Corbyn. It’s anyone but Oxbridge.
 