
It’s been an eventful Africa Cup of Nations 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/football/africannationscup> in Equatorial Guinea, 
with enough off-field drama to compete with the action on the pitch. And after 
three weeks of competition the line-up for Sunday’s final has been settled, 
with Ghana to face Ivory Coast.

Last night the Black Stars beat the hosts 3-0 in a semi-final that descended 
into violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/05/africa-cup-nations-ghana-equatorial-guinea-violence>
 when the home fans pelted missiles across the stadium – although the incident 
didn’t dampen Ghana’s celebrations after the game:

Ivory Coast’s qualifier on Wednesday was slightly less eventful, with Les 
Éléphants overcoming a slight wobble to beat DR Congo 3-1. Jonathan Wilson,who 
watched the match in Bata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/04/dr-congo-ivory-coast-africa-cup-of-nations-match-report>
, wrote for the Guardian that the team’s golden generation could finally be 
coming in to its own.

Some say Africa’s biggest tournament has failed to capture the world’s 
imagination 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2015-01-30-afcon-2015-group-stage-cinderella-stories-claude-le-roy-drawing-of-lots-and-more./#.VNSIf2SsUrM>
this time but there have been some surprises. Congo made it to the
quarter-finals under French coach Claude LeRoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/31/claude-leroy-congo-dr-congo-africa-cup-of-nations-2015>
, formerly coach of DR Congo, and previously disqualified Equatorial Guinea 
made it to the semi-finals against the odds. The team was reinstated when the 
government stepped in at the last minute to host the tournament afterMorocco 
pulled out citing fears about Ebola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/13/morocco-cup-of-nations-ebola-africa>
.

There’ve been plenty of stunning strikes  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9hF0KPi84cU>and silky skills 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TILxr4gorfs>, but our highlight came from the 
tournament’s oldest player – DR Congo’sRobert Kidiaba 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AGRYAYiBWqk> – with his very particular form 
of celebrating:
 Kidiaba pulled his trademark celebration during DR Congo’s quarter final 
victory over Congo 
If you’ve been at the tournament or watching from home we want to know who 
your rooting for in the final: the Black Stars or Les Éléphants? Which other 
teams have you enjoyed watching? And what has been your highlight of the 
tournament, both on and off the pitch.

Tell us in comments below or join the debate on Twitter by sharing your views 
@GuardianAfrica <https://twitter.com/GuardianAfrica>. You can also share your 
photos and videos of you watching the football with GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/539ae4a0e4b0959f1cb32ed5>. 
 