
Is your company the next big thing in tech? Does your startup have the 
potential to transform the way we live, work and interact? Do you have an idea 
that can change the world?

The Guardian and MediaGuru are giving you the chance to find out.

**Enter the Activate Singapore Tech Talent competition for a chance to win 
$50,000 SGD investment from MediaGuru and £100,000 of advertising across The 
Guardian platform** 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/nov/05/tech-talent-pitching-process-criteria>

The Activate Tech Talent day is a startup focused one-day event and 
competition aimed at entrepreneurs, investors, financiers, professional 
services firms, government organisations and academic institutions. It will 
take place on the 16 January the day before theActivate Singapore Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore>. 

Whether you're a startup, a VC, an angel investor or an ideas incubator 
looking for the next big innovation, you'll find the Tech Talent day a 
fantastic opportunity to exchange ideas and learning and do business with 
leading innovators in your field.

- You'll learn what the growth prospects are like for domestic and 
international markets from economic experts

- You'll engage with pioneering entrepreneurs how to protect IP and patent 
ideas, how to recruit and retain talent and how to scale and grow

- You'll forge relationships with investors, angels and VCs who can take your 
ideas to the next level

But does your startup have what it takes?

In addition, we're looking for 30 startups across three categories to come to 
theActivate Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore> Tech Talent day 
and pitch their ideas to a panel of leading investors, inventors and 
entrepreneurs - the winner will take home $50,000 SGD investment from MediaGuru 
and £100,000 of advertising across The Guardian platform. Each category winner 
will also take away a 6" display wifi Kindle courtesy of Amazon Web Services.

Want to get involved? Click here to find out how to enter your startup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/nov/05/tech-talent-pitching-process-criteria>

Just want to attend? Check out the programme here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/dec/16/activate-singapore-tech-talent-startups>

Places are limited for the Activate Singapore Tech Talent day. To register 
your place clickhere 
<https://www.eventsmicrosite.com/theguardian/activatesingapore/>
 