
September

Bad Bridesmaid

Eventually, there will surely be a reality TV show in which commissioning 
executives have to guess which of the reality TV shows being pitched to them is 
actually a satirical send-up of the genre. Meanwhile, we have this second-tier 
ITV offering in which a hen weekend or wedding party has been infiltrated by an 
actor playing an “over the top” character who the bride insists is a long 
lost-friend or family member. Only the bride and the imposter know what is 
going on until the end, when the mayhem is explained, although, writing this, 
it seems increasingly probable that ITV has slipped in a fake press release to 
test us.Mark Lawson ITV2, 11 September

Boardwalk Empire

A series that never quite gained the foothold that many expected it to, 
Boardwalk Empire is about to come to an end.If the trailer is any indication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/aug/12/boardwalk-empire-season-five-trailer-final-series>
, this final series will see the various gangsters and reprobates of the 
prohibition era attempting to legitimise themselves as businessmen. The fact 
that the trailer is soundtracked by all kinds of nightmarish horrorcore 
screeching suggests that this might not be as easy as it sounds. “No one goes 
quietly,” it promises. Well, duh.SH Sky Atlantic, 13 September
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6gfvaRJ3JY0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6gfvaRJ3JY0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6gfvaRJ3JY0&media=>
Cilla

Two years after writer Jeff Pope and actor Sheridan Smith collaborated on a 
drama about the Great Train Robbery – bringing her an acting trophy from Bafta 
for her portrayal of robber’s wife Charmaine Biggs and him a mini-series 
nomination – the same team turn to a more lovable aspect of 1960s culture in 
this Cilla Black life story. Expect pitch-perfect impersonation from Smith but, 
given that Black has been consulted, few biographical surprise-surprises.ML 
ITV, 15 September

The Leftovers

Damon Lindeloff is clearly going through something. After his finale to Lost 
was received to almost universal dismay, he has chosen this adaptation of Tom 
Perrotta’s desperately bleak novel as his next TV project. Three years ago, 2% 
of the world’s population vanished. The survivors, wracked with misery and 
guilt, struggle to find meaning in their disappearance. It’s a crushing watch, 
and answers might be even less forthcoming than in Lost. No polar bears here, 
it is safe to guess.SH Sky Atlantic, 16 September

The Last Ship

If The Leftovers’ grim band of survivor guilt isn’t your cup of tea, you can 
always try The Last Ship. Once again, millions of people around the world have 
died, but this time the remaining few are on a boat. Their job? To stay afloat 
until people stop dying. Their secondary job? To swish around ridiculously and 
spout badly-formed nonsense at every turn. That’s right, The Last Ship is 
executive-produced by Michael Bay. That man ruins everything.Stuart Heritage 
Sky1, 12 September
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4FZdk7LHQ0o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4FZdk7LHQ0o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4FZdk7LHQ0o&media=>
Downton Abbey

There’s no stopping the Emmy-nominated period drama juggernaut. The story of 
the Grantham family has reached 1924, and, according to Mrs Hughes, “Downton is 
catching up with the times we live in.” “That is exactly what I’m afraid of,” 
replies Carson, suggesting yet more resistance to impending modernity – which, 
of course, means plenty of opportunity for baffled zingers from the Dowager 
Countess. Richard E Grant and Anna Chancellor join the cast, with Grant playing 
a guest of the Granthams and Chancellor the mischievous Lady Anstruther. Let’s 
hope all this action leaves less time for the endlessly dreary saga of Lady 
Mary’s suitors.Rebecca Nicholson ITV, 21 September

Transparent

Amazon’s streaming service has yet to produce original content on a level with 
Netflix smashes such as House of Cards or Orange is the New Black, but 
Transparent is its first serious contender. The series, which tells the story 
of Jeffrey Tambor’s Mort and his transition towards becoming Moira, has an 
indie-movie aesthetic and a wry, gentle touch. Tambor’s children are 
self-involved, sexually confused and in the middle of various life crises, with 
Girls star Gaby Hoffman particularly impressive as listless youngest daughter 
Ali.RN Amazon Prime, 26 September

Marvellous

Television’s current obsession with whodunnits means that there are few 
experiments with dramatic form of the sort attempted by the late Dennis Potter 
in Pennies from Heaven and The Singing Detective. So it’s encouraging to hear 
Peter Bowker (Occupation, Eric and Ernie) talking up the strangeness of his 
latest script. He describes Marvellous as “part biopic, part musical, part 
fantasy”.Toby Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/toby-jones> plays 
Neil Baldwin, a real-life figure who overcame learning difficulties to achieve 
success in the worlds of sport, religion, entertainment and academia.ML BBC2
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgRFwKSqvxug&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgRFwKSqvxug>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgRFwKSqvxug&media=>
Glue

Those keen to write off all homegrown E4 dramas as witless Skins knock-offs 
would do well to check out Glue. This eight-part murder mystery, set in an 
ignored corner of the countryside where local youths have been driven reckless 
by boredom, is written by Jack Thorne of This is England ’86 fame.SH E4

24 Hours in Police Custody

Viewers may have to get used to watching images in which large parts of the 
screen are pixillated to conceal identity as this observational series is 
filmed at a Luton police station during initial interrogations of those 
arrested. People released without charge may exercise their own right to 
privacy, while lawyers may demand it for those who are sent deeper into the 
judicial system but, as long as they get enough usable footage, the series 
hopes to benefit from remote and fixed cameras in order to give “unprecedented” 
images of a cop shop in operation. ML Channel 4

October
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYmNIfns2lxg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYmNIfns2lxg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYmNIfns2lxg&media=>
Grantchester

With the exception of the Agatha Christie shows, British detective dramas have 
generally had contemporary settings. But the success of Inspector George 
Gently, Father Brown and The Suspicions of Mr Whicher has encouraged period 
policing, and ITV has put a lot of money and publicity into these adaptations 
of James Runcie’s mysteries, set in 1950s Cambridgeshire and featuring 
cleric-sleuth Canon Sidney Chambers (James Norton). As Runcie is the son of an 
archbishop of Canterbury, theRadio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 
Times should be spared letters about the cassocks and hassocks being wrong for 
the period.ML ITV.

Genesis: Together and Apart

Promising to bring together all the original members of the band Genesis – 
Tony Banks, Phil Collins, Peter Gabriel, Steve Hackett and Mike Rutherford – 
for the first time since 1975, this feature-length documentary boasts footage 
from the 1960s to the 1990s and seems set to treat the group with a 
musicological seriousness that it has been denied because of the critical 
mocking of Collins’s soft-pop solo career. Observers of the dynamics between 
members of disbanded bands will be fascinated by the language and body language 
of the “reunion” sequences.ML BBC2.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F7%2F1410100666205%2Fcfdde0e0-7171-40dd-8dc3-ae924cfea7bf-1020x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20on%20TV%20in%20autumn%202014%3A%20from%20Downton%20Abbey%20to%20Black%20Mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20on%20TV%20in%20autumn%202014%3A%20from%20Downton%20Abbey%20to%20Black%20Mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F7%2F1410100666205%2Fcfdde0e0-7171-40dd-8dc3-ae924cfea7bf-1020x1020.jpeg>
 Grayson Perry: Who Are You? Photograph: Adam Scourfield/Channel 4 
Grayson Perry: Who Are You?

Steve McQueen is currently the only person to have won both the Turner prize 
and a Bafta, but Grayson Perry is increasing his chances with a growing 
portfolio for Channel 4. This variation on the chat-show format sees Perry 
discuss the history of the captured face – from framed portrait to selfie – 
while making his own image of sitters, including former minister Chris Huhne, 
who is said to have gone to the artist’s studio almost directly from prison.ML 
Channel 4.

The Knick

Although The Knick is a self-consciously important drama about a troubled, 
white, male antihero that’s being broadcast in an age with far too many 
self-consciously important dramas about troubled, white, male anti-heroes, it 
has pedigree. It stars Clive Owen, it’s directed bySteven Soderbergh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevensoderbergh> and it’s set in a New York 
hospital in 1900 – great news for lovers of unhygienic gore.SH Sky Atlantic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DREoELMS5tXc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DREoELMS5tXc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DREoELMS5tXc&media=>
Gotham

Now that the trend for TV remakes of existing movies has not turned out to be 
the monumental car-crash it should have been, everyone’s at it – and Channel 5 
has got the rights to one of the most anticipated. Gotham is set in a 
pre-Batman city, beginning with detective James Gordon’s investigation into the 
murder of Bruce Wayne’s parents. We’re promised expansive storytelling, origin 
stories for several Batman villains and – best of all – the Joker is apparently 
hiding in plain sight throughout.SH Channel 5.

Peaky Blinders

Steven Knight is a writer with an unusual knack for coming up with quirky 
ideas that go improbably big: he created Who Wants To Be A Millionaire? and 
wrote the cult movie Dirty Pretty Things. Knight again exceeded expectations in 
2013 with Peaky Blinders, an idiosyncratic gangster drama set in Birmingham in 
1919, which, through its title, introduced to common knowledge the legend of a 
gang who secreted razor blades in the peaks of their caps. In this second 
season, Knight moves the action to London (the gang having concluded that all 
possible money has been made in Brum), introduces new characters – one played 
by Tom Hardy – and promises a more “dangerous” tone.ML BBC2.

Scrotal Recall

With Peep Show and Friday Night Dinner, Channel 4 has a strong history in the 
comedy of sexual and social embarrassment, and, based on the title and premise 
alone, there will be high hopes for this latest filth-com. Folk-rock singer 
Johnny Flynn plays Dylan Witter, a man diagnosed with chlamydia who must 
contact a different former sexual partner in each episode to inform them of the 
possible souvenir of him that they possess.ML 
Channel 4.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0wgxLWjRZEw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0wgxLWjRZEw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0wgxLWjRZEw&media=>
Toast of London

Yes! Yes! Yes! Yes! Yes! Fans of Matt Berry saying the word “yes” in a loud 
voice will be heartened to discover that the sitcom that harnesses his powers 
more potently than anything sinceThe IT Crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/sep/28/the-it-crowd-review> is 
returning for a second series. A full-throated, over-enunciated riot – and 
they’ll probably try to get everyone they know to watch it, just to make sure 
there’s also a series three.SH Channel 4.

Trollied

Sky1’s big attempt at a mainstream sitcom is now in its fourth series. This is 
partly down to solid writing, but it’s mainly because Trollied has an ensemble 
large enough to absorb cast changes. Jane Horrocks and Mark Addy have gone, and 
in their place come Stephen Tompkinson and Miriam Margoyles. It’s hard to fight 
the sensation that Trollied is basically Waterloo Road with a deli counter, but 
it’s likely to deliver regardless.SH Sky1.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F7%2F1410101039099%2F0e550039-0781-4b31-bfe4-e361c1ff4325-2060x1575.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20on%20TV%20in%20autumn%202014%3A%20from%20Downton%20Abbey%20to%20Black%20Mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20on%20TV%20in%20autumn%202014%3A%20from%20Downton%20Abbey%20to%20Black%20Mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F7%2F1410101039099%2F0e550039-0781-4b31-bfe4-e361c1ff4325-2060x1575.jpeg>
 Babylon: back for a full series. Channel 4 Photograph: Channel 4 
Babylon

When it aired as a one-off in February, Danny Boyle’s comedy-drama Babylon 
looked like the sort of thing that deserved to come back as a series, and now 
here it is. The joy of Babylon is watching the various strands of the 
Metropolitan Police yank and bristle against each other as they attempt to stay 
on top of constantly evolving events. A police procedural that is much more 
than the sum of its parts –The Thick of It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-thick-of-it> with truncheons, 
basically.SH Channel 4.

The Great Fire

Tom Bradby, currently best known as an ITN reporter and a close friend of 
Prince William, dramatises a key event of the reign of King Charles II in this 
four-parter about the great fire of London of 1666. This historical disaster 
movie – a sort of period version of old ITV hit London’s Burning – will benefit 
from digital technology’s ability to create and destroy a convincing 
17th-century city but, given Bradby’s background as a journalist and thriller 
writer, may also suggest metaphors for the current terrorist threat to the city.
ML ITV.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F7%2F1410101103621%2F0339f214-84b1-4af5-af90-94e2e3b4d296-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20on%20TV%20in%20autumn%202014%3A%20from%20Downton%20Abbey%20to%20Black%20Mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20on%20TV%20in%20autumn%202014%3A%20from%20Downton%20Abbey%20to%20Black%20Mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F7%2F1410101103621%2F0339f214-84b1-4af5-af90-94e2e3b4d296-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Zawe Ashton stars in Cut for Channel 4. Photograph: Richard Saker 
Cut

After playing one of TV’s most vivid characters – the cool/cruel student Vod 
in Fresh Meat – Zawe Ashton had earned the chance of a leading role in this 
highly anticipated six-parter by promising dramatist DC Moore. The 
recession-sensitive plot has Ashton as one of a group of civil servants 
unwillingly relocated from London to Northampton as part of government cuts who 
are finding that money and love are no easier in the provinces.ML Channel 4.

Bad Robots

Shows involving pranks and hidden cameras (Candid Camera, Beadle’s About, 
Trigger Happy TV, Fool Britannia) frequently become fixtures in the schedules. 
This latest version adapts the concept to the increasingly interactive 
technology employed in supermarket checkouts, “intelligent” road signs and 
websites. Users discover that devices are suddenly answering back or 
misbehaving before the revelation that a jokey ghost has been placed in the 
machine.ML E4.

November

The Missing

As shown by the huge and continuing media coverage of the Madeleine McCann 
case, the sudden disappearance of the young is a story with universal 
resonance, which is perhaps why so many successful crime dramas (Broadchurch, 
Top of the Lake, Happy Valley) involve a lost child. So initial interest is 
guaranteed for this six-parter in which James Nesbitt plays a father 
obsessively returning to the place in France where his child vanished and 
finding that the local police chief also believes that the case can be solved. 
Talented young writers Jack Williams and Harry Williams (Full English and 
Roman’s Empire) intriguingly switch to TV drama’s most popular form.ML BBC1, 15 
November.

Atlantis

The first series of Atlantis was an odd little curio; basically Life on Mars, 
but with Atlantis instead of the 1970s and jokes about Mark Addy farting 
instead of any discernible tension. Perhaps in this new series we’ll find out 
why Jason was sent to Atlantis, or why he suddenly has superpowers, or whether 
or not he has a personality of any kind. If not, at least we’ll always have 
those fart jokes. Addy’s probably the best in the business at delivering them.SH
 BBC1
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F7%2F1410101383090%2Ff4cb10ce-d6b2-4c04-bb57-09884f1bb5d6-2060x1331.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20on%20TV%20in%20autumn%202014%3A%20from%20Downton%20Abbey%20to%20Black%20Mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20on%20TV%20in%20autumn%202014%3A%20from%20Downton%20Abbey%20to%20Black%20Mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2014%2Fsep%2F08%2Fwhats-on-tv-in-autumn-2014-from-downton-abbey-to-black-mirror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F7%2F1410101383090%2Ff4cb10ce-d6b2-4c04-bb57-09884f1bb5d6-2060x1331.jpeg>
 Len Goodman struts his stuff in the Strictly Come Dancing launch episode. 
Photograph: Guy Levy/BBC/PA 
Dancing Cheek to Cheek: An Intimate History of Dance

Generally, successful presenters or shows move towards the lower-numbered BBC 
channels (from 4 to 2 or 3 to 1), but Len Goodman’s temporary transfer from 
BBC1 (where he is chief judge on Strictly Come Dancing) to BBC4 is effectively 
a promotion as it invites him to show a more serious side than the soundbite 
analysis on the pro-am hoofing franchise. Goodman joins historian and BBC4 
regular Lucy Worsley to co-host a story of dance that seems cleverly calculated 
to make effective use of the movie and sound archives.ML BBC4.

Black Mirror Christmas Special

EastEnders <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders> has had a 
clear run when it comes to depressing the living crap out of everyone at 
Christmas. But now Charlie Brooker has decided to throw his hat into the ring, 
with a festive edition of his dark technodrama Black Mirror. Given previous 
episodes, we probably shouldn’t rule out the possibility of seeing a 
perpetually screaming robot Santa who eats babies.SH Channel 4.
 