
Never make predictions, especially about the future. So said Mark Twain, Yogi 
Berra or Niels Bohr – or possibly all three.

But if you must, there are really only two options: play safe and go for the 
obvious, or come up with forecasts so giddily optimistic that no one will take 
you seriously.

Using the former approach, 2016 will produce more tragedy in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and Yemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/yemen>, an uninterrupted stream of refugees 
intoEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/29/germanys-plan-to-strike-eu-wide-refugee-sharing-deal-stalls>
, another iteration of theGrexit crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/12/eurozone-crisis-which-countries-are-for-or-against-grexit>
, deepening drought in the Chinese east and American west, and further hacking 
misadventure on both state and corporate levels. And an awful lot of summits to 
try to deal with all of the above.

Corruption will continue to excoriate three-quarters of the world’s polities – 
leaving the vast majority of humanity disillusioned and increasingly unlikely 
to vote. Ditto sport. Theglobal economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/27/living-dangerously-2016-light-fuse-impending-explosion-global-economy>
 is due another rout, probably starting in Asia.

OECD fears slowdown in global trade amid China woes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/09/oecd-fears-slowdown-in-global-trade-amid-china-woes>
But let’s leave room for a little optimism. There will actually be fewer wars 
in 2016 than for many years. And while the Koreas are unlikely to reunify,Cyprus
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> might. Elections for two of the top 
jobs in the world – in the US and at the UN – could produce women in both for 
the first time. Science will tell us more than we ever knew about our 
ancestors, ourselves and our universe.


The powerful mixture of birth control and rising prosperity that levelled off 
birth rates in western societies in the postwar period will continue to take 
root in Africa, putting downward pressure on overall population levels. We 
might not get to 11 billion people after all.

And away from the headlines, the overwhelming majority of people will continue 
to lead decent, unremarkable lives undeflected by the pulses of pessimism that 
tend to pollute our overall sense of wellbeing. Who knows, perhaps we will even 
start to realise that happiness does not reside in social media, and 2015 will 
go down as the year of peak-share.

Or maybe that’s just too over-optimistic.

The US election

Predicting the course of US politics over the next 12 months is a mug’s game. 
The battle for the White House – which has already been raging in the media for 
months – will undoubtedly dominate. But it has barely begun in the minds of the 
electorate, who have until 4 November to make a choice that will reverberate 
around the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2420994e27fb54c3a5f140f003b1996e434fa3a5%2F131_5_3835_2300%2F3835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2420994e27fb54c3a5f140f003b1996e434fa3a5%2F131_5_3835_2300%2F3835.jpg>
 Will Hillary Clinton become the first female US president? Photograph: Steven 
Senne/AP 
The Republican field has been led most recently by two improbable outsiders, 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and Ben Carson, 
who look as likely to eventually stumble as they ever have. So far, they 
continue to make fools of pundits who underestimate the anti-establishment 
groundswell.

Barack Obama’s natural heir in the Democratic party, Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, is a surer bet: safely 
ahead now of the leftwing challenger Bernie Sanders in the polls and showing 
more resilience in the face of once worrying email allegations. Her 
vulnerability to Sanders’ more authentic populism remains troubling, however, 
for a frontrunner who lost to Obama eight years ago and has yet to ignite the 
excitement that a potential first female president might expect.

But on the assumption that harsh political reality will eventually overcome 
the anger on the right and idealism on the left, it is possible to see a 
plausible narrative emerging for 2016.

The Iowa caucus and New Hampshire primary in February will play their usual 
quirky role as starting bells rather than bellwethers in the long nomination 
contest to come.

The Tea Party champion Ted Cruz could upset Trump to win Iowa and begin the 
slow descent of the billionaire’s ego-inflated balloon.Marco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio> stands a chance of beginning 
his ascent to the top of the polls by taking New Hampshire.
Trump, Trump, Trump 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/12/us_poll-zip/giv-27167Cb64ron3GUJV/>
The Democratic race will be at its most competitive. Sanders may still take 
one or two early states before hitting the higher hurdle of Clinton’s “southern 
firewall” in March.

It is in these 10 Super Tuesday states that the Republican party machinery and 
money will begin to work its muscle too – rallying behind a candidate such as 
Rubio to appeal to the broader electorate.

Those months of fighting Trump will have taken their toll, though, and Rubio’s 
reputation as a pro-immigration unifier will have taken a severe pounding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe08700e47a8126a8497886d8e366ea25d692f8ec%2F0_123_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe08700e47a8126a8497886d8e366ea25d692f8ec%2F0_123_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 US Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump. Photograph: Scott 
Audette/Reuters 
What is left of his youth and charisma will be pitted against Clinton’s 
experience and the chance to make history by electing both a woman and a tough 
commander-in-chief.

The best prediction is that these predictions will be wrong. My next best bet? 
Clinton pips Rubio in a squeaker.
Dan Roberts in Washington

China

According to the Chinese zodiac, 2016 heralds the year of the monkey, an 
auspicious time for expectant parents hoping for quick-witted sprogs.


For the Communist party chief, Xi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping>, who completes three years as 
president in January, the omens are less promising. Thus far, Xi has built a 
reputation as one of China’s most dominant leaders in decades: a super-sized 
centraliser whom headline writers call Big Daddy Xi.

He has cemented his grip on power with a ferocious assault on political rivals 
that has dragged some of the party’s most feared and influential figures 
through the mud and into jail. He has set about restoring the Middle Kingdom to 
the centre of world affairs, pursuing an increasingly audacious foreign policy 
and attempting to reforge China’s role within theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb280d60fa56d551cbbaeb811e70d6997db9d76da%2F0_0_3840_2560%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb280d60fa56d551cbbaeb811e70d6997db9d76da%2F0_0_3840_2560%2F3840.jpg>
 September’s grand military parade in Beijing, to mark the 70th anniversary of 
the victory of the Chinese people’s war of resistance against Japanese 
aggression and the world anti-fascist war. Photograph: Yin Gang/Xinhua 
Press/Corbis 
In September, the Chinese president celebrated his apparent supremacy by 
throwing abombastic military parade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/chinese-military-parade-peace-power-xi-jinping>
 at which nuclear missile launchers and thousands of troops paraded through 
Tiananmen Square.

Yet for all Xi’s swagger, there was mounting evidence in 2015 of his 
weaknesses and those of the 87 million-strong party he leads.

There was the mismanaged stock market rout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/china-stock-market-crisis-explained>
, an affair so badly handled that Xi reputedly lambasted top financial 
officials when he was pictured on thecover of the Economist 
<http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21657395-panicked-response-tumbling-stocks-casts-doubt-pace-reform-china-embraces>
 desperately attempting to prop up plummeting stocks.

“I didn’t want to be on that cover,” Xi fumed. “But thanks to you, I made the 
cover.”

There were the catastrophic Tianjin explosions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/13/china-explosions-dozens-feared-dead-blasts-port-tianjin>
 – a tragedy some described as a Chinese Katrina – which devastated lives and 
exposed deep-rooted problems of government corruption and incompetence. All the 
while, lurking just beneath the surface, was the near constant rumbling of 
political intrigue that has long threatened to tear the Communist party apart.

Those rumblings will intensify in 2016 as rival factions step up their 
opposition to Xi’s anti-corruption campaign and his stewardship of a rapidly 
sagging economy.

Facing growing political pressure from within, Xi will look to foreign policy 
and his domestic security apparatus to ensure public support. He will stoke up 
nationalism by further ratcheting up tensions in the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea, already the scene of a 
controversial island-building campaign that has put Beijing and Washington at 
loggerheads. He will continue to escalate his war on corrupt Communist party 
“tigers” – aiming to snare perhaps his biggest victim to date in the second 
half of the year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f656d8ac7a1ec3411431c326e454047ebeac006%2F0_0_1536_1060%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f656d8ac7a1ec3411431c326e454047ebeac006%2F0_0_1536_1060%2F1536.jpg>
 Chinese president Xi Jinping inspects troops. Photograph: Chen Jianli/Xinhua 
Press/Corbis 
And, with 2016 marking 50 years since the start of Chairman Mao’s tumultuous 
Cultural Revolution, the few who dare to speak out against China’s Big Daddy 
will face even harsher treatment as Beijing seeks to stifle any criticism of 
the party he leads.

Jubilant couples will pack maternity wards as China enters the year of the 
monkey. But for Xi it threatens to prove an annus horribilis.
Tom Phillips in Beijing

The digital world

For people with computers, which is most of us, 2015 wasn’t great. But next 
year is probably going to be much, much worse.


The catastrophic data breach of the extramarital dating site Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> is currently an outlier 
in the history of hacking: for perhaps the first time, the information that was 
leaked was extremely personal, and damaging in its own right. You can’t change 
your passwords, or warn your bank, to stop a marriage being wrecked by the fact 
that you were trying to have an affair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71b12157afc6ba890f71a7d41a8e37ac7a655509%2F0_0_3000_1980%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71b12157afc6ba890f71a7d41a8e37ac7a655509%2F0_0_3000_1980%2F3000.jpg>
 A projection of live data feeds at the Big Bang Data exhibition at Somerset 
House in London. Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
But as we entrust ever more personal data to the cloud, breaches of this sort 
are inevitably going to increase. Connected home CCTV, direct message 
histories, chat transcripts or photo messages could all be devastating on a 
personal level if leaked.

So what good news, then, that the British government intends to force internet 
service providers to retain communications data for a full year. Because the 
experience ofTalkTalk <https://www.theguardian.com/business/talk-talk-telecom>, 
which was allegedly hacked by a group of teenagers applying the 20-year-old 
technique of SQL injections, surely shows that there is no risk at all in doing 
so.

But not every hack is pranksters or criminal enterprise. The coming year will 
also be the year that cyberterrorism comes of age – sort of.

Experts have been warning about the lack of security around industrial control 
systemsfor years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/20/cyber-attack-us-water-utility>. 
The networks that control power plants, national grids and reservoirs rely 
heavily on obscurity to defend against attack: they aren’t directly connected 
to the internet, and use arcane coding. But that obscurity cannot be a 
long-term defence.

In the end, though, we perhaps have more to fear from sheer bad luck than we 
do from dedicated attack. As the pseudonymous security researcher the Grugq 
points out, no hacker in history has ever been as successful at disrupting 
power to American homes as the squirrel that scampered into a substation in 
California and caused a power cut for 45,000 people.
Alex Hern

Brexit

By this time next year, Britain may very well have voted to leave the EU. 
There is, of course, no certainty about this. But let us consider the evidence.


First, the timing of the vote. Most observers agree that David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> will not delay his 
long-promised referendum beyond next year, because he has nothing to gain from 
it. Neither France nor Germany will be making new concessions in 2017, because 
both will by then be embroiled in big elections. So best get it over with: in 
September, probably.

Next, the nature of the debate. The in and out campaigns will argue numbers – 
how many jobs might be saved by staying, how many immigrants kept out by 
leaving, what will be the impact on GDP – but for many voters,Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is not about numbers. It’s a 
question of belief. This is a debate largely impervious to fact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcd3a125a7cc87230f071998e16c72f786bd92e9%2F0_0_3994_2634%2F3994.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcd3a125a7cc87230f071998e16c72f786bd92e9%2F0_0_3994_2634%2F3994.jpg>
 Prime minister David Cameron speaks at the end of a European Union council 
meeting in Brussels. Photograph: Georges Gobet/AFP/Getty Images 
And those who believe Britain would be better off out are edging ahead. Look 
at the polls: a year ago, the stay camp was in front by margins of up to 25%. 
That gap has now narrowed to between two and four points, and three of the past 
eight polls have the leave camp ahead. The trend seems clear.

The unspoken assumption may be that most “don’t knows” will back the status 
quo, but precedent shows that when a vote is about the EU, voters lash out. 
Here, Ukip won last year’s European elections; on the continent, every recent 
referendum on an EU issue bar one has ended in a no.
In or out 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/12/referendum_poll-zip/giv-2575053c3RUSE3hKk/>
What’s more, in none of those countries were the press and governing party 
even remotely as Eurosceptic as in Britain. In the UK, the stay campaign is 
swimming against a decades-old tide of populist anti-EU sentiment relayed by an 
influential wing of the Conservative party and much of the media.

The prime minister has succeeded in reducing what he wants in the way of 
reform to a bare-bones list of demands, many of which the EU may even agree to. 
But the real issue is whether those demands will satisfy his own party, and 
succeed – even temporarily – in turning back that Eurosceptic tide.

With record numbers of EU citizens arriving in Britain, further Schengen zone 
terror possible, a second summer of refugee and migrant chaos probable, a 
well-funded out campaign gathering pace, and much of the media having made up 
their minds, it will be a tight vote.

Until Cameron, his cabinet and, perhaps more crucially, Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> say soon, often and unequivocally 
that Britain’s future depends on its remaining in the EU, I know where I’d put 
my money.
Jon Henley in London

Science

For all the uncertainty about the outer limits of scientific knowledge, some 
events and advances are firmly on the 2016 calendar.

In January, the UK’s fertility regulator will consider the first application 
from British scientists to use a gene editing procedure calledCrispr-Cas9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/28/future-human-gene-editing-landmark-summit-dna-crispr-embyos>
 on human embryos. The team, led byKathy Niakan at the Francis Crick Institute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/18/uk-scientists-seek-permission-to-genetically-modify-human-embryos>
 in London, will manipulate the genes of embryos donated to research to learn 
more about embryo development.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e1b029dba15737479e28e615f1ea2d9454316a9%2F0_0_1920_997%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e1b029dba15737479e28e615f1ea2d9454316a9%2F0_0_1920_997%2F1920.jpg>
 Nasa announced it has found evidence of flowing liquid water on Mars.
 Photograph: Demotix Live News/Corbis 
In April 2015, Chinese scientists became the first in the world to announce 
they had used the tool to modify abnormal human embryos, to investigate whether 
they could correct faulty genes that cause a rare blood disorder, beta 
thalassemia. Expect gene editing to notch up some big successes in the year 
ahead, and become central to a debate on the ethics of genetically modifying 
human beings with changes that pass on to future generations.

The fourth rock from the sun provided one of the most exciting science stories 
of 2015, whenNasa discovered flowing water on Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/sep/28/nasa-scientists-find-evidence-flowing-water-mars>
, or at least the regular formation of damp patches on crater walls and 
gullies. Where the water is coming from, and how much there is, are big 
questions for 2016. The mystery of Martian methane will also keep researchers 
busy. Nasa’s Curiosity rover has measured spikes in methane levels near the 
surface, but whether the gas is emanating from rocks or subterranean Martian 
bugs is unknown. In March, the European Space Agency’s ExoMars Trace Gas 
Orbiter will blast off on a mission to help find the answer. It will sniff the 
atmosphere for minute levels of methane and other gases and, with luck, shed 
light on the source of Martian methane.

In September, the team behind Bloodhound, Britain’s 1,000mph rocket car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/24/bloodhound-supersonic-car-1000mph-london>
, will ship the extraordinary vehicle to South Africa for test drives on an old 
lake bed called Hakskeen Pan. During the runs the driver, Andy Green, hopes to 
get Bloodhound up to 800mph over a 12-mile stretch using only one rocket. A 
cluster of three rockets will be used for the landspeed record attempt later on.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab86df06557b99e4f2c561adfa1b1c7ef89c9c48%2F149_195_1322_596%2F1322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab86df06557b99e4f2c561adfa1b1c7ef89c9c48%2F149_195_1322_596%2F1322.jpg>
 The Bloodhound supersonic car. Photograph: PA 
Just as genetics challenges our future, it unveils our past. Next year, 
researchers in Germany hope to study DNA from a 400,000-year-old human relative 
found in a cave in northern Spain. Their analysis, along with tests on other 
remains, could shed light on new forms of early humans that used to live 
alongside our direct ancestors.

The human story will be richer for it. 
Ian Sample in London

Russia


Vladimir Putin’s 16th year in charge of Russia is perhaps the most 
unpredictable yet. The air force is engaged in an operation outside the borders 
of the Soviet Union for the first time in a generation, Russia’s proxies in
Ukraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> have been left in the 
uneasy limbo of a semi-ceasefire, and the Russian economy is creaking as oil 
prices stay low.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2410f104b22cee85068baf6d4cec766bf3988ce7%2F0_142_4867_1970%2F4867.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2410f104b22cee85068baf6d4cec766bf3988ce7%2F0_142_4867_1970%2F4867.jpg>
 Russian traditional wooden matryoshka dolls showing President Vladimir Putin. 
Photograph: Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP 
Here’s how Vladimir Vladimirovich might imagine a dream year as he’s drifting 
off to sleep in his palatial residence: Russian jets continue pounding all 
manner of rebel groups in Syria while the Kremlin vaunts its anti-Islamic State 
resolve. Irritation in the west turns to grudging respect and an agreement with 
Putin thatBashar al-Assad <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad> 
will remain in charge as the best of a set of bad options. In Kiev, infighting 
and corruption paralyse the government; the pro-rebel territories are pushed 
back into Ukraine but give Russia a permanent veto over Kiev’s policies; the 
west accepts this, forgets about Crimea and ends the sanctions. Oil prices go 
up, the rouble stabilises and sky-high approval ratings last through the autumn 
parliamentary elections.

Putin’s beleaguered foes would suggest a different scenario: a fragile 
international alliance overSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> 
breaks down over obviously disparate aims, and western sanctions over Crimea 
and Ukraine are extended. The economy continues to tank, real wages fall. The 
middle class, shorn of the weekends in Europe and consumer goods it was used 
to, becomes edgy, while workers pushed to economic dire straits begin serious 
protests – a flicker of which was visible at the end of 2015 as long-distance 
truckers went on strike.

Both of these scenarios are eminently possible; what actually happens will 
probably be somewhere in the middle. HowRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> makes it through 2016 and beyond, 
until the 2018 presidential election when Putin is expected to stand again, 
will depend on so many things – from the oil price, to the prevailing 
international mood and Putin’s personal health.

Making predictions about Putin’s Russia is hard because the system is brittle 
and unpredictable. Events such as the revolution in Ukraine or the Turkish 
shooting down of a Russian jet can completely change policy vectors and 
outcomes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa870c4abe2c8a0f71510a7040d8c8c7a68f514b5%2F0_0_2000_1600%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa870c4abe2c8a0f71510a7040d8c8c7a68f514b5%2F0_0_2000_1600%2F2000.jpg>
 A Russian Sukhoi Su-30 on a bombing raid over Syria. Photograph: Tass/Barcroft 
Media 
Putin’s system, lauded by Kremlin strategists for its stability, is in fact 
remarkably unpredictable, partly because it is entirely dependent on the one 
man at the top of the pyramid. Putin’s disappearance for a week in spring, and 
his aides’ refusal to admit that he had a bout of flu, caused unease and 
speculation that provided a glimpse into what could happen if the leader were 
ever seriously indisposed.
Shaun Walker in Moscow

Sport

In 2009, when Rio won the right to stage the Olympics, it was sold as a 
feelgood coming out party for a nation fast becoming one of the world’s 
powerhouses. The rhetoric ran that South America’s first ever Games would 
turbocharge redevelopment of Rio de Janeiro’s creaking infrastructure and tap 
into Brazil’s booming economy. It hasn’t quite turned out like that.


As the Olympics approach, nervousness over whether the venues will be ready in 
time has decreased but has been replaced by worries over everything from police 
brutality to an ever widening corruption scandal and an economic slump that has 
led to fears over ticket sales.

Budgets have been trimmed and the sense of optimism that pervaded the bid has 
been replaced by something close to foreboding. Yet there is not the same level 
of public outrage that was directed at the World Cup inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, and the likelihood is that the 
city’s famous vitality will see it through.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd425673c6da94bb4dedc6db59bed1e6f75277042%2F0_0_3500_2417%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd425673c6da94bb4dedc6db59bed1e6f75277042%2F0_0_3500_2417%2F3500.jpg>
 The Olympic flag flies in front of the Christ the Redeemer statue in Rio de 
Janeiro. Photograph: Ricardo Moraes/Reuters 
 Whether the promised improvements to Rio’s infrastructure materialise as 
billed is another question entirely. And it is one that should worry the 
International Olympic Committee as it contemplates a landscape in which cities 
are no longer queuing up in quite the same way to host their showpiece event.

The other big question is whether Russian athletes will line up on the 
athletics track, after being banned for an indefinite period over systemic 
state-sponsored doping. They almost certainly will, given the wider politics at 
play, but the taint of the scandal will not go away.

In France, football’s European Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> – expanded from 16 
to 24 teams for the first time – was supposed to be a feelgood celebration but 
will now take place under a heavy security blanket after the Paris attacks. Yet 
the signs are that fans are more likely to travel and party in defiance than 
stay away in fear.

Meanwhile, the fallout at Fifa and the International Association of Athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federations (IAAF) from 12 months 
of jaw-dropping developments will continue as criminal investigations into 
deep-seated corruption progress.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11da2edfbed81feb16ccbd915de17a46c989f05f%2F365_92_3467_2335%2F3467.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11da2edfbed81feb16ccbd915de17a46c989f05f%2F365_92_3467_2335%2F3467.jpg>
 IAAF president Sebastian Coe. Photograph: Frank Augstein/AP 
The currently suspended Sepp Blatter will formally relinquish his hold over 
Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> in February but it remains to 
be seen if any of the unimpressive cast of potential replacements offers the 
prospect of real reform, while the embattled IAAF president, Sebastian Coe, 
faces the hardest race of his life in resurrecting his crisis-hit sport.
Owen Gibson

Cyprus

 It’s been dubbed a graveyard for peacemakers, the Rubik’s Cube of diplomacy, 
but despite the odds Cyprus may well defy naysayers in 2016 by solving its 
decades-long division. The strategic Mediterranean island, home of Europe’s 
last partitioned capital, is facing what seasoned Cyprus watchers are calling a 
historic window of opportunity.

In an unprecedented meeting of minds, Greek and Turkish Cypriots regard the 
year ahead as the last best chance to end the ethnic divide. Greek Cypriots, 
emerging from their worst economic crisis since an attempt at union with Athens 
prompted Ankara to invade in 1974, have increasingly come round to seeing the 
benefits of reunification. “They know that if they don’t do a deal now there is 
a very good chance that partition will be cemented and Turkey will annex the 
north,” says James Ker-Lindsay, a Cyprus expert at the London School ofEconomics
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>. “That would mean not only 
bordering Turkey, but an unpredictable and potentially disturbing Turkey.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad7ddc497c10479bc8701d52252800f96d599268%2F0_164_3500_1914%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad7ddc497c10479bc8701d52252800f96d599268%2F0_164_3500_1914%2F3500.jpg>
 A wall marking the boundary of the United Nations buffer zone as seen from the 
Greek Cypriot-controlled area in central Nicosia.
 Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
For the minority Turkish Cypriots, the rationale is not dissimilar. A reunited 
Cyprus would, they say, not only offer a better and brighter future in an EU 
member state but in a country that, in sharp contrast toTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, is avowedly secular.

Reflecting the optimism, both communities are led by doughty pro-union 
moderates – Greek Nicos Anastasiades and his Turkish counterpart Mustafa Akinci 
– who have made reunification in a loose “bi-zonal, bi-communal federation” 
their central goal.

“If you can’t settle it with these two guys, you’ll never settle it,” says 
Ker-Lindsay, who puts the chances of success “at six or higher” on a scale of 
one to 10.

But it is the stance of Turkey itself that gives the biggest hope. A 
confluence of events – ranging from Ankara’s recent run-in with Russia to the 
re-energising of its EU accession process – has put the need for a Cyprus 
settlement centre stage. A solution would afford Turkey a badly needed foreign 
policy success, allow it to diversify its energy supplies – with the island’s 
subsequent transformation into a regional transport hub for oil and gas 
reserves – and boost its chances of joining the EU. It would also free up 
Turkish funds: the island’s breakaway north is utterly dependent on Turkey 
bankrolling it.

“For years, Ankara viewed Cyprus as strategic territory reconquered,” notes 
Hubert Faustmann, who teaches history and political science at the University 
of Nicosia. “Now, it’s a loss it seems willing to accept for higher benefit.”

Both sides are engaged in intense negotiations with a view to holding 
referendums once an agreement is clinched. But they have yet to discuss the 
issues of property, security and territory, all potential deal breakers. 
Parliamentary elections in the south loom, another spoiler if hardline 
rejectionists have their way. “I am hopeful we’ll have an agreement, but 
getting a double yes in the referendums may be as difficult as reaching a 
deal,” says Faustmann. “But the stars are aligned; we have a perfect storm for 
a solution to happen.”
Helena Smith in Athens

UN secretary general

By the end of 2016, there will be a new UN secretary general and there is a 
better than even chance it will be a woman, for the first time. Whether this 
will make any real difference to the world is unclear. The job has been 
described as the “world’s chief diplomat” or even the “secular pope”, though in 
reality it is more akin to the manager of a posh restaurant. You get to rub 
shoulders with a lot of powerful people, but rarely on equal terms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91cf5fc694ac16df9407e99e81827d9256a1f81f%2F15_218_2686_1612%2F2686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91cf5fc694ac16df9407e99e81827d9256a1f81f%2F15_218_2686_1612%2F2686.jpg>
 Irina Bokova, director general of Unesco. Photograph: Francois 
Guillot/AFP/Getty Images 
The incumbent, Ban Ki-moon, was chosen in 2006 in part because he appeared 
sufficiently unthreatening to the world’s major powers. If the rules of the 
game remain unchanged, with the permanent five members of the security council 
choosing his successor in secret and presenting the result to the rest of the 
world as a fait accompli, we can expect a similar outcome.

There is a growing drive, however, to change the rules and throw the contest 
open to the light of public scrutiny. The1 for 7 Billion 
<http://www.1for7billion.org/> campaign, backed by hundreds of NGOs, is 
proposing an official shortlist of candidates who will have to publish broad 
manifestos and subject themselves to questions. The security council would 
still present a shortlist, but it would have to be a list of more than one. 
More than 170 million people around the world have signalled their support. The 
idea is to produce someone who is less secretary and more general, with a broad 
power base and an independent mandate, rather than to be beholden to some murky 
backroom deal.

There are signs that the security council is beginning to take heed of the 
groundswell. In an initiative pushed by the UK, a letter is to be sent to the 
193 delegations in the general assembly in the New Year inviting candidates and 
setting a timetable and format for the election.

Until then, the campaign among aspiring secretary generals continues to be a 
discreet affair, mostly played out in private by unannounced candidates behind 
closed doors in midtown Manhattan. At this early stage, the conventional wisdom 
favours someone from eastern Europe (a region yet to take a turn in providing a 
secretary general) and a woman (all eight holders of the position thus far have 
been men).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e5f10e36e297c80f4d36e69b8407a381b8703d%2F54_141_5250_3485%2F5250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20happen%20in%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fwhat-will-happen-in-2016-predictions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e5f10e36e297c80f4d36e69b8407a381b8703d%2F54_141_5250_3485%2F5250.jpg>
 Helen Clark, former prime minister of New Zealand. Photograph: Sarah Lee for 
the Guardian 
There are a handful of names who fulfil both criteria, including two 
Bulgarians – the Unesco chief, Irina Bokova, and the EU’s budget commissioner, 
Kristalina Georgieva – as well as the former Croatian foreign minister Vesna 
Pusić.

Also thought to be in the running are Helen Clark, the former New Zealand 
prime minister who now runs the UN Development Programme, and Kevin Rudd, the 
former Australian prime minister.

Not even the idealists in the 1 for 7 Billion campaign believe the permanent 
five are going to give up the veto and throw the vote open completely. But the 
hope is that the major powers hit deadlock over their own favourites and find 
themselves unable to resist a genuinely popular choice thrown up by the general 
assembly. Whichever way it goes, it will be a critical year in UN history.
Julian Borger in London
 