
The Department for International Development (DFID) <http://www.dfid.gov.uk/> 
is the Government department dedicated to managing the UK's £5.7 billion aid 
budget. It works with both international organisations, such as theUN 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/About-DFID/Who-we-work-with1/The-United-Nations/> and 
World Bank <http://www.dfid.gov.uk/About-DFID/Who-we-work-with1/The-World-Bank/>
, as well as local partners and NGOs to tackle the causes and effects of 
poverty in over 100 countries across the globe.

The Government has more than tripled its spending on international aid since 
1997 and has pledged to double it again by 2013, meeting the UN target of 0.7% 
of GDP. This puts the UK at the forefront of international efforts to help the 
world's poorest people, lifting 3 million people out of poverty, keeping 5 
million children in school and giving millions more access to basic health and 
sanitation every year.

DFID's recent white paper 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/About-DFID/Quick-guide-to-DFID/How-we-do-it/Building-our-common-future/>
 also gave a renewed focus to the new and emerging challenges facing developing 
countries, including theglobal economic downturn 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Global-Issues/How-we-fight-Poverty/Stronger-Economies/>
, the growing threat ofclimate change 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Global-Issues/How-we-fight-Poverty/Climate-and-Environment/>
 and the continuing problems ofconflict, corruption and security 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Global-Issues/How-we-fight-Poverty/Conflict-and-Security/>
.

DFID's work across the world

Burma - Cyclone Nargis: one year on 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Media-Room/News-Stories/2009/Cyclone-Nargis-One-year-on---Weathering-the-storm/>


Cyclone Nargis struck Burma in May 2008, killing 140,000 and leaving millions 
more homeless and without food or water. DFID contributed £45 million to the 
relief effort, helping over a million survivors to weather the storm.

Kenya - Motorbikes and Midwives: Delivering better care for Kenya's mums 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Media-Room/News-Stories/2009/Motorbikes-and-Midwives-Delivering-better-care-for-Kenyas-mums1/>

Women are more than 50 times more likely to die during childbirth in Kenya 
than in the UK, and in the rural communities of North West Kenya this figure 
can double. As part of DFID's £50 million Kenya Country Programme the UK 
provided motorbike ambulances to these isolated communities, helping pregnant 
women get to the hospital on time

Rwanda - 15 years on: land and security 
<http://www.dfid.gov.uk/Media-Room/Sights-and-sounds-gallery/Rwanda-15-years-on---Land-and-security/>

Land disputes were one of the many factors behind the 1994 Rwanda genocide. In 
the years since DFID has worked to improve land laws, giving all Rwandans – 
regardless of gender or tribe – the chance to grow their own food on their own 
land.
 