
Drug overdose is now the leading cause 
<http://www.asam.org/docs/default-source/advocacy/opioid-addiction-disease-facts-figures.pdf>
 of accidental death in the United States, with opioid-related deaths driving 
the much of the increase. This alarming statistic has gained widespread 
attention and led to a national conversation demonizing opioids and the people 
who use them. But a critical predictor of overdose has remained absent from 
this conversation: opioid-related overdoses, both fatal and non, almost always
involve <http://www.hamsnetwork.org/polydrug.pdf> at least one other drug.


Mixing drugs is generally much more dangerous than single-substance use, and 
certain combinations are particularly lethal. Taking opioids with alcohol, for 
instance, or benzodiazepines,dramatically increases 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3456279/pdf/11524_2006_Article_206.pdf>
 the potential for fatal respiratory depression, as all three drugs depress the 
central nervous system. A person’s blood-morphine concentration needs to be
significantly higher 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3456279/pdf/11524_2006_Article_206.pdf>
 to cause death in an opioid-only overdose than in an overdose where alcohol or 
benzodiazepines are present. These drugs arefrequently 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3456279/pdf/11524_2006_Article_206.pdf>
 noted in autopsy reports for opioid-related overdoses.

Addictions are harder to kick when you're poor. Here's why | Maia Szalavitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/01/drug-addiction-income-inequality-impacts-recovery>
But autopsy reports and death certificates do not always capture the true 
reasons behind a person’s death, especially when drug use is a factor. Kenneth 
Anderson, CEO of theHams Harm Reduction Network <http://www.hamsnetwork.org/>, 
scoured <http://www.hamsnetwork.org/polydrug.pdf> death certificate data on 
opioid overdoses, and found stark state-by-state differences in regards to drug 
mixing. While there are surely some differences between individual communities, 
the more likely explanation for this variation is the subjectivity of 
individual physicians, medical examiners and coroners.

One coroner might attribute an opioid-related overdose death to heroin alone 
when in fact the death resulted from a combination of heroin and a legally 
prescribed, low-dose benzodiazepine. Another could attribute the death of a 
known drug user to overdose, when in fact the death resulted from dehydration, 
pneumonia or another health condition. Researchers have pointed to this and 
called for more thorough reporting of drug-related overdose in death 
certificates, as they provide the basis for our understanding of public health 
trends and consequently shape research and public policy.

Our current obsession with opioids is just the latest trend in a long history 
ofscapegoating 
<http://www.drugpolicyaction.org/docUploads/reinarman_construct.pdf> single 
drugs: alcohol in 1830s and 40s, opium in 1870s, marijuana in the 1950s and 
60s, crack cocaine in the 1980s and 90s, methamphetamine in the 1990s and early 
2000s and now, opioids like heroin, Oxycontin and Fentanyl. The problem of 
multiple-substance use has remained absent from much of this conversation – and 
from the education of users and health practitioners – despite the fact that 
drug mixing is both dangerous andpervasive 
<http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/TEDS2012N_Web.pdf>.

The vast majority of opioid-related overdose death is accidental – and 
entirely preventable. Drug mixing and tolerance changes are the primary 
predictors of overdose. Graduates of 28-day abstinence-based rehabs areover 30 
times 
<http://www.rehabs.com/pro-talk-articles/death-after-treatment-for-heroin-dependence/>
 more likely to die of a heroin overdose than untreated addicts using on the 
streets. These programs should be held legally responsible if they choose not 
to distribute overdose antidote naloxone, and they should be required to run 
regular trainings on tolerance, drug mixing and safe-use practices.

In order to continue receiving federal funding, public schools and 
universities should be required to implement a standardized drug education and 
overdose prevention program covering the dangers of drug mixing.

A deadly crisis: mapping the spread of America's drug overdose epidemic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ng-interactive/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-overdose-deaths-map>
Amid mounting concerns around heroin, intravenous drug use and the spread of 
infectious diseases, the cultural tide seems to finally be shifting in favor of 
harm reduction services that have been proven to work. The federal government 
has called for more access to medication-assisted treatment programs and lifted 
the nearly 30-year ban on allocating funding to needle exchange programs.

Many states have passed good samaritan laws and made naloxone available 
without a prescription. Some have proposed bills that would establish 
safe-injection sites and others have decriminalized marijuana. But none of 
these measures will prove effective if we cannot keep users – be they addicted, 
dependent or dabbling – alive.

By fixating on fearing opioids, we are missing the more culpable factors that 
lead some people to keep using drugs despite negative consequences. Opioid use 
on its own is not dangerous, and it’s time we stop demonizing it. Instead, we 
must implement a national overdose education strategy targeting the immediate 
factors of opioid-related overdose: drug mixing and tolerance changes.
 