
The international criminal court (ICC), created under UN security council 
auspices in 2002, has been the subject of political controversy throughout its 
short history and has been criticised over its perceived bias against Africa 
<http://www.icc-cpi.int/en_menus/icc/Pages/default.aspx>. The court, based in 
The Hague, has also been attacked over itslimited number of successful 
prosecutions – two convictions, both of Congolese warlords, in 13 years – and 
over the cost of its operations 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/daviddavenport/2014/03/12/international-criminal-court-12-years-1-billion-2-convictions-2/>
, estimated at $1bn.

But supporters say the court has laboured under serious handicaps from its 
inception. Powerful international actors, such as the US, China and Russia, are 
not state parties to the treaty of Rome, which established the legal basis for 
the court in 1998. They continue to reject its jurisdiction over their 
territory and citizens. The court has also been thwarted by the refusal of some 
member countries to follow its injunctions. The most recent instance wasSouth 
Africa’s decision not to detain Omar al-Bashir, Sudan’s president 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-33269126>, who was visiting the country 
and is wanted by the ICC for genocide and other crimes.

In all, 123 countries have ratified the treaty of Rome, rendering them state 
parties, while 31 are signatories but have not ratified the treaty. Even 
countries that do not acknowledge the court, such as Israel, have legal 
obligations to cooperate with it in some circumstances, stemming from their UN 
membership andinternational law, including the Geneva conventions. But the 
court lacks teeth to enforce its will. RecentPalestinian attempts, for example, 
to use the ICC to expose illegal Israeli settler actions 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/palestinians-file-report-at-icc-on-deadly-duma-firebombing/>
in the occupied territories have been flatly rejected by Israel’s government. 
The US, Russia and China also routinely withhold cooperation with the ICC.

Yet at the same time, the US is broadly supportive of ICC action against 
foreign nationals of whom it disapproves, such as Bashir and Syria’s president, 
Bashar al-Assad. This has led to accusations of double standards, not least 
following the US-British invasion of Iraq in 2003 and Russia’s annexation of 
Crimea in 2014. Critics say George W Bush,Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/07/tony-blair-war-crimes-prosecuted-eel-like-boris-johnson>
 and Vladimir Putin, among others, should undergo official investigation for 
war crimes.

The ICC prosecutor’s office has launched nine official investigations since 
2002, all in Africa – in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda, Central 
African Republic (two), Libya, Kenya, Darfur (Sudan), Ivory Coast and Mali. It 
has indicted 36 individuals including Sudan’s Bashir, Kenya’s President Uhuru 
Kenyatta, and the former Ivory Coast president Laurent Gbagbo. The Kenyatta 
case fell through. Only Gbagbo is certain to face trial, in November this year. 
Even here,claims that the ICC has mishandled the case 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/08/04/icc-cote-divoire-case-highlights-courts-missteps>
 have cast doubt on the prosecution’s prospects.

The ICC denies anti-African bias. Fatou Bensouda, the chief prosecutor, said 
in a recent interview that the ICC had benefited Africa.“The ICC is working 
with Africa, and working for African victims,” she said 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-11809908>. 

 * Now we want to hear from you. If you’ve been involved with the UN in some 
way, we’d like to hear about your experiences – or if you’d just like to share 
your views – then please use the form below. We will be using the most 
interesting contributions in our reporting.  