
In the same week Unesco has been urged to focus on two world heritage sites 
under very different threats, campaigners in Liverpool are outraged that the 
council hasvoted for the demolition of a range of charming but very battered 
buildings, including the 1912 Futurist cinema 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-merseyside-34054240> in the name of 
regeneration.

Meanwhile, a black Islamic State flag has been flying from the pediment of a 
dazzling Roman ruin at Palmyra in Syria – and news has come of thedecapitation 
of the site’s guardian and destruction of temple structures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/25/islamic-state-images-destruction-palmyra-temple-baal-shamin-isis>
.


At a time when such problems face much of the world’s most precious common 
heritage, Unesco’s noble motto, “building peace in the minds of men and women”, 
is enough to provoke a despairing laugh.

The origins of the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organisation date back to the League of Nations and the yearning to 
rebuild the world after the horrors of the first world war. It came into formal 
existence immediately after the second world war, funded mainly by 
contributions from the now 195 members.

Although Unesco has many goals across many disciplines, and links with 
hundreds of organisations, it is probably best known for theWorld Heritage List 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/>, intended to flag up the places that should be 
most precious to mankind.


The concept was born in crisis – the threat to drown the magnificent ancient 
Egyptian temples of Abu Simbel in the waters of the Aswan dam – and has 
grappled with crises ever since. Governments nominate sites, including ruined 
temples, old factories, mountains and forests, but the title is a badge of 
honour, and carries no special funding or statutory protection. Terrorism is in 
the headlines, but rising sea levels and spreading deserts, urban sprawl and 
marine pollution are all taking their toll in the long term.

The international committee meets once a year – most recently in Germany in 
July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/05/unesco-champagne-world-heritage-united-nations-french>
 – to decide on new nominations, and whether any already selected need to go on 
to a less coveted Unesco list,World Heritage in Danger 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/danger/>.

Liverpool, listed for the buildings, piers and wharves surviving from the 
glory days when it was one of the busiest ports in the world, is the only UK 
site on the danger list, along with Palmyra – on the list four years before the 
current horrors – and other sites in Syria: Damascus, Aleppo and the fabulous 
Crusader castle of Crac des Chevaliers.

Others include the war-ravaged 1,000-year-old mud brick buildings of San’aa in 
Yemen, added only this summer; and the ancient city ofHatra in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/07/isis-militants-destroy-hatra-iraq>
, which stands witness to the complex multicultural history of the country, and 
is therefore exactly the kind of site in Isis’s crosshairs.

The ruined giant Buddhas at Bamiyan in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/10/rebuild-bamiyan-buddhas-taliban-afghanistan>
, destroyed by the Taliban in 2001 – presaging many attempts to scour history 
out of the landscape – have been on the danger list since 2003, and there is 
still no agreement how or even whether to restore them.

“When extremists seek to destroy culture and persecute individuals on cultural 
and religious grounds, we must also respond with more culture, with more 
knowledge, with more protection measures,” said Unesco’s director general, 
Irina Bokova. She is right, of course – but there are days when the news is so 
dire, her gallant words seem mere whistling in the wind.

 * Now we want to hear from you. If you’ve been involved with the UN in some 
way, we’d like to hear about your experiences – or if you’d just like to share 
your views – then please use the form below. We will be using the most 
interesting contributions in our reporting.  