


Rwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>, 1994. The nadir of many 
lows for UN peacekeeping.

Hundreds of desperate Tutsis sought refuge on the first day of the genocide at 
a school where 90 UN troops were under the command of Captain Luc Lemaire. 
Here, they were surely safe from the Hutus and their machetes.

The UN flag flew over the school. The Belgian peacekeepers were armed with a 
machine gun, planted at the entrance. These soldiers were the world’s army. The 
Tutsis could not imagine they would stand by while people were slaughtered.

The 39-year-old captain feared otherwise. The UN in New York had ignored 
warnings that the genocide was being planned and the security council was 
pulling out peacekeepers in response to the mass killing.

Within days, the UN command decided there was more important work for Lemaire 
and his men than protecting Tutsis. The peacekeepers were ordered to abandon 
the school in order to escort foreigners to the airport and out of Rwanda.

As the soldiers left, Tutsis begged to be shot rather than left to the 
militia’s machetes. Within hours, the2,000 people at the school were murdered 
by gun, grenade and blade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/dec/19/theobserver3>.

Lemaire’s contingent kept a sporadic video diary of the wretched events. At 
one point a shaky camera captures a sandbagged machine-gun post and a pickup 
truck of Hutu militiamen sweeping by.

The video then focuses on the soldiers’ log. It reads: “New York didn’t agree 
to change the rules of engagement.” The peacekeepers were not to be permitted 
to save Tutsis. The camera’s microphone picks up an anonymous voice: “There are 
killings and New York doesn’t give a damn.”

The betrayal of the Tutsis in Rwanda was a low point for UN peacekeeping but 
not an isolated one. A year later, Dutch peacekeepers failed to stop the
massacre of 8,000 Muslim men in Srebrenica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1995/jul/12/warcrimes.balkans>, a supposedly 
UN “safe area”, the most notorious mass killing by the Serbs in Bosnia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9e772633342711770e2c34ef5780b7670d460d4%2F0_0_2040_1454%2F2040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don't%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don%27t%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9e772633342711770e2c34ef5780b7670d460d4%2F0_0_2040_1454%2F2040.jpg>
 General Ratko Mladić of the Bosnian Serb army, left, drinks with Dutch colonel 
Ton Karremans, second right, in the Bosnian village of Potočari, on 12 July 
1995, the second day of the massacre. Photograph: Anonymous/AP 
Not long before, there had been the debacle in Somalia where a US-led UN 
humanitarian operation turned into a bloody conflict against a powerful 
warlord. By then Angola was already back at war after its UN peacekeeping 
mission collapsed amid accusations it contributed to the breakdown of peace.

Other disasters – the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Sierra Leone – 
were still on the horizon even as the UN peacekeeping department’s budget 
doubled and doubled again with growing numbers of missions.

70 years and half a trillion dollars later: what has the UN achieved?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/what-has-the-un-achieved-united-nations>
There were good reasons to question the point of UN peacekeeping in the 1990s 
and to wonder if it was not costing as many lives as it was protecting by 
offering an illusion of security. The murdered Tutsis at the school might have 
stood a better chance if they had fled to Uganda.

Two decades later, those responsible for peacekeeping – UN officials, 
countries on the security council assigning missions, militaries contributing 
the forces in blue helmets – say the lessons of the 1990s have been learned.
Protection of civilian lives 
<http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/issues/civilian.shtml> is now a priority. UN 
soldiers no longer have their hands tied in using force to defend the innocent. 
Perhaps most important, the failures of two decades ago stripped the UN of the 
illusion that an election and a few soldiers in blue helmets is enough to 
sustain peace.

But even as peacekeeping has ballooned to become by far the most expensive of 
UN departments (in 2015 it will cost nearly $9bn to keep 120,000 blue helmet 
soldiers and policemen deployed in 16 countries from Mali to Cyprus and Haiti, 
compared with just $500m at the end of the cold war), it is dogged by 
challenges.

The politics of the UN security council continues to hamstring action over 
some conflicts, such as Syria and Darfur. Other missions drag on indefinitely, 
such as in the DRC and Haiti. There is friction between the UN and some 
governments over who has ultimate command over peacekeeping troops, which has 
resulted in conflicting orders with disastrous consequences. Then there are 
spreading conflicts against armed Islamist groups in central and west Africa.
Peacekeepers around the world 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/un_operations-zip/giv-31114WcgEWRWLJ0Ms/>
“In the last 15 years, the number of missions, number of crises have 
drastically multiplied,” said Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary general. “In 
addition to using military and police forces, we have been deploying a lot of 
special political missions. This is preventative diplomacy. If we can prevent 
at the time of symptoms of a crisis, we can save a lot of human lives and human 
resources.”

Jack Christofides, who is on leave from the UN as director of peacekeeping 
operations for central and west Africa, described peacekeeping as “extremely 
taxing at the moment”.

“We’ve got more troops, we’ve got a bigger budget, we deployed in all sorts of 
very very difficult places, much more difficult than we’ve ever been, and we’re 
stretched, we’re really stretched,” he said.

“If you think of the old deployments in places like Lebanon and Bosnia, there 
is a certain infrastructure you could use and work with. The troops coming were 
generally from countries that had the means to launch expeditions. Today, when 
you’re talking about northern Mali and central Africa, you have both extremely 
dangerous conditions and geostrategic locations which are very difficult to get 
to.”

The UN is also grappling with persistent accusations of rape and sexual 
exploitation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/22/panel-to-review-un-response-to-alleged-central-african-republic-sex-abuse>
by its peacekeepers, which is further undermining confidence in the 
organisation, particularly in some of the countries where its soldiers are 
deployed.

And there are added demands as the US presses for peacekeepers to take on a 
more aggressive role, particularly against armed Islamist groups in Africa. 
President Barack Obama is jointly hosting a summit with Ban in New York later 
this month to seek commitments to strengthen peacekeeping with better trained 
troops, equipment and intelligence resources, to the alarm of some of the 
countries that provide substantial contingents of troops in blue helmets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f803249c94b96ff376416a198d347944bbea90b%2F0_0_3228_2049%2F3228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don't%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don%27t%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f803249c94b96ff376416a198d347944bbea90b%2F0_0_3228_2049%2F3228.jpg>
 Indian soldiers gather before their departure to Sudan on a UN peacekeeping 
mission. Photograph: Raveendran/AFP/Getty Images 
India, which has sent more soldiers on UN missions than any other country – 
180,000 on 49 missions – is openly challenging the move towards what some see 
as mostly rich and powerful countries on the security council sending the poor 
to fight and die.

“India is completely committed to peacekeeping provided peacekeeping is what 
we know it to be,” said India’s ambassador to the UN, Asoke Kumar Mukerji. “The 
soldiers in the blue helmets, under the blue flag, are impartial. They are not 
supposed to be partisan. If somebody wants soldiers to go in and fight they 
should hire mercenaries, not take UN soldiers.”

UN peacekeeping came into its own with the collapse of the Soviet Union in 
1991 and the diminishing of ideological rivalries that had dominated 
international politics since the second world war.


Early successes in Cambodia, Namibia, Mozambique and El Salvador generated an 
overconfidence in the ability of UN soldiers to keep the peace. Each of those 
countries had an accord that former warring parties wanted to maintain.

The UN learned the hard way in Angola, Rwanda and Bosnia that where the UN 
wants peace more than those in conflict, then the illusion of peacekeeping can 
perpetuate instability and cost lives.

Out of the disasters of the 1990s came a new model including an ethos of “
responsibility to protect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/28/syria-intervention-un-responsibility-to-protect>
”. No longer would UN forces stand idly by while innocent people were murdered. 
That has helped drive a rapid expansion of peacekeeping to become the UN’s 
single largest operation.

In 1991, the year the Soviet Union collapsed, the peacekeeping budget was just 
$490m. Over the past decade it has leapt from $3.8bn to about $9bn as the size 
and length of missions has expanded. More than 100,000 UN peacekeepers have 
served in Haiti since 2004 and close to 250,000 been deployed to the DRC over 
the past 15 years. There is little prospect of either mission ending soon.
UN budgets 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/un_budgets-zip/giv-31114ST6XvYeuSj5j/>
Today, UN troop deployments in the DRC, Sudan and Darfur each cost more than 
$1bn a year, with Mali and Central African Republic not far behind. The most 
expensive outside Africa is Haiti, with a budget of $500m.

The emphasis on Africa is in part a reflection of the enduring nature of some 
conflicts on the continent, but also the politics of the security council. The 
UN might have had large peacekeeping missions in Syria and Ukraine, were it not 
for Russian objections.

As the scale of peacekeeping has grown so have the questions about its role. 
Most particularly, are peacekeepers there to monitor peace or to enforce it? 
It’s a source of increasing friction between the major powers on the security 
council that approve UN intervention and some of the countries which provide 
the troops.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e9ed3251a4a345adfdb42fd8157deacb8d7a1d7%2F0_113_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don't%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don%27t%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e9ed3251a4a345adfdb42fd8157deacb8d7a1d7%2F0_113_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 A soldier from the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo sits 
on a personnel carrier next to a UN peacekeeper outside Goma. Photograph: 
AFP/Getty Images 
In 2000, British forces landed in Sierra Leone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/nov/13/sierraleone.westafrica> after UN 
peacekeepers stood aside or fled an advance on the country’s capital, Freetown, 
by a notoriously brutal rebel group, the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). 
Several hundred peacekeepers surrendered to the rebels.

A British general, David Richards, was sent in by London to evacuate foreign 
citizens. Confronted with the RUF’s horrific record and the imminent killing of 
large numbers of civilians, he defied his instructions and used UK troops to 
spearhead a counter attack.

Richards, who went on to become Britain’s chief of the defence staff, said he 
was “staggered” to find that the Indian UN force commander, Major General Vijay 
Jetley, interpreted his mandate as that of a neutral intermediary. In Richards’ 
view the UN should have been siding with the elected government against rebels 
breaking a peace agreement.

“I had a real argument with Major General Jetley about this. The Indian 
hierarchy were very reluctant to lose a single person on a UN operation,” said 
Richards. “They were very reluctant to fight and that permeated quite a lot of 
the other contingents as well, to the point where I remember going in to the UN 
headquarters on my first day there in May 2000 and finding Jetley. I said 
General, we’ve got to stop the RUF, you’ve got to tell your people to fight. At 
least hold their positions. He was very reluctant to do it.”

India said its troops were sent to monitor the peace, not enforce it. The UN 
mission in Sierra Leone was further complicated by antipathy between some of 
the national forces, particularlyJetley and his Nigerian deputy, Brigadier 
General Mohammed Garba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/sep/09/sierraleone.unitednations>. 

In an internal UN report, Jetley accused Garba and other senior Nigerians of 
being more interested in smuggling diamonds than keeping the peace. Nigeria’s 
military responded byaccusing the Indian general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/sep/09/sierraleone.unitednations> of 
“trying to justify his ineptitude, inaction and inefficiency in the leadership 
of a multinational force”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff558c996f34a39baf4970a6704b902e460d52d18%2F29_27_2019_1211%2F2019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don't%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don%27t%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff558c996f34a39baf4970a6704b902e460d52d18%2F29_27_2019_1211%2F2019.jpg>
 An Indian UN soldier watches an RAF Chinook helicopter land at the UN 
headquarters in Freetown, Sierra Leone. Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Such differences of opinion over the role of UN peacekeepers were replicated 
12 years later in theDemocratic Republic of the Congo as rebels advanced on the 
eastern town of Goma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/19/goma-congo-rebels-advance>. The 
Indian commander of part of the largest peacekeeping force in the world ignored 
orders from UN officials to defend the town and called the Indian defence 
ministry in New Delhi to ask what he should do. He was told not to resist. The 
rebels seized Goma to the anger of Ban Ki-Moon, who regarded it as a “personal 
humiliation”, according to a senior UN official.

By then members of the wider UN mission in the DRC had come to look like 
bystanders to mass killing, rape and terror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/08/tutsi-rebels-congo-laurentnkunda>
. Richard Gowan, until recently research director at theCentre on International 
Cooperation <http://cic.nyu.edu/front>, a thinktank in New York that works 
closely with the UN on peacekeeping, said Indian forces in Sierra Leone and the 
DRC were taking orders from the defence ministry in New Delhi, not the UN 
commanders on the ground.

“It’s very clear that there are directions from New Delhi to avoid all risk, 
and that there are parallel lines of command between New Delhi and their guys 
in the field. That’s true of a lot of countries. A lot of field officers, if 
they get any order to take a significant risk in a peace operation, they’ll 
immediately phone home. That’s making it almost impossible for some force 
commanders to get anything done because they have no true control over their 
own units,” he said.
peacekeeper numbers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/un_personnel-zip/giv-31114l8ZBnBteoX6R/>
Most western nations will not put boots on the ground as frontline 
peacekeepers and so the UN is dependent on the goodwill of those countries 
prepared to deploy troops such as India, Bangladesh, Rwanda and Nigeria, making 
it hard to assert its authority.

The UN lost confidence in Jetley in Sierra Leone but when the then secretary 
general, Kofi Annan, tried to remove him, the Indian government threatened to 
pull out all of its forces. Annan’s successor, Ban, ran into the same threats 
from New Delhi when he tried to remove the Indian UN commander after the Goma 
debacle.

Rwanda and Srebrenica prompted a greater emphasis on protection of civilian 
lives, and involvement in rebuilding failed states instead of negotiating peace 
treaties, standing back and hoping it all worked out. Gowan said that while the 
“responsibility to protect” ethos was laudable it had also led to 
ill-thought-out missions.

“Sometimes in peacekeeping, the security council says ‘Good God we need to 
have a mission’ and that mission is stuck together,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcc225e08c34539fedd7642aee6515ab8fcb58dd%2F162_0_3336_2002%2F3336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don't%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don%27t%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcc225e08c34539fedd7642aee6515ab8fcb58dd%2F162_0_3336_2002%2F3336.jpg>
 A convoy of the UN mission in Darfur crosses through a mud track in the 
southern village of Kashalongo, south of Nyala. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Gowan pointed to Darfur, where he said the UN intervention came as a 
politically panicked response to public pressure over the mass killings by the 
government-allied Janjaweed militia.

“For political reasons the US and the UK insisted on having the mission. I’ve 
spoken to UK officials since who’ve said: ‘We had no real idea what this 
mission was meant to do. We were just under such public pressure to come up 
with an answer and the answer was peacekeeping.’ That was definitely true for 
the Bush administration as well,” he said.

“Darfur has been a quagmire from the beginning. The frank reality is no one 
believes that the mission is working but no one dares pull it out because they 
fear the moment it goes there will be an even greater spike in violence and the 
security council will be held responsible. It’s become a slow burning disaster.”

Philippe Bolopion, the UN director at Human Rights Watch, said the principal 
reason for the failure of the Darfur mission, a hybrid operation with African 
Union forces, was deadlock on the security council.

“When permanent members of the security council can’t agree to stand up to an 
abusive government such as Sudan’s, and you have weak peacekeeping troops on 
the ground, it’s almost a perfect storm where peacekeepers are not going to 
protect civilians properly,” he said.

Members of the security council routinely prioritise national interests over 
the needs of the peacekeeping missions

“Permanent members of the security council routinely prioritise their national 
interest over the needs of the UN peacekeeping missions they have mandated, as 
a result often undermining them. Russia and China have done this by opposing 
more sanctions against the Sudanese government even when it pushes peacekeepers 
around in Darfur.”

The responsibility to protect has had a more positive impact elsewhere. 
Peacekeepers in South Sudan turned their bases into de facto refugee camps 
protecting tens of thousands of people. That would have been unlikely 20 years 
ago.

But the ethos has been severely challenged by the fallout from the security 
council mandate for military intervention in the 2011 Libyan revolution to 
protect civilians in Benghazi. Russia accused Nato of abusing it to support the 
overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi. That in turn has complicated UN action on Syria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fe3e3e1f64c5cdc0eca798fdefdc5646b28ab22%2F0_0_2600_1777%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don't%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don%27t%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fe3e3e1f64c5cdc0eca798fdefdc5646b28ab22%2F0_0_2600_1777%2F2600.jpg>
 A UN flag flutters amid the rubble of the Lebanese-Israeli border town of 
Maroun al-Ras. Photograph: Patrick Baz/AFP/Getty Images 
Finding common ground on sub-Saharan Africa has generally been less difficult 
because of fewer strategic rivalries. The debacle in Goma prompted the UN to 
put together a fighting force of soldiers prepared to go into combat. South 
Africa, Tanzania and Malawi volunteered to send troops to join the Force 
Intervention Brigade in part because they were weary of the persistent 
instability in the region.

“We were all embarrassed, humiliated at the end of 2012 when Goma fell,” said 
Christofides, who oversaw UN peacekeeping operations in the DRC from 2011 until 
earlier this year and was an architect of the intervention brigade. “Everybody 
has that image of peacekeepers sitting on top of an APC [armoured personnel 
carrier] and this group of ruffians walking into Goma. That was a low moment 
for everybody.

“When we recommended the mandate of the intervention brigade, the security 
council did not need much persuading. You have some very far-reaching language 
in the mandate about targeted offensive operations. That’s not language you see 
in resolutions of the UN. Neutralising armed groups, preventing their 
expansion, disarming them.”

The UN also deployed drones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/04/un-spy-drones-in-congo> for the 
first time to help monitor the movements of the rebels and to verify Rwanda’s 
denials that it was supplying the insurgents. The drones are not armed although 
that appears the next likely step, if not in the DRC then in some other 
conflict where the UN is involved, given their increasing use in the Middle 
East by the US and its allies.

The intervention brigade has been successful in changing the dynamic in 
eastern Congo by pushing back the rebels and providing a degree of stability to 
begin the reconstruction of functioning systems of government, such as the 
courts – although regional politics has played a large part too. But the 
operation has also deeply alarmed countries such as India, which fears it sets 
an example for the future of peacekeeping.

Christofides doubts that the force intervention brigade provides a model for 
other peacekeeping missions. Senior UN officials, some of whom were strongly 
opposed to the creation of the brigade but now judge it a success, are deeply 
wary of the UN taking on a similar role in other conflicts. The DRC, they say, 
was a unique situation.

But even if the force intervention brigade is not replicated, it fits with a 
wider agenda by the major western powers to remake UN peacekeeping as a partner 
in military campaigns. For them, the lesson of British intervention in Sierra 
Leone or the recent French deployments in Mali and Central African Republic 
against armed Islamist groups is that better trained and equipped forces launch 
the initial assault and then the UN comes in as backup. But for that to happen, 
UN peacekeeping has to up its game.

Obama is leading the push with his New York summit on 28 September to seek 
pledges of troops, equipment and intelligence resources to a revamped 
peacekeeping operation.

Washington regards peacekeeping as a national security issue and a “good 
bargain”, as one official put it. The US picks up the tab for a quarter of the 
UN’s $9bn peacekeeping budget, but it is a fraction of the cost of the Pentagon 
or invading Iraq.

Moreover, if other countries are sending their forces then the US does not 
have to risk the lives of American soldiers. Previously, the US mostly regarded 
peacekeeping in Africa, in particular, as a humanitarian issue. Now, given the 
nature of the conflicts in Mali, Nigeria and Central African Republic, 
Washington views it as strategic.

But while the US wants more assertive peacekeeping, it does not want to send 
its soldiers to fight. Obama is pressing more developed countries, in Europe, 
Asia and Latin America, to make greater commitments in the hope of improving 
the quality of UN forces. So is Ban.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a3b62619daa4dd8de5b74965972874e22e7154c%2F0_0_4480_3137%2F4480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don't%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don%27t%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a3b62619daa4dd8de5b74965972874e22e7154c%2F0_0_4480_3137%2F4480.jpg>
 Cambodian mine experts demonstrate their work in the UN-controlled buffer zone 
in Cyprus. Photograph: Barbara Laborde/AFP/Getty Images 
“I’m now in the process of reaching out to developed countries. I’ve been 
speaking to many presidents and prime ministers to diversify the participation 
of peacekeeping forces,” he said.

“If we can diversify and have more countries, particularly some big countries, 
if they can send their own troops in addition to assets and financial support, 
that would be much appreciated.”

UN officials privately concede there is little chance of the US putting its 
forces under UN command. Congress would never stand for it. But Washington is 
joining the UN in pressing other developed countries to play a bigger part in 
peacekeeping.

The UK currently has fewer than 300 soldiers deployed on peacekeeping 
missions, mostly in Cyprus. “We’ve been having goodness knows how many 
discussions with British officials with a view to getting them more involved,” 
said Christofides. “We’re still drawing too many troops from a few parts of the 
world and not enough from other parts of the world. And I don’t just mean 
Africa versus the west, but other countries in Asia and Latin America that 
could contribute a bit more.”

Another senior UN official put it more bluntly: “Britain has a reputation for 
lecturing without contributing.”

The UK is expected to announce a contingent of peacekeepers for South Sudan 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34272308> at the New York summit, but numbers are 
not known.

Richards wants to see Britain make a greater contribution. “The Ministry of 
Defence and, I have to say sadly, the armed forces, don’t really see the UN as 
proper soldiering. This is a cultural ignorance that’s grown up over many 
years. The Americans share it writ large: UN ops is what second- and 
third-world nations do but proper armies, we pick and choose,” he said.

Richards said countries whose forces had experience in Afghanistan and Iraq 
could put that to good use in UN operations. “I think that’s a pretty good role 
for the British armed forces in this era when there’s so many nasty things 
going on in the world. The Americans really need to decide to do it as well,” 
he said. “I think at a low level, our young officers would love to do it. There 
is a higher level political/military reluctance and snootiness about it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae4582197f62cd56a7040c656051f24fbbb08f58%2F0_0_2302_1456%2F2302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don't%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20point%20of%20peacekeepers%20when%20they%20don%27t%20keep%20the%20peace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fun-united-nations-peacekeepers-rwanda-bosnia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae4582197f62cd56a7040c656051f24fbbb08f58%2F0_0_2302_1456%2F2302.jpg>
 A UN peacekeeper patrols in a street in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Photograph: 
Issouf Sanogo/AFP/Getty Images 
India strongly opposes a move towards more forceful peacekeeping. “When it has 
been used as a tool to ensure that a peace agreement is observed so that peace 
building can take place, or as a tool to facilitate a political resolution, it 
works,” said Mukerji, the Indian ambassador to the UN.

“But if peacekeeping is to be seen as peace enforcement, then unfortunately we 
can’t see the UN charter allowing such a radical departure of the use of 
peacekeeping.

“Peacekeeping is not an end in itself. The end is political stability and 
peacekeeping is just a tool to bring about political stability. What’s 
happening now is the cart is being put before the horse. I think that’s a very 
unfortunate development.”

Gowan is sceptical for different reasons. “I think that we may be stumbling 
into an enormous strategic trap because if we have learned over the last decade 
that very highly capable Nato forces, US forces, actually can’t suppress 
Islamic extremist groups, why on earth do we think slightly strengthening UN 
missions is going to give us a tool that allows us to fight terrorists?” he 
said.



 