
Will you be replaced by a machine? There's nearly a 50-50 chance, according to 
a recent study <http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/publications/view/1314> by 
Oxford University researchers who found that 47% of the labor market in the US 
alone is at risk of being mechanized out of existence. Approximately 702 jobs 
thus far held by humans are now threatened by non-humans, as we were remindedby 
a widely shared report on the study this week 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-03-12/your-job-taught-to-machines-puts-half-u-s-work-at-risk.html>
.

It’s not hard to see why. Advances in robotics and artificial intelligence are 
bringing robots intomore and more workplaces 
<http://money.msn.com/leadership/10-robots-in-the-workforce-1>. For example:

 * Autonomous vehicles now in development by just about every major automaker 
threaten the jobs of truckers and cabbies. 
 * The Baxter robot from Rethink Robotics 
<http://www.rethinkrobotics.com/products/baxter/> is designed to work 
side-by-side with human factory supervisors, learning new tasks on the go – 
something only human workers could do previously. 
 * Robotic surgeons such as those made by Intuitive Surgical 
<http://www.intuitivesurgical.com/products/> and the open-source Raven project 
<http://brl.ee.washington.edu/laboratory/node/26> currently require human 
surgeons in the loop, but inroads have already been made into giving these 
machines autonomy as well. 
 * Unmanned aerial vehicles – as in, drones – are getting set for integration 
into the US national airspace next year, potentially replacing the jobs of many 
human pilots. 
 * My profession isn't immune to robotic outsourcing either. The Quill robotic 
journalist <http://narrativescience.com/artificial-intelligence-platform/> 
digests facts from raw data, and spits out fully formed sports and business 
stories. 
 * Oh, and Mark Zuckerberg and Elon Musk are now backing " 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/21/zuckerberg-invest-startup-brain-software-vicarious>
a computer that thinks like a person except it doesn't need to eat or sleep" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/mar/21/zuckerberg-invest-startup-brain-software-vicarious>
. So there's that. 
There’s even a robotic burger flipper 
<http://singularityhub.com/2013/01/22/robot-serves-up-340-hamburgers-per-hour/> 
in the works. The website ofMomentum Machines <http://momentummachines.com/> 
boasts that its slicing, grinding, frying robot can do "everything employees 
can do except better", and that it will "democratize access to high-quality 
food, making it available to the masses".

All of which begs the question: will there be anyone left who can afford those 
better burgers, or will everyone be out of work? And what the hell are we 
supposed to do about the inevitable rise of the machines?


The march of the worker drones does seem inevitable, and not just into 
specialized job functions. The Pentagon's mad-science research arm, Darpa, is 
currently hosting theDarpa Robotics Challenge 
<http://www.darpa.mil/Our_Work/TTO/Programs/DARPA_Robotics_Challenge.aspx> for 
the creation of humanoid robots capable of working in disaster areas that are 
too dangerous for humans. These all-purpose machines are designed to let 
themselves into buildings and pick up and use whatever tools are at hand there 
– indeed, to do the things we cannot.

At the Darpa trials in Miami a few months ago 
<http://aeon.co/magazine/being-human/meet-darpas-new-generation-of-humanoid-robots/>
, I watched one of the 16 struggling 'bots stare for 10 minutes at a door 
handle, apparently uncertain what to do with it. The machinelooked capable 
enough: two arms, two legs, about six feet tall, a head studded with sensors. 
But it was definitely lacking in the brains department. Still, the program 
manager at Darpa in charge of the operation imagines future versions serving as
in-home aides <http://robotfutures.wordpress.com/tag/darpa-robotic-challenge/> 
for the elderly or disabled. The robots are in the primitive, baby-step stages 
right now, but things can move quickly when it comes to Darpa robotics programs.

Autonomous vehicles, for example, went from being unable to complete a course 
through open desert in theDarpa Grand Challenge 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/3512270.stm>, to deftly navigating 
simulated city streets – complete with human-driven traffic – in three short 
years. Three US states and the District of Columbia havealready passed 
legislation 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2013/11/22/autonomous_car_legislation_backs_google_s_vision_of_the_future_over_ford.html>
 regulating robotic cars on public roads.

Sooner or later, it seems, robots will have staged a takeover not only of our 
workplaces, and streets, but also of our homes. What then?

As early as the 1960s, Arthur C Clarke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarke>, professional visionary and 
inventor of the communications satellite, predicted the end of menial labor 
(mental as well as manual), due to mechanization (and, more disturbingly, 
bio-engineered apes). In his essay The World of 2001, originally published in 
Vogue and reprinted in his book The View from Serendip, Clarke wrote: "the main 
result of all these developments will be to eliminate 99 percent of human 
activity …if we look at humanity as it is constituted today."

 Our salvation, in Clarke's view, will lie in our looking toward loftier 
pursuits than all those kinds of jobs that machines will take over:

In the day-after-tomorrow society there will be no place for anyone as 
ignorant as the average mid-twentieth-century college graduate. If it seems an 
impossible goal to bring the whole population of the planet up to 
superuniversity levels, remember that a few centuries ago it would have seemed 
equally unthinkable that everybody would be able to read. Today we have to set 
our sights much higher, and it is not unrealistic to do so.

 Of course this depends on our valuing, as a society, individual knowledge, 
creating thinking, curiosity and all the other things that elevate us above the 
level of machines. It depends on our fostering the kind of society that not 
only frees people from menial labor, but also enables them to reach their full 
human potential – not just go begging for want of a lousy job.

 How many ways can a cook contribute to society other than flipping burgers? 
What can a sportswriter do beyond coming up with endless variations on "beat," 
topped", "outshot" and "defeated"? It's about time to find out.
 