
Why are dubbed musicals so frowned upon in the west when Bollywood pictures 
depend so heavily on playback singers?
Vidhu Khanna, Coventry

In reviewing Man of La Mancha (1972), the American critic Roger Ebert offered 
the Wildean quip, "If there's anything worse than dubbing in the voice of a 
non-singer, it's not dubbing the voice of a non-singer." In the early days of 
screen sound, the primitive technology meant that songs had to be recorded 
live. However, the accidental discovery of playback during the filming of 
Broadway Melody (1929) allowed for numbers to be staged to pre-recorded music. 
This not only saved time and money, but it also solved the problem of achieving 
a balance between the vocal and orchestration. The introduction of sound mixing 
shortly afterwards enabled technicians to tinker with the timbre of a 
performer's voice or simply to replace it with that of a more accomplished 
singer.

With characters breaking into song in everyday situations, the musical genre 
relied entirely on the suspension of disbelief and shrill or discordant voices 
couldn't be allowed to shatter the illusion. Consequently, stars were required 
to lip-sync to such unsung vocalists as Trudy Erwin, Jo Ann Greer, Louanne 
Hogan, Martha Mears, Virginia Rees, Betty Wand and Eileen Wilson.

Eventually, the tendency towards greater realism that had transformed 
Hollywood's other genres seeped into the musical, too. Audrey Hepburn was 
dubbed by Marni Nixon in My Fair Lady (1964), but Rex Harrison talked on pitch 
and there was no going back after Richard Harris and Vanessa Redgrave had 
performed their own songs in Camelot (1967), even though it proved a commercial 
calamity.

In Bollywood, however, fantasy remains a key ingredient of masala musicals and 
stars have to sound as good as they look. Moreover, the huge popularity of 
soundtrack albums means that quality takes precedence over authenticity. Yet 
little attempt has been made to disguise the fact that the majority of India's 
screen idols are miming and playback singers have always been promoted as stars 
in their own right. Thus, while few will have heard of Anita Ellis, Carole 
Richards or Bonnie Lou Williams, the likes of SP Balasubramaniam, KS Chitra, 
Manna Dey, Geeta Dutt, Kishore Kumar, Mukesh, Udit Narayan, Sonu Nigam, 
Mohammad Rafi, Kumar Sanu, Kavita Krisnamurthi Subramaniam, Alka Yagnik and the 
sisters Asha Bhosle and Lata Mangeshkar are household names across the 
subcontinent and its diaspora.

When did they stop playing the national anthem at the end of cinema shows? 
Patrick Peterson, Bicester

The custom for last house audiences to stand to attention for the national 
anthem died out with the culture of deference in the early 1960s. Previously, 
it had been considered bad manners and disrepectful to the monarch to leave as 
soon as the action ended. Moreover, with the credits coming at the beginning of 
a picture, it was easy for cinema managers to play the anthem before anyone 
could reach for their coat.

However, in the late 1950s, disregarding the anthem came to be seen as an act 
of socio-political protest among students and efforts to play God Save the 
Queen before the main feature were abandoned as latecomers ignored it to find 
their seats before the picture started. With British movies being dominated by 
angry young men in kitchen sink sagas that reflected the reality of everyday 
life, the anthem ritual becoming increasingly anachronistic and exhibitors 
simply gave up trying to impose decorum on their patrons.

I was amused to read in Charles Gant's box-office rundown that Gunnin' for 
That #1 Spot took only Â£86 on its opening weekend. Is this a record low? 
Megan Thomas, Wrexham

A: No, John Penney's Zyzzyx Rd 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=PSxBoM9dHTk&feature=related> took a mere $30 
when only six people attended its six-screening sojourn at the Highland Village 
Park Theater in Dallas, Texas during the last week of 2006. And, even then, 
producer-star Leo Grillo refunded $10 to the film's makeup artist Sheila Moore 
after she paid to take a friend. Worse still, Grillo had spent $1,000 on hiring 
the venue to comply with Screen Actors Guild's salary regulations for 
low-budget pictures. He did recoup some of the $1.2m budget, however, when DVD 
sales in 23 foreign territories brought in $368,000.
 