
Abu Dhabi 

October average high: 36C 

Abu Dhabi is hot on the heels of Dubai with its flashy attractions, and the 
Emirate's latest is a world first: a Ferrari theme park (
ferrariworldabudhabi.com <http://www.ferrariworldabudhabi.com>) with the 
world's fastest roller coaster which will reach speeds of up to 150mph. Other 
rides include a flume ride through a Ferrari 599 engine and a miniature Italy 
you can drive through in a 1957 California Spider.

• Best Dubai Holidays (020-7849 4180, bestdubaiholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.bestatdubaiholidays.co.uk/>) has a five-night break from London on 
13 November, flying via Doha to Abu Dhabi, to stay at the five-star Desert 
Islands Resort and Spa on Sir Bani Yas Island, for £786. It has its own game 
reserve and walking trails

Tunisia


October average high: 25C

The history of one of the world's most incredible historic sites will be 
brought to life by a new exhibition at the Carthage museum (
tourismtunisia.com/culture 
<http://www.tourismtunisia.com/culture/carthage_m.html>), which reveals the 
story and times of a man who lived there in the first century BC, whose 
skeleton was discovered in 1994.

• The Residence Tunis is a stylish beachfront complex 20 minutes from Tunis 
city centre and Carthage. W&O travel (08445 277 3310,WandOtravel.com 
<http://www.wandotravel.com/>) has a seven-night break for £4,448 for a family 
of four sleeping in two rooms, including flights from Gatwick. Travel between 
23-31 October

Antigua

October average high: 29C

Want to feel totally tropical? Head to the land of sunshine and cocktail hours 
for yachties. Go snorkelling and make footprints in the sand on one of 365 
beaches.

• Netflights.com <http://www.netflights.com/> has a deal to stay at Jolly 
Beach, an all-inclusive resort with 40 acres of gardens, two pools and a spa, 
for seven nights including flights from £939 from Manchester. Book before 30 
October for travel before 10 December

Madeira

Average November high: 22C

Everyone should now give Funchal a chance, not just the retirees who once made 
it popular, thanks to the posh hotels and cool bars that have opened in recent 
years. Have a cocktail at The Vine, a hotel with a rooftop pool, then head to 
the club Mohle, one of many hip joints putting the fun into Funchal.

• The Co-operative Travel (0845 600 3063, co-operativetravel.co.uk 
<http://www.co-operativetravel.co.uk/>) has seven-night breaks in November and 
December at the five-star Pestana Carlton Madeira, from a range of UK airports 
from £589
 