
Chronology prevented me from witnessing Adrian Mitchell's searing rendition of 
his polemicTo Whom It May Concern <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FmMCObgu_jc> 
(better known by its refrain: "Tell me lies about Vietnam") at London's Albert 
Hall in 1965. I was there, however, for the return match in 1984.

Mitchell, who died at the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/21/adrian-mitchell-obituary>, raged 
against the Falklands war, and then proceeded to do the Vietnam poem all over 
again. He was still doing it this year, but about Iraq.

At least in 1984 we had the impression that the torch would be carried on: 
alongside counter-culture veterans such as Mitchell, Allen Ginsberg and the 
Liverpool Poets, there was the new breed of socially-aware bards: John Cooper 
Clarke, Joolz, Benjamin Zephaniah. But it seems as if Mitchell's tradition, 
that of the eloquent, impassioned ranter, has died with him.

Oh sure, there are lots of poets around, writing lots of poems; but none of 
them seems to encapsulate our times; none of them sticks.Matt Harvey 
<http://www.mattharvey.co.uk/> offers delightful, spontaneous vignettes on 
Radio 4 on Saturday mornings but, by the time the Now Show repeat starts, we've 
forgotten them.

Harold Pinter keeps the flame of agitpoetry burning, but his verses 
<http://www.haroldpinter.org/poetry/index.shtml#> just make me wish he'd write 
another play or two.

As for the poet laureate: can anyone out there name a single Andrew Motion 
poem? I'm not even sure that Andrew Motion can.

Poetry is for funerals, it seems. People want the reassuring banalities of I 
Am Not There <http://www.bereavementuk.co.uk/muva.htm>, a poem suited to a 
culture that's not religious but, you know, a bit spiritual; and it works for 
those who are uncomfortable with the fact that Auden'sFuneral Blues 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/funeral-blues-2/> (aka the one from that Hugh 
Grant film) is actually a gay love poem.

Apart from those two, the only poem that everybody knows would appear to be 
Warning <http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/warning/> ('When I am an old womanâ€¦'), 
which is lovely, but hardly an encouragement to tear up the paving slabs.

Most poets, it seems, are just too self-absorbed, too sensitive for this 
brash, multi-platform age. The supposed million pound recording deal clinched by
Murray Lachlan Young <http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/4606658.stm> is 
the hyped exception that proves the rule and it's still more famous than any of 
his poems.

Maybe the versifiers need to swallow their pride and introversion and 
scruples, and press for their own televised talent contest: Poet Idol, 
Britain's Got Pentameter, ABCB Factor...

After all, there was once a moderately successful Canadian poet 
<http://www.leonardcohen.com/> called Leonard Cohen who, more than 40 years 
ago, realised that only by picking up a guitar and setting his words to music 
could he achieve the one thing that matters in modern culture: to make Simon 
Cowell love him. And in that tradition, I offer the Comment is free community 
its chance to create a collaborative poem that will be a worthy successor to 
Mitchell's; as resonant as Cohen's Hallelujah, but without the pretty tune.

We'll call it Tell Me Lies About Cheryl Cole 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/profiles/cheryl-cole-angel-of-the-north-1064496.html>
, but that's just a starting point. Mitchell's rage wasn't provoked solely by 
the Vietnam War; he was lambasting all the ills of contemporary society. So: 
Iraq, the economy, Russell and Jonathan, Madonna and Guy, it's all fair poetic 
game. Off you go. One rhyming couplet each, and mind your metaphors.
 