
On Thursday the prime minister shifted his Euro campaign strategy towards what 
he said would begreater political inclusivity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/david-cameron-boris-johnson-eu-referendum-debate-tory-psychodrama>
. On Friday thechancellor forecast a post-Brexit housing market collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/20/eu-referendum-george-osborne-house-prices-brexit>
. Meanwhile, the out campaign droned on about immigration, punctuated only by 
odd outbursts from Boris Johnson, some of which, as Michael Heseltine noted, are
very odd.

Thus, with four weeks left <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>
, the great Euro campaign has reached a new low, no idealism from either side, 
only low-grade statistics and even lower grade politics. Neither campaign has 
inspired enthusiasm. They both trade in fear. Indeed, it is almost as if 
“Project Fear” from the Scottish referendum had been split in two to make up 
both sides of the Euro poll.

The remain campaign is increasingly confident and very pleased with itself. It 
should not be. The pro-Europeans should be a mile ahead. The out campaign has 
totally failed to offer any coherent vision of what life would be like outside 
the European structure. Would we be like Switzerland andNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/16/eu-exit-norway-option-costs-thinktank>
, with a sweetheart trade deal but forced to accept European regulations still? 
Or would the UK attempt to be a sort of mid-Atlantic Singapore, trading freely 
with the world?

House prices could fall by 18% if Britain quits EU, says George Osborne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/20/eu-referendum-george-osborne-house-prices-brexit>
Either way, there would be challenges. What gets Eurosceptics out of bed in 
the morning is getting shot of the sort of regulations that European Free Trade 
Area countries such asNorway and Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/27/norway-eu-reality-uk-voters-seduced-by-norwegian-model>
 must accept. Meanwhile, Singapore is successful because it is a small country 
within a large Asian trade area calledAsean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/03/opportunities-fears-asean-prepares-single-market>
, not a big country like the UK outside one.

Despite this, the out campaign is still within striking distance in England, 
at least in online polling. That would suggest something is badly misfiring in 
the remain camp and that instead of just demoralising the outers, Cameron’s 
“Bullingdon boy” tactics are also dispiriting his own side. The biggest danger 
for remain has always been a low turnout among Europe-friendly voters. Only a 
positive campaign galvanises the people, and this is the campaign that is now 
desperately required.

The positive case for Europe’s achievements runs like this. For more than 60 
years, the EU, and its various forerunners, has allowed cooperation between – 
eventually – 28 countries and a single market of 500 million people. These are 
not inconsiderable gains. They are incredible feats, which have contributed to 
European peace, stability and economic progress.

The benefits that have been secured through “social” Europe are also 
substantial to working people and to family life, while Europe’s cohesion in 
pushing forward a green agenda has been positive in forcing international 
agreement on climate change. The fact that these are Europe’s achievements does 
not mean they would disappear overnight if out were to prevail. But they would 
be placed in doubt.

We pay, but have no say: that’s the reality of Norway’s relationship with the 
EU | Espen Barth Eide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/27/norway-eu-reality-uk-voters-seduced-by-norwegian-model>
And so to the elephant in the room: immigration. I have been waiting for 
someone in this campaign to declare it a positive rather than a negative. There 
is not a family inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> that does 
not have relatives scattered to the four corners of the globe, and therefore 
not a family that does not understand the benefits these Scots have brought to 
their new homes overseas.

It is time for an argument that presents immigration and immigrants as a good 
thing. Of course, it is harder to be prejudiced when immigration has a human 
face. Right now, there isa young Australian family from Dingwall 
<http://www.thenational.scot/news/salmond-offers-to-help-keep-family-in-scotland.17731>
 that offers a case in point. The Brains were attracted to Scotland by the 
fresh talent initiative, a policy designed to repopulate the Highlands and 
tackle Scotland’s ageing population.

Now, after investing their life savings and five years of their lives in 
Scotland, Gregg, Kathryn and their young son, Gaelic-speaking Lachlan, face 
being flung out of the country by the UK government’s narrow obsession with 
immigration statistics. Virtually everybody in Scotland wants them to be 
allowed to stay.

Thankfully, the EU debate in Scotland has been largely free of the overblown 
rhetoric emanating from the south. That rational discussion has been greatly 
assisted by Ukip being dusted off yet again by the Scottish electorate in the
recent elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/04/local-elections-2016-explained-voting-on-5-may>
.The SNP will present the case for Europe steadily and positively and will also 
make it clear that it would be unacceptable for Scotland to be dragged out of 
Europe against the will of the people. The world is full of rich irony and 
unintended consequences. In the Scottish referendum of 2014, the prime minister 
asserted that a vote for independence would jeopardise Scotland’s place in 
Europe. Two years on, and with four weeks to go in another referendum, it may 
be that only a vote for Scottish independence can secure it.

Alex Salmond is MP for Gordon 
 