
Just 18% of on-air presenters in their over 50s are women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/may/15/female-tv-presenters-ageism-sexism>
, new figures have revealed. So while David Dimbleby, 74, chairs Question Time, 
Jeremy Paxman, 63, fronts Newsnight and John Humphrys, 69, presents the Today 
programme, what has happened to their female counterparts of a similar age? 
Here's where five famous faces from a few years ago – aged from 61 to 73 – are 
now:

Selina Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/aug/27/broadcasting.film>

The former breakfast TV favourite relocated to Yorkshire to set up a goat-wool 
farm when she left full-time broadcasting. The 61-year-old won £250,000 from 
Channel 5 after successfully suing the Richard Desmond-owned broadcaster for 
ageism.

A campaigner for Age UK, Scott was last on TV on Sky Arts, where she presented 
afive-part documentary series Treasure Houses of Britain 
<http://skyarts.sky.com/treasure-houses-of-britain> in 2011 and was awarded an 
honorary doctorate by the University of Hull for her services to journalism in 
2012. The veteran newsreader also made an appearance on the red carpet at the 
Olivier awards last month.

Anna Ford  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/mar/18/anna-ford-bbc-older-women>

An authoritative female newsreader for decades, Anna Ford quit the BBC in 
2006, when she was 62, claiming she had been sidelined due to her age. When the 
74-year-oldDavid Dimbleby <https://www.theguardian.com/media/david-dimbleby> 
was offered a five-year, £3.5m contract in 2011 by the BBC, Ford questioned 
whether a woman would ever get such a deal.

However, at 69, she says she has no intention of appearing on television again 
and turned down an offer to take part in Who Do You Think You Are? After 
working as a newsreader for GranadaTelevision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television>, ITN and the BBC and helping 
launch the first British breakfast-television station TV-am in 2006, she 
retired and is now a non-executive director for Sainsbury's and chair of the 
company's corporate responsibility committee.

Moira Stuart  <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/oct/04/1>

British television's first female African-Caribbean newsreader, Stuart's 
departure from BBC in 2007 stirred the ageism row, with her colleagues openly 
criticising the decision. Her 26-year career began with her role as a 
production assistant in the radio talks and documentaries department to a news 
presenter for Sunday AM until 2007. She returned to radio in 2010 to read the 
news forBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 2's Chris Evans 
Breakfast Show.

Kate Adie  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/oct/14/afghanistan.television>

The veteran foreign correspondent was the first to report from the Iranian 
embassy siege in London in 1980, and became one of TV's best-known faces after 
reporting from war zones around the world. Adie withdrew from frontline 
reporting in 2003 and went back to her first love, radio, to presentFrom Our 
Own Correspondent <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qjlq> on BBC Radio 4.

The 67-year-old also works as a freelance journalist and public speaker and 
has published four books – The Kindness of Strangers, Corsets to Camouflage:
Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> and War, Nobody's Child 
and Into Danger: People Who Risk Their Lives.

Arlene Philips  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/feb/02/arlene-phillips-on-my-radar>

Best known as a choreographer, and former judge on the BBC television show 
Strictly Come Dancing,Arlene Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/arlene-phillips> first came to fame 
when she created the dance group Hot Gossip. However, in 2008 after a revamp of 
the show, the 69-year-old was dropped for the much younger Alesha Dixon.
 