
It's no secret that the GOP has been playing catch-up to the massive social 
media machine built by Obama campaign for years. (The Romney campaign's 
deficiencies in that regard were well-documented.) As the Republican party 
grapples with the large-scale demographic shifts ahead, we thought it might be 
revealing to see how the 2016 GOP frontrunners have approached the more 
granular social media. Social media interactions, after all, are much more like 
old-fashioned politicking than they are like "messaging": too much polish works 
against you, humor is at a premium, and the real skill isn't convincing people 
so much as working the crowd. So it makes sense to us to ask who's winning the
Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> Primary.

There's more to social media than Twitter, of course. But as the political 
class grows more and more desperate for metrics to measure a race that hasn't 
even begun, it makes sense to turn to Twitter: that's where the journalists 
hang out, so that's where a candidate's image will or won't get the extra spit 
shine that only comes with being very good at this very new form retail 
politics.

Our field, in order of total number of followers (analytics from Twitonomy and 
Twtrland):

1. Donald Trump @realdonaldtrump 

- 2.5m followers
 - Following: 43 (Notable: Steven Tyler, Magic Johnson)
 - 16.4 tweets per day
 - Most re-tweeted post: "Stop congratulating Obama for killing Bin Laden. The 
Navy Seals killed Bin Laden. #debate"
 - Most frequently used hashtag: #trump2016
 - Most mentioned user: @realdonaldtrump
 - Percentage of feed devoted to direct responses: 21%
 - Does he actually write the posts? Almost certainly. No employee could have 
skin so thin.

 - Typical tweet: Quoting something nice someone else said about him or a 
promotion of a Trump-branded property.

"@tnaps85 <https://twitter.com/tnaps85>: If Donald Trump is our next 
president, America will be saved-ith and all will be well in the world. Amen 
and alleliua" True!

— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 22, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/statuses/437087873645682688>


 - He said what? 

Always leave your ego at the door during negotiations. Remember, it's only 
business and there will always be another day!

— Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 29, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/statuses/428609046468235265>

One gets a sense of what The Donald's feed is like just from the numbers: 
egocentric (he's his own most-mentioned user and tweets four times as much as 
other possible nominees) and delusional ("#trump2016"). He has a miniscule 
follower-to-following ratio, suggesting that he uses Twitter almost solely as a 
broadcast medium … and to see what people are saying about him. His high 
response rate is misleading: a good portion of his "responses" are manual 
re-tweets of praise from obscure corners of the Internet (see above). The rest 
of his responses are attacks on media outlets that have criticized him.

2. Senator Marco Rubio @marcorubio

- 504k followers
 - Following: 3k (Notable: lefty outlet @salon and, for real, @ipricku, a 
"piercing, modification and jewelry company")
 - .79 tweets per day
 - Most re-tweeted post: 

#GOPResponse <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23GOPResponse&src=hash> #SOTU 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SOTU&src=hash> #gop 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23gop&src=hash> #tcot 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23tcot&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/3hxtgdbP 
<http://t.co/3hxtgdbP>

— Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) February 13, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/marcorubio/statuses/301541052949614593>


 - Most frequently used hashtag: #sayfie (for The Sayfie Review, a Florida 
political news aggregator)
 - Most mentioned user: @barackobama
 - Percentage of tweets that are responses: 9%
 - Does he write the posts? Maybe not the itinerary-driven ones announcing 
appearances and endorsements, but the ones about sports and various religious 
holidays are so boring and earnest they have to be by the boss. An employee 
would try harder.

 - Typical Tweet: Subject-verb-object-level simple agenda items or sports 
commentary. Least exciting live-tweeting of Miami Heat games you'll ever read. "
Testified today <https://twitter.com/marcorubio/statuses/431102419540647937>
about need to prevent #obamacare #bailout".

 - He said what? 

I actually like the new @MiamiDolphins <https://twitter.com/MiamiDolphins> 
logo.pic.twitter.com/vvCMKWux1K <http://t.co/vvCMKWux1K>

— Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) March 28, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/marcorubio/statuses/317315224946487296>

Rubio's Twitter feed is appropriately safe and people-pleasing, a perfect 
reflection of Rubio's chosen path to the nomination: Don't cause too much of a 
scene, attract just enough attention to show how humble you are…and mercilessly 
attack Barack Obama from every possible angle. He shows an occasional 
awe-shucks-style self-effacing sense of humor but mostly sticks to 
non-controversial topics. That Rubio follows a body-modification salon suggests 
someone in his office has a sense of humor but I'm not sure it's Rubio.

3. New Jersey Governor Chris Christie @govchristie

- Followers: 426K 
 - Following: 568
 - Tweets per day: 4.6
 - Most re-tweeted post: 

If conditions are not safe on Wednesday for Trick or Treating, I will sign an 
Executive Order rescheduling#Halloween 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Halloween&src=hash>.

— Governor Christie (@GovChristie) October 30, 2012 
<https://twitter.com/GovChristie/statuses/263073292699701248>


 - Most mentioned user: @govchristie (second: @springsteen)
 - Percentage responses: 27%
 - Does he write the posts? Unlikely. I imagine they'd be more entertaining if 
he did – indeed, the posts often are just links to video clips of Christie 
being Christie. His charm does not, perhaps, translate very well to the 
abbreviated Twitter form. The feed is, however, in keeping with Christie's 
personality – or at least its best parts: expansive, good-natured, 
service-oriented. Senator Cory Booker may have started the trend of 
Twitter-as-bat-signal, but Christie carries it on: he responds directly to 
users who ask about road closings and repair work.

 - Typical Tweet: At home watching this snow fall 
<https://twitter.com/GovChristie/status/433943966846038017>? Send your pics! 
#PAX #NJSnowDay

 - He said what? 

In a choice between being with my wife on her birthday or Senator Rand Paul, I 
choose my wife.http://t.co/PWNciI0SBy <http://t.co/PWNciI0SBy>

— Governor Christie (@GovChristie) September 3, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/GovChristie/statuses/374936114877825024>

Don't let the loose and friendly feel of Christie's feed fool you: there is a 
tight hand on the reins, which is most obvious in how successful Christie has 
been in avoiding any kind of Twitter awkwardness. There are few regrettable 
re-tweets and no controversies, unless you count his being friendly Obama a 
controversy. It's a masterful display of discipline cloaked by nonchalance, 
which may be the essence of Christie's success. No wonder he was the popular 
guy in high school: you have to want to win without ever looking like you're 
trying too hard.

4. Kentucky Senator Rand Paul @senrandpaul

- 398k followers
 - Following: 325 (Notable: Kevin Spacey, James Woods)
 - 1.6 tweets per day
 - Most re-tweeted post: 

. @BarackObama <https://twitter.com/BarackObama> sent 7 security guards to 
#WWIIMemorial <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23WWIIMemorial&src=hash> this AM 
to keep out our vets. Sadly, that is 2 more than were present in Benghazi.

— Senator Rand Paul (@SenRandPaul) October 2, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/SenRandPaul/statuses/385456294275993600>


 - Most frequently used hashtag: #tcot ("top conservatives on Twitter")
 - Most mentioned user: @FoxNews
 - Percentage responses: 5%
 - Does he write the posts? Again, he may not type up and send out his own 
schedule items, but the feed itself is exactly as idiosyncratic and passionate 
as Senator Paul has shown himself to be otherwise, right down to his 2013 
Festivus "airing of grievances." (Fellow Senator Cory Booker offered to 
participate in the traditional "feat of strength 
<https://twitter.com/CoryBooker/status/415129545717477376>") He is given to 
dramatic rhetorical flourishes that a staffer would probably not risk.

 - Typical tweet: No one, no matter how wise 
<https://twitter.com/SenRandPaul/status/420339444734910464>, can determine the 
"correct" price of bread without a marketplace.

 - He said what? 

Turtle tunnels. Squirrel sanctuaries. Look it up.

— Senator Rand Paul (@SenRandPaul) December 23, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/SenRandPaul/statuses/415213963664961537>

Paul's feed is worth following just for fun, a rare quality in the political 
Twittersphere. Though his low response percentage makes it seem like he's using 
Twitter to mainly to broadcast, like Trump, the replies he does make seem like 
genuine attempts at conversation, if not debate (he is most likely to engage 
with @reason, a Libertarian magazine). The Festivus celebration was borderline 
brilliant, a clever way to repackage GOP whining as a pop culture event.

5. Texas Senator Ted Cruz @tedcruz

- 233k followers
 - Following: 19k (Notable: Jimmy Kimmel)
 - 5.4 tweets per day
 - Most re-tweeted post: 

Retweet if you want answers! #SOTU 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23SOTU&src=hash> #MakeDCListen 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23MakeDCListen&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/gxphn9WA3O <http://t.co/gxphn9WA3O>

— Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) January 29, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/tedcruz/statuses/428367417107296256>


 - Most frequently used hashtag: #txsen
 - Most mentioned user: @tedcruz
 - Percentage responses: 9%
 - Does he write the posts? Cruz is so stiff and mannered in person, it could 
be that his dutiful Twitter feed is just a genuine reflection of his 
personality. But I suspect he delegates actual tweeting to staff (a sure sign 
of this: most of his tweets come from the desktop application Tweetdeck rather 
than a mobile device). There are spurts of legitimate cleverness, though they 
have the same homework-y feel as the endorsements and announcement of media 
appearances. Likes to hi-jack ancient memes for random assaults on Obama. "You 
keep using that word <https://twitter.com/tedcruz/status/423899267552407552>". 

 - Typical tweet: Retweet if you or someone you know  
<https://twitter.com/tedcruz/status/407961876493250560>lost their health 
insurance or faces higher premiums because of #Obamacare

 - He said what? 

We are grateful for the rich history the Jewish culture brings to the US & 
world. I hope you have a blessed Hanukkahhttp://t.co/kgjX5RGpfx 
<http://t.co/kgjX5RGpfx>

— Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) November 27, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/tedcruz/statuses/405750655324676096>

If Rubio's feed is careful, Cruz's is tightly wound: it adheres to a 
consistent combination of personal promotion interspersed with reproach and 
mocking of the Obama administration. I would not be surprised if there was a 
bot doling out the posts to a specific formula, right down to the very 
occasional mention of his family (they exist!). Perhaps the most bizarre thing 
about Cruz's feed is what's not on it: he makes almost no mention of sports – 
not even college football, which is as close to a state religion as Texas has. 
He does have a lot of pictures of himself hunting. (In Iowa 
<https://twitter.com/tedcruz/status/394172833095749632>, no less!) Cruz's 
preference for solo shooting over the communal experience of team athletics is 
a pretty good metaphor for his political career, if anyone's looking for one.

Who's the winner in the top conservative on Twitter race?

Governor Chris Christie. To my mind, the hands-down leader in the Twittocracy 
is the same one that's at the top of the polls. He doesn't have the most 
followers of the top tier candidate, but he does have the highest interaction 
percentage – over a quarter of his tweets are replies to those who have tweeted 
at him. What's more, he leads field in both the proportion of tweets related to 
policy or governance and in "personal" tweets – his most active days have been 
when he's either solicited pictures of New Jersians "snow days" or when he's 
used to Twitter to parse out policy announcements. His showy bipartisanship and 
service-y alerts buttress the same image that has, until recently, made him 
such an appealing candidate overall. The cute animal pictures also don't hurt.
 