
Two men were jailed for life for the murder of investigative journalist Anna 
Politkovskaya <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya> 10 days 
ago. Three others were sentenced to lengthy prison terms for their involvement 
in her killing in October 2006.

The Guardian carried an AFP report on the mailings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/09/anna-politkovskaya-murder-two-men-guilty-russia>
 which contained a telling sentence: "Politkovskaya's family have said they 
were disappointed that the trial had not come any closer to tracking down the 
mastermind behind the murder."

That was something of an understatement. Her family, former friends and 
colleagues, along with journalists across the world, continue to be outraged at 
the failure of the Russian authorities to investigate her murder properly.

Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> activist, Lyudmila 
Alexeyeva, was quoted as saying: "There is one fundamental question: who 
ordered it? Until that is resolved the case has to remain open."

The reasons for continuing suspicions about the case have now been aired by 
Elena Shmaraeva, who works with the Russian Legal Information Agency (RAPSI), in
a lengthy article on the openDemocracy website 
<http://opendemocracy.net/od-russia/elena-shmaraeva/who-really-killed-anna-politkovskaya>
.

She points out that, according to the verdict, the murder of the Novaya Gazeta 
reporter was organised by Lom-Ali Gaitukayev, a Chechen criminal, who was 
sentenced to life imprisonment along with his nephew, Rustam Makhmudov.

Former police officer Sergei Khajikurbanov received 20 years; Makhmudov's 
brothers, Ibragim and Jabrail, were given 12 and 14 years respectively. Another 
former police officer, Dmitry Pavlyuchenkov, had previously received an 11-year 
sentence.

But Shmaraeva, in a methodical detailing of the evidence, shows why the 
prosecutor's claims to have got to the truth of the killing are so 
unconvincing. It is a dense, but compelling, read.

Source: openDemocracy 
<http://opendemocracy.net/od-russia/elena-shmaraeva/who-really-killed-anna-politkovskaya>
 