
Chris Hughton

Villa upset many fans when they picked up McLeish from their neighbours 
Birmingham and although Hughton would be unlikely to draw the same level of 
opprobrium, it is hard to imagine them appointing from St Andrew's again. 
Hughton has credit in the bank from his time at Newcastle and did well under 
difficult financial circumstances to take Blues into the Championship 
play-offs, but he is a long shot.

Alan Curbishley

As an experienced manager with several years of Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> experience and a short 
stint at Villa Park from his playing days, Curbishley represents the safest 
pair of hands. But he has been out of the game since leaving West Ham in 2008 
and needs to return to management soon if he is not to be seen as yesterday's 
man.

Roberto Martínez

Martínez declined Villa's advances last summer to stay with Wigan but after 
pulling off another exhilarating escape at the DW Stadium, he may feel he has 
done all he can at the club. But if that is the case, the Spaniard could see 
his next move as one higher up the food chain than Villa.

Paul Lambert

Lambert has rightly won many plaudits for guiding an unfashionable Norwich 
side to 12th place in their first season since promotion to the Premier League. 
He moved to a bigger club when he traded Colchester for the Canaries in 2009 
and could be high on Randy Lerner's list.

Bob Bradley

Like Martínez, the former United States coach Bradley was considered an option 
for Villa last season. He has also been linked with Fulham in the past and 
despite being sacked after five years in charge of his national side, he 
largely impressed in the international arena. He is currently in charge of 
Egypt, though a Premier League role would surely be enough to turn his head.
 