
From an anonymous male
Dear Carole, I am attracted to women with blonde hair. This seems to be true 
of a lot of men. Is there a biological/reproductive explanation?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:
Ten years after he published On the Origin of Species in 1859, Darwin started 
to research the sexual selection of blonde hair in women in preparation for his 
book The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation toSex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex>, which was published in 1871. 
Unfortunately he was unable to find enough data to support his theory that 
blonde hair is sexually selected and had to drop the subject.

Today there are plenty of theories about the evolution of blonde hair and the 
science of genetics has furthered the debate. Research on variation in human 
hair colouration has shown that mutations in genes that are involved in the 
synthesis of melanin pigments are largely responsible. Individuals with lower 
levels of a melanin pigment called eumelanin are likely to have blonde hair.1 
<http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/10/88>

There is no single gene for blue eyes and blonde hair, but these adaptations 
are often found expressed together because the genes for each trait are located 
close together on the same chromosome.

It has been theorised that the blonde hair and blue eyes seen in Caucasians 
are recent adaptations, dating from approximately 11,000 years ago. The traits 
are thought to have evolved among northern European tribes at the end of the 
last ice age. Although both natural and sexual selection have played a part in 
the evolution of the blue-eyed blonde, sexual selection was probably the 
primary force.

As regards natural selection, depigmentation allows greater penetration of the 
skin by ultraviolet B (UVB), which is needed to synthesise previtamin D3. 
Northern Europe has fewer hours of sunlight compared with Africa, so the theory 
is that tribes migrating into Europe underwent a genetic mutation that resulted 
in the depigmentation of skin and hair.2 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CBkQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.yanaiweb.com%2Fgenome%2FHumanVariation%2FJablonski_JHE_2000.pdf&ei=yg8JTObiDNOs4Qbe5MyDAQ&usg=AFQjCNGErTuyqq7b33XkBFxLiL0IV58xwA>

Sexual selection would certainly have been a powerful driving force behind 
evolution in northern Europeans. Late Palaeolithic females in southern Europe 
and Africa could forage for food and feed themselves and their infants, with 
males occasionally supplementing their diet with meat. In northern Europe, 
however, where ice covered much of the terrain, people were dependent on meat. 
Bands of men went in search of herds of prehistoric bison or mammoth. These 
hunting trips were dangerous, resulting in many fatalities.

It has been suggested that as a result this was a time of intense sexual 
rivalry between females due to their numbers exceeding those of males.3 
<http://jsecjournal.com/NEEPSfrost.pdf> At any given time far more fertile 
women than men were left unmated, so females had to compete for mates and for a 
favourable share of meat. The theory is that when given the choice, 
Pelaeolithic males chose blondes, who stood out from their rivals.

In addition, before bottles of hydrogen peroxide became available, blonde hair 
in females could be interpreted as an honest signal of youth and therefore 
reproductive fitness. This is because postmenopausal women rarely retain the 
flaxen locks of their youth, of course eventually becoming grey grannies.

Interestingly, Aboriginal tribes have evolved blonde hair in females 
independently of the Nordic blonde.3 <http://jsecjournal.com/NEEPSfrost.pdf> As 
this has occurred in an environment not lacking UVB this suggests that sexual 
selection has been more important than the forces of natural selection. But in 
some parts of the world, such as central Africa, mutations that result in 
albinism (or a significant depigmentation) of a baby can provoke fear and 
superstition and sometimes even infanticide. Colour mutations can only 
proliferate in populations if they are seen as desirable and are sexually 
selected for.

There are higher numbers of females born blonde than males and retention of 
blonde hair into adulthood is a sexually selected indicator of fitness in 
females.4 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Queen> Caucasian blondes are 
usually slightly higher in oestrogen than brunettes and are likely to exhibit 
other infantile sexually selected traits (indicating low levels of 
testosterone) that are considered desirable by males, for example finer facial 
features, smaller nose, smaller jaw, pointed chin, narrow shoulders, smooth 
skin and less body hair, and infantile behaviour such as higher energy levels 
and playfulness.5 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract;jsessionid=C80D525D0E216B39C3B848F669161B8F.tomcat1?fromPage=online&aid=166865>

Another possible reason for Nordic gentlemen preferring blondes is to assure 
their paternity. The genes for blue eyes and blonde hair are recessive, meaning 
both parents must have the genes for them to be expressed in their offspring.6 
<http://www.springerlink.com/content/766n130226m12n24/> So it has been proposed 
that blue-eyed men prefer blue-eyed women as mates because they have some 
degree of certainty over fatherhood. A blue-eyed male with a brown-eyed mate 
would not have the same assurance the resulting brown-eyed infant was his child 
and therefore worthy of a slice of the mammoth he risked his life trapping and 
slaughtering and then spent days dragging back across miles of icy tundra.

This would also help to explain the existence of blond males. Blond hair in 
males does not correlate with oestrogen levels as it does in females and blond 
hair in males is not a known indicator of fitness as it is in females. In 
addition, females don't select for physical appearance to the degree that men 
do. For a female to choose a blond male he must be able to deliver resources 
(mammoth), as his blond hair alone is not enough to turn her on.

Blondes do not seem to have lost any of their popularity since the end of the 
last ice age. Research suggests that blondes feature more often as Playboy 
centerfolds than they do in women's magazines, and the percentage of blondes in 
each type of magazine exceeds the base rate of blondes in the normal population.
7 <http://www.springerlink.com/content/t465684814669212/> 

This would suggest that the selection pressures that shaped the standards of 
Western female beauty in the late-Palaeolithic are still the same today, and it 
may well explain why you are attracted to blonde women.

References
(1) Mengel-From J et al (2009) Genetic determinants of hair and eye colours in 
the Scottish and Danish populations. BMC Genetics; 
<http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2156/10/88> 10: 88.
(2) Nina, G, Jablonski, NG, Chaplin, G (2000) The evolution of human skin 
coloration. Journal of Human Evolution; 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CBkQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.yanaiweb.com%2Fgenome%2FHumanVariation%2FJablonski_JHE_2000.pdf&ei=yg8JTObiDNOs4Qbe5MyDAQ&usg=AFQjCNGErTuyqq7b33XkBFxLiL0IV58xwA>
 39(1): 57-106.
(3) Frost, P (2008) Sexual selection and human geographic variation. Journal 
of Social, Evolutionary and Cultural Psychology,Proceedings of the 2nd Annual 
Meeting of the NorthEastern Evolutionary Psychology Society 
<http://jsecjournal.com/NEEPSfrost.pdf>.
(4) Ridley, M (1993) The Red Queen: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Queen>. Penguin.
(5) Grammer, K, Thornhill, R et al (2003) Darwinian aesthetics: sexual 
selection and the biology of beauty. Biological Reviews; 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract;jsessionid=C80D525D0E216B39C3B848F669161B8F.tomcat1?fromPage=online&aid=166865>
 78(3): 385-407.
(6) Laeng, B et al (2007 ) Why do blue-eyed men prefer women with the same eye 
colour? Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 
<http://www.springerlink.com/content/766n130226m12n24/>; 61(3): 371-384.
(7) Rich, MK, Cash, TF (1993) The American image of beauty: media 
representations of hair color for four decades. Sex Roles Journal; 
<http://www.springerlink.com/content/t465684814669212/> 29(1-2): 113-124.
 