
Across the political spectrum, politicians, law enforcement officials and even 
many activists are surprisingly united in the belief that addiction is a 
disease. We need to reduce associated stigma, they intone; “we 
<https://energycommerce.house.gov/news-center/news/upton-we-can-t-arrest-our-way-out-opioid-epidemic>
can’t 
<http://www.pressherald.com/2016/04/09/our-view-police-cant-arrest-maine-out-of-drug-problem/>
arrest 
<http://www.uhcanohio.org/sites/default/files/We%20Can%27t%20Arrest%20Our%20Way%20Out%20%20Nov%2024%202015.pdf>
our 
<http://www.nj.com/opinion/index.ssf/2016/01/christies_proposal_breaks_down_the_barriers_for_ad.html>
way <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/neill-franklin/war-on-drugs_b_3461739.html> 
out 
<https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/voices/we-can-t-arrest-our-way-out-drug-problem>
” of the drug problem. Massachusetts is even running a media campaign called “
State without Stigma 
<http://www.mass.gov/eohhs/gov/departments/dph/stop-addiction/state-without-stigma/>
” to try to get people to see addiction as illness, not evil.

However, in a country in which the most common reason for being arrested is 
drug offenses 
<https://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2012/crime-in-the-u.s.-2012/persons-arrested>
 (overwhelmingly, marijuana possession) and which spendstens of billions 
<http://www.drugwarfacts.org/cms/Economics#US> of dollars on policing and 
incarcerating drug offenders, these well-intended efforts don’t stand a chance.

Heroin killed my brother 38 years ago. Too many still suffer in its clutches | 
Eugene Paul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/heroin-deaths-overdose-treatment-policy-over-punishment-drug-addictions>
We can either criminalize drug possession or fight stigma: we can’t do both at 
once any more than one runner can sprint in opposite directions at the same 
time. The whole point of criminalizing drug use is to stigmatize drug users.

Consider why particular acts are seen as crimes in the first place. Behaviors 
are made illegal because they are seen as harmful or antisocial; the main idea 
is to deter people from engaging in them by using the law to draw a line. The 
law says: these actions are socially unacceptable, and anyone who violates them 
deserves shame, punishment, rejection and moral condemnation.

To argue that “addiction is a disease” while criminalizing possession of the 
drug involved in the addiction is, then, to make an impossible case. You are 
saying “I think your addiction is shameful and users of the drugs you take 
should be caged,” while also claiming “You have an illness that should be 
treated like any other disease.” Neither cancer patients, nor people with 
diabetes nor those with depression are put into this double bind: no actual 
disease is seen this way.


Add to this the fact that the treatment given to people with addiction – 
unlike treatment for any other disorder, mental or physical – is alsoheavily 
moralistic 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/05/01/476193634/does-addiction-treatment-require-a-higher-power>
, typically involving prayer, confession and restitution and frequently 
includingdeliberate humiliation 
<http://www.alternet.org/drugs/humiliating-people-addiction-not-treatment> of a 
type that is, again, not seen anywhere else in medicine. For example, was there 
ever a mainstream cardiac rehabilitation program that involveddressing patients 
who broke rules in drag 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/01/28/AR2006012800062_2.html>
 or diapers? Until at least the late 1990s, such treatment was common in 
addiction programs and deliberately derisive counseling remains so. This, 
obviously, perpetuates stigma.

Consider, too, the issue of “drug courts” in which the defendant’s medical 
treatment for addiction is determined by prosecutors and a judge, not by 
doctors. Punishment for relapse is seen as an acceptable part of the process, 
something that doesn’t happen in diabetes care or high blood pressure 
treatment. Worse,more than half 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/20/opinion/every-drug-court-should-allow-methadone-treatment.html>
 of these courts restrict or entirely reject use of maintenance treatment with 
methadone or buprenorphine for opioid addictions even though maintenance is 
both the standard of care and the only treatment that is known to save lives by 
reducing mortality 50% – or more – compared to other programs. (Although the 
Obama administration is trying to change this by refusing to fund courts that 
don’t offer maintenance, many courts rely on state rather than federal funding.)

Importantly, in courts that deal with mentally ill defendants, there is no 
similar meddling. Because it is not a crime to be mentally ill, judges 
recognize that the expertise needed to cope with the issue is medical, not 
moral, and they defer to psychiatrists about what treatment and medications are 
best. With addiction, since drug possession is a crime, judges feel as though 
their expertise is what’s needed to stop it.

Of course, it’s not wrong to want to try to end stigma: all of the politicians 
and advocates are right that stigma and associated shame are a huge part of why 
people don’t seek addiction help and of why the help on offer is not 
particularly effective or even available. If we want better drug policy, 
fighting addiction stigma is a crucial goal.

Opioids are a bipartisan issue because they've become a mainstream, white one 
| Celine Gounder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/opioids-bipartisan-issue-now-white-people-use-epidemic>
The methods advocates have suggested, however, are far too weak. Yes, as 
Massachusetts’ State without Stigma suggests, we can make some progress by 
doing things like eliminating demeaning language. People with addiction 
shouldn’t be called “addicts” in the same way that people with schizophrenia 
shouldn’t be called “schizophrenics”; person-first language recognizes our 
common humanity.

 Further, being drug free shouldn’t be called “clean,” with the implication 
that active addiction is “dirty”. And terms like “substance abuser” have been
shown <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20005692> to make even medical 
professionals more likely to see punitive approaches as acceptable: better 
language is “substance use disorder” or “addiction”. Language matters.

But actions matter more. If we really want to treat addiction like the medical 
problem it so clearly is, we can’t use the criminal justice system to arrest 
people for showing symptoms of it. If you want to fight stigma, you’ve got to 
first fight criminalization and reform the coercive and demeaning addiction 
treatment system that has been warped by it.
 