
Anyone who falls into the preconception that children won’t or don’t like 
opera is missing one key thing: kids love a strong story, good music and 
well-drawn characters just as much as adults. Probably more so.

If anyone of any age is entertained by a production they will enjoy it. That’s 
the driving force behind producingAlice’s Adventures in Wonderland 
<http://www.aliceopera.com/> at Opera Holland Park – and why I’ve always wanted 
to produce quality children’s theatre.

When we commissioned composer Will Todd <http://willtodd.com/> and librettist 
Maggie Gottlieb to start work on this piece, I told them that what I wanted was 
The Simpsons. They both understood what I meant: the goal was to create an 
opera that appeals to children and adults. Something that both groups would 
enjoy and laugh at together.

I put together an absolutely first-rate creative team. Stuart Stratford 
<http://www.stuartstratford.com/> – who is now music director of Scottish Opera 
– as conductor, with directorMartin Duncan <http://www.martinduncan.com/> and 
designerLeslie Travers <http://leslietravers.com/>. Those three would be 
thought of as a top creative team anywhere in the country. Obviously I wanted 
them to create a great production, but I also wanted to send out a signal to 
audiences, the cast and to critics: that we were taking this children’s opera 
very seriously indeed.

 I would advise this to anyone putting on productions to engage younger 
audiences: put the creative team and cast together as seriously as any main 
stage production and ideally, have characters, preferably including the leading 
performer, that children can relate to or associate with at some level.

Alice isn’t our first foray into producing opera for children. In 2010, we 
produced an abridged version of the Fantastic Mr Fox opera by Tobias Picker and 
Donald Sturrock, based on the story byRoald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/roalddahl>. We did it as a promenade 
production on the Yukka Lawn in Holland Park as I felt it was important to take 
it outside of our theatre – both literally and metaphorically – to help us 
reach a different audience.

We have enjoyed three wonderful sold-out years and over that time, we learned 
a lot about how to make the most of the environment, about the pacing of a work 
aimed at children, and about moving the audiences to different parts of the 
performing space. I’ll never get over the thrill of watching children running 
to get to front for wherever the next scene was happening – literally running 
to get to more opera!

For Alice (as with Mr Fox) the audience are seated on the ground just a few 
feet away from the singers and the orchestra of eleven musicians. It matters to 
me that children are experiencing an opera this close up. It’s about breaking 
down barriers and enabling children at a young age to engage with the music. 
That is the way to developing the audience of the future.

With less music teaching happening in schools, it’s becoming more and more 
important to find other opportunities to get people engaged with classical 
music, earlier. Do that and they are more likely to start going for themselves 
in their twenties.

I hope that coming to Alice will play a part in giving young people the 
confidence to go to other opera, and to be able to decide for themselves if 
they do or don’t enjoy any particular one. Going to the opera should be like 
books, films or food; some you enjoy and some you don’t. But an audience needs 
confidence to be able to make those choices.

 We wanted to keep prices very low to keep the opera accessible, so we charge 
£5 for children and £10 for adults. Obviously, cost is a major factor for 
families in determining if they are being able to go to the theatre, so we were 
very clear about having to keep prices low. For the main stage operas at Opera 
Holland Park we also have afree tickets scheme 
<https://www.rbkc.gov.uk/subsites/operahollandpark/theinspireproject/ticketschemes/freeticketscheme.aspx>
 for children aged seven to 18.

 So far we have only performed Alice during school holidays, but I would say 
the timing of performances is important. A lot of people say you have to 
schedule performances around other likely family commitments. I know how busy 
children’s schedules are these days, but I believe we should be making the work 
better, so parents or kids don’t want to miss it and make coming along a higher 
priority.

We’ve just released a studio-recorded album of Alice. So many people were 
asking for it at the end of the performances we felt we had to do it. I love 
the idea of it playing in the car when families are traveling somewhere.

This production seems to grow and grow. It has real momentum. That’s partly 
because of our enduring affection for Alice’s adventures, but also because as 
with the best straight children’s theatre (Tall Stories’The Gruffalo 
<http://tallstories.org.uk/shows/the-gruffalo> and so on) success comes from 
quality.

James Clutton is producer of Opera Holland Park 
<http://www.operahollandpark.com/>

Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland 
<http://www.aliceopera.com/victorians-guide-to-getting-to-wonderland/> is at 
Holland Park’s Yukka Lawn until Sunday 2 August

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.

 