
I asked a Spanish reporter if any big clubs in the Peninsula had eyes on 
British stars. “I don’t think so,” he said. “You have some grand craftsmen, but 
the Spanish prefer artistes, of which you have only a dozen or so. It’s also 
exceptional for British professionals to be happy abroad.” Bill Croft writing 
in the November 1958 issue ofCharles Buchan’s Football Monthly magazine 
<http://www.charlesbuchansfootballmonthly.com/>.


Now, consider these names: Ashley Cole, Ravel Morrison, Joey Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/joey-barton>, Joe Cole, Micah Richards 
and Jermaine Pennant. At first glance it might appear to be a list of the 
footballers called most frequently to stand in front of FA panels for 
disciplinary hearings. However, as it happens, these are the most noticeable 
names from a remarkably small group of English footballers of recent times to 
have left home for one of the other major European leagues. And for that, they 
should be credited. But we must wonder why this is the case.

Why is it that this motley crew of prima donnas and bad boys are the English 
footballers to have upped sticks to play in a different European country – with 
a different climate, language and culture? Are the more, let’s say, clean-cut 
and well-behaved English footballers content with their lot? Are they already 
in the best league in the world? Or are they reluctant to face the unknown?

In the summer of 2014 a photograph surfaced on the internet of the Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> squad posing together for a very 
ordinary, slightly disorganised pre-season team photograph. As the squad 
grouped together, smiling and showing off their holiday tans, one man stood 
conspicuously apart although he was still clearly posing for the same 
photograph.

That man was Ashley Cole, who had joined the Italian runners-up just weeks 
earlier, seeking a fresh challenge after 15 years at the highest level of 
English football, during which time he built himself the largely undisputed 
reputation as the finest English full-back of the modern era. “Lurking” was the 
favoured word to describe Cole’s stance in the photograph, asthe internet took 
delight in poking fun <https://twitter.com/lurkingashley> at his apparent 
struggle to fit in in Italy. The more cruel viewers suggested he had clearly 
made no friends.

Fast forward 15 months and Cole’s Roman adventure has ended as little more 
than a drab non-event. It will have amused his detractors, who will be taking 
smug pleasure in seeing that his stint abroad has ultimately been a failure. He 
tried Italy and it wasn’t for him. Now, with the ready cooperation of the 
Italian club, he has ended his contract early to join Steven Gerrard over in 
California at LA Galaxy. He will be fine there. Even if he does not really ever 
win anything or play particularly well: he will be fine there.

However, let me now say this: fair play to Ashley Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-cole>. Fair play because, after 
leaving Chelsea, he could have swanned straight over to the US, or to the 
Middle East, or to Australia, or to Southeast Asia where the money appears 
plentiful and the appetite for the game is, it seems, insatiable. Because, for 
all we might praise the technical skill of Spanish football, the passion of 
Italian football and even go so far as to believe the entire German Bundesliga 
experience to be the most complete of the lot, Cole is part of a very small 
group of English players to have headed to mainland Europe to experience a type 
of European football different to that of the familiar English brand. By moving 
to Serie A, Cole clearly felt he still had something to offer at the highest 
level before going for the feelgood 
pre-retirement-kickaround-cum-extended-holiday that most of his English peers 
prefer in the twilight years of their careers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F551adbeb7f2b23d23fe36a3d09802ce8e28785e4%2F0_215_4240_2659%2F4240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F551adbeb7f2b23d23fe36a3d09802ce8e28785e4%2F0_215_4240_2659%2F4240.jpg>
 Ashley Cole signing for Roma in 2014. Photograph: Matteo Ciambelli/Sipa/Rex 
Of course, there will continue to be the lure of the Real Madrid marching band 
of galácticos who will – as long as club president Florentino Pérez is in 
charge – continue to lure in the crème de la crème ofPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> talent with the promise of 
riches and glory. Michael Owen, Steve McManaman, Jonathan Woodgate and, the 
most obvious galáctico of all, David Beckham, have all called the Bernabéu home 
at some stage during the last 15 years, to varying degrees of success. Welshman 
Gareth Bale fulfilled one of football’s great childhood dreams in signing for 
the famous Spanish club in 2013 and, when he is not being lambasted by the 
Spanish media, he usually runs riot against the generally powerless teams of La 
Liga. Aside from Madrid and Barcelona, however, there appears to be no 
continental destination where English players want to play.

Refreshingly, McManaman, who was affectionately dubbed “El Macca” in Spain, 
embraced Madrid life and his successes – eight trophies, including two European 
Cups – make his the most successful foreign stint of any English player since 
Gary Lineker became the darling child of Barcelona at the end of the 1980s. 
Though he received only modest recognition in England for his excellent 
achievements at Madrid, his approach to the new culture should surely be the 
first example followed by English players who make a similar move to mainland 
Europe.

Owen, however, has since admitted that he found it difficult to become attuned 
to the Madrid lifestyle with his young family and found himself frustrated with 
so much time spent waiting around his hotel. He even admitted that, after 
occasionally playing a round of golf with some of his Madrid team-mates in the 
afternoons, he would be left feeling guilty, knowing that his wife and daughter 
would be in the hotel with “nothing to do”. He felt that the lack of a solid 
support system around him and his family meant it was difficult to really enjoy 
life in Spain and ever feel settled. Just one season in, his wife wanted to 
return to England and Owen was missing the excitement of the Premier League. 
Nonetheless, Owen holds no regrets for moving to the Spanish capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F573a9dac2c093fc48464faec340a0823dae877b3%2F0_79_2200_1408%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F573a9dac2c093fc48464faec340a0823dae877b3%2F0_79_2200_1408%2F2200.jpg>
 Michael Owen at Real Madrid. Photograph: Marcelo Del Pozo/Reuters 
Perhaps, then, it is the family element that restricts English players from 
giving the continent a try. Perhaps it is the married-with-children players who 
see little benefit in uprooting and so it is often left to the unmarried or 
childless players with fewer ties that bind to England that decide to try the 
new life abroad. Given the young age at which most footballers tend to marry, 
players settle into the stable life rather early on in their careers and so 
there are not so many unmarried players left to make the move. Even one of 
England’s most cultured footballers, Jack Wilshere, wears his love of his 
country for all to see and, despite his stop-start Arsenal career, it is 
difficult to even imagine him, supposedly England’s most Spanish footballer, 
leaving his London comforts for a new challenge abroad.

Or maybe it is simply that players struggle to see beyond England for quality 
of football. Despite the repeated shortcomings of the English national side, we 
so often proudly proclaim our league as the best in Europe and by that merit 
then, we will gladly assume, the best league worldwide. As we all know, 
football was invented in England. As Cecil Rhodes put it: “Remember that you 
are an Englishman, and have consequently won first prize in the lottery of 
life.” If the English league is the best in the world, then, why go anywhere 
else?

Tom Ince was left in the cold by Liverpool despite much talk of his promise. 
However, upon leaving the club aged 19, he played his way to the country’s 
attention with fine performances at Blackpool. This should have been the 
beginning of an ascent to the top for Ince, but in the summer of 2014 he 
baffled many with his decision to reject a move to Internazionale in favour of 
a switch to Hull City to play under Steve Bruce.

Despite being flattered by the attention and finding it “unbelievable” to 
stand on the San Siro pitch, he said he valued first-team football over being 
at a “status” club such as Internazionale. This is an honourable justification 
for passing up on such an eye-catching move, but Ince was shipped off on loan 
to Nottingham Forest just weeks into the season as it became clear he would not 
feature regularly at Hull. After a subsequent move to Derby County he has 
returned to playing regularly and is finding his form again but, just shy of 
his 24th birthday, it is difficult not to wonder what would have happened had 
he moved to Italy. Upon politely rejecting their advances, Ince said: “I still 
have ambitions to one day play in Europe”. But it’s hard to imagine an 
opportunity as enticing ever coming around again.

Ravel Morrison, once described by Alex Ferguson as the greatest talent he had 
seen in any Manchester United youth side, is currently playing in Italy for 
Lazio. While Morrison is now at his sixth different club, his old academy 
team-mate Paul Pogba is the standout talent inSerie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. In the time that Pogba 
has amassed over 100 appearances for Juventus and 27 caps for France, Morrison 
has found himself tangled up in a string of off-field controversies, with a 
varied repertoire of cases involving witness intimidation, common assault, 
homophobic threats and criminal damage.

The contrast is remarkable considering that Morrison was often seen as the 
more noticeable midfielder in that Manchester United youth side. Morrison left 
Manchester United for West Ham in January 2012, just two days short of his 20th 
birthday. Pogba, who is still only 22 years old, left United the following 
summer, when also aged 19. Their careers should not have veered off in such 
contrasting directions. Could Morrison’s curse really be that he is English and 
has, therefore, already won “the first prize in life”?

Morrison has made just three league appearances in Italy, all from the bench. 
It is said that he has not made an effort to learn Italian, not integrated with 
the Lazio squad and spends his time surrounded by his own personal entourage. 
Lazio are now said to be looking to offload him for just £750,000. Manchester 
United will be kicking themselves for having let one of football’s finest young 
talents slip through their grasp. They won’t be thinking about Morrison.

When another member of this curious group of expatriate English footballers, 
Joey Barton, left England the move abroad appeared to to be a welcome 
self-imposed exile for a player who had become more known for his baggage off 
the field than his talent on it. To his credit, Barton embraced his new 
surroundings on the south coast of France during his season-long loan spell 
with Marseille. During this time, with true Barton class, though, he did still 
manage to tell Brazil captain Thiago Silva he looks like an “overweight 
ladyboy” and also, somewhat less controversially, inform Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
that he has a big nose.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe07dd52eef67155e1b32cda76a4a5a566ecb8edf%2F0_0_4080_2720%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe07dd52eef67155e1b32cda76a4a5a566ecb8edf%2F0_0_4080_2720%2F4080.jpg>
 The artist known as Joey Barton. Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose for the 
Observer 
His contribution in a footballing sense was respectable, clocking up 25 league 
appearances as well as five in the Europa League. This is how Barton assessed 
his time in Marseille on Twitter: “I’ve had a year in France at a fantastic 
club and almost won the championship. And made a lifelong connection with the 
fans.” He was not as successful at Marseille as his compatriot, Chris Waddle, 
20 years earlier, but the midfielder enjoyed his time so much that wanted to 
make his loan spell in France permanent. However, Marseille could not afford to 
pay the sort of wages he was accustomed to in England and so, with his 
belongings all packed up again, he returned to England.

Jermaine Pennant, meanwhile, is a player whose performances on the pitch have 
rarely offered much of a return on the time and effort invested in keeping him 
on the right side of the tracks off it. Pennant, who gave his name as Ashley 
Cole to police officers following an infamous drink-driving episode, ultimately 
became more known for his car escapades than his playing. It is difficult to 
decide which is more baffling: that he was a youth product of the Arsène Wenger 
school of football at Arsenal or that, aged 24, he was one of the best 
performers in the 2007 Champions League final, as Liverpool succumbed to Milan. 
Nonetheless, when the time came for Pennant to leave Liverpool he looked to 
Spain and found himself signing up to be the best paid player at Real Zaragoza. 
It was not to be a successful time for the man from Nottingham.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36220761aa77f7a67e65d399f2d22a996340ea93%2F0_418_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36220761aa77f7a67e65d399f2d22a996340ea93%2F0_418_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Jermaine Pennant poses with his new Tampines Rovers jersey. Photograph: Roslan 
Rahman/AFP/Getty Images 
The first footballer in history to play while wearing an electronic tag 
following his imprisonment for the aforementioned drink-driving incident was 
sent home on various occasions for arriving late to training. On one occasion, 
he claimed the delay was due to be being pulled over by police for speeding 
while en route to work. Following one of these misdemeanours the local 
newspaper, El Periódico de Aragón opened an article with the sentence: “Pennant 
is as he is and nobody is going to change him.”

Much to the annoyance of his team-mates, the local press and the club 
supporters, it was felt that the Englishman never made any real effort to learn 
Spanish and, despite his qualities as a winger, rarely made any significant 
sort of contribution on the pitch in his 25 appearances. The damning 
assessments in the media continued: “Pennant, unadapted in every sense to the 
city and the club, has been absolutely unproductive despite his quality.” The 
club were relieved to wash their hands of him when Stoke City decided to bring 
the winger back to England. Months later, in one barely believable final show 
of arrogance or, simply, ignorance, Pennant was contacted by Real Zaragoza 
regarding a Porsche with the number plate P33NNT that had been left outside 
Zaragoza train station five months earlier. The footballer allegedly claimed to 
have forgotten he even owned it. Now aged 33, he has recently signed for 
Tampines Rovers.Look them up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/04/jermaine-pennant-trial-tampines-rovers-singapore>
.

And now, for England’s very own “artiste”: Joe Cole. One of England’s most 
gifted footballers of the modern era, Cole, sometimes dubbed “the Cockney 
Pelé”, stands out from the rest of the English players in this group. His 
talent on the ball along with his likeable nature earned him almost universal 
admiration. However, England national sides never knew how to accommodate such 
a luxurious position in a team of only eleven players. It was generally agreed 
that Cole would have been more suited to the Spanish or Italian leagues, where 
skill on the ball was valued over physical power. Yet, tied as he was to 
London, Cole spent his peak years at Chelsea doing his best to fit into the 
highly disciplined 4-3-3 system employed by José Mourinho. Of course, this 
would also bring about the most successful period of his career, but it came at 
the expense of Cole’s artistry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeca18a2c50d2e59b536854abfb03ac420875a32%2F0_85_4120_2468%2F4120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeca18a2c50d2e59b536854abfb03ac420875a32%2F0_85_4120_2468%2F4120.jpg>
 Joe Cole reading France Football magazine in Lille. Photograph: Tom Jenkins 
for the Guardian 
In reality, Cole’s move to the continent in 2012 probably came too late in his 
career to offer us a true sight of the roaming playmaker Harry Redknapp had 
originally envisaged. His loan spell in France offered Cole a respite from the 
pressures of English football. At Lille, the slower pace on and off the pitch 
suited Cole, who had been somewhat drained by a sustained lack of fitness, form 
and luck during his time at Liverpool. Still, the experience was better late 
than never and his French adventure brought Lille supporters moments of true 
quality to savour. Yet, as with so many of these English players, the move 
abroad was nothing more than a loan spell. For all the talk of hoping to make a 
deal permanent, very few have ended up committing to anything beyond the loan. 
Not that we should be wishing our own players away, but there appears to be a 
reluctance to commit to life away from England.

Maybe the main explanation for the scarcity of English football exports to 
Europe lies in something simple: a fear of learning foreign languages. This is 
something ingrained into the English psyche from a young age, where very few 
youngsters embrace learning another language and then, in later years, see it 
as a largely futile practice given the widespread general assumption that 
pretty much everybody already speaks English.

How did Joe Cole, once England's great hope, end up on loan in League One?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2015/nov/19/joe-cole-england-coventry-city-west-ham-chelsea-liverpool>
This has made the English eternally fearful of making a fool of themselves on 
foreign soil, so why would English footballers take the risk of moving to 
countries where not everybody speaks English? It would explain why Jermaine 
Pennant might feel much more at home in Singapore, where English is the first 
language, than he did in Zaragoza. It seems that to English footballers, these 
mainland European countries are ideal locations for various things: rest and 
recuperation, luxury parties and visiting specialist physios. But certainly not 
for living in.

Still, there are reasons for encouragement.

There must be times this season when Micah Richards is facing up to 
disgruntled Aston Villa fans in wet, cold Birmingham and he wishes he was back 
in Florence, looking out from the Ponte Vecchio after a day’s training under 
the Tuscan sun. In the summer of 2014, frustrated with his lack of 
opportunities at Manchester City, the Midlands-born defender took himself out 
of the Premier League bubble to sign on a season-long deal with Fiorentina. 
Richards was proud of himself for moving to Italy aged 26, during what are 
typically a player’s peak years.

However, as the season progressed he was unfortunate to find himself 
unfavoured once a three-man defence was implemented by manager Vincenzo 
Montella. “I see that as a real shame because I have really settled here,” he 
said. “I’m renting this great apartment on the river from Luca Toni. I love the 
lads. I love the training. The city is absolutely amazing.” So, although 
Richards ended up returning to English football after his season in Italy, he 
deserves credit for embracing the opportunity in a way that most other English 
players fail to do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ca7e7b705fa03fa3806968c7400dbdc7a8427d%2F0_254_5303_3179%2F5303.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20English%20footballers%20so%20reluctant%20to%20move%20to%20other%20European%20leagues%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fin-bed-with-maradona%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fenglish-footballers-europe-ashley-cole%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59ca7e7b705fa03fa3806968c7400dbdc7a8427d%2F0_254_5303_3179%2F5303.jpg>
 Micah Richards in Florence. Photograph: Michele Borzoni/TerraProject 
Nathaniel Chalobah, an export from the world youth football farm that is 
Chelsea Academy, is currently on loan at Napoli. The 21-year-old, who was born 
in Sierra Leone and moved to London as a child, spent recent seasons on loan 
gathering experience at a variety of Championship sides before moving to Italy 
at the start of this season. Although he has not featured in the first team 
very often, he is benefitting from training with a quality squad who are 
challenging for titles domestically and in Europe. He also chipped in with an 
outstanding goal in a Europa League win over Legia Warsaw in December.

According to the FA website, he has immersed himself into life in Naples, 
taking intensive language lessons and requesting that his team-mates converse 
with him in Italian. He clearly appreciates the benefits of his new experience: 
“Learning a language is something you can keep for life, and learning as you 
live in a country can only help that. Experience-wise, it’s been good for me to 
see how they play their football, the culture, the lifestyle and everything 
else.”

Naturally, more playing time in the second half of the season will be key to 
his development but here at least is an example of a promising young English 
footballer with a positive, open mind who sees European football as an 
opportunity to grow, rather than as a way to keep the salary high or escape 
troubles back home.

Another Chelsea old boy, Michael Mancienne, played for Hamburg from 2011 to 
2014, turning out 49 times in the Bundesliga. He was not successful enough to 
earn anything like the levels of adoration that Kevin “Mighty Mouse” Keegan 
enjoyed during his three years in Hamburg, but it was a fruitful experience 
nonetheless. And, as is the case with the vast majority of Chelsea youth 
players, Mancienne never made the grade for the Chelsea first team; however, to 
have still made a solid career for himself is an achievement owing in no small 
part to his considerable experience in the Bundesliga.

So what is it, then, about the reluctance of an Englishman to play on the 
continent? The language? The weather? The quality of football? The money? The 
sense of humour? Maybe we, quite simply, are not sending our best boys out on 
the job. Or perhaps we are even, whether consciously or not, sending out those 
we specificallydon’t want anymore – those we have become sick and tired of in 
England. It would be fascinating to see how Theo Walcott would fare at Altético 
Madrid or what Tom Huddlestone might have offered to, say, Bayer Leverkusen. 
But ultimately, we in England live in the era of the English football bubble: 
the Premier League, Sky Sports, mega-money sponsorship deals, foreign owners 
and all their riches. And it is constantly drummed into our TV sets that this 
is the best league in the world. Maybe English players have already won the 
first prize in the lottery of life. Why go anywhere else?

• This blog first appeared on In Bed With Maradona 
<http://inbedwithmaradona.com/>
• Follow In Bed With Maradona <https://twitter.com/Inbedwimaradona> on Twitter
 