
Drawing has seen something of a renaissance in the last twenty years in the 
UK. From theCampaign for Drawing 
<http://www.campaignfordrawing.org/home/index.aspx> to the Drawing Research 
Network <http://www.drawing-research-network.org.uk/>, from the Drawing Room 
<http://drawingroom.org.uk/> to the Rabley Drawing Centre 
<http://www.rableydrawingcentre.com/>, we've witnessed a proliferation of 
passion, effort and energy matched by increased museum exhibitions, dedicated 
degree courses, professors, publications and conferences.

All of the above have been established in pursuit of understanding, developing 
and promoting drawing, and many inside and outside the sector endure to 
evidence drawing as both the most sophisticated means of thinking and 
communicating, and an activity for all.

In the 1990s dedicated resources for drawing were much thinner on the ground. 
At Gloucestershire College ofArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> 
(now University) my team taught a structured programme that started with an 
intensive drawing course as the introduction to the underpinning systems and 
principles of visual language and painting in particular. The need for current 
exemplars was evident, more than anything to ensure the vitality of a student's 
application and his or her practices.

The Jerwood Drawing Prize 
<http://jerwoodvisualarts.org/jerwood-drawing-prize-2014> grew in the face of 
this need, and developed in the wake of the Cleveland International Drawing 
Biennale that came to an end in 1996 after 23 years, and as the successor 
project for the nascent Malvern Open Drawing, founded in 1991. The project was 
a twin-headed opportunity: to facilitate an understanding of current drawing 
practice; and to provide students with professional experience as part of the 
curriculum to organise and understand the process of an open exhibition.

Our overarching aim was to affirm the value of drawing, and the reach of the 
project is more tangible than we could have imagined. We have received 
phenomenal support from a number of funders, champions and supporters of 
drawing in our establishment, joining theJerwood Charitable Foundation 
<http://jerwoodcharitablefoundation.org/> family of projects in 2000 and 
redefining our scope as UK wide.

Having collectively raised the game and placed drawing back on the agenda – in 
schools, universities, in teaching and research, galleries and contemporary 
practices – perhaps it is time to deepen, extend and further evaluate its 
specific function.

Drawing <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/drawing> remains a central 
and pivotal activity to the work of many artists and designers – a touchstone 
and tool of creative exploration that informs visual discovery. It 
fundamentally enables the visualisation and development of perceptions and 
ideas. With a history as long and intensive as the history of our culture, the 
act of drawing remains a fundamental means to translate, document, record and 
analyse the worlds we inhabit. The role of drawing in education remains 
critical, and not just to the creative disciplines in art and design for which 
it is foundational.

As a primary visual language, essential for communication and expression, 
drawing is as important as the development of written and verbal skills. The 
need to understand the world through visual means would seem more acute than 
ever; images transcend the barriers of language, and enhance communications in 
an increasingly globalised world.

Alongside a need for drawing skills for those entering employment identified 
by a range of industries in the creative sectors – animation, architecture, 
design, fashion, film, theatre, performance and the communication industries – 
drawing is also widely used within a range of other professions as a means to 
develop, document, explore, explain, interrogate and plan. This includes the 
fields of science, technology, engineering, mathematics, medicine and sport.

Surely, this should affirm drawing to be an essential part of the curriculum 
at all levels for all subjects, and something for which a clear commitment 
needs to be made. If we really want to move theSTEM to STEAM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/nov/23/art-party-conference-bob-roberta-smith>
 agenda, drawing could be the connector at the heart of it all.

Anita Taylor is director of the Jerwood Drawing Prize 
<http://jerwoodvisualarts.org/jerwood-drawing-prize-2014> and dean of Bath 
School of Art and Design <http://artdesign.bathspa.ac.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 