
Emma Watson’s films have made over $8.4bn at the worldwide box office. She 
boasts more than 22 million followers on Twitter and more than 33 million likes 
on Facebook. Yet earlier this month, her new thriller The Colony made just £47 
in its opening weekend. That means fewer than 10 people in the UK came out to 
see it.

Emma Watson's new film makes £47 at UK box office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/05/emma-watson-new-film-the-colony-47-pounds-uk-box-office>
At first sight, it’s a disaster, a sign that Watson’s post-Hermione appeal is 
on the wane, and it’s led to some incredulous headlines worldwide, eager to 
report the fall of such a bright star. But here’s where some small print is 
required.

The film, which premiered to tepid reviews at last year’s Toronto film 
festival, is the latest in an increasingly long line that don’t rely on box 
office. In fact, the poor showing is of little consequence.

The Colony, previously titled Colonia, was only launched on three screens for 
one matinee showing a day and these cinemas were in Hull, Widnes and Burnley, 
meaning that anyone in the nation’s capital would have to drive for around four 
hours to see it. But, most importantly, The Colony was also released 
simultaneously on digital services, meaning that anyone with a smart TV or a 
laptop could watch the film at home instead.

Watson isn’t the only big star to have seen their work pushed down this route. 
Last November, Morgan Freeman thriller Momentum made just £4.60 per screen 
after a 10-site release, while last month, legal thriller Misconduct, starring
Al Pacino <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alpacino> and Anthony Hopkins, made 
less than £100 in its first weekend.

“Day-and-date releases minimise costs for a distributor,” says Andreas 
Wiseman, Screen International’s head of news. “They only need to pay for a 
campaign once rather than at different stages throughout the windowing process. 
The growth in these kind of releases coincides with the proliferation of 
digital platforms. Distributor deals with platforms such as Netflix, LoveFilm, 
iTunes etc often require that a film is shown in a certain number of cinemas, 
so distributors will sometimes see the theatrical release as a box-ticking 
exercise.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440591103431%2FKP_403726_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlotte%20Rampling%20and%20Tom%20Courtenay%20on%2045%20Years%3A%20'A%20life%20without%20regrets%20is%20quite%20unusual'-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlotte%20Rampling%20and%20Tom%20Courtenay%20on%2045%20Years%3A%20%27A%20life%20without%20regrets%20is%20quite%20unusual%27-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fcharlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440591103431%2FKP_403726_crop_640x360.jpg>
Charlotte Rampling and Tom Courtenay on 45 Years: ‘A life without regrets is 
quite unusual’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/aug/26/charlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-45-years-video-interview>
The “day-and-date” release is not an entirely new concept. Smaller films have 
been launched on both theatrical and digital platforms simultaneously for a few 
years now, with some notable success stories. Last year, the Oscar-nominated 
drama45 Years <https://www.theguardian.com/film/45-years> became the 
highest-grossing and widest-playing film to have utilised this strategy, making 
around £2m despite being available at home at the same time.

But the key difference is scale. At its highest screen count, the film was at 
89 cinemas, many of them in key cities, a strategy in direct opposition to The 
Colony.

“What do you do with a small mainstream film?” asks box-office analyst Charles 
Gant. “In general, independent cinemas don’t want them, since these venues have 
limited screen space, and usually a wealth of arthouse titles to choose from. 
And multiplex bookers will want to know what kind of marketing support there is 
going to be.”

Morgan Freeman thriller loses Momentum taking £4.60 per cinema
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/24/morgan-freeman-thriller-momentum-flops-uk-cinema>
Both The Colony and Momentum were released by Signature Entertainment, a UK 
distribution company started in 2011. Jon Bourdillon, the company’s chief 
operating officer, says the strategy exists to “give the film the widest 
possible level of distribution and exposure”.

The Colony, thanks to its small theatrical bow, received the same level of 
attention as any other film released in cinemas that week, meaning it had 
reviews in print, an almost impossible result for a DVD release. It’s also 
advertised on digital platforms as being “in cinemas now”, giving it a certain 
gloss in comparison to other direct-to-video options, and bears a slightly 
pricier rental tag.

“The main objective of a Premium VOD (video on demand) release is to try to 
get more income from VOD than you might expect from just a standard VOD 
release,” says a source at Bulldog Film Distribution. “Misconduct definitely 
wasn’t a flop for us as a distributor, despite only making a few thousand 
pounds at the box office. Theatrical is just one area of the whole release and 
other areas, including PVOD, are much more positive.”

It’s likely that the model will continue to shift, even for bigger movies. 
Napster founder Sean Parker has been developing a new format called The 
Screening Room, allowing people to watch blockbusters such as Captain America: 
Civil War or The Secret Life of Pets at home on the same day they’re released 
in cinemas.

“Consumption of film entertainment has become that much more immediate, fans 
simply can’t and won’t wait like they used to,” says Bourdillon.
 