
Awards season breaks into a gallop with the first peek at Vanity Fair's 
Hollywood Issue 
<http://photos.vanityfair.com/2014/02/02/1391377260899_3-hollywood-cover-2014-640-new-logo.png>
, second only to the Superbowl as an annual exercise in celebrating rich people 
in funny-looking clothes. Every March the magazine features a colourfully 
titled gatefold cover, populated by a group of Hollywood's hottest stars and 
photographed by Annie Leibovitz. This year's pic features Chiwetel Ejiofor, 
Idris Elba and Naomie Harris, but it's not just the healthy number of Brits 
that makes the new cover an oddity compared to most years. It's nothing less 
than a rebellion against the format.

"Diversity"
 Lupita Nyong'o, one of four Oscar nominees on the cover. Photograph: Rich 
Polk/WireImage 
There are six black actors on this year's cover. That's a six-fold increase 
over most years (Will Smith was the only black manon 1996's "Boy's Town" cover 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2007/02/hollywoodcovers_slideshow200702_slideshow_item1_2>
, Anthony Mackie thesole non-white face 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2011/02/the-2011-hollywood-issue-cover> 
in 2011). Angry fans had started Photoshopping black and hispanic faces over 
VF's traditionally WASPish brood. So 2014's cover is a giant stride forward for 
diversity or – at the least – recognition that 2013 was a good year for black 
talent (Fruitvale Station, 12 Years a Slave, Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom). 
Funny that they never noticed that in 2005 (Jamie Foxx won an Oscar, Don 
Cheadle was nominated) or any other year before ...

Grins

Three of them here! Potentially more of a surprise than the diversity thing. 
Nobody smiles on the VF Hollywood cover. It's about looking edgy (1999'sNew 
Kids on the Block cover 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2007/02/hollywoodcovers_slideshow200702_slideshow_item4_5>
, which leaned hard on scowls and hoodies), mysterious (the Inception meets old 
Hollywood romanticism of 2004'sSend in the Gowns 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2007/02/hollywoodcovers_slideshow200702_slideshow_item9_10>
) or sexy (every year). You can get away with looking soaking wet (as Leo 
DiCaprio did in 1996), but you can never, ever look happy.

Fully clothed

It's only recently that VF's chosen ones have started dressing for dinner. The 
first Hollywood Issue cover 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2007/02/hollywoodcovers_slideshow200702>
 (1995) had Linda Fiorentino topless, Uma Thurman in a slip and Sarah Jessica 
Parker striding around in her bra. Equality broke in in 2000, when everyone – 
boys too – stripped down to their smalls for "Splendour in the Grass 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2007/02/hollywoodcovers_slideshow200702_slideshow_item5_6>
". The stars have added layers with the years since, with this 2014's clutch 
kitted out in full dress suits and long ballgowns. Expect polo necks next year.

Awkward poses
 Margot Robbie in The Wolf of Wall Street. Photograph: Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar
This year's group are in paradise compared to the limb-twisting tableaux of 
awkwardness that was 1997'sThe Next Wave 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/features/2007/02/hollywoodcovers_slideshow200702_slideshow_item2_3>
. Claire Danes had a headache, Minnie Driver's back was cramping, Cameron Diaz 
was struggling to loosen the dress and leave the whole sorry mess behind. The 
set designers this year have finally found somewhere for everyone to sit. 
Though it's worth noting that a woman still has to lie down to fit the frame: 
Margot Robbie this year, was Kristen Stewart in 2010, was Gwyneth Paltrow in 
2001. A good time to be an osteopath.

The wild card
 Vanity Fair HOLLYWOOD Cover March 2014. Photograph: Annie Leibovitz/Vanity 
Fair 
There's always a couple of "eh?!" actors on VF's spread. For every early 
sighting of a big-hitter (Matthew McConaughey joined Leo and Will Smith on the 
1996 shoot) there's a bit-part player who never made it off the reserve list 
(Johnathon Schaech anyone?) In a field that includes established stars (Julia 
Roberts) and hot-shot up-and-comers (Idris, Chiwetel), this year's fruitfly 
should be Chadwick Boseman (third from right), the star of the Jackie Robinson 
biopic 42. On closer inspection though, it's the group's most recognisible face 
that has the least buzz this year. George Clooney is hardly awards-bait this 
season. Meanwhile Boseman is already causing a stir with his take on the 
Godfather of Soul for Tate Taylor's James Brown biopic. Clooney will sell the 
magazine, but for once the newbie's the story.
 