
Come A-level results day this year, some students will tear open their results 
envelope and be faced with grades that exceed their expectations. These 
students will have the option to improve their university choice or course 
through Adjustment.

Fatuma Mahad, director of operations at Ucas, explains: “Adjustment is the 
Ucas service for students who have achieved higher grades than they expected 
and want to see what other options are available while still holding onto their 
confirmed [university] place.”

The service was introduced in 2009, with 390 students going down the 
Adjustment route. That number has grown steadily since, but in 2014 only 1,160 
of the 512,370 who began university in September entered through Adjustment. 
Could this all be down to the fact we form attachments to decisions we make?

After a heady summer of envisaging your higher education haunts, sussing out 
which halls you’re after and making a beeline for new buddies, you’ll have a 
firm picture in your mind of what your university life will be like. Much of 
this will be based on the location you’re heading to.

“When we make choices, they are often grounded in reasons that we have formed 
over a period of time,” says psychologist Emma Kenny. “Students who have been 
offered a place at university will have formed positive associations related to 
their chosen university. Once a commitment is made, behaviour often follows 
such a path.”

Five steps to upgrading your degree offer through Adjustment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/05/five-steps-to-upgrading-your-degree-offer-through-adjustment>
Mahad agrees, adding: “Adjustment is used by relatively small numbers of 
people because it’s a significant step to switch at this point. Most students 
remain committed to their first choice university, having researched the 
course, attended open days, and forged relationships with current students or 
other applicants.”

An attachment to one single university wasn’t an issue that English literature 
student Megan Brittan faced, however. “I was planning to go to the University 
of Birmingham to study English literature, but when I got my results I went 
through Adjustment and ended up going to Warwick instead,” she explains.

“It was a difficult decision because I hadn’t looked at the university,” 
Brittan says. “It was a risk going to a university I had never seen but I felt 
no particular attachment to Birmingham’s course, although the place was lovely. 
But I essentially decided I would enjoy Warwick as much as I would any other 
university.”

Selecting a university that league tables determine to be more prestigious 
isn’t always the most important thing, explains Kenny: “While there are options 
to attend ‘better’ universities, this opportunity doesn’t necessarily form the 
basis for a student’s choice. In fact many students choose universities for 
far-reaching social and environmental purposes.

“It’s important at times to trust instinct. If we have made and felt content 
with a decision, there is little reason to change our minds, especially if the 
results will eventually be the same.”

Don't sit back if your A-level results are better than expected – consider 
Adjustment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/04/dont-sit-back-if-your-a-level-results-are-better-than-expected-consider-adjustment>
Getting caught up in the excitement of better-than-expected results can also 
lead to rash decisions, Mahad points out: “I would encourage students who are 
thinking about Adjustment to consider the practical implications of changing to 
a different university and to talk to their school, college or careers office 
to help them decide if a move is the right thing.”

“If someone is considering Adjustment, I would tell them to go with their gut 
instinct,” says Brittan. “If they do have an attachment or were particularly 
excited to go to their first choice university, then I would suggest they stay 
with their decision – they chose that place for a reason.

“For those unsure about their first choice university, like me, be open to 
other options and go for the university with the better course and reputation.”

Adjustment anxieties

1. I don’t want to lose my original offer

Jeopardising your firm choice might seem risky, but if you try Adjustment and 
don’t find anything, you’ll still keep the place you were granted on results 
day. You only lose it if you confirm a decision to go elsewhere.

To discover course vacancies students need to contact admissions offices for 
information and discuss course availability. Just be clear that you’re only 
gathering information, and be sure to make no verbal commitments.

2. The process seems stressful

While there are time limits, Adjustment needn’t be cause for concern. The 
Adjustment period begins on results day and lasts until 31 August. Your 
personal Adjustment period starts the moment your “conditional firm choice” 
changes to “unconditional firm”. If you have registered for Adjustment, you 
have five 24-hour periods to search and secure an alternative course. The 
“track” section of the Ucas site shows how long is left of your Adjustment 
period – keep an eye on this and concentrate on your research and the time 
period should be plenty.

3. There’s no time to visit my new choice

When going through Adjustment, you’re unlikely to have time to traipse up and 
down the county checking out campuses. Get a feel for the university by 
chatting to current students and people who have made the course their firm 
choice – what appealed the them about the course? What was the atmosphere like 
on the open day? What did they like about the location?

4. I’ve started to make friends on my course

While it’s great to chat to other students on forums in advance, the 
likelihood is that the friends you make before actually heading to uni won’t be 
pals for life. Long-lasting friendships are forged over long hours in the 
library, late night conversations in the student union and people with the same 
hobbies and lifestyles as you.

5. What about the logistics?

It’s important to think about practicalities like accommodation and bursaries; 
your new choice may not have a guarantee of a place in halls, and you could 
lose deposits you have put down at your original choice. You may also 
ineligible for bursaries and tuition fee discounts aimed at students who enter 
via the standard application route. Ask the university what you will be 
eligible for before you commit as it could differ for Adjustment applicants. If 
a university representative seems unsure or doesn’t know the answers to your 
questions ask to be put in touch with someone who knows the situation for sure.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 