
Akira Kurosawa <https://www.theguardian.com/film/akirakurosawa> and Hollywood 
may find themselves working together soon for the first time since the late 
director's abortive involvement in the war epicTora! Tora! Tora! 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0066473/>, one of several traumatic episodes that 
led him to attempt suicide in 1972. The remake rights to the lion's share of 
his movies and unproduced screenplays have been granted by the Akira Kurosawa 
100 Project to the Los Angeles-based company Splendent, whose chief,Sakiko 
Yamada, told Variety <http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118041655> he aimed to 
"help contemporary film-makers introduce a new generation of moviegoers to 
these unforgettable stories". The Kurosawa Project said it had received 
"countless" requests from US and European film-makers, "expressing intense 
interest in remaking Kurosawa's movies".

The prospect of Kurosawa's influence being funnelled through Hollywood again 
is enticing; after all, the last time Hollywood directors paid sustained 
attention to his films, they helped revolutionise Hollywood film-making.

Two Kurosawa remakes were particularly important: John Sturges's The 
Magnificent Seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/34969/magnificent-seven> and Sergio 
Leone'sA Fistful of Dollars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83427/fistful-of-dollars>, deriving from
Seven Samurai <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76377/seven-samurai> 
(1954) and Yojimbo <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0055630/> (1961) respectively. 
The former, passing directly from Japan to Los Angeles, produced one smash hit, 
offered a narrative template for movies as diverse asThe Dirty Dozen 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0061578/> and Ocean's Eleven 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0054135/>, spawned three lesser sequels and a naff 
TV series, while inadvertently foretelling in metaphor America's looming 
military entanglements in south-east Asia (minus the then-inconceivable 
defeat). The latter revolutionised the moribund American western, changing 
ideas about violence and the hero's morality, supercharging the work of the 
likes ofSam Peckinpah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/09/sam-peckinpah-retrospective> and 
Walter Hill, and handing the genre a new two-for-one Ford/Wayne inClint Eastwood
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/clinteastwood>, director and western icon 
combined. The brazenness of Leone's rehash, however, prompted a letter from 
Kurosawa saying, accurately enough: "A Fistful of Dollars is a very fine film, 
but it's my film," and a lawsuit, later settled out of court.

Meanwhile, the first film-school-educated generation of young directors was 
absorbing the Emperor's work, and savouring it with an aesthetic as well as a 
professional palate.John Milius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/nov/08/artsfeatures>, a Kurosawa fanatic 
who quotedHidden Fortress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83724/hidden.fortress> in his The Wind 
and the Lion <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0073906/>, introduced George Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/georgelucas> to the same movie, which offered 
him the skeletal outline and epic scope ofStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars>, and the samurai archetype looms 
large in the scripts and movies ofPaul Schrader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/jul/06/features.geoffreymacnab>.

The new generation paid frequent homage to Kurosawa within their movies but 
also, more importantly, without, once their own success had been assured.Steven 
Spielberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg>cast Toshiro Mifune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/mar/02/3>, very much in type, in 1941, 
andMartin Scorsese <https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese> played 
Vincent Van Gogh in Kurosawa's Dreams – with effects by Industrial Light and 
Magic. Lucas andFrancis Ford Coppola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/francis-ford-coppola> went a stage further in 
1980 by persuading 20th Century Fox to cover a shortfall inKagemusha's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/83533/kagemusha> budget in exchange for 
international distribution rights.

But cultural exchange is a two-way, if not a nine-way street. Let's not forget 
Kurosawa was, even early in his career, by far the most westernised of Japanese 
directors, a lover of Lubitsch, Chaplin and Ford, and was often scorned for it 
in Japan, both by jingoistic war-nostalgists and by the westernised Marxist 
generation of Japanese film-makers bringing up the rear. He was a voracious 
consumer of western movies and literature, and the literary sources for his 
movies range from Gorky (The Lower Depths), Dostoyevsky (The Idiot), and 
Shakespeare (Throne of Blood, Ran) to Georges Simenon (Stray Dog), Ed McBain 
(High and Low) and Dashiell Hammett (Yojimbo).

Outside the parameters of the Kurosawa Project/Splendent deal, four other 
Kurosawa remakes are already in the pipeline, including a Weinstein Company 
remake of the Seven Samurai set in Thailand, proving the hunger for Kurosawa 
remakes cited by Project 100 is real, at least for film-makers, and that 
Kurosawa-based cultural exchange maintains its steady, mutually enriching 
ebb-and-flow.
 