
We won’t stop. That is what the images from last Wednesday’s massive marches 
in Buenos Aires and across Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/argentina-women-south-america-marches-violence-ni-una-menos>
 against gender violence are saying.

What took place shows that something important started last year with the 
first massive demonstrations on behalf of the right of women to lead lives 
without the fear of violence. The movement continues to grow stronger every day.

This time, as was the case for the two previous marches of June last year and 
again in June this year, women and men of all ages took to the streets of
Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>. Sometimes they did so 
despite cold, driving rain, just to make it clear that in a society that knows 
how to protest in favour of other rights – the rights of workers, human rights 
– the time has come also to face up to machismo in everyday life.

Argentina: hundreds of thousands of women set to protest against violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/argentina-women-strike-violence-protest>
Argentina needs effective public policies against gender violence. But it also 
needs every individual to take responsibility for their private behaviour on a 
daily basis too. “Femicide”, as the murder of women as a result of domestic 
violence and other categories of hate crimes against women has been defined by 
law in our country, is a huge and urgent problem. In the 18 days leading up to 
Wednesday’s march there were 19 such murders of women in Argentina. These 
killings are the end result of small, daily acts of machismo.

Despite the marches, Argentina is far from being a feminist country. It never 
was before and it’s not one now. It was only in 1991 that Argentinian female 
politicians obtained, not without hard work, a law guaranteeing30% of elective 
posts for women <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Argentine_quota_law>. The 
struggle continues for total equality. Then and now, male politicians have 
attempted to block this initiative.

Abortion is legal in just a few special cases, such as a health risk for the 
mother and rape.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> also 
continue to be underpaid, earning 30% less than men for the same job. And even 
though female students today are the majority at Argentina’s universities and 
increasingly active as academic researchers, decision-making and directive 
posts are still reserved for men.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fniunamenos-marchers-argentina-women-gender-violence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe996eb9a0be34e6f38d6ab6e5b8b028e8f400edd%2F0_269_4305_2583%2F4305.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20%23NiUnaMenos%20marchers%20are%20demanding%20a%20better%20Argentina%20for%20women%20%7C%20Soledad%20Vallejos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fniunamenos-marchers-argentina-women-gender-violence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20%23NiUnaMenos%20marchers%20are%20demanding%20a%20better%20Argentina%20for%20women%20%7C%20Soledad%20Vallejos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fniunamenos-marchers-argentina-women-gender-violence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe996eb9a0be34e6f38d6ab6e5b8b028e8f400edd%2F0_269_4305_2583%2F4305.jpg>
 ‘Sometimes big, long-lasting movements start with a spark.’ Photograph: Eitan 
Abramovich/AFP/Getty Images 
So the broad support for the #NiUnaMenos “not one less” movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/the-guardian-view-on-niunamenos-challenging-misogyny-and>
 is not something anybody could easily have imagined would happen in Argentina. 
Nevertheless, it looks like only hard, sad stories wake us up to the grim 
reality of gender violence.

The Guardian view on #NiUnaMenos: challenging misogyny and murder | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/the-guardian-view-on-niunamenos-challenging-misogyny-and>
Last year, between May and June, #NiUnaMenos sprang to life after a teenager 
from a small town was founddead and buried in her boyfriend’s garden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/08/argentina-murder-women-gender-violence-protest>
. This June, the first anniversary of last year’s massive street demonstrations 
saw a second such nationwide demonstration being held. But now, in this 
unusually cold and rainy October for Argentina, anew brutal femicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/argentina-women-strike-violence-protest>
 became headline news and the reaction was colossal. The protest is still not 
enough, but it’s worthwhile. It’s not a solution, but it’s a statement and an 
assuming of collective responsibilities in the violence against women.

Women, men, teenagers and kids (yes, there were families out in the rain) held 
handmade posters with passionate slogans and drawings. Some of them told 
stories of violence against women, others just showed solidarity and asked for 
people to open their eyes to what is happening.

Sometimes big, long-lasting movements start with a spark. I’d like to think 
that #NiUnaMenos is the spark for a new Argentina that is better for women.
 