
The question “Is Jeremy Corbyn art?” hasn’t been asked very often. Most people 
are still trying to answer the deeper question: “IsJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> politics?”

But for 21-year-old fine art student Lucie Carter, who staged a hoax talk by 
the Labour leader last week, defending the relationship between the two turned 
into a full-time occupation.

Corbyn didn’t attend Carter’s event, which was held at Lancaster University. 
But a cardboard box daubed with the words “Jeremy Corbyn” did. It’s an approach 
the artist calls “object-oriented ontology”. Unfortunately, localLabour MP Cat 
Smith <http://www.catsmith.co.uk/> didn’t see what was so funny about 
object-oriented ontology.

“People turned up at the event – Labour supporters and party members,” Smith 
complained 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/labour-members-left-baffled-after-8008287>
. “They paid for parking and childcare, time off work and incurred an expense 
for an event that wasn’t happening,” she said.

The furore spread across the internet. Was it a) art, b) justified, c) 
necessary to get angry about it even if it wasn’t? We asked the non-cardboard 
Lucie about all three.

Jeremy Corbyn calls for new economics to tackle 'grotesque inequality'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/21/jeremy-corbyn-labour-economy-re-industrialisation-digital-age>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fjeremy-corbyn-cardboard-box-hoax-talk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c6987b7e69a8de86334aafec58ea3a6c2ffa3ab%2F0_376_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20invited%20people%20to%20a%20talk%20by%20%E2%80%98Jeremy%20Corbyn%E2%80%99%20(AKA%20a%20cardboard%20box)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fjeremy-corbyn-cardboard-box-hoax-talk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20invited%20people%20to%20a%20talk%20by%20%E2%80%98Jeremy%20Corbyn%E2%80%99%20%28AKA%20a%20cardboard%20box%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fjeremy-corbyn-cardboard-box-hoax-talk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c6987b7e69a8de86334aafec58ea3a6c2ffa3ab%2F0_376_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Lucie Carter on her box: ‘It wasn’t a flash decision. I’ve got a body of 
developmental work behind it.’ Photograph: Lucie Carter 
Hi Lucie. For them what don’t know, what is object-oriented ontology? 

It’s this theory to do with the privileging of non-human objects over actual 
humans. It’s about what happens when you view all objects as equal.

When did you first realise you wanted to put Jeremy Corbyn’s name on a box? 

It wasn’t a flash decision. I’ve got a body of developmental work behind it. 
I’ve got this huge installation of boxes with celebrities’ names painted on the 
side. The box could have been anyone – it wasn’t really to do with Jeremy 
Corbyn. But I think if I had put Kim Kardashian’s name on it, some of the 
realism would have gone out in terms of people attending.

What other celebs are on these boxes? 

I’ve got one that has got Johnny Depp’s name on the side, but I got my Js 
mixed up, so it’s an L. It says “Lohnny Depp”. Lionel Richie. Beyoncé. Gordon 
Ramsay.

How do you choose who gets to be on the box? 

Completely at random.

When did you first realise the Corbyn thing was taking off more than you had 
intended?

I think it was at the point I received a phone call off Cat Smith, the MP. She 
wanted me to delete the event from the internet listings, so I did.

But you still held the event. What was the reaction? Were people disappointed 
to learn they weren’t going to get a one-hour lecture on Nye Bevan’s attitudes 
to international solidarity?

They all turned up knowing that it was the cardboard, not the actual Jeremy 
Corbyn. When I was there, [there were] in total, probably like five people – 
two of whom were viewers, the others came with me. The viewers all thought it 
was funny. They had a selfie with it.

And then … it was over. What happened next? 

I just went to pick it up, then walked back to the studio with it, put it 
there.

Are you going to keep the box permanently? It’s your The Physical 
Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living 
<http://www.damienhirst.com/the-physical-impossibility-of> [AKA Damien Hirst’s 
formaldehyde shark].

I suppose you could say that.

What is it worth now that it has been the centre of an art-world controversy? 

I dunno. I really know nothing about the art market.

What has the reaction been within the university? 

Well, I would just like to point out that a few people have said in passing 
that I was trying to promote an art event at the last minute, as though I 
hadn’t done any work and panicked. But that’s not true – the artwork included 
the hoax and the reactions to it. It was as much about art’s subjectivity and 
the stigma against art as a degree.

Do you like Jeremy Corbyn? 

I don’t really keep up with politics, but he seems like a decent lad, yeah. I 
like his policies to do with education. And the arts.

What sort of art do you think he likes? 

Dunno.

Soviet realism, and then he probably has a calendar of Monet’s waterlilies? 

Sounds about right.
 