
When I wrote my open letter to the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons (RCVS) 
calling for a ban on the treatment of animals with homeopathic remedies, I 
hoped it would offer an opportunity for my colleagues in the veterinary 
profession to stand up for evidence-based veterinary care. Now, withmore 1,000 
vets lending their names to the letter as I submit it to the RCVS 
<https://www.change.org/p/the-royal-college-of-veterinary-surgeons-a-call-to-ban-veterinary-surgeons-from-prescribing-homeopathy-as-a-treatment-for-animals>
, along with hundreds of veterinary nurses and students, it’s time for our 
professional body to take our concerns seriously.

The case against homeopathy has never been clearer, with every well-controlled 
study showing that these remedies are no more effective than a sugar pill – 
which is no surprise, considering that the vast majority of homeopathic 
treatments contain no active substances at all.


Many people think homeopathy remedies are essentially herbal remedies, but 
they can be based on anything from herbs to animal products, or from minerals 
to X-rays. More importantly, herbalists believe that the larger the dose of 
herb, the larger the effect, whereas the central belief of homeopathy is that
substances get more powerful the more dilute they are 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homeopathic_dilutions>. In short, even when the 
initial ingredient is a herb, there is no herb left by the time dilution has 
been completed and the homeopathic ‘remedy’ is ready to be used.


As a 2010 House of Commons Science and Technology Committee report on 
homeopathy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2010/feb/22/mps-verdict-homeopathy-useless-unethical>
 concluded, homeopathic remedies perform no better than placebos, and that the 
principles on which homeopathy is based are “scientifically implausible”.


While the NHS finally appears to be ending support for homeopathy, with 
clinical commissioning groups around the country ending funding for homeopathy 
services 
<http://goodthinkingsociety.org/projects/nhs-homeopathy-legal-challenge/nhs-homeopathy-spending/>
 and theDepartment of Health reviewing whether to blacklist the treatments 
completely <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-34744858>, sadly it appears no 
such progress has been made in the veterinary world. It isn’t hard to find vets 
willing to prescribe these ineffective remedies to sick animals, andthe British 
Association of Homeopathic Veterinary Surgeons 
<http://www.bahvs.com/cured-cancer-cases-1/> claims that homeopathy can be used 
to treat cancer in dogs 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/2016/06/24/homeopathy-can-kill-pets-and-should-be-banned-say-vets/>
.


Although homeopathy supporters often like to paint themselves as the little 
guys, standing up to the powerful lobby of an evil pharmaceutical industry, in 
reality homeopathy has friends in extremely high places. Earlier this year, 
Prince Charles claimed he exclusively uses homeopathic remedies when treating 
his cows and sheep,advising scientists that the treatments represent a solution 
to the growing problem of antibiotic overuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/12/prince-charles-use-homeopathy-in-animals-to-cut-antibiotic-use>
. While I commend his recognition of the dangers presented by the 
overprescription of antibiotics, his proposed solution demonstrates a deep 
ignorance of the realities of veterinary medicine.

I have no doubt that Prince Charles, along with my colleagues in the 
veterinary profession who do prescribe homeopathy, has nothing but the best of 
intentions. Unfortunately, being well-intentioned and deluded is no substitute 
for being right, especially when the cost of being wrong can be all too high.

As a vet, there are few things more heartbreaking than having to pick up the 
pieces after an animal has received inadequate care. Unfortunately, too many 
times in my career I’ve been presented with an animal whose perfectly treatable 
condition has been left to deteriorate, because their owners and vets were 
convinced that homeopathic remedies would do the trick. At best, it leads to 
unnecessary suffering and a reduced likelihood of a full recovery. At worst, as 
with the case of a horse I treated for severe laminitis, there is no option 
left but euthanasia.


Having to put down an animal who would likely have lived a long and healthy 
life had they been given the correct treatment is something no vet would 
relish. What is deeply frustrating is that there is no real way for an animal’s 
owner to judge whether the advice they receive from a qualified vet is based on 
sound research or, in the case of homeopathy, personal belief that flies in the 
face of evidence. The public rightly place their trust in veterinary surgeons, 
reasoning that our medical knowledge is the result of years of study and 
training at formally accredited institutions, and based on sound research.


For the veterinary profession to retain the trust of the general public, we 
have to ensure that the treatments that we offer are, to the best of our 
ability, based in evidence. As the regulatory body for veterinary surgeons in 
the UK, it is the duty of the RCVS to monitor the ethical and clinical 
standards of our profession – clearly, the promotion of demonstrably 
ineffective treatments is not compatible with these standards.


As the RCVS considers its response to our letter, they must bear in mind that 
a failure to end the prescription of homeopathic remedies in animal care is an 
implicit endorsement of these treatments. It would therefore also be an 
implicit acceptance of vets who place animal welfare at risk by putting their 
personal beliefs ahead of evidence-based medicine and the body of knowledge our 
profession has accrued. I sincerely hope that does not happen, and that the 
RCVS chooses instead to heed this call from more than 1,000 vets and end the 
use of these ineffective treatments once and for all.
 