
Despite being an enthusiastic consumer of spy films and novels, I’ve never 
much fancied being an actual spy. Physical cowardice is part of the reason – I 
don’t like the sound of all the piranha tanks, gun fights, torture by sleep 
deprivation or polonium-laced sushi (depending ongenre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/26/classic-spy-novels-top-10>) – 
but that’s not the main deterrent. After all, popular culture makes it clear 
there are plenty of espionage jobs that don’t involve anything more challenging 
than ducking under some police tape in a cashmere overcoat. That’s the sort of 
spy I’d dream of being, if I dreamed of being a spy which I’m surprised to find 
I don’t. The suit-and-tie, office-with-a-rooftop-view, “How can we stop them 
realising we’ve realised that they’ve realised we realise?” kind.

Which isn’t to say I don’t want to be George Smiley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/22/le-carre-call-for-the-dead>: I 
absolutely do want to be George Smiley. I just don’t want to be any of the 
people he’s based on. I’d be thrilled to pretend to be a spy, with lots of 
people watching and applause at the end. What I’m not tempted by is the long 
career, wrestling with terrible secrets, mind-bending complications and 
soul-crushing compromises, while not being able to get credit when it went 
well, sympathy when it went horribly or a huge pile of money if I happened to 
be good at it.

Maybe this time it was a belt shampoo bomb? A mace made out of plastic cutlery 
embedded in a Frederick Forsyth novel?

Call me a showbiz wanker (if you’re reading online, there’s a whole section 
below entirely designed for that purpose) but, to me, that job sounds crap – 
though recruitment must have been enormously helped by the efforts the film, 
publishing and TV industries have made to glamorise it. The occasional poolside 
page-turner or pacey mini-series on the subject of social workers would 
probably do wonders for the prospects of thousands of drug addicts’ toddlers.

Not that anyone’s taking on more welfare providers at the moment. Under 
Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-the-vicars-daughter-poised-to-pull-the-tories-and-the-country-from-the-abyss>
, public spending is all about restraint – that is, the state’s ability to 
restrain people. So it’s security personnel they’re recruiting, according to 
reports last week, with MI6 looking to hire nearly 1,000 new spies over the 
next four years, increasing its payroll by almost 40%. This is part of a widely 
circulatedgovernment plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/21/mi6-recruit-digital-internet-social-media>
 to increase the staff of all three covert security agencies (MI5, MI6 and 
GCHQ) by a total of about 1,900.

This all has a very different vibe from the cold war when Britain’s secret 
services were still secret. Or officially secret anyway, which is not quite the 
same thing. But that’s no longer politically viable. In this era of austerity, 
the public would be more offended by the notion that thousands of government 
employees were doing nothing than that they were, say, invading the privacy of 
millions, testing the limits of international law and abetting our allies in 
systematically committing war crimes. “I don’t mind if they’re organising 
rendition flights, as long as they’re not just sitting on their arses!”

Since 1986, when the existence of a secret intelligence service was first 
grudgingly acknowledged, all three institutions have been flirting with the 
limelight. As the Soviet Union collapsed, they all shyly took a bow and, at 
some point between the publications ofSpycatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fromthearchive/story/0,12269,1326319,00.html> and 
Stella Rimington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/sep/16/biography.features>’s 
autobiography, possibly when the location manager for a Bond film first rang up 
to inquire about filming outside MI6, they abandoned the shadows for ever.

In some ways, this process was quite fun – almost like a revelation that 
wizards or dragons really existed. “So thereare spies, after all! And they do 
hang out in huge central London buildings, trying to steal secrets from each 
other. How magical!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmi6-spies-recruitment-justification-austerity-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6e6dadfab1e3fd5d61653197c87116a7010ddcf%2F0_0_1884_2665%2F1884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20our%20spies%20keep%20telling%20us%20everything%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmi6-spies-recruitment-justification-austerity-david-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20our%20spies%20keep%20telling%20us%20everything%3F%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fmi6-spies-recruitment-justification-austerity-david-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6e6dadfab1e3fd5d61653197c87116a7010ddcf%2F0_0_1884_2665%2F1884.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
But there’s something rum about this openness. To start with, it’s not 
meaningful openness. We know who the heads of these organisations are – we 
know, for example, that MI6’s current “C” is really calledAlex Younger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/31/mi6-technology-arms-race-terrorists-criminals>
, thus reducing the code name to the same trivial ceremonial level asBlack Rod 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/jun/14/uk.media> and the Stig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/sep/01/the-stig-identity-high-court>
. But we don’t know what they’re actually doing.

The openness about their existence and leadership, but not about the 
activities of their thousands of staff, is rather rubbing the public’s nose in 
the fact that there are things we are forbidden to know, and forbidden to know 
about people whose salaries we pay. In contrast, the previous policy of keeping 
the organisations as well as their activities secret shows a certain delicacy, 
even a fitting shame that such a recourse should be necessary in an ostensibly 
free country.

This shame is understandable in the context of the cold war, when the Soviet 
bloc countries over which the west, with considerable justification, asserted 
its moral superiority, kept so much secret from their own peoples. In the free 
world, secrecy smacked of tyranny. It alarmed people so, ironically, the scale 
of it was best kept under wraps.

MI6 to recruit hundreds more staff in response to digital technology
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/21/mi6-recruit-digital-internet-social-media>
Nowadays, however, our security services want us to be alarmed. They want it 
because it will make us feel we need them, and this is the bigger problem with 
the current openness. The Soviet Union gave spies an indisputable raison 
d’être. Since its fall, they’ve felt the need to justify their existence. 
Obviously, before you can justify your existence, you have to admit it – but 
that was just the first step. The government proudly letting it be known, at a 
time of considerable national austerity, that thousands more security officers 
are to be employed shows how successful that self-justification has been.

The language of it is familiar. We hear of “security threats”, “foiled 
attacks”, of the prime minister “chairing an emergency Cobra meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/29/theresa-may-cobra-meeting-cameron-end-to-calais-crisis>
”. At airports we see policemen with guns, while seemingly random prohibitions 
from our hand luggage are clues from which we attempt to work out the nature of 
the latest maniacal assault on our way of life. Maybe this time it was 
something with liquidsand shoes? A belt shampoo bomb? A mace made out of 
plastic cutlery embedded in aFrederick Forsyth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/01/frederick-forsyth-i-was-an-mi6-agent>
 novel?

I’m not saying this fear of terrorism is unjustified, and I’m not saying it’s 
justified. I’m saying we don’t know, and that it’s unwise to leave unquestioned 
the estimation of the problem provided by the people we’re paying to solve it.

The widely reported terrorist threat, the stories of “near misses” and 
“heightened terror alerts”, and the announcement of more investment to “keep us 
safe” create, from the security services’ point of view, a virtuous circle of 
increasing funding. Modern espionage is about what they’re seen to do, when it 
used to be the opposite. It’s become my sort of job after all.
 