
The announcement of another Uber helicopter service, this time for the 
Sundance film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sundancefilmfestival>, 
signals the beginning of a new, more aggressive campaign to compete with their 
ride-hailing competitor Lyft.

Uber executives have been rattled by the recent $1bn investment in Lyft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/lyft>, a round announced in January and 
led by General Motors.

The Lyft investment caught the attention of more traditional transportation 
companies likeAirbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> which, 
seeing that GM is investing in startups, initiated the partnership with Uber, 
it is understood.

The helicopters will fly between Salt Lake City’s airport and Park City, a 
15-minute journey, for $200 a person during the day and $300 at night.Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> first experimented with 
helicopters in 2013 in New York.

The viability of the service is certainly another nod to Silicon Valley’s 
embrace of inequality <http://www.paulgraham.com/ineq.html>, but it also says 
something about Uber and Airbus.

Lyft’s new valuation came as a shock to Uber, an executive there recently told 
the Guardian. They’d all assumed the fight was basically over. And Airbus 
executives, who don’t typically get covered by tech reporters, seems to be 
wanting a little startup veneer, which many car companies got recentlywith 
announcements at CES 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/07/self-driving-cars-hog-the-road-at-ces>
.

“It’s a pilot project. We’ll see where it goes – but it’s pretty exciting,” 
Airbus CEOTom Enders <http://topics.wsj.com/person/E/Tom-Enders/6405> said 
about the partnershipat a tech conference in Munich 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/airbus-to-join-forces-with-uber-for-on-demand-helicopter-service-ceo-says-1453048668>
 yesterday.

Already, the San Francisco-based ride-hailing behemoth has had to cut prices; 
Lyft quicklyfollowed suit 
<http://recode.net/2016/01/15/to-protect-its-turf-lyft-follows-uber-in-cutting-prices/>
. In Silicon Valley’s funding game, an environment that values market share 
over profit, all that matters is that user numbers keep going up.

This means more press, more Uber for kitten-like moments (a gimmick in which 
the company sends on-demand kittens, often to media offices), more helicopters.

When Uber and Lyft looked more evenly matched last year, Uber began “Operation 
SLOG,” exposed in adocument leak to the Verge 
<http://www.theverge.com/2014/8/26/6067663/this-is-ubers-playbook-for-sabotaging-lyft>
. Covert Uber contractors would pose as civilian Lyft riders only to recruit 
the drivers. The company gave the operatives burner phones and credit cards to 
create fake accounts. To further disrupt their competition, Uber operatives 
also reportedly called and canceled more than 5,000 Lyft rides.

It seemed to work. Uber raised $8.61bn to reach its current astronomical 
$70bn. Silicon Valley insiders had largely written off Lyft. Andthen Lyft 
raised $1bn 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-12-21/uber-rival-lyft-plans-to-raise-up-to-1-billion-in-new-funds>
 in a round led by General Motors. At a valuation between $3.9bn and $4.5bn, 
it’s still small in comparison, but in the startup world brand loyalty is weak, 
and consumers could quite easily switch apps.

The contrast between the two companies – Uber with its smooth black 
aspirational aesthetic and Lyft with its pink mustaches and drivers who insist 
on “fist-bumping” riders – is stark. Even as Uber tries to soften its image with
humanizing profiles <http://www.fastcompany.com/3050250/what-makes-uber-run> of 
its bellicose founder and Lyft moves to a more slender understated pink 
mustache, they represent two very different approaches to a ride-hailing future.
 