
David Oyelowo was born in Tooting Bec. But if you know the name, it's likely 
from the credits of American films –Jack Reacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/99730/jack-reacher> and Lincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149491/lincoln>, Lee Daniels' The 
Paperboy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/149976/paperboy> and Daniels' 
new one,The Butler <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155322/butler>, 
which just topped an Oscar tipsters' chart of the key films of the 2013-14 
awards season. Or, rather, it tied for first place, along with David O 
Russell's latest,American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle>, and 12 Years a 
Slave <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156376/12-years-a-slave>, Steve 
McQueen's take on the true story of a free black man sold into slavery. Lower 
down the list areFruitvale Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155235/fruitvale-station>, Ryan 
Coogler's acclaimed drama about the real-life killing of a young 
African-American man by San Francisco transport police in 2009, and the biopic
Mandela: The Long Walk to Freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156450/mandela>. The trend is not hard 
to identify. But it is hard to unreservedly applaud its implications.

"I think it would be a cataclysmic failure for black film if 2013 was 
remembered as the year of the black Oscar," says Oyelowo. "If this year is 
remembered, it should be as an indictment of the past. Up until now, the 
British film industry has said: 'There isn't an audience for black films. We 
don't have the actors. Black doesn't travel.' I hope 2013 acts as a defiance 
for those false pretences."
 Idris Elba stars as Nelson Mandela in Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom 
But in so far as those pretences have taken hold, they've triggered something 
of a brain drain: Fruitvale Station aside, many of the films listed have heavy 
British involvement, but are set in the United States (or, in Mandela's case, 
South Africa). Mandela stars Londoners Idris Elba and Naomie Harris, and 12 
Years a Slave is directed by Ealing-born Steve McQueen and stars Forest Gate's 
Chiwetel Ejiofor. Both Mandela and Slave premiere at theToronto film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival>, which starts next week. 
Also debuting there are Half of a Yellow Sun, the debut film from the 
Brixton-based Nigerian playwright Biyi Bandele; the period drama Belle, about 
the daughter of a naval officer and a slave in the 1700s, from Streatham-born 
actor turned director Amma Asante; and The Double, Richard Ayoade's follow up 
to Submarine.

"I look for the best films first, and these were the best films I found this 
year," says Toronto's artistic director, Cameron Bailey. "The early 1990s was a 
great time for black cinema, but then there was a really serious dip. Now 
there's a whole generation of new black directors. It's a really rich time for 
black British directors in particular."
 Chiwetel Ejiofor and Thandie Newton in Half of a Yellow Sun. 
But can the British film industry take credit for black Britain's new presence 
in Hollywood? Many are sceptical. For while Britain has nurtured black talent, 
many feel the country has yet to fully embrace black storytelling on screen in 
the same way that was in evidence for decades across the pond.

"When are we going to get films and television about the black British people 
from our past?" asksStephen Bourne <http://www.stephenbourne.co.uk/nt.html>, a 
London-based historian of black cinema. "In this country we don't want to 
acknowledge that black Britain has a heritage.Mary Seacole 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mary_Seacole> is the only black Briton in the 
primary school curriculum. That's a terrible thing for our society."

Glance at the careers of many of our best black actors and directors and a 
pattern emerges: they have learned at home and sought work abroad. Britain has 
become a feeder school for the United States – where there is an industry that 
allows its black stars to tell their own stories in the way they want to.
 Gugu Mbatha-Raw and Sam Reid in Belle. Photograph: film company handout 
Says Oyelowo: "I loved living in the UK, and it's still my home. But it became 
clear I wasn't going to be able to tell the stories I wanted to tell. When I 
went to British film investors with stories of the black experience in a 
historical context, I was told verbatim: 'We're looking for Dickens or Austen. 
Your story is a hard sell.' Britain is not inclusive of how I look or who I am, 
so I looked to America."

This conservatism, he thinks, stems from a nexus of affluent white men in 
control of the industry's finances: "It's a question of supply and demand. The 
black British audience hasn't been served. Britain is a more multicultural 
place with more cross-proliferation than America, but I think there's a 
reluctance in our cinema to accept the real Britain we live in – and that's 
because we still operate within the auspices of a class system motivated by 
nepotism."

The refrain chimes with Zawe Ashton, star of Channel 4's Fresh Meat and Carol 
Morley'sDreams of a Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144079/dreams-of-a-life>, who is about 
to direct her first film, partly, she says, in response to the paucity of roles 
on offer: "I feel I've had to work a hundred times harder than most actresses 
because I have to pick through a minefield every time I'm offered a part," she 
says. "You want to show your range, but the complexity of roles isn't there for 
black actors. We have to make them for ourselves."

This independent mindset is helped by the cheap production and distribution 
technologies now common in the industry: "Being a black film-maker in Britain 
is incredibly difficult, but still possible," says Bandele, who moved to London 
from Nigeria in 1990. "When I started writing in the early 90s, the industry 
was much more inclusive than it is now, and I have absolutely no idea why that 
is. I have to constantly battle to be allowed to write black characters who are 
as noble and flawed as any other human being."

"British people are simply not made aware of how bound up they are with people 
from the so-called elsewhere," says John Akomfrah, director of the forthcoming
The Stuart Hall Project <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2578290/reference>, a 
documentary about the influential Jamaican intellectual's search for his 
identity in postwar England. "The challenge black film-makers face is to get 
through that attitude, because no one else is going to do it for them."

If black storytelling is to gain a permanent foothold in British cinema, then 
the burden of proof lies with the movie-going public. "I think audiences are 
only just beginning to recognise that black stories are universal," says 
Asante. "It's still hard, but it means we're better able to convince film 
investors we're not just telling niche stories with narrow concerns."

In her first interview 
<http://www.deadline.com/2013/07/new-academy-president-cheryl-boone-isaacs-we-are-moving-forward-and-evolving-first-interview/>
 since assuming the position, Cheryl Boone Isaacs – the first black president 
of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences – said: "We need to 
really pump up the diversity of minorities that continue to make movies and 
welcome as many as possible into the Academy." In March, it looks likely 
she will welcome many of Britain's best to her first Oscars. But how many of 
the winners will stand at the podium and give thanks to the British film 
industry?
 