
Those following the New York City mayoral race know there's a Bill de Blasio 
boomlet going on in press circles. De Blasio, the city's public advocate (an 
ombudsman of sorts), has seen favorable coverage and support from theHuffington 
Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/08/11/bill-de-blasio-progressive-mayor_n_3727094.html>
,the Nation <http://www.thenation.com/article/175637/bill-de-blasio-mayor> and 
theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/12/opinion/wrestling-with-dying-hospitals.html?ref=opinion>
. And he has clearly ramped up his campaigning to take advantage of Anthony 
Weiner's further embarrassment.

So, read the papers and blogs, and you'd think De Blasio was on his way to 
earning his spot in a runoff against the vulnerable first-round frontrunner,
Christine Quinn <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/christine-quinn>.

The problem is that the data and history continue to suggest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/29/anthony-weiner-mayor-race-surprises>
 it's former comptroller Bill Thompson who is more likely to make the runoff. 
If you haven't heard of Thompson, it's likely because he lacks thepizzaz of 
others 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/12/opinion/keller-the-anti-weiner.html?pagewanted=all>
. There has already been a black mayor in New York, and Thompson is 
middle-of-the-road in a primary context.

The primary polling

Still, Thompson is the candidate who is currently in second place when looking 
at all the polling data. Per theHuffPollster aggregate 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/2013-new-york-city-mayor-democratic-primary>
, he's at 17% – 3pt ahead of de Blasio and 8pt behind Quinn, who is well behind 
the necessary 40% to avoid a runoff. Thompson, not De Blasio, has gained the 
most ground over the past two months. He's widened the gap between de Blasio 
and himself by 2pt.

The idea of a De Blasio boomlet has come from two individual 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/polls/quinnipiac-17748> polls 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/polls/nbc-new-york-wsj-marist-17731>
. I'd trust the aggregate. The reason is because the sample sizes on 
individuals polls can be quite small. Take the most recent Marist survey, for 
example. The poll had only 320 likely voters, which carries a theoretical 
margin of error of 5.5pt. Given the difficulties of polling New Yorkers, the 
true margin of error is likely closer to 6.5pt. Thus, De Blasio's 4pt jump from 
Marist's prior poll is not statistically significant.

That's why it wasn't surprising to see De Blasio's seeming "momentum" come 
crashing back to earth by placing 5pt behind Thompson among definite primary 
voters in the most recentNew York Times/Siena survey 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/09/nyregion/quinn-leads-democratic-candidates-for-mayor-poll-finds.html?_r=0>
. An aggregate that looks at all the data won't be fooled by one or two 
individual polls.

Democratic coalition-building

It's no accident that in every single Democratic primary since 1989, a 
minority candidate has placed no lower than second. There's a reason why the 
last time a white non-Jewish male won a Democratic mayoral primary was in 1969, 
when current runoff rules were not in effect. Ethnic politics in New York has 
always been the name of the game inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City.

Somewhere near 30% of the primary electorate will be African Americans. White 
males will comprise only a little more than 15% of the vote. White males who 
aren't Jewish will number even fewer. Thompson has a natural ethnic voter base 
that De Blasio cannot match.

De Blasio has been doing best among white liberals, unsurprisingly. His two 
best percentages in the recent Marist poll were among whites and Manhattanites, 
despite his being from Brooklyn. The issue is that there are just not enough of 
these voters. White liberals will make up less than 20% of the electorate, and 
Quinn is making a play for them, too. She's been doing best among Manhattanites 
at 32%, and whites at 31%, in the most recent Marist survey.

There's some notion that De Blasio could eat into Thompson's black base – 
after all, De Blasio is married to a black woman. De Blasio'sfirst big TV 
advertisement <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GgvXniTz7D8> starred his biracial 
son, Dante.

So, De Blasio is the most liberal viable candidate. I'm wary. 

Take a look at the 2009 public advocate map 
<http://nyc.precinctsreporting.com/#2009P:PA_D;;A;AP;T;;T>. De Blasio won a few 
black neighborhoods around his Park Slope home, against his Manhattan-based 
main opponent, Mark Green, who is not black. He also lost Bed-Stuy and 
Brownsville in Brooklyn. Outside of Brooklyn, De Blasio lost every single black 
neighborhood. He lost in Harlem in Manhattan, Jamaica in Queens, and Wakefield 
in the Bronx.

De Blasio's best numbers were in the white areas around Park Slope and in 
Manhattan. This result matches the polling from this year, as to where De 
Blasio's strongholds are.

Without looking at the polling, you'd think De Blasio would do worse among 
blacks this time around. Thompson has thevast majority of black endorsements 
<http://www.wnyc.org/articles/wnyc-news/2013/jun/03/thompson-scores-endorsements-historic-harlem-powerbrokers/>
 and, being from Brooklyn, he can eat into De Blasio's showing there.

And – wouldn't you know it? – the polling backs this up. De Blasio has placed 
no better than fourth among blacks inany recent New York City poll 
<http://elections.huffingtonpost.com/pollster/2013-new-york-city-mayor-democratic-primary>
. There is little sign at all that he has any "momentum" in this community.

Thompson, meanwhile, won 76% of blacks when he lost to Mayor Bloomberg in 2009 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2009/11/04/nyregion/1104-ny-exit-poll.html> 
– 21pt higher than his showing among any other racial group. He won 80-90% in
black neighborhoods <http://nyc.precinctsreporting.com/#2009P:M_D;;A;AP;T;;T>, 
as he took 71% of the vote against a nominal opponent in the 2009 primary. This 
comports with Thompson leading (or in a statistical tie) among black voters in 
every single post-Weinergate poll.

Polling biases

At this point, Thompson hasn't pulled away into a clear second because he's 
only taking about 25% and 35% of the black vote in recent surveys, while 
running in the mid-teens among whites. I'm willing to bet that he'll end up 
doing better among black voters. Why?

Take a look at this table from prior primaries since 1989. 

The margin between polls at this point (a month before the primary) and the 
final poll shows that the candidate who ends up in second has always closed the 
gap between the frontrunner and himself. Undecideds tend to break toward the 
non-frontrunner in New York City primaries.

The minimum change was 7pt in 1989 when incumbent Ed Koch closed a 14pt 
deficit at this point to 7pt in the final New York Daily News poll. Al Sharpton 
in 1997 and Freddy Ferrer in 2001 each took 18pt off the leading candidate's 
margin. If such a pattern continues, the final data may show Quinn and Thompson 
in a first-round dead heat.

The other bias is that the final primary polls have consistently undervalued 
the minority candidate. The leading minority candidate has closed when losing, 
or widened when leading, the margin on the closest candidate.

You get an idea why when looking at the final polls 
<http://www.quinnipiac.edu/institutes-and-centers/polling-institute/new-york-city/release-detail?ReleaseID=1392>
 from the 2009 general. They only had Thompson taking the black vote by about 
40pt – but he ended up taking it by a 53pt margin.

This seems to be a fairly consistent finding. Minority candidates take a 
higher percentage of the minority vote than pre-election polling indicates.

Thompson has both biases working in his favor. My guess is most of Thompson's 
rising black vote will come from those who had supported the fadingAnthony 
Weiner <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner>.

Conclusion

That's why I'll take Bill Thompson to advance in the runoff. He has the 
polling, demographics, and history on his side. Now, De Blasio is close to 
Thompson and historical precedent is made to be broken, but the evidence 
suggests that Thompson is more likely to make it.

I should also add that with about 25% of the primary electorate undecided, and 
De Blasio only 11pt behind Christine Quinn, it's conceivable that De Blasio 
couldalso make it over Quinn, who is only polling in the mid-20s. Polling from 
past primaries suggests that frontrunners stay at about the same level in 
polling from August to September.

At this point, however, a Quinn-Thompson runoff is the most likely outcome.
 