
It was the dog, or fox, that didn’t bark. During her leadership campaign, Tory 
MP Andrea Leadsom vowed to hold a vote to bring back foxhunting and declared 
there was a “need toexterminate vermin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/andrea-leadsom-repeal-fox-hunting-ban-climate-change>
, which foxes are”. At her first party conference as environment secretary, 
Leadsom might have been expected to throw some red meat to the Tory faithful 
and renew David Cameron’s promise of a free vote on repealing the Hunting Act. 
Instead, she prattled on about catching rural Pokémon andselling bottled air 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2016/10/3-most-baffling-moments-andrea-leadsoms-speech>
.

After Leadsom’s appointment, John Bryant <http://www.jbryant.co.uk/>, an 
expert in non-lethal fox deterrence, contacted Defra to ask if its official 
policy on foxes (they are not a pest) had changed. The department replied: “At 
a national level, we continue to have no reason to believe that foxes are 
causing significant losses to the agriculture industry.”

Foxhunting: an unspeakable way to repeal a very good law | Barbara Ellen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/12/foxhunting-unspeakable-way-to-repeal-good-law>
It doesn’t sound like Leadsom has much support within her department. More 
striking is the waning enthusiasm for hunting in her party.

The burgeoning (anti-hunting) Blue Fox 
<http://www.conservativesagainstfoxhunting.com/> group claims the support of 
more than 55 Conservative MPs. More significantly, perhaps, anIpsos Mori poll 
<http://www.league.org.uk/news-and-opinion/press-releases/2016/sept/poll-shows-majority-of-public-view-anti-hunt-politicians-more-favourably>
 last month for theLeague Against Cruel Sports <http://www.league.org.uk/> 
found that 73% of Tory voters back the hunting ban. Of the general public, 84% 
oppose foxhunting, with even more objecting to hunting deer (88%) and hares 
(91%). It’s not country v city, either: 82% of rural voters oppose hunting.

Conservative MPs with slender majorities ignore these figures at their peril. 
Blue-blooded foxhunters must grasp one inescapable fact: it is never coming 
back. People want higher standards of animal welfare.

Public disquiet about driven grouse shooting 
<http://markavery.info/category/e-petition-to-ban-driven-grouse-shooting/> is 
growing. While moves to outlawlead shot 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/shooting-government-set-to-ignore-calls-to-ban-lead-shot-over-health-fears-a6886616.html>
 andsnares <http://www.league.org.uk/our-campaigns/snares> have been blocked so 
far, these will be banned. Wise Tories shift with the times. Leadsom’s silence 
on foxes is her smartest move so far.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrea-leadsom-quiet-foxhunting-animal-welfare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b48c5c220e71a389c74ab77fe1774de413818a7%2F55_311_1080_648%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20has%20Andrea%20Leadsom%20gone%20so%20quiet%20on%20foxhunting%3F%20%7C%20Patrick%20Barkham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrea-leadsom-quiet-foxhunting-animal-welfare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20has%20Andrea%20Leadsom%20gone%20so%20quiet%20on%20foxhunting%3F%20%7C%20Patrick%20Barkham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fandrea-leadsom-quiet-foxhunting-animal-welfare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b48c5c220e71a389c74ab77fe1774de413818a7%2F55_311_1080_648%2F1080.jpg>
 Johnny Lynch, aka the Pictish Trail, ‘makes ends meet by running a record 
label and a music festival’. Photograph: Publicity image from music company 
The real gig economy

I paid £8 on Saturday to see the sublime Pictish Trail 
<http://pictishtrail.co.uk/> play at Norwich Arts Centre, arrived unfashionably 
early and discovered there were four other acts on the bill. Two solo artists,
Ginny Dix <https://soundcloud.com/ginny_dix> and Rory Hill 
<https://soundcloud.com/rory_hill>, sang beautiful original songs and the other 
support acts, including the extremely strangeMonoganon 
<http://lostmap.com/monoganon/>, were excellent.

Gigonomics refers to an economy where people have “gigs” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/26/will-we-get-by-gig-economy>
 rather than real jobs, but real gigonomics is even harsher. The solo artists 
were grateful for £20 and three free cans. Pictish Trail were sleeping in a 
Travelodge that night and their creative force, Johnny Lynch, makes ends meet 
by running a record label and amusic festival 
<http://lostmap.com/news/2016/1/27/aaaaa-wooooooooh-howlin-fling-returns>.

I’m in awe of their talent and saddened it isn’t better rewarded. When I’m 
promoting a book, literary festivals often charge an embarrassing amount (I try 
my hardest to inform and entertain, but £8 for me or five bands? I know which 
I’d choose). Authors who complain that some literary festivalsdon’t pay them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/28/can-literary-festivals-pay-their-way>
 should probably get out more.

The hate we’re in



The writer Anthony Horowitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/anthony-horowitz> gave good value for money 
at the Cheltenham Literature festival 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/literature/> this weekend. He claims the 
Midsomer Murder scripts he once wrote are truer to life than we imagine. 
“Sherlock Holmes says … that nowhere is more evil than an English village, and 
I live in Norfolk so I should know,” he said. “English villages are special 
places where hatred and mistrust and suspicion and anger and bitterness have a 
natural place to grow.”

Horowitz argues that anger is swept aside by the pace of city life. As a 
fellow Norfolk village-dweller, I think he’s struck on something with marketing 
potential. “Norfolk – fresh air to breathe, time to hate” has a nice ring to it.
 