
Last summer, the promise of an Amy Schumer-penned film about sex and dating 
gave romantic comedy fans a reason to get excited. The genre, which has seen 
its sparkle considerably dulled in recent years, was about to receive an 
injection of reality from a comedian whose TV sketch show had revelled in 
tearing down tired female stereotypes.

How To Be Single review – Rebel Wilson underused in diverting singleton comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/how-to-be-single-review-rebel-wilson-dakota-johnson>
For a while, Trainwreck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/13/trainwreck-review-judd-apatow-funny-but-unthreatening-alt-romcom>
 seemed to follow suit from Schumer’s television work, by sticking a drunken 
finger up to convention and showing a female character whose choice of boozy 
one-night stands over anything resembling conventional romance stood out as a 
refreshing change. For too long, women have been the rule-following stiffs in 
romcoms, desperate for love and affirmation, while men have had most of the 
fun. But as Schumer’s script progressed, the influence of director Judd Apatow 
soon started to dominate.

Apatow is one of the most deceptively conservative directors in Hollywood, and 
even in the female-fronted hitBridesmaids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/23/bridesmaids-review>, which he 
produced, the film’s theme of unsentimental female friendship saw a forgettable 
romantic subplot shoehorned in.

Schumer’s fierce independence and proud resistance of societal pressure to 
base her happiness on the man she’s with soon dissipated and she found herself 
changing and conforming forBill Hader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/13/bill-hader-im-a-fraud-i-really-shouldnt-be-here-trainwreck-amy-schumer>
’s strangely flawless, and rather boring, love interest. Her sexual freedom 
became something to be ashamed of and her hatred of sports was soon abandoned 
for a regressive finale that saw her scantily clad, literally cheerleading for 
a man to want her.

While ensemble comedy How to Be Single sounds on paper like hopelessly generic 
dross (New York! Ladies! Cocktails!), it manages to make a few rather 
fascinating decisions, at least within the framework of a very traditional 
genre. Based on a chick-lit book but entirely remodelled to fit the format of 
what feels like an extended pilot of a Sex and the City reboot, it focuses on 
four women and their differing views of singledom.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fhow-to-be-single-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F18%2F1455810405303%2FKP_1801373_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20be%20Single%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fhow-to-be-single-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20be%20Single%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F18%2Fhow-to-be-single-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F18%2F1455810405303%2FKP_1801373_crop_640x480.jpg>
Now, just to be clear, we’re not talking about a transcendent game-changer 
here that deals with gritty realism. There are still frustrating cliches at 
play (work is an infrequent hobby yet expensive apartments are easily obtained) 
and a few too many moments of cloying sentimentality, but the film gets a 
surprising number of things right. The lead character Alice, played with 
impressive depth by Dakota Johnson, is sick of aligning herself with a man 
(“Why do we always tell our stories through relationships?” her voiceover 
asks). She’s forever at risk of falling into “dicksand”, a phrase created by 
her new friend Robin, a riotousRebel Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/rebel-wilson-ive-been-practising-my-transgender-face-so-i-can-win-oscars>
.

Stunted adolescents and bros4eva – the world according to Judd Apatow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/06/stunted-adolescents-and-bros4eva-world-acording-to-judd-apatow>
It refers to a risky state of being that results in a gradual loss of self, as 
a woman starts to forget who she is and instead becomes “a girlfriend” or “a 
wife” – part of a co-dependent unit without her own independence or fully 
formed set of identifiers to fall back on. (It must be noted that men are also 
susceptible to this.) At the start of the film, she breaks up with a college 
sweetheart in an attempt to try being single in the big city and receives an 
education on how to enjoy casual sex (without being punished!) and to rely on 
herself to deal with situations without a man’s help. Having found herself in a 
serious relationship at a young age, Alice has foregone the chance to find out 
what she wants, both emotionally and sexually, and through a series of 
educational flings, she starts to develop.

Solitude is also key, and the film examines the process that one must go 
through when attempting to deprogramme a set of behaviours that exist out of a 
life shared with someone else.


OK, so this is intercut with scenes of her doing shots with Rebel Wilson and a 
step-by-step process on dealing with a hangover at work, but there’s something 
slightly progressive about all of this: a woman enjoying sex and choosing to be 
alone without being branded a slut or an emotionally stunted freak.

Along the way to her ultimate realisation, she has a brief relationship with 
an African American father, played by Damon Wayans Jr, and his race is never 
mentioned once, a departure from Schumer’smisjudged jokes 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/07/20/schumers_unfortunate_trainwreck_lesson_amys_casual_racism_isnt_one_of_her_bad_habits_to_overcome/>
 in Trainwreck. This might sound like a minor note, but interracial romance on 
the big screen is still surprisingly taboo, especially within romantic 
comedies. If it does happen, it’s an issue or, more likely,the issue. 

Looking for casual sex? Head for the cinema
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/17/looking-for-casual-sex-head-for-the-cinema>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Ftrainwreck-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439469803038%2FKP_386538_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trainwreck%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Ftrainwreck-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trainwreck%20-%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Ftrainwreck-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439469803038%2FKP_386538_crop_640x480.jpg>
There’s also a refreshing absence of weight jokes directed at Robin, despite 
the fact that Rebel Wilson’s on-screen presence has been somewhat reliant on 
this thus far, including her very character name, Fat Amy, in thePitch Perfect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/20/pitch-perfect-review> films. 
What’s interesting about her character is how proudly single she remains. 
Hollywood has taught us to see women who aren’t in relationships as damaged 
Miss Havisham types to be pitied and eventually eaten by their cats. It’s this 
staid stereotype that has one waiting for Robin’s tearful revelation as to why 
she is alone, possibly involving a man’s betrayal, but it never comes. In fact, 
her secret is that she’s actually incredibly rich and is even happier than she 
appears.

The film’s climactic, “running through the city to tell someone how you feel” 
moment is between two female characters, based around the importance of 
friendship, still sidelined so often for romance on screen. Christ, even Julia 
Roberts ended up with Javier Bardem at the end of her transatlantic soul-search 
inEat Pray Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/23/eat-pray-love-review>.

At one point in the film, Leslie Mann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/16/leslie-mann-this-40-interview-apatow>
’s character comments: “All those Sex and the City girls did was look for 
boyfriends.” In How to Be Single, the four women are hardly spending their days 
doing tapestries and embracing celibacy, but by the time the finale arrives, 
and some of the main characters remain single through choice and not sad 
circumstance, an important realisation has been made. Being alone, even if 
temporarily, isn’t a cry for help, it’s a decision, and one that can help a 
woman, or a man, figure out what they really want and need. Johnson’s Alice 
realises that dependence on someone else just to avoid spooning a pillow isn’t 
worth risking her own happiness. How to Be Single isn’t taking a dramatic left 
turn, but it’s making steady progress in the right direction.

 * This article was amended on Friday 19 February 2016. We mistakenly put Miss 
Haversham rather than Miss Havisham. This has been corrected.  