
Composure and dignity, eloquence and grace are words that few could deny the 
families of two African Americans shot dead by police during a torrid week in 
the United States.

Do black people have second amendment rights? | Zach Stafford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/07/black-people-second-amendment-rights-philando-castile-alton-sterling-police-shootings>
On Tuesday, Alton Sterling, a father of five, was killed in Baton Rouge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/alton-sterling-philando-castile-black-gun-owners>
, Louisiana, after being approached by the police for selling CDs outside a 
convenience store. On Wednesday, Philando Castile waskilled outside Minneapolis 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/philando-castile-shooting-police-union-governor-racism>
after being pulled over for a broken light. And on Thursday in Dallas, at a 
peaceful protest over the killings,a sniper took the lives of five police 
officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/dallas-police-shooting-gunman-kill-white-officers>
.

As a country again stared deep into its soul, Sterling and Castile’s relatives 
were among the most prominent, searing voices. “I, for one, will not rest or 
not allow him to be swept in the dirt,” said Quinyetta McMillon, 31, the mother 
of Sterling’s 15-year-old son, Cameron, who sobbed as she addressed a press 
conference.

A video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-baton-rouge-police-video>
 appeared to show two officers approaching Sterling, 37, with one tackling him 
over the hood of a car, then both apparently restraining him on the pavement. 
“As this video has been shared across the world,” McMillon said, “you will see 
with your own eyes how he was handled unjustly and killed without regard for 
the lives that he helped raise.

“As a mother, I have now been forced to raise a son who is going to remember 
what happened to his father that I can’t take away from him. He is at an age of 
understanding. I hurt more for him and his loss.”

Castile, a 32-year-old cafe supervisor at a Montessori school, had an equally 
articulate champion in his girlfriend Diamond Reynolds, wholivestreamed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/facebook-live-video-appears-to-show-black-man-shot-police-minnesota-philando-castile>
 the aftermath of his shooting to a worldwide audience. When asked about 
Thursday’s massacre of police, she replied: “This thing that has happened in 
Dallas, it was not because of something that transpired in Minnesota today.

“This is bigger than Philando,” she said, adding the names of other black men 
and women who have died in police custody. “This is bigger than all of us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Ffamily-philando-castile-alton-sterling-police-victims-girlfriend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F456f46b25a788313bdaf82d65e73be88be340153%2F0_139_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20we%20can't%20stop%20listening%20to%20the%20families%20of%20police%20shooting%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Ffamily-philando-castile-alton-sterling-police-victims-girlfriend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20we%20can%27t%20stop%20listening%20to%20the%20families%20of%20police%20shooting%20victims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Ffamily-philando-castile-alton-sterling-police-victims-girlfriend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F456f46b25a788313bdaf82d65e73be88be340153%2F0_139_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Valerie Castile, center, is kissed by her son’s girlfriend, Diamond Reynolds, 
on Thursday as they march in Minnesota. Photograph: Jeff Wheeler/AP 
Castile’s mother, Valerie, showing remarkable poise in a CNN interview, said 
starkly: “I think he was just black in the wrong place.”

The authenticity of these voices rang clear and true through the noise of 
America’s 24-hour news cycle, rightwing radio shock jocks, lurid commentary on 
social media and the interventions ofHillary Clinton, Donald Trump and other 
politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/dallas-shootings-us-elections-trump-clinton>
. It illustrated how the families of the victims of police shootings have 
emerged as key figures in the national effort to comprehend events.

'This is bigger than Philando': family waits to speak to investigators about 
shooting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/remembering-philando-castile-everything-mr-phil-did-was-for-the-kids>
Among those watching the week’s tragedies unfold was Sandy Phillips 
<https://twitter.com/MamaRedfield?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, whose daughter, Jessica, was among 12 people killed when a gunman opened fire 
in a crowded cinema in Aurora, Colorado, in 2012. “These people are in such 
shock that it pains me to see them interviewed so early. But I know it’s 
exactly what America needs to see and what America needs to hear,” she said on 
Friday. “People say they’re dancing on the graves of the dead but it’s the NRA 
[National Rifle Association] that’s dancing on the graves of the dead.”

Phillips and other affected parents have taken an increasingly significant 
role in the broader campaign against gun violence, seeking to prevent deaths at 
the hands of police, criminals, terrorists or mentally disturbed individuals. 
They lobby politicians, campaign on social media, run support groups and give 
speeches at candlelight vigils, Capitol Hill and the White House.

But though they speak with the unimpeachable authority of experience, they are 
not necessarily heeded by the influential gun lobby. Phillips, who channelled 
her grief into Jessi’s Message, an advocacy group for victims and survivors, 
said: “To see people who have lost loved ones – this is not OK, this is not my 
America any more. The NRA still try to demonise them and make them unimportant, 
but these men and women are a force. They won’t give up.”

Several African American women who lost children have appeared alongside 
Clintonduring her presidential election campaign 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/14/us/politics/hillary-clinton-mothers.html?_r=0>
, often introduced as “a group of mothers who belong to a club no one ever 
wants to join”. They have included Geneva Reed-Veal, the mother ofSandra Bland, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/18/sandra-bland-wrongful-death-lawsuit-lawyers-clash>
 who died in police custody in Texas last year, and Sybrina Fulton, the mother 
of Trayvon Martin, shot dead bya self-designated neighbourhood watchman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/14/trayvon-martin-george-zimmerman-trial>
 in Florida.

When Barack Obama unveiled new executive actions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/05/obama-gun-control-executive-action-background-checks-licenses-gun-shows-mental-health-funding>
 on gun control in January, he was introduced by Mark Barden, whose 
seven-year-old son Daniel was murdered during the 2012 shooting at Sandy Hook 
elementary school in Newtown, Connecticut. Barden, who had been a professional 
musician, chose to make it his life’s work to save other families from the same 
pain.

Dallas shooting: Obama to visit area as fresh protests deepen America's divides
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/09/obama-visit-dallas-shootings-fresh-protests-police-violence>
“I found I had no choice,” explained Barden, a managing director of Sandy Hook 
Promise <http://www.sandyhookpromise.org/>, a gun violence prevention 
organisation. “I had been handed this mission and I made a conscious decision 
to throw myself into it 100%.”

Po Murray, chair of another organisation, the Newtown Action Alliance 
<http://newtownaction.org/>, agreed: “We’re seeing more and more families 
jumping into the gun violence prevention arena because they don’t want to see 
another family go through what they went through. We love them: they are true 
heroes of the fight. As the number of gun violence victims keeps growing, there 
is no way the NRA can win.”

In the case of Castile, his girlfriend Diamond Reynolds was not only eulogist 
but journalist. She used her phone to post extraordinary footage to Facebook 
Live that appeared to show the moments after police shot her boyfriend, who can 
be seen slumped in the car, his shirt soaked in blood. She can be heard telling 
an officer: “You shot four bullets into him, sir. He was just getting his 
license and registration, sir.” While this took remarkable presence of mind, 
Reynolds’ shock and fear are also palpable.

Phillips, of Jessi’s Message, compared Reynolds with the mother of Emmett 
Till, a 14-year-old African American murdered after whistling at a white woman 
in 1955, who insisted that her son be displayed in a glass-topped casket so the 
world could see his beaten body. “Philando Castile’s girlfriend is so poised 
and collected to have committed to live video,” she said. “She can’t have 
realised how badly he was shot.

“This appears to be a shooting that didn’t have to happen. If there had been a 
video of the Aurora theater or Newton school shootings, this would have been 
stopped. We’ve now had several where it’s up close and personal. This is how we 
are getting our news: right through our phones, immediate and tragic. God 
willing, it will change the way we react to gun violence in this country.”
 