
Given their torturous progress en route to the finishing line Wigan could have 
been forgiven for wishing the season had finished in March, when theirs had 
effectively ended. While the subsequent two months have provided little cheer, 
though, yesterday gave something close to the ideal conclusion. As Wigan 
overcame Portsmouth, and overhauled Stoke to claim 11th place, their goalscorer 
Hugo Rodallega furthered the impression he is poised to make a considerable 
impact next term, whileAntonio Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-valencia> provided a 
scintillating valedictory display.

"He showed why we'll struggle to hold on to him [Valencia]," said Steve Bruce. 
"He was magnificent and he deserves to play at the highest level. How the hell 
do you replace him?" It was a pertinent question: Jermaine Pennant, a potential 
successor, suffered in comparison with the electric Ecuadorean. Despite the 
end-of-season slump Bruce reflected with some satisfaction. "For a club like 
ours it's terrific we can finish 11th while some massive clubs were relegated," 
the manager said.

Portsmouth were long candidates for demotion themselves. The caretaker manager 
Paul Hart, whose own future will be resolved at a board meeting this week, 
downplayed his contribution to preserving theirPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> status. "If you look at my 
CV, there are not many achievements," he insisted. Self-deprecation may yet 
earn him the position on a permanent basis.

With or without him, a summer of upheaval beckons, but this was a farewell 
best forgotten for some valiant servants. In particular it may have marked an 
inglorious ending for Sol Campbell, PortsÂ­mouth's most successful captain for 
half a century. His was an undignified send-off, the defender failing to cut 
off the cross that led to the goal and slashing wildly like a batsman playing 
down the wrong line. It meant Rodallega was afforded the luxury of a touch 
before tapping in Charles N'Zogbia's cross.

If a defensive mishap brought the breakthrough, Wigan's invention and energy 
could have yielded more goals. "You could see our achilles heel," said Bruce. 
"We could have won two games." Rodallega could have had a hat-trick while Asmir 
Begovic thwarted Mario Melchiot, who had combined with the Colombian.

N'Zogbia and Valencia provided pace on either flank and Wigan benefited from 
defensive solidity. Besides revelling in Newcastle's misfortunes their 
supporters offered an appreciation of Titus Bramble's excellence over thepast 
nine months. The chants of "Bramble for England" were only aired mockingly 
before this season, but he has been awarded the club's player of the year award.

His career has been transformed by Bruce, while Valencia has been assisted on 
his rapid rise. Asked when the Ecuadorean may exit, he referred to Real 
Madrid's forthcoming choice of president: "When is the election on?"

Man of the match Antonio Valencia (Wigan)

Valencia is likely to be sold to a big club in the summer, and here's why: he 
doesn't mess about, a proper old-fashioned winger who hugs the touchline, 
spending most of his day in the opposition half.
 