
Willow Smith has explained that she quit the remake of iconic screen musical 
Annie <https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie> thanks to her "intuition".

"To be honest, something inside me was just, like, 'Don't'," she told Teen 
Vogue <http://www.teenvogue.com/entertainment/2014-07/willow-smith>. "I'm very 
connected with my intuition." The film was announced, with Smith attached, in 
early 2011, but her part was eventually given to Quvenzhané Wallis, the 
10-year-old actor who became the youngest ever Best Actress Oscar nominee for 
her performance in Beasts of the Southern Wild, aged eight.

The film, about an orphan who is taken under the wing of a wealthy 
industrialist in a quest to find her parents – thus providing copious 
opportunity for emotive singing and dancing – was first a stage musical and 
then a successful movie in 1982. The remake co-stars Jamie Foxx and Cameron 
Diaz; its producers include Willow's parents, Will and Jada Pinkett Smith, as 
well as Jay-Z, who once famously sampled the musical's central Hard Knock Life 
number. It is released on Boxing Day.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnasLuiP-1E0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnasLuiP-1E0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnasLuiP-1E0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here for video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nasLuiP-1E0&feature=kp>

While her brother, Jaden, has pursued Hollywood like their parents, Willow has 
instead focused on musical extra-curricular activities (as well as a 
precociously hip wardrobe). After her hit single Whip My Hair in 2010, she's 
worked on much moodier tracks like piano balladDrowning 
<http://youtu.be/86ele2ePE2w> and atmospheric R&B jam 5 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=795z9Z8hhQ0> (featuring a rap from Jaden), and 
is currently writing a new album. "I have enough songs to make an album," she 
said, "but most of the songs I don't like ... [the album is] going to be 
something outlandish, something that nobody can imagine, something that comes 
from me and only me. Something we need right now."

Elsewhere in the interview, released in full on 15 July, she offers up the 
brilliantly raw and earnest opinions that only a 13-year-old can have. Of world 
peace, she says: "We all need to learn how to harmoniously live on this planet 
without frying it like those systematic French fries the government feeds us," 
while regarding homework she states: "Teacher: Why don't you have your 
homework? Me: Too busy learning about life."
 