
As the new year dawns, there is some final bad news from 2016. Figures 
collected by Action on Armed Violence (AOAV <https://aoav.org.uk/>) and due to 
be published shortly show that 2016 was a particularly grim year for suicide 
bombings.


Between January and November this year we noted 236 suicide attacks globally, 
as reported in reputable English-language media. Such terror strikes resulted 
in 11,621 deaths and injuries, a 19% increase on the same period the year 
before, and 78% (9,020) of the total harmed have been civilians.

Suicide attacks are becoming more expertly targeted and, in turn, deadlier

Suicide bombs have, it seems, shifted from being an exceptional weapon of war 
– used rarely – to one almost normalised. This year, 21 countries saw at least 
one suicide attack.

Will 2017 offer some respite from suicide attacks? Sadly, it is not likely. If 
there is a dark prediction to be made, it is that more harm will come from 
suicide bombs than ever before.

It is important to note that the annual number of suicide bombings globally, 
over the past six years (the time that AOAV has been running its global monitor 
of explosive violence), has not dramatically fluctuated. The year with the 
highest number of suicide attacks – 2013 – saw 270 strikes. The year with the 
lowest – 2011 – saw 205. Not that major a difference.

What concerns, though, is that suicide attacks are becoming more expertly 
targeted and, in turn, deadlier. By the end of November 2016, the average 
number of civilian casualties per attack this year stands at 38. This compares 
to 24 in 2014.

Furthermore, the fact that the armed group Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> is losing territory indicates a 
possible future rise in suicide attacks. Such attacks have already taken place 
from Paris to Jakarta, and are a result of tactical decisions made by Isis 
leaders, as well as a desire among Isis supporters to “avenge” the caliphate. 
In 2016, Isis claimed more than 1,000 “martyrdom” operations. Such figures are 
difficult to verify, but the group has certainly increased its suicide 
operations and Isis boasts a long list of willing martyrs.

Put simply, when Isis is pushed into a corner, zealots among their ranks turn 
to the suicide belt or car.

This year, Syria saw a sharp increase in suicide strikes, with a 630% rise in 
deaths and injuries to November, compared to the same period last year. In 
addition, inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> both Isis and 
groups such as Jabhat Fateh al-Sham have recently shifted from predominantly 
targeting armed actors to civilians. It is likely that areas filled with people 
supportive of the Syrian regime will continue to be attacked in 2017.

Iraq may also see a bleak 2017. Up to November 2016, civilian casualties from 
suicide attacks increased by 118% compared to 2015. The country is still the 
home base for Isis, and also where the group has traditionally committed its 
most lethal suicide attacks, such as the bombing ofKhan Bani Saad in July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/17/iraq-car-bomb-blast-kills-at-least-80>
 (at least 260 killed and injured), and theKarrada, Baghdad bombing in July 2016
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/baghdad-bombings-dozens-killed> 
(at least 566 killed and injured).

The arrival of Isis in Afghanistan may also mean more suicide bombings in 
urban centres there, partly as a result of rivalry with the Taliban. While 
Afghanistan has, so far, been relatively spared from sectarian violence, Isis 
suicide attacks there appear increasingly to be alongsectarian lines 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-38048604>. If this trend continues, it 
does not bode well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fwill-2017-see-more-suicide-bombings-sadly-probably-yes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff50a8f86cefdc293161e41b7f3b039df417a5d11%2F0_256_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%202017%20see%20more%20suicide%20bombings%3F%20%20Sadly%2C%20probably%20yes%20%7C%20Iain%20Overton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fwill-2017-see-more-suicide-bombings-sadly-probably-yes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%202017%20see%20more%20suicide%20bombings%3F%20%20Sadly%2C%20probably%20yes%20%7C%20Iain%20Overton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fwill-2017-see-more-suicide-bombings-sadly-probably-yes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff50a8f86cefdc293161e41b7f3b039df417a5d11%2F0_256_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The grandmother of soldier who died in a suicide car bomb attack in Turkey in 
2016. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty Images 
Turkey has already seen several high profile suicide bombings by both Isis and 
Kurdish separatists, both of which the country is now fighting in Syria. AOAV’s 
figures show thatTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> has seen a 
15% increase this year in deaths and injuries caused by suicide bombings, 
compared to the same period in 2015 and it is likely this trend will continue.

Pakistan’s future is also uncertain. Despite successes in combatting terrorist 
groups in the country in recent years, there was a 114% increase in civilian 
casualties of suicide bombings in 2016, compared to the same period in the year 
before. It is likely that, as certain groups in Pakistan continue to be pushed 
back, more retaliatory suicide attacks may occur. Suicide bombings by the
Tehrik-i-Taliban <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tehrik-i-Taliban_Pakistan> 
offshoot,Jamaat-ul-Ahrar <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jamaat-ul-Ahrar>, were 
responsible for 76% of all the civilian deaths and injuries caused by suicide 
attacks in Pakistan in 2016.

Finally, there is the ever-present threat of suicide attacks in western 
Europe. Isis will likely carry out new terror attacks across Europe, including 
suicide bombings,according to the EU-wide law enforcement agency Europol 
<https://www.europol.europa.eu/newsroom/news/islamic-state-changing-terror-tactics-to-maintain-threat-in-europe>
. Intelligence services estimate that dozens of jihadis under Isis’ direction 
are already in Europe alongside other lone wolf terrorists who have no direct 
contact with the group. While this might be scare tactics designed to bolster 
national security funding, if the recent past is anything to go by, suicide 
bombings will likely remain part of Europe’s future.

Yet, despite these dire predictions, there is a frustrating lack of focused, 
constructive energy to address the rising use of suicide bombings.

Some toxic commentators say we need to hit Isis harder from the air and that “
we’ll have to kill civilians 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/1828900/richard-kemp-victory-against-isis-is-like-ww2-well-have-to-kill-civilians/>
” in doing so. But the use of aerial-dropped bombs to target insurgents has 
been shown to act as a strong recruitment driver for terrorist groups. As AOAV
regularly records 
<https://aoav.org.uk/2016/5-years-aoav-explosive-violence-data-91-killed-injured-populated-areas-civilians/>
, almost 90% of those killed or injured in airstrikes in populated areas are 
civilians – a grossly disproportionate figure – and their surviving relatives 
are all too often radicalised following the explosive blast.

We must commemorate the victims of terrorism with love and hope
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/01/we-must-commemorate-the-victims-of-terrorism-with-love-and-hope>
Far more, instead, needs to be done understanding how to prevent would-be 
bombers getting their hands on pre-cursor materials; Islamic scholars and 
imams, as well as politicians and diplomats, need to be more vocal in their 
condemnation of the indiscriminate use of explosive weapons against civilians; 
and funding needs to be found to ensure that civil society, businesses, trade 
officials, police units, UN agencies, militaries and any other key component of 
the counter-IED network come together to respond imaginatively and creatively 
to this terrible weapon.

Failing to do so will result in 2017 being as terrible a year as 2016.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 