
Amir Khan has been pounding on doors for a while. He spent years chasing the 
best boxer in the world,Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/floyd-mayweather>, to no avail. In fact, 
Mayweather seemed to revel in dangling a possible fight in front of Khan, only 
to rip it away like the school bully holding some poor kid’s lunch just out of 
reach. Mayweather then stuck it to Khan one last time, choosing Andre Berto for 
his swansong when everyone just assumed Khan would finally hit the lottery.

With Mayweather’s retirement, Khan has moved from Money to Manny Pacquiao, his 
one-time stablemate and sparring partner. After suffering a 
duller-than-all-hell defeat to Mayweather, Pacquiao appears ready to talk about 
a return to the ring, and Khan is astrong candidate  
<http://espn.go.com/boxing/story/_/id/13719583/manny-pacquiao-return-expected-spring-2016-las-vegas>
to be his opponent. Khan’s advisor is Al Haymon, which would ordinarily shut 
down any potential fight with Pacquiao’s promoter, Bob Arum. But Khan gives the 
impression that he’d not only sell his soul to Satan for a big fight, but those 
of his close friends, relatives and any nearby pets. Haymon might be pushed 
right the hell out of the way for this one. Khan could actually get what he’s 
desperately craved – a big fight. His problem will be what happens next.

Khan looks like a great fighter. His hand speed is up there with the quickest 
draws in the sport. He has good power. He throws every punch well and he’s 
laser beam-accurate. He owns an Olympic silver medal, and he was brought up 
early in his career as a future pound-for-pound king. Everything lines up.

Except, he isn’t a great fighter. He’s very good and has earned victories over 
Marcos Maidana, Devon Alexander, Zab Judah, Chris Algieri and Paulie 
Malignaggi. Those are all quality wins over solid opposition. But when we talk 
about Khan, we must discuss the obvious: that chin.Breidis Prescott knocked him 
out several years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/sep/07/amirkhan.boxing>, when Khan was 
still considered a prospect. He had just started to shake the “chinny” label 
when he ran intoDanny Garcia’s monster left hook in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/15/amir-khan-danny-garcia-live>.

That has been Khan’s issue: he runs into a lot of punches. He is so hell-bent 
on offence that he often forgets that the guys he is fighting are generally 
very happy to hit him back. This is only a minor issue when dealing with 
non-punchers such as Malignaggi or Algieri. He can swallow a few shots and walk 
through them. But Pacquiao? He can pop, even if he’s nowhere near the 
destructive hurricane he used to be.

Khan believes his skills are on par with those of Pacquiao and Mayweather. But 
Mayweather never went to sleep multiple times in the ring and Pacquiao didn’t 
struggle with Algieri. In fact, he beat the living shit out of him. Styles make 
fights, but it’s hard to ignore the fact thatAlgieri gave Khan a pretty tough 
battle when they met in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/30/amir-khan-fights-off-spirited-challenge-from-chris-algieri>
. Khan then acted as though he’d just defeated Tommy Hearns.

Maybe this is the perfect time for Khan. Pacquiao will be 37 at the end of the 
year, and he may not be as sharp when he returns, especially after going 
through shoulder surgery and rehab. And by rehab, I meansalt water. 
<http://bloguin.com/queensberryrules/2015-articles/manny-pacquiao-thinks-salt-water-cured-his-shoulder-or-hes-lying.html>

But Pacquiao isn’t just another decent opponent. He’s an all-time-great, 
capable of making very good fighters look dreadful, even at his advanced age. 
It’s hard to envision Khan recklessly flying into one of Pacquiao’s straight 
left hands or right hooks and coming out OK. And though he’s been under the 
defensive tutelage of silky smooth-sounding Virgil Hunter for a few fights, 
Khan can’t seem to help himself; he is an attacker. The good news for boxing 
fans is that Pacquiao is too, so the fight could be an absolute scorcher, at 
least for a while.

But when Khan gets caught (and he absolutely will get caught), what happens 
next? Again, Pacquiao is no longer a battering ram with fists but, as Algieri 
can attest, he’s not tossing cotton balls either.

Khan badly wants to fight Pacquiao and he wanted to fight Mayweather before 
him, because he wants to fight the best. But that feels too simple in this case 
– everyone wants to fight the best and prove themselves against the elite. But 
Khan is different. Khan is chasing redemption. The Prescott loss haunted him 
for years, and the Garcia knockout was no different. Those losses won’t go away 
if he beats Pacquiao but they’ll sting a hell of a lot less.

Pacquiao’s team could go in another direction and pick someone like Lucas 
Matthysse or even Terence Crawford. But I don’t think they will. I think 
Freddie Roach, Pacquiao’s trainer, loves the idea of getting his former pupil 
in the ring. And Arum, head of Top Rank, is probably rubbing his hands together 
at the thought of bringing a whole bunch of rowdy British fans across the pond 
to Las Vegas.

And then we’ll see what Khan has. He believes he’s one of the best fighters in 
the world and perhaps he’ll get another chance to prove it. Or, maybe he’ll end 
up on the business end of a wicked beating. Either way, he asked for it.

• This article first appeared on The Queensberry Rules 
<http://bloguin.com/queensberryrules/>
• Follow The Queensberry Rules <https://twitter.com/tqbr> and Lou Catalano 
<https://twitter.com/loucat32> on Twitter
 