
When thinking of great motivational music – Eye of the Tiger 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=btPJPFnesV4>, Lose Yourself 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bmXumtgwtak> – Olly Murs isn't the first artist 
that springs to mind. But perhaps unaware of the Essex boy'scheesy beginnings 
on the UK X Factor <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CECQ1zLtokk>, unorthodox 
Nando's-based photoshoot 
<http://www.malextra.com/bizarre/Mans+restaurant+tattoo-53236.html> and this 
glorious video of him falling down some stairs while singing Signed, Sealed, 
Delivered (I'm Yours) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GE848itbQSE>, Australia 
have chosen Dear Darlin' as one of 30 tunes that will put them in the right 
frame of mind to give England a pasting in the Ashes.

The rest of the playlist ranges from rock to rap, pop to dance, but with the 
dial firmly set to "anthemic", just in case Dave Warner needs to get even more 
pumped than he is already. Which is quite a lot. Even the eyebrow-raising 
appearance of Katy Perry is justified by a song in which she promises to be 
"coming at you like a dark horse". Elsewhere, the hip-hop and R&B beloved of 
sports stars everywhere gets a decent showing with Nelly, Drake and the 
inevitable Jay-Z and Kanye – although Chris Rogers may find the young person's 
music all a bit energetic for his ears, and no doubt would like a nice sit down 
and a bit of Simply Red; national pride is satisfied by the presence of 
Midnight Oil, and as for the inclusion of Don McLean's eight-minute American 
Pie ... maybe a half-time singalong?

But the real sound of this playlist is the pounding, synth-glazed, autotuned, 
relentlessly upbeat sound of modern pop showcased on Avicii's Dear Boy, and 
signified by the fact thatRihanna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna> 
keeps popping up. That said, it does end in confident style, with Bill 
Withers's immortally breezy Lovely Day. Will Australia have one?
 