

The horror ... Pamela Anderson and Jenny McCarthy in Scary Movie 3

Be afraid... be very, very afraid. Spoof films just won't go away. The 300 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/film/2007/03/300_is_a_dangerous_piece_of_fa.html> 
parodyMeet the Spartans <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=onX8C05G-kA> has just 
cleaned up in the States. Judd Apatow felt the need to do a number onWalk the 
Line <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4yzjtnj8Y3U> with Dewey Cox - though 
admittedly withless than earth-shattering results 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/reviews/movie/15087391/review/17652941/walk_hard>. 
And horrible though this may be to contemplate, a fifthScary Movie 
<http://www.worstpreviews.com/media.php?id=598â„‘=0&place=posters&place2=poster> 
is in development over at Dimension Films. Last year we were treated to 
Brit-spoofHot Fuzz 
<http://film.theguardian.com/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_Film_of_the_week/0,,2013737,00.html>
 and Pirates/Tolkien/Narnia skewererEpic Movie 
<http://film.theguardian.com/news/story/0,,2001169,00.html>. And you don't have 
to cast your mind back very far to recall the barely-halcyon days of the early 
part of this very decade, when you couldn't move for assorted Scary Movies, 
variousAustin Powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/friday_review/story/0,,762902,00.html> sequels, 
Not Another Teen Movie 
<http://film.theguardian.com/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,720910,00.html>
 andJohnny English 
<http://film.theguardian.com/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,933888,00.html>
, to name but a few.

It's a truism to say that the spoof is the lowest form of the cinematic art. 
These films are essentially parasitic, recycling ideas from other movies that, 
when they first emerged, may have seemed clever or frightening or funny - but, 
when run into the ground by lesser talents, have merely become stupid. I know 
this because, for reasons I don't want to go into, I had to sit through all 
four Scary Movies. Not something anyone should do on a full stomach. The Scary 
Movies are a potent warning about how liberally cinema can reward people for 
such terrible work. If we disinter its nefarious origins, we realise the first
Scary Movie <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0175142> was a spoof of a film - Scream
 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0117571/> - that was itself a bit of a spoof (or 
at least a satire) on a previous generation of horror films, and which had had 
itself quite a bit of fun parodying and spoofing the already worn-out genre 
tricks. Scary Movie itself had no such claims to smart-arse acuity, being 
simply a ragbag of lame jokes and low-rent cameos, recycled from the still-warm 
corpse of a much cleverer movie, only four years old. But here's the thing: 
Scary Movie made lots and lots of money - almost half as much again ($150m) as 
Scream. So, as a spoof of a spoof, Scary Movie may be the most pathetically 
reductive film in the history of cinema; but you can't argue with the figures. 
People loved it, damn them. And this was even before Scream had finished 
cranking out itsclever-clever, postmodern sequels 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120082/>.

Hence the continuing presence of spoof films in our cinemas. Inevitably, when 
discussing the subject, filmgoers' thoughts turn to the golden days ofBlazing 
Saddles <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R6dm9rN6oTs>, Young Frankenstein 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0072431/>, Airplane! 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q3rXK7NhWN8> and The Naked Gun 
<http://www.geocities.com/Hollywood/Trailer/3980/index.html> ... but the 1970s 
and 80s are almost paleolithic in cinema terms. That comedy magic is long gone. 
(Though that didn't stopJim Abrahams <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000720/> 
getting involved inScary Movie 4 
<http://film.theguardian.com/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1748546,00.html>
, thereby proving it.) I'm not saying it's impossible for there ever to be a 
good spoof movie again; it's just that they're much, much harder than 
film-makers seem to think. Creatively speaking, spoofs attract the lazy, the 
inept, the self-loving, and the rip-off artist; but to make them watchable they 
have to keep the joke count at least ten times higher than any normal non-spoof 
comedy. (That, at least, is howMel Brooks 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/features/story/0,,1313477,00.html> and the Zuckers 
<http://uk.geocities.com/zaz_fan/zaz_web_pages/index> managed to get away with 
it.) The new generation of spoofers have got nowhere near this; that's why no 
one will be watchingScary Movie 4 
<http://film.theguardian.com/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,1748546,00.html>
 in 20 years time, and why everyone has forgotten that Epic Movie ever even 
existed.
 