
It’s easy to doubt the effects of climate change – especially if you’re a 
Republican or a dedicated Fox News watcher. It’s an abstract concept easily 
“disproven” by the first cold day, and Republican-driven policies (or the lack 
thereof) to address it reflect just that. But it’s more difficult to deny the 
causes of smelly green goop washing up on a lakeshore or sticking to your toes.

But the toxic algae bloom in Lake Erie that caused 400,000 Toledo residents to 
avoid municipal water for two days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/04/toledo-water-drinking-ban-lifted-lake-erie-algae>
 provides an opportunity for conservatives to illustrate the ease with which 
theycould co-opt the environment movement to push for local control, market 
solutions and individual choice – and start dealing with the very real crises 
on their doorsteps.

To that end, Ohio’s Republican governor – and pro-fracking 
<http://www.msnbc.com/rachel-maddow-show/kasichs-fracking-plan-comes-sharper> 
enemy to the state’s environmentalists – John Kasich alreadysigned legislation 
<http://www.cleveland.com/open/index.ssf/2014/05/kasich_set_to_sign_ohios_first.html>
 to address the algal blooms producing the toxins in Lake Erie earlier this 
year. That was too late, of course, and it might also be too little: it’s a 
voluntary program to certify farmers who use the phosphorous fertilizers that 
cause the blooms, and it won’t take effect untl 2017.

But even signing the legislation puts Kasich on the “Al Gore” side of the 
environmentalist spectrum to others in the GOP. In Washington state, Republican 
state house members argued that there was no science“that proves fertilizers 
have any impact on water quality” 
<http://houserepublicans.wa.gov/house-highlights/house-highlights-march-5-2011/>
. In Wisconsin, Governor Scott Walker “eased 
<http://www.jsonline.com/news/statepolitics/walker-signs-bill-easing-phosphorous-rules-for-communities-b99254590z1-256396661.html>
” the deadlines for polluters in the state to meet the previous 
administration’s numerical standards for the amount of phosphorous allowed in 
public waters (hetried 
<http://host.madison.com/news/local/environment/walker-s-proposal-may-violate-clean-water-act/article_380a8186-4db8-11e0-889a-001cc4c03286.html>
 to replace the numeric standards with a “narrative description” of reduction 
efforts, but wasn’t successful). In Tea Partying Florida, the Republican state 
legislaturesought to overturn locally-enacted bans on phosphorus fertilizer 
<http://www.bradenton.com/2011/03/24/3058032/bill-limiting-local-fertilizer.html>
 – an effort pushed by a Scotts Miracle-Gro lobbyist whotexted 
<http://mayportmirror.jacksonville.com/news/florida/2013-08-05/story/text-messages-show-lobbyists-begging-behind-scenes-political>
 a representative, “I am begging for your help here.”

Meanwhile, dozens of communities and 12 states 
<http://paradise-lawns.com/phosphorus-ban-in-fertilizers/> have banned 
phosphorous fertilizers – and some even ban phosphorous in detergent, too. 
These laws don’t just spring up in Birkenstock Nation capitals such as Vermont 
or Ann Arbor, Michigan: Virginiabanned 
<http://www.chesapeakebay.net/blog/post/va._governor_signs_bill_banning_lawn_fertilizer_containing_phosphorus>
 phosphorous fertilizers in 2011 under the watchful eye of Republican governor 
Bob McDonnell, and New Jersey governor Chris Christieenacted 
<http://www.nj.com/news/index.ssf/2011/01/nations_strictest_limits_on_fe.html> 
the nation’s strictest regulations on the use of the chemical with trademark 
defiance and sentimentality in 2012. Christie explained:

We understand that the beauty of the body of water that we have here in New 
Jersey is much more important to our psychic health and our economic health 
than any of the arguments being made by the other side.

Research from 2009 shows that the results of fertilizer bans are clear: one of 
the oldest bans in the country – in Michigan – was linked to28% reduction 
<http://ns.umich.edu/new/releases/7272-water-quality-improves-after-lawn-fertilizer-ban-study-shows>
 in phosphorus in downstream waters.


We shouldn’t be too surprised by some GOP flexibility on this aspect of 
environmental regulation: it’s mayors and governors who wind up having to deal 
with environmental crises on the ground and in real time – and who ultimately 
cannot afford ideological purity at the cost of their communities (though it 
may cost them higher office).


For them, GOP disdain for executive power stops at the Beltway’s edge; they 
cannot afford the luxury of speeches and stunts when their constituents go 
thirsty or can’t take baths.


Environmental crises are usually trotted out as case studies in the limits of 
conservative governance: they are systemic problems, requiring broad, 
coordinated action and strict penalties in place to dramatize the cost of 
continued malfeasance (since the real costs are all too broad to force 
individuals to take action). Coal seems like “cheap” energy ... until you 
calculate the associated health and environmental costs after its use; avoiding 
chemical fertilizers seems expensive until you compare it with the cost of 
cleaning up after them.

The situation in Ohio has brought home how short the timeline of deferred 
costs can become, and itshould: phosphorus fertilizers aren’t like oil wells or 
fracking fields, because consumers can make a direct choice in using them or 
not. Specific sites such as waste management plants (so-called point sources) 
aren’t even the primary sources for phosphorous pollutants in public waters 
like Lake Erie; rather, much of the pollution in the water is the result of 
run-off from developed land (non-point sources 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nonpoint_source_pollution>).

And algal blooms aren’t like climate change – though, importantly, they’re 
exacerbated 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/08/04/this_is_climate_change_ohios_water_crisis_was_a_manmade_disaster/>
 by it: they are near-term and ugly, comparatively immediate consequences of 
definable actions that everyday citizens can see without a microscope or 
binoculars. They are inarguable.

In Ohio, the urgency to take action on the algal blooms can only be enhanced 
by the recognition that doing so makes economic sense – and will keep harsher 
regulations at bay. Phosphorus bans even make a certain economic sense: The EPA
estimates 
<http://midwestadvocates.org/assets/resources/nutrient_pollution_factsheet.pdf> 
that “nutrient pollution” costs the US $1bn a year in lost revenue from outdoor 
tourism and waterway recreation.

The problem with getting consensus on environmental policy is not, primarily, 
that Democrats want to continue expanding the leviathan of big government and 
Republicans are seeking local solutions – it’s that many conservatives refuse 
beyond all reason to acknowledge that there is a problem to be solved at all.

Maybe a glass of goop can change that.
 