
After he was named Most Valuable Player of Friday’s NBA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> All-Star celebrity game, Win Butler 
said he was retiring from the annual exhibition. What he did next all but ruled 
out any future invitations.

The Arcade Fire <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire> frontman, 
speaking with ESPN’s Sage Steele, leveraged the platform of a nationally 
televised acceptance speech to make a political statement – before promptly 
getting the hook.

Win Butler strayed from ESPN's pedantic script – and that's why he had to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/13/win-butler-strayed-from-espns-pedantic-script-and-thats-why-he-had-to-go>
“I just want to say that it’s an election year in the US,” Butler began, ESPN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/espn> almost immediately beginning its 
go-to-commerical bumper music. “The US has a lot they can learn from Canada: 
healthcare, taking care of people, and I think—”

The veteran Steele, a truck producer no doubt screaming in her earpiece, 
affably cut Butler off mid-sentence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fstreamable.com%2F2yqr&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fstreamable.com%2F2yqr>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fstreamable.com%2F2yqr&media=>
 Win Butler turned political during his All-Star celebrity game acceptance 
speech. 
“So we’re talking about celebrities and not politics. Congratulations on your 
MVP!” Steele said as ESPN quickly cut away with Butler looking simultaneously 
defeated and bemused.

Butler, with good size (6ft 4in) and reasonably soft touch around the rim, had 
been dominant asTeam Canada won 74-64 over Team USA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/feb/12/nba-all-star-celebrity-game-live>
 in the friendly exhibition at Toronto’s Ricoh Coliseum, scoring 15 points on 
6-for-17 shooting and grabbing 14 rebounds. But few will remember his 
performance on the court as much as what he did moments after the final buzzer.

Born in California and raised in Texas before attending New Hampshire’s 
Philips Exeter Academy, Butler moved to Montreal in 2000 to attend McGill 
University and has lived there since.

Win Butler's political MVP speech at celebrity game cut off by ESPN – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/feb/12/nba-all-star-celebrity-game-live>
There he met band-mate and future wife Régine Chassagne and formed the Arcade 
Fire, whose third studio album The Suburbs won the Grammy for Album of the Year 
in 2011.

The 35-year-old had opened his remarks on Friday with a tribute to his adopted 
hometown and notice of his “retirement” from the game which marks the 
unofficial start of the NBA’s All-Star Weekend. He’d finished with eight points 
and 12 rebounds in last year’s debut appearance.

“I’ve lived in the great city of Montreal for 15 years,” Butler said. “I’ve 
represented Montreal. If you guys want to fast-track my Canadian citizenship, 
hopefully this will help make me a permanent resident. I just want to say that 
I’m retiring as a celebrity right now, so I will not be eligible for the 
celebrity game next year.

“I’m retiring as a celebrity. We brought this home for Canada. Respect to 
Drake. Respect to Team Canada.”

Butler is no stranger to the hardwood. For several years he organized an 
annual charity basketball game 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/win-butler-takes-basketball-just-as-seriously-as-music-20110926>
 coinciding with the Pop Montreal music festival pitting musicians against 
college players. Among the invitees for the 2014 event were Bon Iver’s Justin 
Vernon, the Strokes’ Nokolai Fraiture and San Antonio Spurs post man Matt 
Bonner.
 