
How do you decide between the CoPilot app 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2015-02/23/london-air-ambulance-app>, 
which reduces the time taken for London Air Ambulance’s pilots to be dispatched 
to emergencies by two minutes, aportal and app <https://dontbottleitup.org.uk/> 
helping people to work out if their drinking is risky and to get instant online 
help, and theBuddy app <https://www.buddyapp.co.uk/>, a digital service helping 
mental health patients stick with their treatment?

That was my unenviable task recently as a judge of the Tech4Good awards. For 
me, however, there were three standout winners. StartupOpen Bionics 
<http://www.openbionics.com/> has developed 3D printed bionic hands, which can 
be created in five days for £1,000 – far cheaper than the traditional 
£20,000-£80,000 price tag and half the weight, yet with a similar range of 
movement. It offers an affordable prosthetic to the millions of hand amputees 
worldwide who use a hook, or nothing at all.

The awards were announced on Tuesday, and other winners included a group of 
14-year-old students at Stratford girls’ grammar school who built an app to 
support teenagers exploring their sexuality and gender. In terms of sheer 
dedication and going beyond the call of duty as well as technical wizardry,
Rachael Moat <http://www.rachaelmoat.co.uk/> was a worthy winner of the IT 
volunteer of the year. Moat, principal clarinettist with Lancashire Chamber 
Orchestra, is also a music teacher who volunteers atSeashell Trust 
<http://www.seashelltrust.org.uk/>, a school for children with complex needs 
and severe learning difficulties, who often have little or no verbal language. 
Moat realised she could do more for them than play a tune. She programmed aSkoog
 <http://www.skoogmusic.com/> (a squishy cube) with musical sounds to enable 
pupils to be active participants in her sessions, and then developed other 
customised technology for individual pupils. One student doesn’t like touching 
things or taking instructions and has a restricted diet, but loves music. So by 
coating a metal bowl inelectric paint 
<http://www.bareconductive.com/shop/?product_cat=electric-paint>, Moat was able 
to develop a way for him to experiment with touch and taste. Every time he 
dunks his hands in the bowl when it is filled with water, custard or spaghetti, 
itplays music <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_8zI8C4BzHg>.

Tech innovations that could improve lives in 2015 | Alison Benjamin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/07/tech-innovations-improve-lives-social-impact>
Technology with a social purpose seems to be flourishing. Nesta, an innovation 
charity, has announced the 10 finalists in its firstInclusive Technology prize 
<http://www.inclusivetechprize.org/news-blogs/congratulations-10-finalists>, 
the US awards for tech that benefits humanity announces its winners in 
November, and theNominet Trust 100 <http://socialtech.org.uk/nominet-trust-100/>
 will open nominations for its 2015 awards in the summer.

Already there are plenty of possible contenders. An app to monitor the health 
of people with epilepsy is launched on Wednesday. The EpsMon app, a 
collaboration between the charitySudep Action 
<https://www.sudep.org/?gclid=CjwKEAjwlPOsBRCWq5_e973PzTgSJACMiEp20jLTtmBaT3Lfw5ObZIRG-ds_SKigw3b4m0dxUAZOLhoChWPw_wcB>
, engineers at Plymouth University, and Royal Cornwall hospital and Cornwall 
NHS trust was developed to support adults with epilepsy following cuts to NHS 
funding for epilepsy monitoring by GPs. It aims to allow them to take better 
control of their condition and hopes to save lives by giving them a seizure 
checklist that monitors their risk levels and alerts them when to go to their 
doctor. Epilepsy is among the top 10 causes of premature death, with at least 
three epilepsy-related deaths a day. GPs used to be funded to monitor the 
condition, as recommended by Nice guidelines in 2004, but NHS financing for 
these annual reviews was cut in 2014.

And last week, an app was launched to help girls and women in the UK at risk 
of, or living with the consequences of, female genital mutilation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/09/fgm-awareness-web-app-launched-to-inform-girls-at-risk>
. Over 20,000 girls under the age of 15 are estimated to be at risk of FGM in 
the UK each year while 66,000 women are living with it. Furthermore, 60,000 
girls aged 14 and under have been born in England and Wales to mothers who have 
undergone FGM, and these girls are thought to be at risk.

But for many, digital inclusion remains a pipedream. According to the Office 
for National Statistics, in May, 27% of disabled adults hadnever used the 
internet 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/publications/re-reference-tables.html?edition=tcm%3A77-395602>
, compared with 7% of non-disabled adults. And last month’s report by the Extra 
Costs Commission found that part of the reason disabled people typically face 
£550 in extra living costs is due to the lack of ability of many of them to 
shop around online. Too many sites are not accessible to those with 
disabilities.

The government’s digital inclusion strategy is a step in the right direction, 
but does not mention what it intends to do to force companies to make their 
websites more accessible. Matthew Hancock, the lead minister for digital 
inclusion, should look to Norway, where in 2013 the government passedregulations
 <http://uu.difi.no/english> requiring all new websites to meet minimum 
accessibility standards by 2014 and all old sites to do so by 2021. The 
government should be developing apps to make public services accessible to all, 
not just the tech savvy.
 