
The 153rd and latest edition of Wisden has praised the England team’s 
transformation over the past 12 months as “the most uplifting story in 
international cricket of the year”.

The notes of the annual, which is published on Thursday, credits the 
appointment of Andrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/11/colin-graves-andrew-strauss-pick-new-england-coach>
 as the director of England cricket last May among a number of decisions that 
gave the senior men’s side a sense of direction and saw performances in both 
Test cricket, where the Ashes were regained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/ashes-2014-england-win-series-australia-fifth-test>
 at homeand South Africa beaten away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/stuart-broad-six-wickets-england-south-africa-series-win>
, and the limited overs formats taking a dramatic upturn.

Stuart Broad hits zone at Trent Bridge to send Australia batsmen into twilight 
| Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/06/england-stuart-broad-zone-australia-ashes>
“Records fell like confetti,” writes the editor Lawrence Booth. “England 
passed 400 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/09/england-new-zealand-first-odi-match-report>
 for the first time in a one-day international,and knocked off 350 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/17/england-morgan-root-new-zealand-centuries>
 in another. They made their highest one-day score overseas, in Dubai [355 for 
five 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/nov/20/pakistan-v-england-fourth-odi-live>
], then smashed it a few weeks later, in Bloemfontein [399 for nine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/03/south-africa-england-first-odi-match-report>
]. Jos Buttler scored a hundred off 66 balls, then – as if to make up for his 
tardiness – off 46.

“Stuart Broad took eight for 15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/06/england-australia-stuart-broad-joe-root>
 as Australia were demolished for 60 at Trent Bridge,then six for 17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/stuart-broad-six-wickets-england-south-africa-series-win>
 to skittle South Africa for 83 at Johannesburg. The two most resonant national 
records fell one after the other: in Antigua, Jimmy Andersonovertook Ian 
Botham’s Test-wickets haul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/17/jimmy-anderson-breaks-ian-botham-england-test-record-wickets>
, andwent on past 400 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/29/jimmy-anderson-england-400-wickets>
; at Leeds, Alastair Cooksurpassed Graham Gooch’s Test-runs tally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/30/alastair-cook-england-leading-test-run-scorer>
, and approached 10,000.”

Such good-news stories contrasted with what had occurred the year before, the 
Test side having stuttered in their rebuilding process following the 2013‑14 
Ashes whitewash and the one-day team tumbling out of the 2015 World Cup at the 
group stage – something of an ignominious achievement given the format of the 
tournament.

Strauss, whose first act was to remove Peter Moores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/08/peter-moores-removed-england-coach-andrew-strauss>
 as head coach, earns praisefor appointing Trevor Bayliss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/25/trevor-bayliss-england-cricket-head-coach>
 in his place, and thus reuniting the Australian with his former assistant 
coach Paul Farbrace, who had enjoyed a bright spell in temporary charge of the 
team during the interim period in which New Zealand toured. “Forget leather on 
willow. The sound of the English game in early 2015 was palm on forehead. [But] 
in a delightful turn-up for the form guide, the ECB – having spent the previous 
year losing touch with reality – were making some smart decisions,” Booth 
writes.

“Victory at the Wanderers in January 2016, to knock South Africa off the top 
of the Test rankings, confirmed that a different kind of hope had taken hold. 
It was the most uplifting story in international cricket all year, the more so 
for being utterly unexpected.”

Elsewhere, the all-rounder Ben Stokes, who embodied this change in outlook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/03/ben-stokes-south-africa-england-jonny-bairstow>
, is named as one of Wisden’s five cricketers of the year along with Jonny 
Bairstow, following a summer in which the right-hander’s staggering form for 
Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/28/jonny-bairstow-durham-yorkshire-county-championship-match-report>
 during their successful County Championship defence earned him a Test recall 
midway through the 3-2 Ashes win.

The Australian batsman Steve Smith, top-scorer in that series with 508 runs, 
is also included in the five, as are the early-summer touristsBrendon McCullum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/brendon-mccullum> and Kane Williamson of New 
Zealand. “An English summer has rarely witnessed a more popular touring 
captain,” says Booth of McCullum, while praising his team-mate as “consistency 
personified, and beautiful to watch”.

Williamson is also named as Wisden’s Leading Cricketer in the World for 2015, 
having amassed 2,692 international runs across all formats, a full 323 ahead of 
second-placed Steve Smith, while a third Kiwi,the all-rounder Suzie Bates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/21/new-zealand-women-australia-world-twenty20>
, is awarded the Leading Woman Cricketer in the World. “It needed something 
special to deny both Meg Lanning and Ellyse Perry this award, and Bates’s 
all-round performances were precisely that.”

Off the field, Wisden notes that the “age of the Big Three may be over before 
it has properly begun” in observing that the architects of the 2014 reforms of 
the InternationalCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Council, 
which saw India, Australia and England take control of the governing body and 
allocate themselves 52% of revenues generated by global events, have nearly all 
left the stage.

The book also urges countries around the world to give day/night Test cricket 
a chance following the first such match between Australia and New Zealand in 
Adelaide last November, arguing that “if it takes off everywhere, boards can 
use the extra revenue to prove to their stars that they needn’t become soulless 
freelancers, forever scouring the globe for their next fix”.
 