
A women's campaign group for equality in football has criticised BT Sport's 
decision to employAndy Gray <https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-gray> as 
co-commentator for Sunday's FA Cup tie between Arsenal and Liverpool.

Women In Football, made up of leading professionals within the game, says many 
will be disappointed that the broadcaster has opted to employ Gray, who was
sacked by Sky over sexist comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/25/andy-gray-sacked-sky>that 
were leaked to the press in 2011. His colleague at Sky,Richard Keys, who was 
also at the centre of the controversy, resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/26/richard-keys-resigns-sky-sports>
.

Gray, who will stand in for Michael Owen, had returned to British TV last month
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/25/andy-gray-returns-commentary-bt-sport>
 when BT selected him as a co-commentator for Everton's FA Cup victory over 
Stevenage. However, new footage of the pundit making sexist remarks had cast 
doubt that he would continue in the role.

The footage, understood to be authentic, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/30/andy-gray-bt-sport-sky-video> 
showed Gray and Keys singing "get your tits out for the lads" to the Sky 
presenter Clare Tomlinson during the early 2000s.

A spokesperson for Women In Football said: "Many women working in the football 
industry will be disappointed with the decision to give Andy Gray a platform on 
UK television, a move which appears to be at odds with BT Sport's commitment to 
championing women in sport when the channellaunched last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/jul/31/bt-sport-launch>."

Gray resurrected his career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/08/richard-keys-andy-gray-talksport>
 by presenting a TalkSport radio show with Keys from Doha, where the pair front 
Premier League coverage for beIN Sports.

A BT spokesman said: "BT can confirm that Andy Gray will make a guest 
appearance forBT Sport <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bt-sport> at the FA 
Cup tie between Arsenal and Liverpool. Andy is a very experienced broadcaster 
and we are delighted that he will be making another appearance for us."
 