
Today marks the third anniversary of the murder of the Russian investigative 
journalistAnna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/03/politkovskaya-murder-investigation-russia>
 (Getting away with murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/sep/15/russian-journalists-murder-cpj-report>
, 16 September). Yesterday the human rights organisationReach All Women in War 
<http://www.rawinwar.org/> presented the annual Anna Politkovskaya Award, set 
up to recognise women defending human rights in zones of war and conflict, to 
theOne Million Signatures Campaign for Equality 
<http://www.sign4change.info/english/> in Iran. This group of women are risking 
their lives to collect signatures in support of a petition to change the laws 
which discriminate against women. Many have faced imprisonment, and torture and 
abuse in detention; they have been banned from travelling abroad and their 
lives have been in danger. But this has not stopped their determination to 
struggle for equality. They live a life of courage in the face of danger, just 
as Anna did.

In October 2007, we presented the first Anna Politkovskaya Award to Natalia 
Estemirova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/23/chechnya-natalia-estemirova> for 
her courage in seeking and telling the truth about the torture, disappearances 
and murders of civilians in the war in Chechnya. We were outraged by the 
killing of Natalia on 15 July. Nobody has been charged for this crime and two 
other humanitarian aid workers helping children disabled by the war,Zarema 
Sadulayeva and her husband, Alek Dzabrailov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/11/activist-and-husband-grozny-slaying>
, were abducted and killed in Chechnya on 10 August.

We call again on the Russian government to bring to justice those who killed 
Anna and Natalia and their colleagues inChechnya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chechnya>, and to end the killings of 
journalists and human rights defenders in the Russian Federation. We also call 
on world leaders to take action to protect the journalists and human rights 
defenders in areas of war and conflict. We owe it to the memory of Anna and 
Natalia to protect those who still speak out on behalf of those to whom nobody 
wants to listen.

Mairead Maguire, Betty Williams, Archbishop Desmond Tutu, Elena Bonner, Frank 
Judd, Gillian Slovo, Azar Nafisi, Rigoberta Mench√∫ Tum, Eva Hoffman, Vaclav 
Havel, Susan Sarandon And 99 others, RAW in WAR
 