
With Game of Thrones entering its fourth season 
<http://www.hbo.com/game-of-thrones#/game-of-thrones/about/video/season-4-trailer.html>
 on HBO later this year, bookshops up and down the country will soon be setting 
up tables stacked high with recommendations for what to read after GRR Martin. 
Let fantasy fans rejoice! Unless, that is, you happen to be a woman.According 
to the fantasy writer Juliet E McKenna 
<http://jemck.livejournal.com/171552.html>, booksellers and the media are so 
obsessed with "grimdark books about blokes in cloaks" that it's hard for anyone 
else to get a hearing.
 I will give a book of mine, of their choice, to the first person who can send 
me a photo of such a display that isn't entirely composed of male authors. 
Because I've yet to see one. I have challenged staff in bookshops about this, 
to be told "women don't write epic fantasy". Ahem, with 15 novels published, I 
beg to differ. And we read it too. 
I'm one of those readers. We certainly do. And, partly in an attempt to 
redress McKenna's concern that the Guardian "repeatedly discuss[es] epic 
fantasy without ever once mentioning a female author", partly inspired bythis 
fantastically overfunded Kickstarter 
<https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/lightspeedmagazine/women-destroy-science-fiction>
, but mainly because I fancy finding something brilliant to read this weekend, 
let's name some of them.

Riffing off a 2012 list of fantasy writers which included nine women out of 
113,SFF blogger Werthead makes a great start 
<http://thewertzone.blogspot.no/2014/02/waterstones-fail-to-recognise-female.html>
.Robin Hobb <http://robinhobb.com/> â€“ yes, she's brilliant (my go-to reread). 
Who else out there is just a little bit excited about this summer's release of 
a new book in the Fool and Fitz story, Fool's Assassin? Werthead also reminds 
me that I've been meaning to readNK Jemisin <http://nkjemisin.com/> for ages, 
and thatElizabeth Bear <http://www.elizabethbear.com/> is wonderful.

Here in this household, Ursula K Le Guin is a fixture on the bookshelves, as 
areJaqueline Carey <http://www.jacquelinecarey.com/>, Juliet Marillier 
<http://www.jacquelinecarey.com/> and Kelly Link <http://kellylink.net/>. It's 
on the horror side, but I adoreMuriel Gray 
<http://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/ea.cgi?Muriel_Gray>'s books, as well as Diana 
Wynne Jones (for children, but I still read them). I lovedG Willow Wilson's 
Alif the Unseen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/oct/07/alif-the-unseen-willow-wilson-review>
, I have just started readingSarah Pinborough <http://sarahpinborough.com/>, 
I've liked both ofJess Richards <https://twitter.com/jessgrr1>'s quirky, 
fantastical outings Snake Ropes and Cooking with Bones, and my new favourite 
author isKameron Hurley <http://www.kameronhurley.com/>, partly because God's 
War is so good, partly because she makes such good points about the trap of 
hyper-masculinity 
<http://www.kameronhurley.com/women-and-gentlemen-on-unmasking-the-sobering-reality-of-hyper-masculine-characters>
.

I'm thinking of starting the weekend with something by Mary Robinette Kowal 
<http://www.maryrobinettekowal.com/>, an author I've never read, but who has 
behaved withsuch good grace in the latest SFWA row 
<http://www.teleread.com/ebooks/the-sfwa-might-just-stay-relevant-after-all>. 
But who are the other female fantasy authors you'd recommend, and where should 
I start?
 