
Actors love voiceover work: you don’t have to learn your lines, you can 
basically turn up in your pyjamas, read whatever the script says in a silly 
voice, then forget about it until the cheque arrives. This was especially true 
of doing talking animals, where your audience was unlikely to question your 
commitment anyway. But not any more. For one thing, advances in film mean CGI 
animals look as if they’re really,actually talking, rather than trying to get 
peanut butter off their teeth. For another, our YouTube-enhanced collective 
memory remembers everything. In honour ofthe news that Bradley Cooper is set to 
play a talking dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/16/bradley-cooper-voice-hound-lasse-hallstrom-a-dogs-purpose>
 in Lasse Hallström’s new movie, A Dog’s Purpose, here is a rundown of the 
talking-animal roles they’d prefer to forget – if we let them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsXvSEVO1Heo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsXvSEVO1Heo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsXvSEVO1Heo&media=>
Andy Garcia – Beverly Hills Chihuahua

As one review put it: “The film is Beverly Hills Chihuahua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/16/beverly-hills-chihuahua-film-review>
. The audience is the fire hydrant.” The offences stack up in this Lady and the 
Tramp variation, in whichDrew Barrymore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/may/23/five-best-moments-drew-barrymore-scream-blended-best-movies-films-top>
’s pampered pooch gets lost in lawless Mexico and is almost coerced into dog 
fighting (which would have been a relief). Coming to her rescue are a host of 
talented Hispanic actors forced to say awful things like: “We’re Mexican, not 
Mexican’t.” García plays a German shepherd who can’t smell. To stay in 
character, he clearly held his nose throughout.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS-oJ1D5aZcM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS-oJ1D5aZcM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS-oJ1D5aZcM&media=>
Diane Keaton <https://www.theguardian.com/film/diane-keaton> – Look Who’s 
Talking Now

With the wreckage of Godfather III still steaming, Keaton leapt into another 
barrel-scraping three-quel to try to erase the memory. Who elsecould have 
injected the necessary gravitas into the role of Daphne the posh poodle, who 
fights off wolves to protect her mistress Kirstie Alley as they race to rescue 
John Travolta from the sex-starved boss who has got him tied up in her cabin in 
the woods?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D20dudgZjeaY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D20dudgZjeaY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D20dudgZjeaY&media=>
André Benjamin – Charlotte’s Web

In 2006, the world was still waiting for another Outkast album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/05/andre-3000-outkast-reunion-i-felt-like-a-sell-out>
, but André 3000 had more important things on his mind. He was deeply immersed 
in preparations for his role asElwyn the Crow 
<http://www.tedperez.com/archive/charlottesweb/site/andre_benjamin_3000.html>, 
a small but crucial character in this farmyard tale. In the end, Benjamin 
didn’t get many lines, but just hear the conviction he puts into those cries of 
“Caaaaw! Caaaaw!” He clearly went full method.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7bVY_UspXyc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7bVY_UspXyc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7bVY_UspXyc&media=>
Penélope Cruz – G-Force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/31/g-force-disney-film-review>

With an Oscar practically in the bag and Hollywood at her feet, Penélope Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/19/penelope-cruz-this-much-i-know>
 must have thought twice about playing a feisty, Spanish token female in an 
elite guinea-pig task force. Fortunately, this is one sexy rodent, who knows 
martial arts and only “uses her feminine charms when the mission requires”. 
See? She’s a role model. For guinea pigs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS5NFis_DVqI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS5NFis_DVqI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS5NFis_DVqI&media=>
Sinbad – Homeward Bound II: Lost in San Francisco

Two lovable dogs and a charming cat – voiced by white actors – get lost in the 
big bad city and run into a street gang of ghetto dogs – who, naturally, have 
“black” speech patterns and are voiced by African-American actors. Because dog 
racism is a thing, alright?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpNQCSZM-h40&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpNQCSZM-h40>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpNQCSZM-h40&media=>
Vin Diesel – Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/vin-diesel-groot-guardians-of-the-galaxy-interview>


Bradley Cooper was doubtless hired by Lasse Hallström for A Dog’s Purpose on 
the strength of his show-stealing turn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IvdHeqxbDrc> in last year’s Guardians of the 
Galaxy. His wise-cracking, ball-scratching Rocket Raccoon took talking 
creatures to the next level. Vin Diesel drew the movie’s short straw, or rather 
stick,playing Groot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/vin-diesel-groot-guardians-of-the-galaxy-interview>
, the tree creature. His limited range is truly challenged trying to find 
different ways of repeating his one line: “I am Groot.” He’s never been so 
wooden.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5mkm22yO-bs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5mkm22yO-bs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5mkm22yO-bs&media=>
Scarlett Johansson – The Jungle Book

Disney’s forthcoming live-action remake of The Jungle Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/16/first-trailer-for-disney-live-action-jungle-book-remake-mowgli>
 has a promising cast: Idris Elba as Shere Khan, Bill Murray as Baloo, 
Christopher Walken as King Louie. But what’s this?Scarlett Johansson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarlettjohansson> as Kaa, the python? Her 
velvety voice was used to great effect as a seductive operating system in Spike 
Jonze’s Her; hearing it come out of a shifty, scaly snake just doesn’t seem 
right.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Factors-best-friend-hollywood-stars-talking-animal-roles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F19%2F1445259279023%2F90720fec-2fa2-442d-b3e0-623a520842a8-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woof!%20The%20talking%20animal%20roles%20stars%20would%20rather%20we%20forgot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Factors-best-friend-hollywood-stars-talking-animal-roles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woof%21%20The%20talking%20animal%20roles%20stars%20would%20rather%20we%20forgot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Factors-best-friend-hollywood-stars-talking-animal-roles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F19%2F1445259279023%2F90720fec-2fa2-442d-b3e0-623a520842a8-1020x612.jpeg>
 Frank Welker, as a monkey, in Indiana Jones: Raiders of the Lost Ark 
Frank Welker – Raiders of the Lost Ark

Welker really is the forgotten hero of talking-animal movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/09/frank-welker>. He’s one of the 
most prolific voice actors in history (he’s Fred in Scooby-Doo and 14 of the 
Decepticons in theTransformers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/118377/transformers> films, among other 
roles). But Welker is also a master impersonator of animals thatdon’t talk. His 
unsung and unspoken roles include the screeching pet monkey in Raiders of the 
Lost Ark, the penguins inMr Popper’s Penguins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/04/mr-poppers-penguins> and the 
gremlins inGremlins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/dec/09/gremlins-review>. In this world, 
that’s pretty dignified.




 