
Woolworths’ private label changes are a defensive response to the growing 
popularity of German discount retailerAldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi>, but won’t have the impact the 
retailer hopes it will, an academic says.

Australia’s largest supermarket chain is dumping Homebrand and Select labels 
and replacing them with Essentials and a new brand calledWoolworths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/woolworths-australia>.

The Woolworths brand will cover more than 2,000 products, mainly food, and is 
expected to come with a lower price tag than the existing Select range.

Nationals' Fiona Nash blasts Coles for suggesting competition laws will 
increase prices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/24/nationals-fiona-nash-blasts-coles-for-suggesting-competition-laws-will-increase-prices>
Teresa Davis, an associate professor at the University of Sydney business 
school, said the move was clearly in response to the growing Aldi threat.

“The latest move by Woolworths is no more than a defensive strategy against 
Aldi,” Prof Davis said.

“It is reactionary and is essentially just tinkering around with its offering. 
I don’t think it is going to make a huge difference.”

She said that since arriving in Australia 15 years ago, Aldi had been quietly 
cementing itself as the alternative while Woolworths andColes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/coles> were locked in a long-term price 
war.

“Aldi has consistently said: ‘We don’t have too many brands, they are private 
labels, but this is our offering and we make sure they are of decent quality 
and at a good price’, while there’s nothing to differentiate Woolworths and 
Coles, and Woolworths doesn’t appear to have a clear long-term strategy to 
combat this.”

She said both Coles and Woolworths confused consumers with their plethora of 
private labels ranging from premium, mid-tier to low-end while Aldi’s strength 
was its simple offering and its “less is more” strategy.

Woolworths is struggling with declining sales growth, while Coles continues to 
maintain strong growth due to is “everyday prices campaign”, analysts say.

Woolworths to replace frequent flyer loyalty scheme with food bill discounts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/26/woolworths-to-replace-frequent-flyer-loyalty-scheme-with-food-bill-discounts>
Aldi is expected to steal market share from the major players and the 
independents as it aggressively expands its store network.

A UBS report, released in May, said Coles was expected to lose sales to Aldi 
at a rate of about $332m a year to the 2019 financial year, while Woolworths 
was expected to lose $476m.

It also said Aldi’s market share of about six per cent nationally would jump 
to 10% in four years time.

Analysts estimate Woolworths’ share of the $88bn supermarket sector to be 
about 40%, while Coles has more than 30%.
 