
Work has begun on a £1.9m wall to block migrants and asylum seekers from 
attempting to board lorries heading to theCalais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> port.


The structure will stand 4 metres tall and 1km long on both sides of the dual 
carriageway approaching the port, a few hundred metres from the main refugee 
camp, where more than 10,000 people live in conditions that charities describe 
as dangerous and dirty. It will be made of smooth concrete, making it harder to 
climb, and extends an existing wire fence that flanks the immediate approach to 
the port.


But charities working with those in the camp have said the project will 
endanger lives by forcing migrants and refugees to take ever greater risks to 
reach the UK. Steve Symonds,Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> UK’s refugee and 
migrant rights programme director, said: “This wall will simply push desperate 
people further into the hands of smugglers and into taking far greater risks to 
get to the UK, and more will die in the attempt.”
MSF Sea (@MSF_Sea) 
BREAKING: The contruction of the Great Wall of #Calais 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Calais?src=hash> has commenced! It won't stop 
people of course, it will just make it more dangerous!pic.twitter.com/Ol5TzCxIDW
 <https://t.co/Ol5TzCxIDW>
 <https://twitter.com/MSF_Sea/status/778254077088133122> September 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MSF_Sea/status/778254077088133122> 
The immigration minister, Robert Goodwill, announced the plan last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/uk-immigration-minister-confirms-work-will-begin-on-big-new-wall-in-calais>
. It will be paid for by the British government as part of a £17m joint 
Anglo-French package of security measures aimed at preventing people from the 
“Jungle” refugee camp from stowing away on lorries and other vehicles on the 
French side of the border.


The French interior minister, Bernard Cazeneuve, has said he intends to 
dismantle the camp entirely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/02/france-vows-to-dismantle-jungle-refugee-camp-calais>
 by the end of the year.

In 2015-16 more than 84,000 migrants and refugees were caught trying to 
illegally enter the UK at “juxtaposed ports” such as Calais – where immigration 
checks are carried out before boarding a train or ferry – according to Home 
Office figures.

Photos of foundation works on the wall emerged on Tuesday, but a Home Office 
spokesman said construction started last week.

Charities working with those in the camp say that 13 refugees and migrants, 
including three children, have died this year attempting to board vehicles 
approaching the port in a desperate attempt to reach Britain.

Last week, a 14-year-old Afghan boy became the latest fatality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/afghan-boy-killed-in-calais-in-attempt-to-climb-on-to-lorry-to-uk>
, dying in a hit-and-run after he fell off a lorry. The boy, who has not been 
named, was understood to have a legal right to travel to the UK as he had 
relatives there, but had become frustrated with delays in processing his case.

“This wall is going to prevent migrants from getting on to the road every 
night. They put tree trunks, branches, gas cylinders” in the road to stop the 
trucks, the Calais port chief executive, Jean-Marc Puissesseau, said earlier 
this month, according to AFP.

“We can no longer continue to put up with these repeated assaults,” he said.

Research by Help Refugees, one of the charities that works in the camp, found 
that in September the camp’s population rose above 10,000 for the first time, 
including more than 1,000 unaccompanied children. An official count by the 
French authorities last month put the number of people in the camp at 6,900.


Matilda Gladstone, a spokeswoman for Help Refugees, said: “We are disheartened 
that once again money and resources are being poured into building walls to 
keep people out, and not into helping care for the vulnerable, displaced people 
in the refugee camp in Calais.”

She added: “We would like to see Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> prioritise the safety of 
children over the fear of immigration.”

Leigh Daynes, the executive director of Doctors of the World, said: “The use 
of British taxpayers’ money on fences inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is ludicrous. Walls are not the 
answer to the humanitarian catastrophe in Calais.

“They will not deter vulnerable refugees from seeking to have their asylum 
claim heard here. It is time for the UK to hear and settle those claims in 
France and end the suffering of ordinary people in search of a better life.”
 