
After spending the last week immersed in ER Eddison's 1922 epic, The Worm 
Ouroboros, I feel as if I'm emerging from a strange, rich, mad, dream. I hadn't 
expected to like the book at all – I'mno fan of faux-heroic language 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jul/30/poul-anderson-hrolf-krakis-saga>
, and the whole thing (yes, the whole thing) is written in 
Elizabethan-inflected prose – but somehow, reluctantly, unexpectedly, I've 
fallen utterly under its spell.

Ryaned75 had warned me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/aug/20/fantasy-forgotten-beasts-eld?commentid=f84bbdd1-5b3d-47c0-885a-55751c8f7afd>
 that "the first 50 or 60 pages are a slog, but once you get used to the 
language there is a lot of great stuff in there". I'd been very sceptical, and 
my friends (who find my fantasy leanings rather amusing) spent an evening 
opening The Worm at random and reading bits out. "'Tis a brave gown,' said he, 
'thou wearest tonight, my pretty pug'" – how they laughed.

To be honest, I was dreading it, but ryaned was right, right, right. It took 
no time at all to get used to the language, full-scale immersion proving far 
less grating than modern attempts to throw in the odd thee or thou to up the 
heroism. And it was frequently beautiful: "The outer ward of the fortress was 
dark with cypress trees: black flames burning changelessly to heaven from a 
billowy sea of gloom."

As the author James Stephens 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Stephens_(author)> writes in his 
introduction: "In reading this book the reader must a little break his way in, 
and must surrender prejudices that are not allowed for. He may think that the 
language is more rotund than is needed for a tale, but, as he proceeds, he will 
see that only such a tongue could be spoken by these colossi; and, soon, he 
will delight in a prose that is as life-giving as it is magnificent." Maybe I 
wouldn't go as far as life-giving, but it's certainly utterly unlike anything 
I've read before.

There are many odd things about The Worm, not least the beginning, which sees 
a man, Lessingham, fall asleep and dream – or is it a dream? – that he has 
travelled to the plane Mercury (which is very Earth-like). He arrives in the 
court of the Demons, observes for a while – and then is never heard of again. 
Either Eddison became bored with him, or forgot about him (poor Lessingham 
though – how'll he ever get home?). Another peculiar detail is that Eddison's 
various warring factions – the Demons, the Witches, the Goblins, the Imps – are 
all basically humans and not at all goblinish or implike or demonic. The 
Witch-king, Gorice, does do a fair bit of evil magic, however.

Once I'd forgotten about Lessingham, and realised that my Demons weren't going 
to have horns or tails, it turned into a wonderfully heroic adventure. Gorice 
is killed in a wrestling ("wrastling") match with the Demons, and after being 
reincarnated steals away the Demon warrior Lord Goldry Bluszco, imprisoning him 
at the top of an impossibly high mountain. Luckily, Lord Juss, Goldry's 
brother, has a dream revealing his whereabouts, and he and Lord Brandoch Daha 
set off to rescue him, battling "mantichores" with "brown blood-stained 
gubber-tushes grinning betwixt bristly lips", climbing deadly peaks, riding 
hippogriffs through the air – an excellent quest.

Unfortunately, while they're gone the Witches besiege their homes, attempt to 
rape the (unbelievably beautiful) Lady Mevrian, and generally cause havoc. The 
Lords get back just in time, thank goodness, save Mevrian, kill all the Witches 
in an epic battle and then sit around moping at home once they've won. "What 
joy shall we have of soft beds and delicate meats and all the delights that be 
in many-mountained Demonland, if we must be stingless drones with no action to 
sharpen our appetites for ease?" Fortunately, the (of course incredibly 
beautiful and also magical) Queen Sophonisba wrenches the action back to the 
beginning and the book ends – unexpectedly, but rather brilliantly – as it 
began. "'Lord, it is an Ambassador from Witchland and his train. He craveth 
present audience.'"

Eddison's Worm was an inspiration to Tolkien, who wrote in a letter that he 
enjoyed his books "for their sheer literary merit", and CS Lewis was also a 
fan, judging that "no writer can be said to remind us of Eddison". But Tolkien 
wasn't entirely uncritical. He "disliked his characters (always excepting the
Lord Gro 
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicworm>)" – 
and I have to agree with him. Though the various Lords and Witches are fairly 
two-dimensional – either the strongest, most handsome, best fighters in the 
world, or boozing twits – Lord Gro is different. He's a brilliant statesman and 
negotiator whose fatal weakness is that he can never bear to be on the winning 
side, so switches allegiance just when he's brought the Witches, then the 
Demons, to the fore. Irresistible.

Tolkien also "thought [Eddison's] nomenclature slipshod and often inept", 
though for all his rigour, anyone who named a character Tom Bombadil is on 
shaky ground. Here I disagree. I don't care if there's no discernible logic to 
"the lean dark fingers of Tetrachnampf nan Tshark", the mountain Koshtra 
Belorn, or "the white gables of Islargyn" – they are marvellously evocative 
nonetheless. But in spite of that, Tolkien still judged him to be "the greatest 
and most convincing writer of 'invented worlds' 
<http://books.google.com/books?id=ZGzMwxyoi5wC&pg=PA182&dq=%E2%80%9CIn+spite+of+all+of+which,+I+still+think+of+him+as+the+greatest+and+most+convincing+writer+of+%27invented+worlds%27+that+I+have+read,%E2%80%9D&as_brr=3&ei=XtvESvnUEJOwNr6vnfAD#v=onepage&q=&f=false>
" that he had read. High praise indeed.

I'm not sure I'll be reading any more Eddison – he's fairly hard work – but I 
am still slightly overwhelmed by The Worm. I love it despite its flaws, and 
really want to know what you think, if you've dared to tackle it. If not,it's 
all here, for free <http://www.sacred-texts.com/ring/two/>.

But what next? Another Masterwork 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fantasy_Masterworks>? A British 
<http://www.britishfantasysociety.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=129&Itemid=63>
 orWorld Fantasy award <http://www.worldfantasy.org/awards/awardslist.html> 
winner (there's been talk about Gene Wolfe)? Tell me what to read ...
 