
By Crom <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crom_(fictional_deity)>! Eons have crept 
by since last I ventured into theWorld of Fantasy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/series/fantasy-reading>, about which I feel 
very bad. To be honest, it was the sheer size of The Complete Chronicles of 
Conan lurking by my bedside that put me off. I took it on two separate holidays 
but couldn't bring myself to read it; it was exhausting me before I'd even 
begun.

Aching and sore, my arms might not be what they once were, but I'm kicking 
myself for putting Robert E Howard off for so long for such a silly reason. 
This is the least tiring reading I can imagine; no thought required, just great 
big dollops of melodrama, evil jungle beasties and treasure hidden in lost 
cities. Say Conan today and it (unfortunately) summons up the image of a
loin-cloth clad governor of California 
<http://s.bebo.com/app-image/8047448397/5411656627/PROFILE/i.quizzaz.com/img/q/u/08/05/16/Arnold-Schwarzenegger---Conan-the-Barbarian--C10102051.jpeg>
, but Howard's muscle-bound barbarian, first published in Weird Tales magazine 
in 1932, is much more fun.

Of the stories I've read – and I've done my best, but no, I've not managed all 
of them – the Cimmerian has variouslyburgled a jewel-clad tower in which an 
elephant-headed being is imprisoned 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Tower_of_the_Elephant>, escaped from/killed a 
monstrous demon, girl intact by his side 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xuthal_of_the_Dusk> (actually, this happens in 
more than one), saved kingdoms, killed dragons and man-eating plants, won a 
thousand fair maidens' hearts and slain hundreds of foes. My favourites wereRed 
Nails <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Red_Nails> and Queen of the Black Coast 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Queen_of_the_Black_Coast> – perhaps 
unsurprisingly because they both have feisty female heroines as opposed to the 
fainting weaklings who are usually clinging to the barbarian's brawny arm with 
their untouched-by-the-fearsome-sun white hands.

Basically, these stories are pure pulp fiction, and all the more enjoyable for 
being unashamedly so. Rather than, as I've been doing, devouring several of 
them in one sitting, I think it would be better – less repetitive – to read 
them as they were originally published inWeird Tales 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weird_Tales>; I can imagine them working 
brilliantly in regular instalments,garish art 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margaret_Brundage> and all. They're the work of a 
young man, in his 20s –Howard committed suicide in 1936, at the age of 30 
<http://nndb.net/people/941/000045806/> – and they clearly came tumbling from 
his pen at full speed. Stephen King is quoted on my edition, saying they "seem 
to almost fall over themselves in their need to get out".

For all that, though, there are elements that jar horribly today. Villains are 
usually dark-skinned; the darker the eviller. The more lily-white a woman's 
skin, the more prized she is. Howard might be aproduct of his time 
<http://www.rehupa.com/romeo_southern.htm>, but so am I, and it's impossible to 
read sentences such as "in this accursed city … where white, brown, and black 
folk mingle together to produce hybrids of all unholy hues and breeds – who can 
tell who is a man, and who is a demon in disguise?" without cringing.

Howard's women, too, get me down. Conan is obviously written for boys, but why 
oh why are the ladies such wimps? Even the spirited Valeria in Red Nails – "as 
quick and ferocious as a tigress" – is popped on Conan's knee and caressed – 
against her will, but later, as "a chill crept through her veins", she will 
"unconsciously" lay her "white hand on her companion's muscular brown arm" for 
reassurance. And she's one of the good ones. Yasmela, white, supple (weirdly, 
they're often supple), beautiful and a princess, might loathe Conan's "raw 
brute strength and unashamed barbarism, yet something breathless and perilous 
inside her leaned toward him; the hidden primitive chord that lurks in every 
woman's soul was sounded and responded". God almighty. Later, she'll throw her 
white arms "convulsively about his mailed neck", and he'll fiercely crush her 
"slim white body".

I realise it might sound ridiculous to criticise the Conan stories for their 
attitude to women and race. What was I expecting, for heavens' sake? It's not 
that I'm averse to melodrama – far from it. I revelled in some of the stories' 
more preposterous excesses: who could resist Pelias the sorcerer, in The 
Scarlet Citadel, when he explains how he has been "kept alive, in shackles more 
grim than rusted iron", by his enemy? "He pent me in here with this devil 
flower whose seeds drifted down through the black cosmos from Yag the Accursed, 
and found fertile field only in the maggot-writhing corruption that seethes on 
the floor of hell." Pure, atmospheric, over-the-top evil joy.

As I said before, though, I can't put aside the stories' grating elements to 
lose myself entirely in their swashbuckling pleasures. MaxCairnduff said onmy 
last blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2010/jan/25/anubis-gates-tim-power> 
that they are "among the best literature that fantasy has produced, and 
incredibly influential". I'll take the influential point no problems, but I'd 
love it if someone could explain why they're so highly rated. I'm wondering if 
it's because a lot of people (probably male) read Conan as teenagers and 
remember him with huge fondness, but would be surprised if they went back to 
the stories today. They're fun, but they're so simplistic –Jane Gaskell 
<http://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/ea.cgi?Jane_Gaskell> does the same 
ancient-world-peopled-by-barbarians-and-gods thing so much better in theCija 
books <http://www.isfdb.org/cgi-bin/ea.cgi?Jane_Gaskell>.

Anyone read those, by the way? They might be utterly ludicrous too, but 
Gaskell writes better, thinks deeper and has a pinch of tongue-in-cheek to her. 
I read Gaskell when I was 14 – I swear she's still good today, though – and 
spent a couple of weeks saying "Oh gods" to myself, as Cija does, as I thought 
she was so cool. Any of you out there ever swear by Crom?

I think my next choice will be a female writer; the balance needs to be 
redressed a little.Death's Master by Tanith Lee 
<http://www.fantasticfiction.co.uk/l/tanith-lee/deaths-master.htm>, perhaps? As 
far as I can see, Lee is the only woman to have ever won aBritish Fantasy award 
<http://www.britishfantasysociety.org.uk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=129&Itemid=63>
, which is shocking. I'm open to suggestions, however – and I promise that this 
time around I'll be much quicker to get cracking.
 