
"To Dad. Happy Saturnalia/Birthday/New Year etc. This book is everything it's 
cracked up to be. Have a good escape from reality! Love, Nigel. Dec 1990."

So runs the inscription inside the cover of my copy of Tim Powers's The Anubis 
Gates, winner of the 1983 Philip K Dick Memorial award and the sixth novel I've 
read as part ofmy journey through the history of fantasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/fantasy-reading>. Regardless of the 
fact I'd fallen for Nigel already for wishing his dad a happySaturnalia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saturnalia>, I think he's got it exactly right. 
Once I'd started The Anubis Gates I couldn't put it down until I surfaced, 
breathless, from a torrential adventure which ranged from 19th-century poets to 
the gods of ancient Egypt. The story's fairly complex – it's one of those books 
where they don't even try to summarise it on the back; it's "a yarn, an 
adventure novel … a supernatural thriller, a literary mystery, a horror story" 
– but here goes.

Brendan Doyle, a somewhat wimpy American academic who's researching the 
scantily documented life of the mysterious 19th-century poet William Ashbless, 
is called to England at the whim of a millionaire who needs a Coleridge expert 
(Doyle had previously published a poorly reviewed biography of the Romantic 
poet). Why? Well, it turns out the millionaire, J Cochran Darrow, has 
discovered how to time travel, and is planning a lucrative trip back to the 
beginning of the 19th century and a certain pub where Coleridge gave a lecture, 
for which literature enthusiasts are shelling out top dollar.

Doyle agrees to go, but after hearing Coleridge – "a pudgy old fellow with 
long gray hair" – speak, is kidnapped by a gang of evil 
itinerants/magicians/followers of the ancient Egyptian gods. A long and 
glorious account of his escape and hapless journey through the streets and 
slums of 19th century London follows (I always adore fantasy storylines where 
horror after horror and ordeal after ordeal are piled onto the hero, who holds 
up regardless).

The premise of the book is that the magicians want to return the ancient 
Egyptian gods to the world; to do so, they need to restore Egypt as an 
independent power, and so come up with various plots – summoning Anubis, 
creating a Byron double that will murder King George … the obvious, really. For 
added excitement, there's also werewolf/bodysnatcher Dog-Face Joe, who's 
patrolling the streets, more time travel, and a terrifyingly twisted 
clown/magician called Horrabin to provide the shivers. Doyle is caught up in 
the middle of this – I don't want to give too much away, but it's an immensely 
satisfying plot. Once you've accepted the time travel concept, it slots 
together brilliantly, twists and all – I have to say I saw the major one coming 
(who is William Ashbless?) but that in no way affected my enjoyment. Apart from 
the fact that it links to the modern world – one of my favourite touches in 
fantasy, and the first book in this series to do so – who could fail to love a 
book that sees a brainwashed Byron attempting to foment unrest amongst "the 
common labourers"?

And may I also pay special tribute to Powers's Coleridge, who in my opinion 
steals the book when, finding himself among a series of monsters created by 
Horrabin decides he's having an opium dream. "Bravely curious about what sort 
of monsters might inhabit the deepest levels of his mind", he hears an echoing 
scream. "And what was that? he'd wondered. My ambition, fettered and all but 
starved by my sloth? No, that's misleading; more likely it's the embodiment of 
my duties – not the least of which is talent – ignored by me and imprisoned in 
this bottommost oubliette of my mind." So he sets the monsters free. Wonderful.

I'm certainly not the only one to think The Anubis Gates is a cracking read. 
My last few fantasy blogs saw many of you heartily recommend it; the Guardian 
calls Powers "the best fantasy writer to appear for decades" on my edition; and 
it's got rave reviews all over the place online. "One of modern fantasy's most 
dazzling acts of the imagination,"they say here 
<http://www.sfreviews.net/anubis_gates.html>. "Superb," they agree here 
<http://bobsbooks.wordpress.com/2007/06/08/the-anubis-gates-by-tim-powers/>. 
And it makes Cheryl Morgan'stop 12 steampunk classics here 
<http://www.flashlightworthybooks.com/Top-Classic-Steampunk-Sci-Fi-Books/403>. 
The book is actually seen as one of the founding novels of the steampunk genre 
(the term is,it says here <http://www.irosf.com/q/zine/article/10114>, dated to 
a 1987 letter to Locus Magazine by SF writer KW Jeter, who wrote that 
"Victorian fantasies are going to be the next big thing, as long as we can come 
up with a fitting collective term for Powers, Blaylock and myself. Something 
based on the appropriate technology of the era; like 'steampunks', perhaps").

Powers himself, though, seems to resist this sort of categorisation; he 
"seemed a bit bemused about the term", according toSteampunk Scholar 
<http://steampunkscholar.blogspot.com/2009/05/review-anubis-gates-by-tim-powers.html>
, who met him last year, "although he's not dismissive of being included within 
the steampunk umbrella, or parasol". He continues: "Powers is a superior 
writer; he just happens to have no higher agenda, exemplified best by his 
comment at the Eaton conference regarding Dracula. He related how people often 
tell him Bram Stoker's novel is about the situation of women in the 19th 
century, to which he replies: 'Really? I thought it was about a creature who 
stays immortal by drinking blood.'"

I think this is spot on. What The Anubis Gates is, and should be enjoyed for, 
is a thrilling, riproaring, wonderfully inventive adventure. It's well-written 
– nothing ever jars;there are no dosts or thees here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jul/10/british- 
fantasy-awards-michael-moorcock>. Perhaps it's no Book of the New Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/nov/23/the-book-of-the-new-sun-science-fiction-ulysses>
 to have you scratching your head about meanings and undertones weeks later, 
but then why should it be? Tons of fun, loads of scares, buckets of humour – it 
doesn't need to be anything more.

I'd love to know what you think, though. After the sheer pleasure of Powers, 
I'm wondering if, next, I should return to my original plan of reading through 
the World Fantasy Award/British Fantasy award winners … which would mean it'd 
be a choice of Richard Matheson'sBid Time Return 
<http://www.worldfantasy.org/awards/awardslist.html> or more Michael Moorcock 
<http://www.britishfantasysociety.org/index.php? option=>. Or have you any 
better suggestions? I fancy something older, tougher, meatier than the Powers, 
something defining for the genre, but potentially less jaw-droppingly brilliant 
than the Wolfe … I can't always be raving with delight. Thoughts very welcome.
 