
As northerly winds have continued to bring wintry conditions to the UK, the 
same feed of Arctic air has plunged deep into west Europe. The Alps and their 
plethora of ski resorts have had some of the heaviest snowfalls this season, 
with the north-west Alps, especially in France andSwitzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/switzerland>, getting particularly deep 
coverings in the latter part of last week.

Chablais and the Mont Blanc massif near Chamonix each got more than 1.5 metres 
of snow. The overload of snow led to numerous large avalanches across the Alps, 
one of which, on the Piz Vilan, in Switzerland, killed five people.

The unsettled conditions also affected other parts of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/index/europe>, in the form of torrential 
rain. The Basque region, northern Spain, had heavy rain, with Bilbao recording 
more than 80mm in just 24 hours, close to the monthly average.

The storms were accompanied by strong winds and big waves which damaged boats 
and promenades along the coastal strip of north-westSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/spain>.

Fresh off the back of strong blizzards across the north-east US early last 
week, more cold and very icy conditions have struck large portions ofCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/canada> and the US. Over the weekend snow 
blanketed large swaths of north and east US, from the Midwest to the 
north-east. Iowa reported nearly 30cm of snow in 24 hours, while 15cm of snow 
grounded all flights at Chicago’s O’Hare airport. Freezing rain struck the 
northern Midwest, coating roads and pavements with solid ice.

The wintry blast was rather fitting as, on Monday, Pennsylvania’s most famous 
groundhog, Punxsutawney Phil – a live rodent cast as a weather predictor – 
“declared” another six weeks of winter after “casting his shadow” on Groundhog 
Day, the second day of February.
 