
First-half fouling

In the Brazil versus Colombia quarter-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/04/brazil-colombia-world-cup-quarter-final-match-report>
 the Spanish referee Carlos Velasco Carballo awarded 54 free-kicks – more than 
either of the most notorious gorefests in World Cup history, the 1962 Battle of 
Santiago, between Chile and Italy, or 1954’s Battle of Berne, between Hungary 
and Brazil – but showed just four yellow cards. Even though there were 
precisely as many fouls in the first half as in the second, the first booking 
did not arrive until the 64th minute. Most controversially, Juan Zúñiga was not 
cautioned for the foul that left Neymar with a fractured vertebra and briefly 
unable to feel his legs.

In its aftermath the German tabloid Bild alleged that Fifa had come to a 
“secret arrangement” with referees, instructing them not to book players in the 
first half of matches unless absolutely necessary. A Fifa spokesperson insisted 
there was no truth in the story – “Protecting [players] is the most important 
thing we do,” they huffed – but the statistics seem hard to refute.

In the four quarter-finals just one man – Costa Rica’s Júnior Díaz – received 
a first-half booking, but 12 men were cautioned after half-time (and two in the 
single period of extra time). That is one booking for every 360 first-half 
minutes, and one every 15 minutes thereafter. In the last 16 there were eight 
first-half bookings, compared with 17 in the second half and six in extra time 
(even though just four of the eight matches had extra time). That’s one booking 
every 45 first-half minutes, and one every 20 minutes and 52 seconds 
thereafter. In the group stage there were 42 first-half bookings (one every 51 
minutes and 26 seconds), and 86 in the second half (one every 25 minutes and 7 
seconds). All this is despite a near-even distribution of fouls – up to the end 
of the quarter-finals there had been 843 in first halves, and 894 in second 
halves.

This is not an entirely new trend – in the last Premier League season there 
were nearly twice as many bookings in the second half (828) as there were in 
the first half (422) – butCarballo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/05/brazil-colombia-world-cup-referee>
 and his colleagues do seem to be stretching it to hitherto unexplored heights. 
It’s increasingly clear that this is indeed a game of two halves, and that 
fouls will only be seriously punished in one of them.

Ashley Cole

Leighton Baines was isolated and exposed as Italy attacked at their leisure 
down England’s left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/15/england-italy-world-cup-2014-group-d-match-report>
 in their opening game, was only marginally more assured in his second 
appearance against Uruguay and was omitted for their by-then-meaningless third. 
Cole was often outstanding in winning 107 caps for his country but rarely has 
he looked quite as good as when, in his absence, Antonio Candreva skipped past 
Baines with humiliating ease before dropping a cross on to Mario Balotelli’s 
head in Manaus.

Ravshan Irmatov

The Uzbek whistle-wielder has made history in Brazil, taking charge of four 
matches which, when added to the five he officiated in South Africa four years 
ago, gives him the mostWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> appearances of any 
referee ever. At the sprightly age of 36, he is likely to return in Russia and 
stretch his lead still further, and is the bookmakers’ favourite to take charge 
of this year’s final. Irmatov’s popularity with the selectors is unusual: he 
was the only referee to get five matches in 2010, and is one of only two to 
have already had four in this tournament.

Irmatov is proof of Fifa’s variable-amounts-of-tolerance policy regarding 
refereeing errors.Yuichi Nishimura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/12/brazil-croatia-world-cup-2014-group-a-match-report>
, for example, got a penalty decision wrong in the opening game between Brazil 
and Croatia and was never seen again. Felix Brych had a perfectly good first 
game, butfailed to give Russia a penalty in his second and when they lost to 
Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/22/belgium-russia-world-cup-2014-group-h-match-report>
 he too was dumped.

Irmatov and his team, on the other hand, made a terrible offside decision at 
1-1 in their first match, betweenSwitzerland and Ecuador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jun/15/switzerland-ecuador-world-cup-2014-group-e-match-report>
, but got away with it because the Swiss won anyway (thanks, it must be said, 
to an excellent stoppage-time advantage). Then in their second game Irmatov’s 
squad missed a clear penalty when Croatia’s Darijo Srna palmed away Andrés 
Guardado’s shot – with the score at 0-0 – and got away with it because the 
Mexicans won anyway. Indeed, given the potentially tournament-ending 
implications of the Swissnot scoring their last-gasp winner in Brasília it is 
hardly surprising that he was so keen for that attack to continue.

His tournament has improved since, though no performance has been perfect – in 
his third game Irmatov absent-mindedly ran right into the USA’s Jermaine Jones 
as the midfielder tried to burst into Germany’s penalty area, leaving the 
referee grinning but the player flat on the turf, and in his fourth he did 
nothing to tone downTim Krul’s in-your-face shootout antics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jul/06/netherlands-keeper-tim-krul-intimidation-tactics>
 against Costa Rica. Irmatov may be more experienced but he has often looked 
less assured than he did four years ago – not that anyone at Fifa seems to have 
noticed.

The substitute

It has been a wonderful tournament for substitutes, with players rising from 
the bench to score fully 18.24% of all goals up to the end of the quarter-final 
stage, and Holland’s Tim Krul proving the magic works at both ends by removing 
his bib to decide a penalty shootout. But the tournament’s outstanding 
substitute did not score at all: the 20-year-old AmericanDeAndre Yedlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/07/deandre-yedlin-roma-liverpool-usa-world-cup>
, who arrived in Brazil a relative unknown with only two caps in his cupboard, 
left it the rumoured target of Liverpool, Roma and others after a series of 
energetic appearances off the bench. The only disappointing moment for the 
World Cup’s benched men was when Óscar Granados was booked for being a bit 
narked when Costa Rica were not awarded a second-half penalty against Greece in 
the last 16. Mind you, even then the substitute was right – it was a clear 
handball (even thoughLos Ticos won anyway the referee involved, Australia’s 
Benjamin Williams, was sent home without seeing further action).

Brazuca

For many years scientists worked on making footballs smoother and rounder, and 
in 2010 they got as close as they ever will to a perfectly smooth, perfectly 
round ball. At which point, they discovered that smooth, round balls were not, 
in fact, very good, especially at high altitudes. Though at the last minute 
Adidas tried to improve things by adding scratches – or “aero-grooves” in 
new-ball speak – David James still thought the Jabulani was “horrible”, while 
Gianluigi Buffon said it was “really unpredictable” and “not decent”.

The Brazuca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2014/may/14/brazil-2014-the-physics-behind-the-brazuka>
, though, has been something of a triumph, even though it is still very round 
indeed, generating absolutely no furious player comments and gleaning 3.12 
million followers on Twitter with occasionally witty status updates, insisting 
“I’m trying to go in everyone, I’m really trying!” during a goalless draw, and 
complaining that “Manuel Neuer won’t even let me in the box, let alone the net” 
as the German sweeper-keeper frustrated Algeria.

Group stages

Not long ago this was being widely touted as the most open and exciting World 
Cup of all time. After the first two rounds of group matches it seemed a 
perfectly reasonable claim: 94 goals had flooded in, at the rate of 2.937 per 
game, leaving fans worldwide drooling onto their sofas and keyboards. But there 
is nothing so debilitating to a footballer as fear, andas the matches grew more 
important the torrent of goals started to slow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jul/03/world-cup-goals-excitement>
: the final round of group games might have had a few goal-heavy treasures –a 
couple of 4-1s and a 3-2 leap out – but with 42 goals and 2.625 a game it was 
the beginning of the end. The last 16 saw 18 goals, but exclude the seven 
scored in extra time and each 90-minute match mustered a meagre 1.375, a figure 
that slipped further in the quarter-finals to just 1.25. In all, games from the 
second half of the tournament have provided 2.071 goals each, excluding extra 
time.

The 2010 World Cup provided just 2.27 goals per game overall, but in that 
tournament the last 16 featured some particularly lusty attacking (and 
England’s helpful defending), ending with a healthy 2.625 goals per game 
(excluding extra time), while the quarter-finals averaged 2.5. Even the 1990 
World Cup, the only tournament to average fewer goals than the last, narrowly 
outdid the current one both in the last 16 (1.625 goals, excluding extra time) 
and the quarter-finals (1.5).
 