
The world's largest sauna, a black-metal band playing rocks, deer-hide drums 
and a goat horn, and experimental films projected onto a giant rack for drying 
fish are just some of the attractions hoping to lure visitors toSalt, the 
world's first Arctic arts festival <http://www.salted.no/>.

From Friday, the 400-strong population of Sandhornøya, a remote Norwegian 
island 90 minutes' drive from the nearest big town, promises to be swelled by 
festivalgoers ready to explore what organisers call "anArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> state of mind" through art, music, 
architecture and food.

Most of the action will be concentrated on a beach on the island's northern 
tip, 2km long and 300 metres wide. "It has this really special white sand," said
architect and artist Joar Nango <http://www.youraga.ca/the-joar-nango-lecture/>
, who isSami, the indigenous people of the area 
<http://boreale.konto.itv.se/samieng.htm>. "Right behind there's a 
500-metre-tall, black mountain wall which is totally vertical. In the wall, 
there are eight pairs of eagles nesting. It's a magical place."

Nango has built three shelters on the beach where visitors will be able to 
stay. Sleeping four apiece, they are based on traditionalSami storage houses 
called njalla <http://sv.wikipedia.org/wiki/Njalla>. Nango's dwellings are 
built on skis so can be pulled around the beach, and have a glass roof to view 
the northern lights.

Other accommodation includes traditional Sami tents, with a floor of reindeer 
skin laid over birch twigs. "It gives a lot of warmth to the room," said Nango.

For the festival, Sami Rintala of Rintala Eggertsson Architects 
<http://www.ri-eg.com/> has built three "arctic pyramids", all based on 
traditional fish-drying racks, a nod to the area's first dominant industry 
exporting dried, salted cod to countries like Spain and Brazil. One has been 
designed to show a video installation bythe Chinese artist Yang Fudong 
<http://www.mariangoodman.com/artists/yang-fudong/>, which will be projected on 
it throughout the night.

The second building is a concert hall, and the third is what Rintala, a Finn, 
claims is the world's biggest sauna.

"The Finnish military might have something for 50-100 people but we are 
110-120, depending on how close you want to sit to someone half-naked." Thanks 
to a glass wall at the end of the building, Rintala added, festivalgoers will 
be able to sweat watching the sun set in the Arctic Atlantic.

The festival was co-founded by Erlend Mogård-Larsen and curator Helga-Marie 
Nordby 
<http://www.nuits-sonores.com/en/programmation/#!programmation=participant$nordby-helga-marie/2068>
, who got the idea after working on an art biennial in Lofoten, Norway in 2010. 
The pair spent two years searching northern Norway for a suitable location 
before alighting on Sandhornøya.

"When we came here there was no doubt," said Nordby on the eve of the 
festival. "Right now the sun is shining and it's totally quiet – normally there 
is a lot of wind. It's just amazing."

Despite the island's small population, Nordby and Rintala say that the local 
populace have embraced the festival. "The mayor – he's more like a sheriff – 
welcomed us with open arms," said Nordby. "There are 24 people who own the 
rights to the beach and all of them immediately said they wanted us to do [the 
building projects]."

"I'm representing the local voices and I feel very respected and listened to," 
said Nango. "The festival is a wonderful initiative that's done something a lot 
of art projects have tried to do, which is a global, contemporary cultural 
theme with a very grounded local context."

Indigenous performers like the Sami singer Elle Márjá Eira 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w7ybe2ZU9e8> will be playing with acts like 
"arctic ambient" musician Biosphere <http://biosphere.bandcamp.com/>; Wardruna, 
a black-metal-affiliated band <http://www.wardruna.com/> who play traditional 
Norwegian instruments; and musicians from theArctic Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.noso.no/en/>, who will be performing on the beach.

The festival will continue for a full year before moving to seven more 
northern locations for a year apiece. Greenland is next, with locations in 
Scotland and Ireland being pondered by Nordby and Mogård-Larsen.

Before that, Salt has to brave its first winter. Temperatures on Sandhornøya 
can plunge to -20C (-4F), and the festival's architecture will be buffeted by 
the sea. "It can get quite rough. Dealing with the weather is part of the 
project, but it's stronger than us," said Nordby, adding that she would be 
philosophical if Salt ended up getting washed out to sea. "If you're getting 
too cold you can just jump into the sauna."

Rintala, who lives locally, said that the island was more than ready for its 
first arts festival. Far from worrying that visitors will spoil it, "we want to 
show the beauty of nature here to people who wouldn't otherwise come.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, music and good food are the 
basic pillars of civilisation, and we feel very comfortable supporting them."
 