
I admit it: I have been seduced by Patricia A McKillip's The Forgotten Beasts 
of Eld, the 1975 winner of the inauguralWorld Fantasy awards 
<http://www.worldfantasy.org/awards/1975.html> and the latest in my trawl 
through fantasy champions of days gone by. Gorgeous, lyrical prose, a story 
that is more than just a linear journey from one drama to another, and a 
three-dimensional female character: it feels a million miles away from my 
manful slogs throughMichael Moorcock's Corum trilogy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/jul/10/british-fantasy-awards-michael-moorcock>
, andPoul Anderson's Hrolf Kraki's Saga 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/jul/30/poul-anderson-hrolf-krakis-saga>
.

Sybel, McKillip's ivory-haired heroine, "beautiful as moonlit ice", lives 
alone on a mountain with a collection of magical, mythical beasts: the Boar 
Cyrin, the Dragon Gyld, the Black Swan of Terleth, the tawny Lyon Gules, the 
Cat Moriah and the falcon Ter. She "called" them and keeps them with her thanks 
to her power to know their true names (a magic I especially like, ever since 
Ged first named his shadow in Ursula Le Guin's Earthsea books) and her heart's 
desire is to call the "pennant-winged, moon-coloured" bird Liralen. Icy and 
emotionless, her world is disrupted when Coren, prince of Sirle, seventh son of 
a seventh son, comes with a newborn baby to her gates. Sybel doesn't want to 
take Tamlorn, but there is nowhere else safe for the heir to the kingdom, so 
she raises him on her mountainside, and starts to love him.

Her love draws her into the world of men and a country at war: Tam's father, 
King Drede, and Coren both want him for what he can bring them, and Sybel too 
for her power and her beauty. She is determined not to help either side, but 
once she's started to feel emotion, she can't stop.

There's a truly horrifying scene when Drede's sorcerer "calls" Sybel to him, 
and threatens to take away her memories and her free will to make her his. 
Coren wins her because he's truly in love with her, but Sybel has now taken the 
step into the world of human emotions, and is full of rage and hatred for 
Drede, plotting his annihilation with her herd of beasts. McKillip has fun 
piling the negatives onto Sybel in the second half of the book: can we still 
like a heroine who will wipe a memory from her husband's mind, knowing how much 
the idea of this troubled her when she was poised to receive the same 
treatment? And what of her beasts: much as they love her, do they really want 
to bend to her every whim? ("Free to fly to the world's edge on the rim of 
twilight ... Free to be stroked by fat-fingered kings in the Southern Deserts, 
to hear the whisperings of moon-eyed witches," they dream: probably not.)

If I've made it sound generic, it isn't. Eschewing the "farm boy discovers 
he's heir to the kingdom" trope – Tam is very much a secondary character to 
Sybel – The Forgotten Beasts of Eld is an elegant look at ideas of memory and 
captivity: even the ending feels ambiguous, a little empty, as our great 
sorceress Sybel leaves her fortress of solitude to mother "a houseful of 
wizardlings". It's not quite a happy ever after for the most powerful woman in 
the land, and I don't think McKillip intended it to be.

Sprinkled throughout with half-forgotten myths and legends – "the giant Grof 
was hit in one eye by a stone, and that eye turned inward so that it looked 
into his mind, and he died of what he saw there" – The Forgotten Beasts of Eld 
feels timeless. But it doesn't take itself too seriously, either: "I told you 
to drop him off the top of Eld Mountain," says Sybel privately to her Falcon, 
on first meeting Coren. The Liralen, she says later, is "very hard to find, 
especially when people interrupt me with babies".

I think I've fallen for this book because it's so different to what I was 
expecting: a cool drink of water in the midst of the overwrought, derivative, 
under-edited and overwritten tomes that dominate much of fantasy today – and, 
judging from my excursions into Corum and Kraki, did in the past as well. And 
others agree: "it feels ageless, eternal, light and perfect like a star",they 
say here <http://www.sfsite.com/03b/fb220.htm>; "one of the great single-volume 
fantasies",says this site <http://www.sffworld.com/book/1591.html>; another 
reviewer <http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classics2> 
praises McKillip's "evocative, lapidary style". I'd love to know what you think 
if you've read it too.

I am now girding myself for ER Eddison's The Worm Ouroboros: DafydA warned 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/jul/30/poul-anderson-hrolf-krakis-saga>
 that "High Fantasy Overwriting in spades [it] doth have". Bring it on, I say: 
I am sufficiently refreshed by McKillip to tackle the worst he may have to 
offer.
 