
Everyone warned me about injury, but I secretly laughed them off. I was 
warming up properly, stretching afterwards and, short of lining myself with 
cotton wool, doing everything possible to look after my legs. No way could 
injury strike me down. Except that it did.

I had been pounding the treadmill in an ill-advised interval training session: 
two minutes at full pelt, two minutes at normal speed. Then one and a half 
minutes of each and so on down until I reached 30 seconds at each speed. It's 
the athletes' tried and tested way to increase aerobic capacity and, hence, 
maximum running speed.

In a bout of madness, I was also wearing brand new trainers (my first proper 
running shoes). Normally, runners spend a couple of weeks walking around in new 
shoes to mould them to their feet - in my excitement, I hadn't done this.

A dull ache in my right knee that hadn't gone away after three days was the 
first sign that something was wrong. By now I was used to the aches and pains 
straight after runs but this new pain was sharper and more persistent. I 
stopped running for a week, then two. And still the knee grumbled on in pain.

A month of inaction later (which explains this column's temporary absence, 
concerned readers), I went to see a physiotherapist. She told me the problem 
lay in the faulty biomechanics of my leg. Some muscles were weakened, leading 
to a running action that put a twisting stress on my knee.

There was nothing I could have done to avoid the injury, said the physio, who 
was surprised I had trained for as long as I did before it flared up. Training 
had probably brought my knee out of alignment for long enough to inflame the 
tendons there. On no account was I to try any running until the problem had 
been fixed.

Eight weeks later, I haven't run a step. It'll take several more weeks of 
stretches and strength-building in my right leg to get me back up to speed. In 
the meantime, I've been told to swim or get on the cross-trainer to maintain 
aerobic fitness.

But the marathon cares nothing for my setbacks. And a tiny, but persistent, 
thought makes me wonder if I'll have enough time to recuperate and complete my 
training. Watch this space.

Â· Alok is running the London marathon this year
 