
Sir Martin Sorrell's WPP and France's Publicis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/publicis> Groupe have ruled out mounting 
bids to buy Aegis's Synovate market research business, although both could be 
interested in the UK-based group's media buying assets should the sale trigger 
a full breakup.

Shares in Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> Group climbed to a 
four-year high on Monday after the company confirmed talks with French market 
research group Ipsos about a £500m deal to buy rival Synovate.

Aegis's share price climbed 7% to 152p – a height not reached since April 2007 
– as analysts factored in prospective counterbids and the prospect of the 
group's core media buying networks, which include Carat and Vizeum, being sold.

However, the field of prospective bidders for Synovate will not include WPP 
and Maurice Lévy's Publicis,which both pursued deals for Aegis Group back in 
2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2005/oct/28/aegisgroupbusiness.advertising?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Lévy, heading Publicis's annual general meeting in Paris on Tuesday, said in 
response to a question from the floor that the company was "not a candidate" 
for buying Synovate.

Shareholders also voted to raise the age limit for members of the management 
board from 70 to 75 in order to allow Lévy, who is 69, to continue to run the 
business and find time to adequately groom a successor. Lévy's contract was due 
to expire at the end of this year.

WPP <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wpp> is also understood to have 
"absolutely no interest" in making a move, according to a senior executive at 
the marketing services group.

Sorrell, who is notorious for finding it difficult to keep out of a bidding 
war for a prized asset, acquired research group TNS formore than £1bn in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/06/wpp.taylornelsonsofres?INTCMP=SRCH>
. A number of City analysts – including Deutsche Bank and Liberum – consider 
WPP an unlikely bidder due to "significant market share" issues.

The company recently said M&A activity would "focus on small- and medium-sized 
companies focused on new markets, new media and consumer insight" spending "at 
least £200m or more per annum".

Potential bidders could include Japan's Dentsu, US-based Omnicom or 
German-listed research group Gfk, which looked to tie up with TNS before WPP 
acquired it.

Assuming a deal for Synovate goes ahead many observers believe that will put 
Aegis Media into play.

In such a case Vincent Bolloré, who is chairman and 33% stakeholder in WPP and 
Publicis rival Havas, is the kingmaker given he holds a 26.5% shareholding in 
Aegis Media.

"Bolloré has a stake [in Aegis] and he doesn't do uninvited deals," said one 
source. "Bolloré is the man in control."

Bolloré has long harboured designs on a deal with Havas – the group lacks the 
muscle of Aegis's media buying business. However, he recently changed his tone, 
describing the holding in Aegis as no longer a "strategic" investment but a 
"financial" investment.

Nevertheless he added that he will "keep his options open" over the future of 
Aegis. If Aegis Media came into play the usual array of bidders has been 
speculated including US groups Omnicom and IPG, as well as WPP and Publicis.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 