
The old adage that it's not the winning but the taking part that counts seems 
to be coming true for this year's X Factor finalists afterSimon Cowell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell> indicated all four acts could 
sign lucrative contracts.

But the real winner is Cowell himself after 20m viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/dec/10/x-factors-strongest-year-yet>
, the most for any British TV talent show, were expected to tune in to today's 
big final. The music mogul and show creator has already seen hispersonal stock 
rise by £40m to £165m since last year 
<http://www.nme.com/news/paul-mccartney/50796>.

While contestants in earlier series fought it out to win a once in a lifetime 
prize of a £1m record deal, the latest set of finalists – Cher Lloyd, teenage 
boyband One Direction,Rebecca Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rebecca-ferguson> and series favourite Matt 
Cardle – are all tipped to be signed by record companies.

Mary Byrne, who controversially left the show after a last-minute rule change 
allowed the judges to put Lloyd through instead of allowing the public vote to 
decide, has already been signed by Sony to release an album next year.

Last week Cowell said he had not ruled out giving recording contracts to all 
the final four acts 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1337608/X-Factor-final-2010-Simon-Cowell-contracts-EVERY-performer-final.html>
, meaning Lloyd and the other runners up will certainly find themselves back in 
the limelight.

"I haven't made a decision yet on whether I will give all finalists a record 
deal," he said. "But it is definitely a possibility. I will just have to see 
how they perform."

While a £1m contract might sound large, recording contracts have not increased 
with inflation <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-10654380>. By 
contrast Cowell has seen his coffers overflow, with plans for a US version of 
the show imminent and a nationwide X Factor live UK tour kicking off in 
February 2011.

The last two series have seen both winner and runner-up snapped up by Sony 
Music, which also owns Cowell's own label Syco Music.

Last year's winner, Joe McElderry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/joe-mcelderry>, and Olly Murs, his more 
critically acclaimed runner-up, both signed to Syco Music and Epic Records.

The Brit and Mobo award winning boyband JLS were runners-up in 2008 and have 
since gained three UK No 1 hit singles and released a US single. The 2008 
winner,Alexandra Burke <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alexandra-burke>, 
also signed to Epic and has enjoyed chart success.

But being a winner is itself no guarantee of continued success. While 2006 
winner Leona Lewis is nowreportedly worth £11m 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/personalfinance/7629549/Sunday-Times-Rich-List-2010-Harry-Potter-stars-dominate-top-20-young-millionaires-list.html>
, Leon Jackson, who won a year later,was dropped by Syco in 2009 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/entertainment/7954964.stm> after his single When 
You Believe reached No 3 in the charts.

While Cowell's X Factor earnings keep growing, so does the backlash.

McElderry failed to top last year's Christmas singles chart after hundreds of 
thousands of fans, driven by an anti-Cowell Facebook campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/dec/20/rage-against-machine-christmas-number-1>
, bought the expletive-heavy Killing in the Name by Rage Against the Machine.

This year, The X Factor's chart dominance is challenged by a number of comedy 
spin-off campaigns <http://vimeo.com/17426438>.
 