
Yahoo has abandoned plans to sell its $31bn stake in Chinese e-commerce 
business Alibaba, announcing instead that it would be keepingAlibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> and getting rid of everything 
else.

CEO Marissa Mayer and chairman of the company’s board Maynard Webb called the 
process a “reverse spin” in a conference call with investors on Wednesday. 
Rather than spin off one division, Yahoo will spin itself off into a separate, 
publicly traded holding company that will contain Yahoo’s core business and its 
stake inYahoo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo> Japan.


The troubled tech company has struggled to find a direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/03/yahoo-potential-sale-marissa-mayer-stock-price>
 and under Mayer’s leadership had concentrated on its still huge user base. 
Mayer has made dozens of acquisitions and added original video, star 
commentators and magazine-style content in a bid to grow the business. Now it 
seems Yahoo’s future strategy is mainly about tax planning.

“We certainly appreciate simplicity, but the Alibaba shares would be taxable 
to Yahoo and would result in further taxation to our shareholders, so there 
would be double taxation,” said Mayer.

Yahoo's 'seemingly permanent decline': is this the end for the once-mighty 
firm?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/03/yahoo-potential-sale-marissa-mayer-stock-price>
Activist investor Starboard Value sent an open letter to Yahoo in November 
instructing the company to spin off its internet search and display advertising 
businesses and to devote the company to Aabaco (the division that owns the 
Alibaba stake) and Yahoo Japan, a joint venture with Japanese telecoms company 
Softbank. The proposed move would leave the current company’s most valuable 
joint ventures in a separate holding company and split them from Yahoo’s dicey 
advertising businesses.

“Yahoo is the only Silicon Valley company we know that currently has a stock 
price almost entirely driven by the value of an entity outside of its control,” 
wrote Starboard principal Jeffrey Smith last month. “Yahoo is at a disadvantage 
in recruiting the best talent because its stock price performance does not 
reflect the performance of Yahoo employees, but rather the performance of 
Alibaba Group.”
 