
The bad news keeps on coming for Yahoo. On the same day the company reached a 
shortlist for the sale of its troubled assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/07/verizon-yahoo-bid>, the 
fallen tech giant once again missed its quarterly earnings predictions.

Revenue for the company’s second quarter was $1.31bn. Revenue, minus 
commissions paid to partners for web traffic, fell 19% in the second quarter, 
the sixth decline in the past seven periods.

Yahoo's 'seemingly permanent decline': is this the end for the once-mighty 
firm?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/03/yahoo-potential-sale-marissa-mayer-stock-price>
Investors have demonstrated renewed optimism about the company’s stock as it 
seeks a buyer – the share price rose more than 13% this year so far.CEO Marissa 
Mayer is rumored to be on her way out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/19/yahoo-marissa-mayer-sale-buyout>
, but the company has given no indication of when she will go or who will 
replace her.

Yahoo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo> is reviewing a third and 
potentially final round of bids for its web properties that is expected to 
include Verizon Communications and private-equity firm TPG. Bidders have 
reportedly expressed concerns about Yahoo’s flagging fortunes. Once Silicon 
Valley’s pre-eminent online presence, it has fallen further and further behind 
Google parent Alphabet and Facebook.

The company announced it would fire 15% of its workforce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/02/yahoo-earnings-cutting-workforce-closing-offices-tech>
 in February as it tried to recoup money following a series of big-ticket 
purchases. Mayer could potentiallywalk away with a $137m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/19/yahoo-marissa-mayer-sale-buyout>
 payoff if she is fired.

“With the lowest cost structure and headcount in a decade, we continue to make 
solid progress against our 2016 plan,” said Mayer. “In addition to our efforts 
to improve the operating business, our board has made great progress on 
strategic alternatives. We are relentlessly focused on delivering shareholder 
value.”


Ahead of the results Ross Levinsohn, the company’s interim president whom 
Mayer beat out for the top job in 2012, was asked what he thought was the 
future held for his old company. He elected to quote Rocky III: “I think the 
prediction is pain,” Levinsohn said in aCNBC interview 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/07/18/the-prediction-is-pain-for-yahoo-former-interim-ceo-said.html>
.


“The state is troubled, clearly,” Levinsohn said. “I think we can look back 
over the last four years and say the strategy did not pay off.”

Yahoo has pursued revenue growth along a number of avenues, none of them 
ultimately very lucrative and all of them advertising-based. The company tried 
to program high-end video like Netflix and Hulu but ended up with an anemic 
market share after years of changing tacks – at no point were its programs 
available on a TV except through an XBox gaming console – and last year it 
announced a $42m writedown on the cost of the programming itself.

From there, investors pressured the company to decide how to deal with its 
stake in Chinese e-tailer Alibaba, its most significant financial asset. Most 
of the company’s shareholders would prefer to have a stake inAlibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> alone, but Yahoo is still trying 
to find away to spin off its stake without a major tax burden.

Yahoo still engages a huge number of people: 228.2 million users visit the 
parent site alone, with an average time spent on the site per month of 12 
hours. Its Yahoo Mail and Tumblr products have solid viewer figures, as well. 
But growth has eluded, and continues to elude, one of the first digital 
companies to become a household word.
 