
Sicily

Almost 60 years old and still going strong, Club Med, the granddaddy of 
all-inclusives, now has more than 80 villages as far afield as Bora Bora to 
choose from. Closer to home, Club Med Kamarina serves up a mix of great food, 
cracking childcare and excellent activities - from circus skills and sailing 
classes for kids as young as four, to trapeze lessons for the young at heart - 
on Sicily's south-west coast.

• Club Med (0845 367 6767) clubmed.co.uk <http://clubmed.co.uk> offers seven 
nights for two adults and two children from £4,144, inc flights, based on July 
departures. (Book before 31 March for bonus of £450.)

Turkey

We'd be amazed if you hear the words "I'm bored. . ." at LykiaWorld in 
Antalya. On offer are water sports, 2.5km of private beach, eight pools - and 
then they up the ante with an activities list that reads like the London 2012 
proposal. Nordic walking, pilates, tai chi, aikido, acrobatics, dance, 
painting, cooking . . . You can even learn how to lob a boomerang. The kids' 
club caters for babies through to stroppy teens, while the Ayurveda & Wellness 
Centre provides an escape from activity overkill.

• First Choice (0871 200 7799, firstchoice.co.uk <http://firstchoice.co.uk>) 
offers seven nights in a family room for two adults and two children from 
£2,638, inc flights from East Midlands, departing 25 August.

France

With 30km of beach on your doorstep and an 8,000-hectare pine forest out back, 
it's the best of both worlds at Club Med's La Palymyre Atlantique. Set on the 
Avert peninsula, you're brilliantly placed to appreciate the resort's sailing 
school. Landlubbers can brush up on tennis, archery, climbing and 
rollerblading, or explore the surrounding 65km of cycle tracks. Outstanding 
food and kids' clubs for four- to 18-year-olds are part of the deal.

• Club Med (0845 367 6767, clubmed.co.uk <http://clubmed.co.uk>) offers seven 
nights for two adults and two children (two-11 years, under twos go free) from 
£4,270, inc flights, based on 19/26 July departures. Drive yourself there and 
it's £3,402. Brittany Ferries sails from Plymouth to Roscoff from £68 each way 
in July (0871 244 0744,brittany-ferries.co.uk <http://brittany-ferries.co.uk>). 

Caribbean 

Aruba is outside the hurricane belt and August is one of the best times to 
visit. Famed for its incredible beaches - and pricey restaurants - 
all-inclusive makes sense, but that often means hotels the size of small 
cities. For a more personal touch, the family-owned-and-run Amsterdam Manor 
Beach Resort has good-sized rooms and is seconds from blinding Eagle Beach. Go 
all-inclusive, and aside from à-la-carte food you'll get two meals out at 
participating restaurants and free use of mountain bikes and snorkel equipment.

• First Choice (0871 200 7799, firstchoice.co.uk <http://firstchoice.co.uk>) 
offers 14 nights for two adults and two children from £4,196, inc flights from 
Gatwick on 19 August.

Menorca 

OK, so we haven't had the tape measure out, but the location of the five-star 
Insotel Club Punta Prima, overlooking what's probably Menorca's largest beach, 
should keep water babes happy. Back on land, there's a huge array of sports 
available, from squash and archery to mountain biking tours, rifle shooting and 
even a mini astro-pitch for budding Cesc Fàbregas types. Alternatively, hone 
your Spanish and Latin dancing skills - or just your body in the gym and spa.

• Sovereign Luxury Holidays (0871 200 6677, sovereign.com 
<http://sovereign.com>) offers seven nights for two adults and two children 
(under 15) from £3,450, inc flights from London Gatwick, departing 25 July.

Austria

Rubbing shoulders with the Carinthian Nockberge Mountains, Lake Brennsee 
lapping at its toes, the Brennseehof's location alone is enough to convert 
beach bums. Part of the Kinderhotel group, it takes family friendly to another 
level: at least 60 hours of childcare per child (from two years) per week, an 
exhausting array of sports facilities and classes, loads of lakeside larks from 
pedaloes and windsurfing to a new spa, great food, and unlimited non-alcoholic 
drinks and fresh fruit.

• Kinderhotels (0845 082 2422, kinderhotels.co.uk 
<http://www.kinderhotels.co.uk>) offers seven nights for two adults and two 
children (three-six/six-12 years) from £2,412/£2,262, based on departures 
between 11 July and 22 August.Ryanair.com <http://Ryanair.com> flies to 
Klagenfurt from London Stansted.

Greece 

Refurbished for 2009, Sani Beach Club's "Ultra All...#8209;Inclusive" package 
is the real deal - with knobs on. Whether you want to dine à la carte or eat 
ice cream at midnight, it's all included. One of four hotels that comprise the 
Sani Resort - a 1,000-acre ecological reserve on Greece's Kassandra peninsula - 
you can dine at most of the resort's other restaurants, too. There's an 
extensive array of activities, plus a new creche and kids' club. Not forgetting 
7km of Blue Flag beach.

• Carrier (0161-491 7650, carrier.co.uk <http://carrier.co.uk>) offers seven 
nights in a sea-view Junior Suite for two adults and two children (two-12 
years) from £3,820, inc flights from London Gatwick. Valid for travel between 
28 August-17 September.

Mauritius 

While not as hot as the winter months, summer in Mauritius is still balmy and 
there's less chance of it tipping down. Situated on the island's quieter 
south-west coast, the colourful Tamassa has kids' clubs, a spa and various 
sporting activities - but the main draw here is the beach and turquoise lagoon 
on your doorstep. If you tire of sand castles and snorkelling there are 
windsurfing, pedalos, kayaks, sailing, water-skiing and glass-bottom boat trips 
to while away the hours.

• Key2holidays (020-7963 6669, key2holidays.co.uk <http://key2holidays.co.uk>) 
offers 14 nights for two adults and two children (under 12) for £5,425, inc 
Heathrow flights from 20 July-31 August (book by 30 April).

Canaries

Melia Gorriones looks out over the 30km of pristine powdery sand that is 
Fuerteventura's Sotavento beach. As well as the usual array of activities and 
facilities, the hotel has a kids' club for five- to 12-year-olds and, at extra 
cost, a diving school and kite/windsurfing centre - but we reckon it's the 
never-ending beach that'll hold your focus.

• Classic Collection Holidays (0800 008 7299, classic-collection.co.uk 
<http://classic-collection.co.uk>) offers seven nights for two adults and two 
children (under 11) for £3,660, inc flights from Gatwick, departing 29 July.

Cyprus

Slap-bang on Coral Bay, the Coral Beach Hotel & Resort makes a great base for 
water babes wishing to follow in the wake of our Olympic swimming squad who've 
trained here. Vast pool aside, there's a busy entertainment schedule for young 
and old, with kids' clubs, an arts and crafts centre and a spa - plus a 
seemingly endless supply of grub that'll ensure you don't go hungry, no matter 
how many laps you do.

• Prestige Holidays (01425 480400, prestigeholidays.co.uk 
<http://prestigeholidays.co.uk>) offers seven nights for two adults and two 
children (seven-12 years) from £4,424, Coral Gold Club, inc flights from London 
Heathrow departing 30 July. Valid for bookings by 30 April.
 