
Oxfam has issued a statement warning that the global agreement on aid 
effectiveness is "on a knife edge". What Oxfam means is that there is no 
guarantee that the monitoring mechanism set up in 2005 to measure how well 
donors and recipients were doing against their commitments will be in place in 
time for theBusan conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
 in three weeks' time. Donors are none too keen on continuing a bureaucracy 
that costs them time and money, and only serves to show them in a bad light – 
they have performed poorly so far.

Some point to the failure of donors to change their practices as evidence that 
theParis Declaration on Aid Effectiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/jan/03/paris-declaration-aid>
, agreed in 2005, has not worked. But there is an irony at the heart of the 
process set up in the wake of Paris to monitor commitments. On almost every 
level, when it is looked at in detail, it is a poor way of assessing "aid 
effectiveness", which is what it claims to do. But recipient countries have 
endorsed its importance at every stage.

First, let's admit that it is deeply flawed. Most people would assume that 
measures of how effective aid is would include assessments of how many people 
it has helped, or how a country has benefitted. But the Paris process narrowed 
down what we mean by "aid effectiveness" into some fairly technocratic targets 
that are only tenuously linked to real outcomes for real people. David Booth, 
of the Overseas Development Institute (ODI), is one of many who argue that we 
need tobring politics back into the discussion 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/download/4928.pdf> if we are going to make 
meaningful headway on improving the impact of aid.

Second, those targets that did make it into the Paris Declaration are measured 
using indicators that everyone admits are weak. Take ownership, the beating 
heart of the Paris vision for aid. It is measured by a World Bank team looking 
through the recipient countries' policy documents and deciding whether or not 
they have long term strategies – it could hardly be more patronising. The data 
collected for most of the quantitative indicators is fragmented and hardly 
comparable across countries.

Third, country context is absent from the measurements. "Fragile states" such 
as Liberia and East Timor are treated in the same way as emerging economies 
like Egypt and Colombia, even though their institutions are significantly 
weaker, meaning that aid has to be delivered very differently.

But here's the irony. Despite these and other flaws, the bureaucracy of the 
Paris Declaration Monitoring Survey has led to improvements in the 
recipient-donor relationships. Recipients, armed with a list of promises, are 
better able to demand that donors improve their practices. There has been a 
subtle rebalancing of power.

Changes in the global context are the main causes of this change in body 
language: donor economies are doing badly, calling into question their 
assumptions of always knowing best; emerging powers are doing well, implying 
different ways of doing things and providing poor countries with other avenues 
for trade and aid relationships; and poor countries are doing better 
economically than before, giving them more confidence and shaking off an 
attitude of dependence.

So we should not exaggerate the importance of a list of voluntary commitments, 
but nor should we overlook its usefulness. Recipients enter the room armed with 
the document and donors, of course, can do the same, if and when a recipient's 
poor developmental objectives or accountability deserves to be challenged.

Much more work needs to be done to come up with a new global compact 
appropriate for a new context, learning from what went right as well as wrong 
in the past five years. My colleague Matt Geddes has written about theneed to 
align commitments with incentives 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/details.asp?id=6112&title=aid-effectiveness-donor-incentives-hlf4>
 in a changing context.

First, it needs to gradually attract the interest of those who are not yet 
signed up 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/details.asp?id=5950&title=aid-effectiveness-hlf4-busan-development-finance-core-principles>
, most importantly the big emerging powers (like China and Brazil) and the Arab 
donors. So far, they have shown little interest because of the driving role of 
the OECD in the process. At Busan, an agreement looks to be in place to set up 
a new Global Partnership for Development Cooperation, which would be an 
important step forward.

Second, the most important aid effectiveness compacts should now be at a 
country level. Measurements are only really meaningful if they are developed 
and monitored by recipient countries because they know what is appropriate to 
their contexts. Rwanda is blazing the trail with its2010 Kigali Statement 
<http://www.minecofin.gov.rw/webfm_send/1475>.

But donors should not use these new challenges as an excuse to undermine what 
already exists. A firm global compact is absolutely necessary to complement new 
plans, which still need a lot of fleshing out – Simon Maxwell, former director 
of the ODI, has some ideasfor concrete commitments 
<http://www.simonmaxwell.eu/blog/putting-some-bite-into-busan.html>. Crucially, 
a firm newcommitment on transparency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/14/busan-aid-china-rejects-transparency>
 should be one of the major outcomes of Busan.

An abundance of research evidence would suggest major changes to the Paris 
agreement, based on an analysis of what has worked well and what hasn't. But it 
seems that no one wants to open up a Pandora's box; if you question one 
principle, someone else will question another, and you might end up with not 
much left.

Despite its many flaws, the Paris Declaration is the best we have. For donors 
to seek to reduce their commitments now, against the explicit wishes of 
aid-recipient countries, would be self-serving and shortsighted. Global 
agreements are always something of a lowest common denominator – let's not set 
the bar even lower.
 