
The SMS you will get if you drive through the South-Western Townships, also 
known asSoweto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/02/district-9-soweto-residents-exploitation>
, is as certain as death and taxes. The message – and sometimes a phone call – 
from yourcar tracking company <http://www.tracker.co.za/about-us/why-tracker/> 
will notify you that you are now in a “high-risk area”.

This is the side of Soweto most people have come to expect: a place with poor 
infrastructure, high unemployment and crime. In areas such as Jabavu, the 
employment rate sits at just34% <http://wazimap.co.za/profiles/ward-79800035/>. 
The median monthly income for those who work in the area is R2,400 (£118). Yet 
a few kilometres away from some of the township’s poorest parts lie Diepkloof 
Extension and Pimville, home to Soweto’s richest. Modern luxurious homes (many 
valued at well over R1m), German cars parked in their garages, sit behind high 
walls – reminiscent of Johannesburg’s traditionally white suburbia.

For Soweto’s richer young residents, the car wash is also the chance to show 
off the wealth they rarely speak about

One of the owners of these homes is Thabo Moagi, founder of Rockwell 
Communications <http://rockwellcommunications.co.za/>. Born and bred in the 
township, Moagi doesn’t see why he need live anywhere else. “Soweto has 
everything I need,” he says. “The people. The shops. The culture.”

Moagi is also the founder of the hip-hop event series Authentic Sundays 
<https://twitter.com/AuthenticSunday>. In just five years it has become 
Soweto’s biggest urban event <http://authenticsunday.co.za/?page_id=81>, 
attracting the attention of major brands, South Africa’s biggest artists, and 
young people from across Johannesburg.

Pimville, where the 27-year-old has his home and business offices, also boasts 
a golf course, a mall and a stadium – all recent developments catering for its 
wealthy inhabitants. But Moagi likes to hang out at the PDL car wash. In the 
townships, car washes offer people an opportunity to socialise and network, and 
have become a cornerstone of township culture. For Soweto’s richer young 
residents, the car wash is also the chance to show off the wealth they rarely 
speak about.

Soweto Theatre aims to foster township's cultural revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/02/soweto-theatre-township-cultural-revolution>
Like many rich Sowetans, Thabo shies away from talking about his net worth. 
This isn’t just about modesty. The rich don’t talk about their wealth for fear 
they will be attacked for it, but more importantly, to be able to blend in with 
South Africa’s “old money”.

“Mature entrepreneurs would take it as flaunting and immature behaviour,” 
Moagi explains.

Blending in is something these young black millionaires have become good at. 
For Thato “TT” Mbha, owner of Black Real Estate, growing up in Soweto and going 
to school in the white suburbs of north Johannesburg meant he had to straddle 
two worlds. To fit in, there was a performance he had to master at an early age.

“During the day, I was exposed to modern culture and sports such as water polo 
and swimming. I had to play the part; when I got back home I could be myself,” 
Mbha says. It’s a skill he has used to navigate corporateSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>, where he has worked for one of 
the country’s biggest retail companies and a multinational oil corporation.

Moagi and Mbha have learned to adapt and thrive in the new South Africa and 
they are building a new Soweto – one they hope will maintain the area’s best 
characteristics. “Soweto is a place full of love and unity and people here look 
out for each other,” says Moagi. But it’s hard to see that unity continuing 
indefinitely. Property prices in Pimville and the developments that have sprung 
up to cater to its wealthy residents are also creating a new, unaffordable 
Soweto.

The dream that the 1994 democratic breakthrough would put an end to the 
poverty and alienation of black people has yet to become a reality for all. The 
truth is, as the gap between rich and poor continues to widen, most Sowetans 
won’t need to go to north Johannesburg to see how the other half live. They’ll 
get a great view right from their doorstep.
 