
Dear Akram

In saying that we should not have more female choreographers “for the sake of 
having more female choreographers 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/akram-khan-dont-have-more-female-choreographers-for-the-sake-of-it/>
”, you are choosing to disregard a gender imbalance so egregious, and of such 
long standing, that it shames the British dance establishment. In the 
contemporary sphere, female choreographers areroutinely passed over for 
commissions 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2015/dance-must-overcome-condescending-attitude-to-female-choreographers/>
 in favour of less experienced men. The more large-scale and high-profile the 
commission, the smaller the probability that it will be awarded to a woman. In 
classical dance, female choreographers face even greater discouragement; no 
woman has been commissioned to choreograph a main-stage ballet at the Royal 
Opera House since the 1990s.

Dance audiences are being presented, overwhelmingly, with work created from a 
male perspective

In any other branch of the arts such inequitable decision-making would be 
greeted with outrage – imagine Tate or the National Theatre simply ignoring 
female artists and playwrights – but this being dance, no one makes a scene. 
Inevitably, the fewer female choreographers who are awarded major commissions, 
the smaller becomes the pool of women with the requisite experience, which in 
its turn serves as an excuse to continue parcelling out the work to an inner 
circle of men.

You suggest that historically, there have been times when there has been “an 
imbalance” in favour of female choreographers, citingPina Bausch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/pinabausch> and Martha Graham 
<http://marthagraham.org/>. In truth, while these women and others like them 
carved out spectacular individual careers, they did so in wider professional 
and artistic environments dominated by men. And it has never been otherwise. 
Women have often been artistic pioneers, and women were certainly the midwives 
of British dance. But at a given point, invariably, the men take over.Rambert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rambertdancecompany>, founded in 1926, is 
Britain’s oldest dance company. In 1966, with the venture solidly established, 
Marie Rambert handed over toNorman Morrice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/jan/21/theatre2>, and the company has 
not had a female director since.

Sexism in dance: where are all the female choreographers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/apr/28/women-choreographers-glass-ceiling>
No one is advocating the increased representation of women choreographers for 
the sake of it, or for reasons of box-ticking or political correctness. No one 
wants tokenism. The issue, which should concern us all, is that dance audiences 
are being presented, overwhelmingly, with work created from a male perspective. 
This skews and narrows the range of theatrical experience, and inhibits the 
evolution of our art form. Your current workUntil the Lions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/17/until-the-lions-review-akram-kham-mahabharata-thrilling>
 reimagines a story from theMahabharata, with particular reference to the 
female characters whom you describe as its “unsung heroes”. Its title comes 
from an African proverb. “The hunter will always tell the story until the lions 
can have their say.”

Akram, it’s 2016, and we need to see female choreographers given the same 
opportunities as their male colleagues. Not “for the sake of it”, but because 
it’s time for dance to shed its institutionalised sexism, to rid itself of the 
whiff of privileged boys’ clubs and backstairs deals and join the artistic 
mainstream. It’s time for the lions to have their say.
 