
After its sellout runs at the Young Vic and Wyndham’s theatres in London, Ivo 
van Hove’s bracing, barefoot revival of Arthur Miller’sA View from the Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/13/a-view-from-the-bridge-review-miller-mark-strong>
 is to transfer to Broadway.

Theatre archive: Roy Hattersley meets Arthur Miller – a view from the 
barricades
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/23/theatre-archive-roy-hattersley-meets-arthur-miller>
The show picked up five-star reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/17/view-from-the-bridge-review-ivo-van-hove-arthur-miller>
 andthree Olivier awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/12/view-from-the-bridge-scoops-three-olivier-awards>
 including best actor for Mark Strong as the longshoreman Eddie Carbone who is 
torn apart by jealousy and betrayal. It will begin previews at the Lyceum 
theatre in New York on 21 October 2015 – four days after the 100th anniversary 
of the playwright’s birth and just over 60 years after A View from the Bridge 
was first performed, as a one-act play, on Broadway.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8GBKa-yN_V8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8GBKa-yN_V8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8GBKa-yN_V8&media=>
The Young Vic’s revival was one of many Miller classics staged in the UK in 
his centenary year. The RSC’sDeath of a Salesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/02/death-of-a-salesman-review-antony-sher-harriet-walter-arthur-miller-rsc>
, starring Antony Sher, is currently playing in the West End while the Royal 
and Derngate theatre in Northampton is presenting the world premiere ofThe Hook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/11/the-hook-review-stylish-premiere-of-arthur-millers-waterfront-drama>
 (based on a Miller screenplay that was never produced). There have already 
been productions of All My Sons (toured byTalawa 
<http://www.talawa.com/all_my_sons_2015.php>); Playing for Time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/19/playing-for-time-review-arthur-miller-sian-phillips-crucible-sheffield>
 (at Sheffield Crucible), about the Auschwitz Women’s Orchestra; and two other 
stagings of A View from the Bridge (at theEveryman in Cheltenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/01/a-view-from-the-bridge-arthur-miller-touring-consortium-review>
 and atBolton Octagon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/25/a-view-from-the-bridge-review-arthur-miller-octagon-bolton>
).


However, the Young Vic’s version could well be the only Broadway production of 
a Miller play in this significant year for the Pulitzer-winning dramatist. A 
View from the Bridge was last staged on the Great White Way in 2010, with Liev 
Schreiber and Scarlett Johansson. The most recent major Miller production on 
Broadway was Mike Nichols’s 2012 staging of Death of a Salesman, starring 
Philip Seymour Hoffman. Scott Rudin willreportedly produce a Broadway revival 
of The Crucible 
<http://www.playbill.com/news/article/scott-rudin-will-produce-broadway-revival-of-witch-hunt-drama-the-crucible-349635>
 next year, with Ivo van Hove rumoured to direct.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fyoung-vic-view-from-the-bridge-broadway-arthur-miller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434033189701%2F32fd4c37-925b-4d87-9219-3c763046d71f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Young%20Vic's%20A%20View%20from%20the%20Bridge%20will%20transfer%20to%20Broadway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fyoung-vic-view-from-the-bridge-broadway-arthur-miller%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Young%20Vic%27s%20A%20View%20from%20the%20Bridge%20will%20transfer%20to%20Broadway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjun%2F11%2Fyoung-vic-view-from-the-bridge-broadway-arthur-miller%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F11%2F1434033189701%2F32fd4c37-925b-4d87-9219-3c763046d71f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Vanessa Kirby, Gillian Anderson and Ben Foster in A Streetcar Named Desire at 
the Young Vic in 2014 Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
Nicola Walker, Phoebe Fox, Emun Elliott and Michael Gould will all reprise 
their roles in A View from the Bridge, which runs until 21 February 2016. The 
Young Vic’s celebrated revival of A Streetcar Named Desire, starring Gillian 
Anderson and directed by Benedict Andrews, will be presented at St Ann’s 
Warehouse in New York from 23 April to 22 May 2016.

David Lan, the Young Vic’s artistic director, said: “A Streetcar Named Desire 
and A View from the Bridge are two of the masterpieces of the American theatre. 
We’ve had the best time producing them at theYoung Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/young-vic> in London. It’s thrilling to be 
bringing them to New York with artists of this quality. This is the opportunity 
of a lifetime.”
 