
Social entrepreneurship in Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> 
is still a young sector – 75% of all initiatives are not older than four years. 
But they are growing constantly – as is the awareness about what social 
entrepreneurship is and how social innovation can contribute to societal 
development.

According to a recent study by the Vienna University of Economics and Business 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vienna_University_of_Economics_and_Business>, 
there are around 270 social entrepreneurs to be found in Austria. An 
infrastructure to support them is slowly emerging, providing co-working spaces, 
consulting, training or access to networks of supporters.

Many individuals do not yet realise that they are in fact social entrepreneurs 
and that there is a new career pathway unfolding, which receives increasing 
public acknowledgement. That is why raising awareness about this new type of 
work and business model, entrepreneurial culture and new career opportunities 
is still on the forefront of the efforts of organisations such asThe Hub Vienna 
<http://vienna.the-hub.net/> and my own organisation, Ashoka 
<https://www.ashoka.org/>. Both have helped the term "social entrepreneurship" 
become mainstream in Austria.

Generating income on their own as well as gaining more financial independence 
is a major issue for Austrian social entrepreneurs. According to the Vienna 
university study, more than half (52%) of social entrepreneurs' budget comes 
from private funding, one-third comes from their own earnings, while roughly 
10% come from federal sources.

Specific social venture funds do not yet exist in Austria. The financial 
sector, as well as the social entrepreneurs themselves, still need to capture 
the opportunities of social financing. One pioneer isGood.Bee 
<http://www.erstestiftung.org/factory/good-bee/>, which is providing financing 
for social enterprises and works in the field of micro-finance in central and 
eastern Europe. Crowd-funding is also a source for funding: online platforms 
such asrespekt.net <http://www.respekt.net/> help to connect promising projects 
with investors.

Countering the brain-drain

The social entrepreneurs in Austria tackle a wide range of different issues. 
In the field of regional development, Ashoka fellowMartin Hollinetz 
<https://www.ashoka.org/fellow/martin-hollinetz> founded Otelo 
<http://www.otelo.or.at/>, which counters the brain drain in rural areas by 
establishing regional innovation centres, giving people the necessary 
infrastructure to be innovative and creative and the possibility to start their 
own enterprises.

Inclusion of marginalised groups in mainstream society is a major focus of 
Austrian social entrepreneurs –Career Moves <http://www.careermoves.at/>, for 
instance, connects people with disabilities with potential employers. Gregor 
Demblin, the founder, sees huge potential in people with disabilities, as they 
can be top performers, whose potential is not used due to societal prejudice.
Exit <http://www.ngoexit.org/>, an NGO, helps victims of human trafficking by 
giving not only legal and psychological advice but also by helping these 
victims to set up a new life in Austria, and not fall back into prostitution, 
where they ended up after coming to Austria.

A new career path

Many young people in Austria do not yet realise that there is a new career 
path that combines entrepreneurial spirit with solving major social challenges. 
But several social entrepreneurship support-organisations such as The HUB 
Vienna, awards such as The Social Impact Award or training programmes like
Pioneers of Change <http://pioneersofchange.at/> in Vienna especially attract 
young social entrepreneurs.

These young aspiring talents have a very unique and fresh approach to deal 
with a multitude of social problems:whatchado <http://www.whatchado.net/> is 
helping young people to find out what career paths exist and how to get there. 
They interview people of different backgrounds and sectors and feature them in 
short films to explain how they became what they are today.Dachgold 
<http://www.dachgold.at/> is convincing companies to use solar energy to cover 
their energy needs, because they use most of their energy during the day 
(unlike many private households). Since solar energy storage is very 
inefficient, using the energy right away during the day is a very sustainable 
solution.

It is not just a lack of knowledge and access which inhibit young social 
entrepreneurs from starting their own initiative – they are often just afraid 
to take the risks of founding their own projects. Ashoka fellowJohannes Lindner 
<https://www.ashoka.org/fellow/johannes-lindner> responded to this by starting 
Entrepreneurship Education <http://www.eesi-impulszentrum.at/> in many Austrian 
schools and helps students become more entrepreneurial, self-dependent and lose 
the fear of taking initiative. Johannes's business plan competitions encourage 
young people to combine their entrepreneurial thinking with self-driven action. 
Each year,2,500 students participate in these competitions, and two-thirds of 
the projects <http://austria.ashoka.org/node/1712/> are actually implemented. 
In Austrian secondary schools, 20,000 students benefit weekly from the teaching 
and learning content developed by him.

Social entrepreneurship in Austria is still too young for us to grasp its 
scale and impact. Nevertheless, this movement has a lot of potential to bring 
about social change. One of the main challenges is the lack of support 
infrastructure outside the urban,densely populated areas. Focus should also be 
given to initiatives that encourage youth to become more involved and engaged 
in solving social problems. Competitions for young social entrepreneurs such as 
theSocial Impact Award <http://socialimpactaward.net/> or the Join our Core 
<http://www.joinourcore.com/> competition clearly show that there is lot of 
potential among Austrian youth.

Young people no longer want to adapt to often rigid and uninspired structures 
in established organisations and companies. Instead, they would prefer to set 
up their own enterprises where they can live their values, be creative and 
shape the impact they want to have on society. Without doubt, Austrians will 
have to take more risks to solve social problems. As Melinda Gates, wife of 
Bill, the Microsoft billionaire, says "We believe in taking risks, because 
that's how you move things along."

Michael Hagelmuller is a mobiliser for Join Our Core Ashoka Austria 
<http://www.joinourcore.com/>

This content was brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To join the Guardian's 
Social Enterprise Network,click here 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>
 