
One of the most rewarding parts of running initiatives for young dancers is 
knowing that the people with whom I work will be some of the leading 
choreographers and artists of tomorrow. And judging from the outstanding levels 
of skill, commitment, motivation, creativity and courage that I see on a daily 
basis, the future looks bright.

But the arts world of tomorrow can be a difficult one to imagine, as today’s 
young people – the artists of the future – are growing up in a very different 
world to the one in which my peers and I grew up. Their career paths will be 
markedly different from those of the adults who are making the decisions about 
their education and development.


As we enter another academic year, the arts have a precarious position in 
young people’s lives. Government plans for the study of the arts have been 
scrutinised and debatedin recent months 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/education-news/nicky-morgan-confronted-over-troubling-decline-of-the-arts-in-schools-10394456.html>
. The value of the “core” Stem (science, tech, engineering and maths) approach 
has been pitted against the Steam approach (the “a” is for arts). The former 
threatens to squeeze the arts out of the education system, and out of the minds 
and hearts of young people.


A wealth of research – recently from the likes of the Cultural Learning 
Alliance and Creative Industries Federation – continues to illustrate the
positive impact 
<http://www.culturallearningalliance.org.uk/evidence/the-case-for-cultural-learning-key-research-findings>
 of studying the arts and the benefits of learning through artistic and 
creative practice, particularly for young people who come from economically or 
socially deprived backgrounds.


High-profile creative figures continue to campaign for the arts and their 
“incalculable worth in what it means to be a human being,” as author Philip 
Pullmanput it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/philip-pullman-barbarian-arts-education-english-baccalaureate>
. Even the head of the Confederation of British Industry recently made thecase 
for arts education 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/education-news/john-cridland-encourage-teenagers-to-study-arts-so-computer-games-of-the-future-are-not-designed-by-spotty-nerds-says-cbi-boss-10452182.html>
, underlining its importance not only for the arts sector, but for business, 
which today thrives on artistic and adventurous creativity.

Yet, the evidence that every child’s core learning entitlement in formal 
education should include knowledge and experience of the arts is all too often 
overlooked. Meanwhile, funding for out-of-school arts projects is being cut, as 
local authorities struggle to cope with government policies and spending 
constraints.


A range of organisations devote themselves to go above and beyond national 
efforts to encourage and nurture artistic talent, tasking themselves tirelessly 
with putting their artforms at the top of the agenda for young people in their 
country. This, in today’s climate, is becoming increasingly challenging.

Anyone in a job similar to mine could tell you about the struggle to get the 
government to pay greater attention to the arts and recognise the benefits they 
bring, particularly for young people. Certain sectors in the arts world can 
also be far too quick to dismiss the work of young artists as low-quality 
amateur work that is irrelevant to the professional world.


On the contrary, the standards at which young dancers in this country and 
abroad are performing can be outstanding and on a par with professional 
companies, with the added exuberance and freshness that younger artists can 
bring, as our new annualApex Rising 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2015/national-youth-dance-company-apex-rising/>
 youth dance festival, which just opened Sadler’s Wells autumn/winter season, 
aims to illustrate. It therefore becomes our mission to do everything possible 
to help young people produce exceptional work and make it known that these 
emerging artists are a force to be reckoned with.

There are certain things that can be invaluable for a young dancer’s 
development. For example, creating, rehearsing and performing under the 
direction of accomplished professional artists can be crucial and, indeed, life 
changing. Rigorous practice in carefully spaced out intensive sessions helps 
young people learn the purpose of preparation. Multiple performance 
opportunities develop an understanding of sharing the creative process with an 
audience and of knowing oneself better as an artist. Other elements such as 
strong peer support, daily reflection to articulate, analyse and consolidate 
learning, and contextual understanding also serve to ensure that all dancers 
achieve their best.


What skills do arts sector grads need to develop their career?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/may/21/what-skills-arts-graduates-need-develop-career>
But before we can instigate this journey of nurturing and developing, we need 
the talent to be out there in the first place and to be able to identify it. 
Over the past three years, since the inception of theNational Youth Dance 
Company <http://www.sadlerswells.com/national-youth-dance-company/> (NYDC), 
around 50% of the company’s selected dancers have had some sort of formal dance 
training. So how did the other half find an interest in dance? Mainly through 
their schools and colleges, ranging from one-off visits to dance performances, 
to dedicated teachers running weekly dance clubs or finding space for dance in 
the ever-more pressured curriculum.


Without a sufficient emphasis on arts in the mainstream, many young people 
without prior knowledge or family support will not discover their artistic 
interest and aptitude. They will not find their way to the people and 
organisations that can offer them the chance to develop and fulfil their 
potential. They will be denied the opportunity to reward their talents and 
possibly to lead rich and satisfying lives.


The key to building a sustainable arts future therefore lies in making young 
artists a priority today, in education and all other areas of everyday life. 
They are the leading choreographers, directors, painters, sculptors and 
composers of a tomorrow that will come all too soon. They have the power to 
shape the future and they ought to be taken seriously.


Jane Hackett is director of the National Youth Dance Company 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/national-youth-dance-company/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 