
BBC-backed YouView <https://www.theguardian.com/media/youview> soaked up more 
than £40m in funds from its shareholders in the last financial year, with staff 
costs increasing by almost 50% as the internet-based TV service finally 
launched.

YouView called on £42.1m on funds from its backers – the BBC, ITV, BT, Channel 
4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>, Channel 5, Arqiva and TalkTalk 
– in the year to the end of March.

This represents an increase of almost 30% on the £32.6m Youview's shareholders 
forked out the previous year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/07/lord-sugar-paid-500000-chair-youview>
, as time and resources were ploughed into getting the much-delayed TV service 
to launch last July.

YouView's annual financial filing reveals the extent of the upscaling of the 
business, which almost doubled staff numbers from 29 to 55 between the end of 
March 2012 and the end of March this year.

Research and development numbers rose from one to 15, while those in 
administration grew from 28 to 40.

YouView's employee costs similarly saw a major rise, up 44% from £3.25m to 
£4.64m yearonyear.

On a per-staff-member basis, YouView has been able to cut its relative 
expenses,from a rather expensive £112,206 per head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/07/lord-sugar-paid-500000-chair-youview>
 to £84,400 per person employed.

YouView said "sales have gone well and are as expected for the period from 
launch to the end of the financial year".

However, it is understood that only a little over 30,000 YouView set-top boxes 
have been sold directly to consumers through retail outlets, a price point of 
almost £250 considered a barrier compared to cheaper rivals.

Nearly all of the well over 500,000 households that have a YouView set-top box 
have received them either for free, or heavily subsidised, through offers from 
BT TV andTalkTalk <https://www.theguardian.com/business/talk-talk-telecom>.

While this has given the service a solid running start in terms of user base, 
there have been tensions between the shareholders.

The BBC, Channel 4 and Channel 5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive> are public service broadcasters 
who backed YouView on a free-to-air founding principle, and some in the 
industry are of the opinion that BT and TalkTalk have effectively hijacked the 
joint venture to cleverly build their own pay-TV services.

The agreement between the shareholders – which includes a commitment to invest 
£115m between them covering development, launch and the first four years of 
operation – ends on 31 March next year.

YouView admits that at the time the financial accounts were signed off, at the 
end of August, none of the partners had given a "firm commitment" to sign up a 
new deal.

"While there are no firm commitments from any shareholder at present in 
respect of continuing financial support, the company is actively engaged with 
its shareholders," YouView said in its filing. "The company has no reason to 
believe that the business will not continue to receive financial support beyond 
31 March 2014, particularly given the successful launch of the platform in 2012 
and its continued adoption by customers."

 Since the financial filing was signed off, the talks are understood to have 
made little progress – there was understood to have been a hope they could seal 
a new shareholder agreement as early as September – and will continue into the 
new year.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 