
Watchmen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/126328/watchmen> director 
Zack Snyder has lined up a cavalcade of youthful actors to star in his next 
project, the action fantasy Sucker Punch,according to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/hr/content_display/film/news/e3iee48bd23f07a5c213e3b84a392291ab7>
.

Mamma Mia's Amanda Seyfried <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125168> is 
in talks to take the lead role in the production, that will also featureHigh 
School Musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/mar/04/high-school-musical-4-tv>'s 
Vanessa Hudgens,Elizabeth: The Golden Age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/120843/elizabeth>'s Abbie Cornish, 
Thirteen's Evan Rachel Wood andSuperbad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/119573/superbad>'s Emma Stone.

Sucker Punch sounds like a cross between Girl, Interrupted and Alice in 
Wonderland. It is set in a women's psychiatric ward in the 1950s where the lead 
character is due to be lobotomised in five days' time. She invents an imaginary 
world, and escapes into it, taking a number of her fellow inmates with her. 
Snyder has called it "Alice with machine guns," and says it will blend such 
elements as dragons, B-52 bombers and brothels.

The film will mark the first time Snyder has taken on the duty of main 
screenwriters - in conjunction with Steve Shibuya - on a project of his own 
conception, although he previously adapted Frank Miller's comic book 300 for 
the big screen, and came up with the basic storyline for forthcoming zombie 
tale Army of the Dead, which he will also direct.

That project is slated for 2010, with Sucker Punch arriving in cinemas the 
following year. Snyder's Watchmen, his much-anticipated adaptation of the 
classic Alan Moore graphic novel about masked vigilantes in an alternative 
1980s, arrives in cinemas this weekend.
 