
She is Sahara of the Tuna, and you come for her deserted beaches and crowded 
fish restaurants, and for her beach shackchiringuitos in which to boogie the 
hot night away. Here in Cadiz province, Zahara de los Atunes lies between Cape 
Trafalgar and Spain’s southernmost nipple at Tarifa, 40 minutes to the south.

Where Tarifa is bliss for spliffed-up surfers and world-weary dreadlocked 
hippies, Zahara is more innocent, a let-it-all-hang-out family destination. It 
is also one that has carved a part in the heart of the Spanish food lover with 
its devotion to the red tuna (Atlantic bluefin tuna, famed for its rosy flesh) 
and the red-skinned Retinto cow.

In this land that so honours the pig, Zahara’s red tuna is granted the title 
“theibérico of the sea”. As ever, Spain can leave the dedicated vegetarian 
feeling hungry – even the plainest of mixed salads here will include fat chunks 
of tuna, “for flavour!” we were told.

Your pomaded open-shirted playa type tends to prefer Atlanterra, a slick 
purpose-built beach resort two kilometres south of town, but Zahara itself is 
Spain’s far south at her authentic, relaxed best.

Food and drink
 Ramon Pipi 
Food to go
It feels like there’s hardly an hour in the day or night when eating and 
drinking aren’t central to Zahara life. For many, the day starts at the tiny 
Mercado de Abastos (Plaza de Abastos, Mon-Sat 9am-2pm) where there’s spanking 
fresh produce, fish and meat, plus a stand-up bites and drinks bar, Abacería La 
Plaza. Alimentación Aaron on the corner of Calle Nécora has all the essentials 
for a beach feast. Down the road, Kikirimu (Paseo del Pradillo 4) serves great 
takeaway roast chicken, empanadas, sausages, Retinto burgers and drinks for the 
beach.

Restaurants
Of the town centre restaurants, Ramon Pipi  
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Restaurante-Ramon-Pipi/110932892271793>(+34 95 
643 9580, Calle Maria Luisa 38) is buzzy, good and slightly smart. Make a point 
of trying theirmorillo de atun, a delicious, disc-shaped morsel from the top of 
the fish’s head.El Castillete <http://barelcastillete.com> (+34 63 897 9493) is 
more old school, with traditional fishy tapas and raciones. Cerro Currita 
(Calle Cerro Currita, on the beach in front of Tourist Info, +34 68 623 3401) 
does gorgeous, unhurried rice dishes and local specialities well.

Bars
In town, the pick of the bars includes La Malvaloca (Calle Maria Luisa 20), a 
cucumber-cool, crowded bar with affordable seafood tapas. We also loved El 
Último Gato (Calle Aldade José Ruiz Cana 11) whose eight-seat bar and muralled 
garden are fine places in which to lose a few hours and a few inhibitions. 
Taberna Trasteo (Calle Maria Luisa 24) is larger and more lounge-like, with a 
charming line in killer rum-basedcócteles.
 Chiringuito La Luna 
Chiringuitos are beach bars that morph from late lunch to sundowners to 
DJ-till-dawn beats. The night scene here doesn’t get grooving until at least 
midnight. The pick of Zahara’s chiringuitos areEl Pez Limon 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Chiringuito-El-Pez-Limon/447610131926259> and 
La Luna <http://chiringuitolaluna.com/> , both on Playa de Carmen in front of 
the town. La Luna has its own record label.

Things to do

Sunbathe
Hit a different sandy beach each day along this 40km of clean coastline. Playa 
del Retin to the north of town has no facilities, and thus the luxury of space. 
It’s popular with naturists, and with wandering Retinto cattle – don’t be 
surprised to meet something red and horny. Playa de Carmen is Zahara’s 
town-centre beach where sunbeds, kid-safe swimming and chiringuitos are yours 
to enjoy. Moving south, Atlanterra’s beach is beautiful, but suffers slightly 
from the proximity of the purpose-built resort. Los Alemanos is named for the 
Germans to whom Franco gifted properties. He gave them a great beach. Clamber 
carefully down to Playa del Canuelo for perfect solitude, then potter on via 
Ensenada de Bolonia, Valdevaqueros and Punta de la Peña all the way to Playa de 
los Lances at Tarifa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2Fzahara-de-los-atunes-spain-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F31%2F1406822015188%2F6b626397-5433-4359-a5a9-c4daced9fe33-2060x1434.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zahara%20de%20los%20Atunes%3A%20sun%2C%20sea%20and%20seafood%20in%20southern%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2Fzahara-de-los-atunes-spain-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zahara%20de%20los%20Atunes%3A%20sun%2C%20sea%20and%20seafood%20in%20southern%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F02%2Fzahara-de-los-atunes-spain-holiday-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F31%2F1406822015188%2F6b626397-5433-4359-a5a9-c4daced9fe33-2060x1434.jpeg>
 Playa del Carmen. Photograph: Kevin Gould 
Get active
In Zahara, take kitesurfing lessons and certified courses from Kitemanglar 
<http://kitemanglar.com/> (+34 60 1369 2900, kitemanglar.com), and try surfing, 
paddleboarding or longboarding withZahara Red Tuna  <http://zahararedtuna.com/>
extreme sports. For family activities, you could hire bikes or ride horses 
through the unspoilt landscape.Zaharaenlaweb.com 
<http://www.zaharaenlaweb.com/es> is a privately-run concierge service for 
everything from cycle hire to diving and horse riding. And if all this hanging 
out leaves you strung out, you can always take the 45-minute ferry ride from 
Tavira over to Tangier, Morocco (frs.es <http://www.frs.es/>).

Festival feasting
There are two annual gastronomic festivals celebrating the cuisine of the 
region (with a big focus on tuna, of course).Ruta del Atun 
<http://rutadelatun.com/> will take place in May 2015, while Ruta del Retinto 
<http://rutadelretinto.com/> from 24-28 September this year has horse races and 
polo matches. Eachruta includes a glorious weekend-long tapas crawl and 
competitions for the best dish (tuna or beef respectively).

Catch a film
The now-ruined beachfront Palacio de la Chanca was built in the 15th century 
by the dukes of Medina-Sidonia, who profited hugely from the tuna fishing 
industry, thealmadraba. The tuna were processed in the palace precincts, with 
bootleg fish butchered in the church next door. Today the palace’s ruined walls 
host summer’s exuberant open air Cine de Verano (June-September) and stalls 
selling everything from kente cloth bumbags to octopus stew.

Where to stay

Hotel Doña Lola Zahara <http://www.donalolazahara.com/> (doubles from €70) is 
clean and friendly, with a mixture of hotel rooms, family apartments, a smart 
restored “hostel” and (unusually for Spain) some disabled-friendly rooms.

Hotel Avenida Playa <http://www.avenidaplayahotel.com/> (doubles from €50) is 
a few steps from the beach, and great value. The family also rent three holiday 
apartments, and run the noted, Restaurante Casa Jose Maria on the ground floor.

How to get there

Easyjet flies from Gatwick to Seville from about £120 return, then it’s around 
2½ hours by road to Zahara.Comes <http:>runs a regular bus service (€19 
one-way).
 