
It took the reformists a while to agree on their preferred candidates for 
today’s parliamentary and Assembly of Experts elections. In the end, on 16 
February they announced they had reached consensus with ‘moderates’ - including 
former president Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani and Hassan Khomeini, grandson of the 
1979 Revolution’s leader – and some ‘principlists’ on ‘The Grand Coalition of 
Reformists’.


The coalition published a preferred list of parliamentary candidates in every 
city and a preferred list of Assembly of Experts candidates in every province. 
In Tehran there were 30 names for 30 parliamentary seats, and 16 names for 16 
seats in the Assembly of Experts, includingHassan Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani>, who while a candidate for 
the Assembly was not outspoken given his role as president.

The reformists’ preferences raised a few eyebrows. As well as suggesting many 
unknown figures, the coalition included some principlists, including three 
former intelligence ministers not widely seen as sympathetic to the reformists’ 
traditional goals.

Sadegh Zibakalam, the reform-inclined professor of political science at the 
University of Tehran, said the mass disqualification of reformist candidates by 
the Guardian Council made compiling the lists difficult. “We didn’t have much 
choice left. Nearly 90% of reformist candidates, even the second- and 
third-rate ones, were disqualified. So we had to either boycott the elections 
and leave the political ground to the principlists, or change our strategy.”

The reformists picked the latter. According to Zibakalam they decided to 
invest in a new, young generation of candidates who are not necessarily 
reformists and hope that if they get to the parliament and the Assembly, at 
least some of them will gravitate towards reformism. But he adds that this was 
not enough and they were still short of candidates, so they had to approach 
some principlists.

“We thought, ‘Instead of letting the hardline principlists win, let’s help the 
moderate principlists get into the parliament’,” added Zibakalam. “Reformism is 
not only about empowering reformists, it also means you should boost the 
moderate principlists against the hardliners. That also somehow paves the way 
for the reformists.”

The lists had some notable inclusions. In Tehran for example, principlist 
parliamentary candidates Kazem Jalali and Behrouz Nemati took strong stands 
against protests after the disputed 2009 post-election protests, referring to 
them as “sedition 
<http://www.afkarnews.ir/%25d8%25a8%25d8%25ae%25d8%25b4-%25d8%25b3%25db%258c%25d8%25a7%25d8%25b3%25db%258c-3/447346-%25d8%25b4%25d9%2588%25d8%25b1%25d8%25a7%25db%258c-%25d9%2586%25da%25af%25d9%2587%25d8%25a8%25d8%25a7%25d9%2586-%25d8%25b3%25d8%25af-%25d9%2585%25d8%25ad%25da%25a9%25d9%2585-%25d8%25af%25d8%25b1-%25d8%25a8%25d8%25b1%25d8%25a7%25d8%25a8%25d8%25b1-%25d9%2581%25d8%25aa%25d9%2586%25d9%2587-%25da%25af%25d8%25b1%25d8%25a7%25d9%2586-%25d8%25a7%25d8%25b3%25d8%25aa-%25d8%25aa%25d8%25ae%25d8%25b1%25db%258c%25d8%25a8-%25d8%25a8%25d8%25a7-%25d8%25a7%25d9%2587%25d8%25af%25d8%25a7%25d9%2581-%25d8%25b3%25db%258c%25d8%25a7%25d8%25b3%25db%258c>
”, a derogatory term commonly used by principlists. In February 2011 Jalali 
asked forthe heaviest punishment 
<http://hamshahrionline.ir/details/128348/iran/estate> for opposition leaders 
Mehdi Karroubi and Mir Hossein Mousavi. No further punishments were in fact 
meted out upon Jalali’s request.

And as for the Assembly of Experts, former intelligence ministers Ghorban Ali 
Dorri Najafabadi and Mohammad Reyshahri were on the Tehran list. During Dorri 
Najafabadi’s time at the ministry, some of its agents were involved in the
murder of dissidents and intellectuals 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2011/01/the-chain-murders-killing-dissidents-and-intellectuals-1988-1998.html>
, as the ministry admitted in a statement of January 1999. It is not known 
whether Najafabadi or Reyshahri were aware of the killings. In April 2011 the 
European Union imposed a travel ban on Dorri Najafabadi, and froze his assets 
for “serious human rights violations 
<http://justice4iran.org/persian/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/first.eusank1dl.pdf>
”.

After the 1979 revolution, Reyshahri acted as chief judge of the Military 
Revolutionary Tribunal, which tried political dissidents andsentenced thousands 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/documents/mde13/021/1990/en/> to death, some by 
Reyshahri’s own order 
<https://books.google.com.tr/books?id=dmgfcoj0dpec&dq=reyshahri+execution>. 

In Hamedan province, Ali Razini, currently a member of the Assembly of 
Experts, was on the reformists’ list. As yetanother judge 
<http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=13931001000127> of the Military 
Revolutionary Tribunal, he has been implicated in theexecution of political 
prisoners 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2009/08/irans-crumbling-judiciary.html>
.

And in Khuzestan province Ali Fallahian, also a member of the Assembly, is 
another example. As a Minister of Intelligence during the Rafsanjani 
presidency, Fallahian wasaccused of involvement 
<http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=8607080166> by journalists, including 
Akbar Ganji, Emadeddin Baghi, and politicians such as Mostafa Tajzadeh, in 
killing dissidents. Fallahian is also on Interpol’swanted list 
<http://www.interpol.int/notice/search/wanted/2006-34754> for his alleged 
connection to the1995 bombing <http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/7083848.stm> 
of a Jewish centre in Buenos Aires that killed 85 people. Fallahian does not 
appear to have responded to these claims.

The reformists, including former president Mohammad Khatami, encouraged people 
to vote for all the candidates on their lists to stop the hardliners. While 
Khatami hasn’t named anyone specifically, in Tehran current members of the 
Assembly, Ayatollahs Ahmad Jannati, Mohammad Taghi Mesbah-Yazdi and Mohammad 
Yazdi, were the likely targets.

Mohsen Kadivar, a research professor of Islamic studies at Duke University, 
North Carolina, who trained as a cleric at the seminary in Qom, questions this 
strategy. “Let’s say instead of Khamenei’s appointed figures, former 
intelligence ministers get into the Assembly. What difference does it make? 
They also have very dark political records. I don’t see any difference.”

Zibakalam disagrees somewhat. “Unfortunately, we had to choose between bad and 
worse,” he says. “I agree Reyshahri has killed a lot of people...He has no 
democratic background, but he is also not against democracy and freedom. And 
also, what other options do we have? To let Jannati and Mesbah-Yazdi, who are 
openly against any freedom, get in?”

Zibakalam also added that people change over time, citing Mousavi, Rafsanjani 
and Khatami. “During the 1980s they also had no respect for democracy, the rule 
of law and liberalism, but they had to change over time. If we can accept their 
changes as genuine, why can’t we accept that other people change too?”

Denise Hassanzade Ajiri is a staff writer and editor at the Tehran Bureau, an 
independent media organisation hosted by the Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau 
<https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>

 