
App: Zoopla <http://www.zoopla.co.uk/android>

By: Zoopla Ltd

Price: Free

Available on: Android <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android>, iPhone

What is it?

A property search app that allows you to find houses in your area or by 
postcode, as well as research the housing market from your phone. Zoopla claims 
to be the first of the major property portals to launch an Android app, such as 
Rightmove or FindaProperty.

Who is it by?

Zoopla.co.uk <http://www.zoopla.co.uk/> is a property website offering 
listings along with value and price trend information, "providing rich property 
data and local market information in one place, enabling users to search for 
property in a variety of customised ways".

What does it promise?

It offers hundreds of thousands of property listings, more than 16m sold 
prices dating back to 1995, and free instant value estimates for every UK home.

How does it work?

It works in the same way as other property apps: you search for property for 
sale or rent near you or by postcode, and display the results as a list or on 
an integrated Google map).

An interesting feature is that you can also view recent sales data for 
postcodes, as well as Zoopla-estimated valuations for all the UK's 27m homes. 
The app processes Land Registry sales data along with other housing market 
statistics (it calls this its "secret formula") to produce estimates. You can 
also save and email friends your favourite properties and click through to call 
estate agents.

Is it easy to use?

A HTC Desire-wielding chimpanzee could probably use it without too many 
problems.

Is it fun?

It's certainly functional and highly useful if you are looking to buy or rent 
a home. Using the camera to scan properties around you to obtain sales and 
valuation information is entertaining if a little clunky in practice: users 
point their phone at a property using the camera to display relevant 
information such as whether the property is for sale, how much it last sold 
for, and what its current valuation is. Even property doom-mongers might enjoy 
tracking how many houses are for sale, for how long, and if the asking price 
drops over time.

It's great fun â€“ when it works.

Is it pretty?

The purple branding is pleasant enough, but its ubiquity might offend some. 
Navigation is simple, though some of the buttons are small enough to cause the 
odd problem when tapping.

Should you download it?

The Android version isn't that much different from the iPhone app, but that 
means it contains some of the better features that rival apps do not have, such 
as sale prices and expertly-integrated Google maps. The "augmented reality" 
camera scan (a Zoopla innovation since copied by rivals) is good when it works, 
but it crashed on me a couple of times on theiPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> (although not on the Android 
version).

The Zoopla app also displays all results from a search, unlike rivals which 
only produce the first 100, requiring you to refine your search.

The Android version is streets ahead of rival Android property apps such as 
Property <https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> Finder UK (which has poor 
navigation and design and patchy coverage, especially in the rental market), 
making it a must-have for Android users. IPhone users might want to try this as 
well as rival apps (all are free to download) to determine which they prefer.
 