
Dead Man Winter, Furnace (Gndwire Records), 27 January

This is the debut album from Dave Simonett, the leader of the progressive 
bluegrass group Trampled By Turtles. The Minnesota songwriter documents the 
fallout from a divorce with a set of poignant folk-pop songs that are tuneful 
and raw.

Rose Cousins, Natural Conclusion (Old Farm Pony), 3 February

Joe Henry produced this sophomore album by the Halifax-based singer Rose 
Cousins, whose lovely folk songs, such asFreedom 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_euom1vdrhs>, are reminiscent of the acclaimed 
debut by Patty Griffin many years ago. The simplicity of these songs is 
deceiving; as sparse as they feel, her voice draws you in until you realize you 
are at the heart of the storm.

Chuck Prophet, Bobby Fuller Died For Your Sins (Yep Roc), 10 February

San Francisco’s Chuck Prophet continues his creative roll with this 
forthcoming album of garage soul topped withBad Year for Rock and Roll 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Ja0mJp75WE>, a tribute to the many musical 
icons – including Prince and David Bowie – who died this year.

The best Americana albums of 2016 – and the ones that didn't cut it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/14/best-worst-americana-albums-2016>
Ryan Adams, Prisoner (Pax Am/Blue Note), 17 February

Following a live album and a full-album cover of Taylor Swift’s 1989 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/25/ryan-adams-1989-album-taylor-swift-like-shakespeare-interview>
, theenfant terrible of Americana presents his first set of all original songs 
in three years. Judging by first single Do You Still Love Me?, the sound 
follows the 1980s anthem rockers Foreigner and REO Speedwagon.

Son Volt, Notes of Blue (Transmit Sound), 17 February

The alt-country movement of the 1990s started with this St Louis band and the 
vision of songwriter-singer Jay Farrar. Many incarnations later, Farrar is back 
with a set of new songs reportedly influenced by the work of Mississippi Fred 
McDowell, Skip James and Nick Drake.

Rhiannon Giddens, Freedom Highway (Nonesuch), 24 February
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Famericana-albums-2017-release%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca913c9b6b8ab96373376113fb0f86b06bc3dbe3%2F0_34_2813_1687%2F2813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20Americana%20albums%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Famericana-albums-2017-release%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20Americana%20albums%20to%20look%20forward%20to%20in%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Famericana-albums-2017-release%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca913c9b6b8ab96373376113fb0f86b06bc3dbe3%2F0_34_2813_1687%2F2813.jpg>
 Rhiannon Giddens at the Cambridge folk festival. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the 
Guardian 
The former member of the Carolina Chocolate Drops returns with a second solo 
effort following the theme of racial strife from slavery to civil rights to 
Black Lives Matter. Largely a set of originals, the album also includes songs 
originally by Mississippi John Hurt,the late folk singer Richard Fariña 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/25/richard-farina-lost-genius-bridged-gap-beats-hippies>
, and the title song by the Staple Singers.

Old 97’s, Graveyard Whistling (ATO), 24 February

For more than 20 years, this Texas band have stayed true to their 
hyper-kinetic brand of roots country. The original lineup – singer Rhett 
Miller, guitarist Ken Bethea, bassist Murry Hammond, and drummer Philip Peeples 
– have regrouped for this 11th album featuring Good With God, featuring Brandi 
Carlile in the title role.

Wesley Stace, Wesley Stace’s John Wesley Harding (Yep Roc), 24 February

The singer formerly known as John Wesley Harding returns to his birth name 
with a new album that doubles as a stealth return effort by the Jayhawks as it 
features the band’s core lineup – Gary Louris, Marc Perlman, Tim O’Reagan and 
Karen Grotberg – backing up each song, includingLet’s Evaporate 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yU1WEuxSzB0&feature=youtu.be>, the album’s 
first single.

Valerie June, The Order of Time (Concord), 10 March

This is the second album by the Memphis singer and multi-instrumentalist 
Valerie June, whose 2013 album, co-produced by Dan Auerbach of the Black Keys, 
wove together blues, folk, ambient electronics and Appalachian soul.

Hurray for the Riff Raff, The Navigator (ATO), 10 March

One of the more unexpected breakout albums in recent memory was the debut from 
this New Orleans band, which featured Latin rhythms, rock, doo-wop and country. 
This follow-up is described as “a cinematic concept album” inspired by the 
Puerto Rican roots of singer Alynda Segarra.
 