


1 Gardening at Night
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rl5TdBcAUts>

As early 1980s music whizzed and flashed by, four peculiar creatures came from 
the south. They made weird, soupy music that wore its influences lightly – a 
spot of Gang of Four here, a dash of the Velvet Underground there, with guitar 
jangle holding the whole thing together. Years later, the band said that this 
track (from their first EP, 1982's Chronic Town) was the first the that they 
felt was really complete. Its lyrics are abstract, as Michael Stipe's generally 
were until the early 1990s – there's something murky here about pocket change, 
and neighbours going to bed at ten. The title's real inspiration, however, was 
revealed in the band's Best of the IRS Years liner notes, in 2006: "gardening 
at night" meant peeing in bushes after dark. Six months later,REM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rem> played the song when they were inducted 
into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.



2 Perfect Circle
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EXxprhjaot4>

Murmur, in 1983, was the perfect debut album: mysterious, propulsive and like 
nothing else of its time. This ballad shows that record's more emotional side, 
its scattershot lyrics like snapshots of small, tender scenes. Here were 
"shadows way out of place", someone "standing too soon", girls being asked to 
put their dresses on "and stay real close". A jangly, reverb-laden old piano 
and Peter Buck's 12-string guitar made this music sound ancient, somehow; Mike 
Mills' sad, descending bassline in the chorus only deepened its melancholy. 
Perfect Circle was also composed chiefly by drummer Bill Berry, who would go on 
to write the band's best-known ballad a decade later, Everybody Hurts.



3 Driver 8
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yDiBxdEmeeU>

Coming from the sleepy university city of Athens, Georgia, REM made much in 
their lyrics (and videos) about their part of the US. This song is about a 
train route from New York City to New Orleans, which the band debuted at a MTV 
gig in 1984, titled Rock Influences: Folk Rock. (The Byrds 
<http://www.thebyrds.com/>' Roger McGuinn and the Lovin' Spoonful's John 
Sebastian also joined them). The album that Driver 8 ultimately came from 
though, 1985'sFables of the Reconstruction 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/fables-of-the-reconstruction-mw0000195395>, was 
recorded further afield– in Wood Green, north London, with folk-rock producer
Joe Boyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jul/11/fairport-convention-boyd> (Nick 
Drake, Fairport Convention) at the controls. At that time, Michael Stipe has 
said he was bulimic, terrified that he had Aids, and he washaving a nervous 
breakdown 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/07351-michael-stipe-s-last-stand-an-r-e-m-exit-interview>
. This song is a moment of joy in a record where swampy depths reign.



4 Orange Crush
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_mSmOcmk7uQ&feature=kp>

By the late 80s, REM were a bruising live band, their singer often using a 
megaphone on stage. On 1988'sGreen 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/green-mw0000202089>, their first album on major 
label Warners Brothers, Orange Crush was their uncompromising battle charge. 
Its fizzy pop title belied a political message – about the chemical Agent 
Orange, sprayed on Vietnam to deforest the land, and the effects it had later 
on American veterans. The peculiar percussion in the song's middle-eight – 
helicopter blade whirrs, and a distant shouting army – sound especially fierce 
against Michael Stipe's distant, spoken-word testimony. It wouldn't be the 
first or the last time REM showed their political leanings. 1987's Exhuming 
McCarthy fromDocument <http://www.allmusic.com/album/document-mw0000651105> and 
1992's Ignoreland fromAutomatic from the People <http://Automatic From The 
People> are two other bracing examples of their left-wing stance.



5 11
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Px0lRVvG20Y&feature=kp>

REM's sweet, naive songs often get forgotten in histories of the group (or 
deliberately ignored, in the case of 1991'sShiny Happy People 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iCQ0vDAbF7s>, the bubblegum hit that still gets 
some fans' blood boiling). Don't Go Back to Rockville fromReckoning 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/reckoning-mw0000191497> is up with their best, 
butGreen <http://www.allmusic.com/album/green-mw0000202089> had three more: Get 
Up, Stand and this hidden final track, listed in the liner notes as 11 (but 
listed as Untitled on Spotify). The harmonies of Mike Mills are at their 
prettiest here, a feature of REM that would get more prominent on their next 
album,Out of Time <http://www.allmusic.com/album/out-of-time-mw0000690984>. The 
song also features some of Stipe's loveliest, most innocent lyrics. "This world 
is big and so awake/ I stayed up late to hear your voice/ This light is here to 
keep you warm/ This song is here to keep you strong."



6 Country Feedback
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6EHBh1FuY1Q>

Recorded in one take for Out of Time 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/out-of-time-mw0000690984>, released in 1991, the 
words allegedly off a piece of paper that never had a complete lyric on it, 
Michael Stipe has claimed this to be his favourite REM song (at other points, 
he's also given this honour toPerfect Circle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zqlr0v3NitY&feature=kp>, and 1986's Fall on Me) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lf6vCjtaV1k&feature=kp>. Country Feedback is a 
woozy, atmospheric piece, looping around a wheezing pedal steel, and an 
achingly sad and slow chord progression on guitar. Once again, we're dropped 
into a sequence of evocative images: a "flower scorched", clothes that "don't 
fit us right", a "wedding ring". Coming across like a journey into a desperate 
mind, Stipe's vocals sound more naked than they've ever been before. "I lost my 
head," he sings, keeningly. "I need this, I need this."



7 Nightswimming
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ahJ6Kh8klM4>

REM's biggest album – 18m copies sold internationally and counting – was as 
southern a record as Murmur or Fables of the Reconstruction. Best known for the 
big melodies of Everybody Hurts, The Sidewinder Sleeps Tonight and Man on the 
Moon, a murkier, older REM mood prevails onAutomatic for the People 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/automatic-for-the-people-mw0000089350> – try the 
arresting Try Not to Breathe, about an old man grappling with death, a cousin 
to Green's similarly affecting You Are the Everything, or the woozy New Orleans 
Instrumental No 1. Nightswimming sits between both camps. Led by the simple, 
bright piano of Mike Mills and lifted by strings arranged by Led Zeppelin's 
John Paul Jones, it is a simple, powerful piece of nostalgia about lost 
innocence, inspired by the band's early days, spent skinny-dipping in rivers, 
without a care in the world.



8 Leave
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qdqwvVLa3hc>

After Monster's experiment in back-to-basics raw rock, 1996's New Adventures 
in Hi-Fi saw REM making music on the road. Tracks were almost exclusively 
written on tour, including this jolting number, with an additional four tracks 
recorded in the studio. The first minute is REM at their gentle, menacing best, 
before a huge siren-like feedback loop slams us awake, powering us along for 
the next six-and-a-half minutes. At the song's heart, we find a protagonist 
that is desperate to go, losing themselves in anger, "sorrow" and "pain". 
Shortly after, REM would cease being a quartet and become a trio when Bill 
Berry left the band saying "ready to sit back and reflect and maybe not be a 
pop star anymore".



9 Electrolite
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1LewYq40Svw&feature=kp>

Based on a circular piano line that Michael Stipe wasn't originally keen on 
until Mike Mills convinced him, Electrolite is one of REM's most touching 
songs. The lyrics were inspired by Michael Stipe's time living in Los Angeles, 
and his love of the city's lights as viewed from up above. "Hollywood is under 
me," he sings clearly, "I'm Martin Sheen/ I'm Steve McQueen/ I'm Jimmy Dean … 
stand on a cliff and don't be scared". Michael Stipe saw Electrolite as a 
farewell song for the 20th century, with LA being the perfect location for such 
a subject. "Nowhere seemed more perfect than the city that came into its own 
throughout the 20th century,", he wrote in an essay later quoted in the LA 
Times. The video is also one of the band's fun later experiments, partly shot 
upside-down, full of blow-up reindeers, dry ice and growing band members.



10 Diminished
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ywfLS78-oSw>

Made in the aftermath of Bill Berry leaving the band, 1998's Up 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/up-mw0000040590> experimented with electronics, 
and a softer, slighter mood – a tone that would remain for the group's final 
five albums together. Up remains the best of these.At Your Most Beautiful 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UIXs66BPooY> and Walk Unafraid are two 
particularly stunning, rich songs off that record, but this slow, sombre album 
track packs a gentler punch. It begins elliptically with "I watched you fall/ I 
think I pushed", edging along like a sad lullaby into "I have never hurt 
anything", before it breaks into real euphoria two minutes and six seconds in. 
"Does she know I sing that song?", it goes, yearningly, before issuing an 
instruction any old or new REM fans would be wise to learn: "Sing along, sing 
along".

• What do you think of Jude's choices? Nominate the songs she should have 
included – and say why – and we'll do an alternative 10 of the Best for REM on 
Friday 21 February
 