
An 11-year-old British composer has earned comparisons with Mozart after her 
opera opened in Vienna to a standing ovation.

Alma Deutscher, who lives in Surrey with her parents, was already 
world-renowned as a violinist and pianist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/05/alma-deutscher-10-music-world> 
before her first full-length opera made its debut on the Austrian stage on 
Thursday.

The work re-imagined the Cinderella fairytale to be set in an opera house 
ruled by a wicked stepmother, where Cinderella is a composer whom Deutscher 
described as “a bit like me”.

It is Deutscher’s most ambitious work yet, having written her first piano 
sonata at six years old, and a short opera based on a story by Neil Gaiman when 
she was seven. She also performed on stage in Cinderella, playing musical 
interludes on the piano and violin.

“I never get nervous on stage, as I’m just happy that people want to come and 
listen to my music,” she told the Guardian earlier this year. “When I play, I 
am in control, I know what I’m doing and so I don’t see what there is to be 
nervous about.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F11-year-old-british-composer-debuts-first-opera-in-vienna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F117e711d99a943faba2b0285675cdc51ded5eb79%2F0_0_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=11-year-old%20British%20composer%20debuts%20first%20opera%20in%20Vienna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F11-year-old-british-composer-debuts-first-opera-in-vienna%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=11-year-old%20British%20composer%20debuts%20first%20opera%20in%20Vienna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2F11-year-old-british-composer-debuts-first-opera-in-vienna%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F117e711d99a943faba2b0285675cdc51ded5eb79%2F0_0_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 Despite writing and performing music at the age of 11, Deutscher has resisted 
the nickname ‘Little Miss Mozart’. Photograph: Jenny Goodall/PR 
Deutscher, whose mother is an organ scholar at Oxford and father is an amateur 
flautist, said much of the musical inspiration behind Cinderella and other 
compositions came when her mind was elsewhere.

“Quite a few of my melodies and themes for this opera came while I was 
skipping,” she told Radio 4’s Today programme. “I take my skipping rope to the 
rehearsals and skip with it in the breaks.”

She told NBC’s Today show that “the funny thing is that when I try to get 
beautiful melodies it usually never comes and my mind just goes blank. For 
example, a few days ago when I was in bed resting in the middle of the night 
then I got this beautiful melody.”

The opera is two and a half hours long with the musical score running to 237 
pages. Instead of the glass slipper of the fairytale, the prince looks for a 
lost melody he cannot quite remember. She said: “I thought the prince having to 
ask whose foot would fit the slipper doesn’t make much sense. Lots of people 
might have the same sized foot, but only one person could have written that 
melody.”

Conductor Simon Rattle declared he was “absolutely bowled over” when he first 
saw her perform, but it was Stephen Fry who first speculated that Deutscher 
could be this generation’s Mozart, after watching a video of her performing on 
YouTube. However, it is not a comparison that the 11-year-old is particularly 
keen on.

She said: “I love Mozart very much, he’s probably my favourite composer, but I 
don’t really like it when people call me ‘Little Miss Mozart’ because I don’t 
like being called ‘little’. I’m very big, and secondly, if I just wrote 
everything Mozart wrote again it would be boring.”
 