
Indian police have rescued nearly 200 children, most of them under 14, who 
were found working in a brick kiln, officials said on Wednesday.


 The children were rescued in the Yadadiri district in Telangana, 40km from 
state capital Hyderabad, as part of Operation Smile, a national campaign to 
tackle child labour and missing children.

Death on the road: can Mumbai shed its reputation as the ‘car crash capital’?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/03/death-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital>
 The rescued children had moved from the eastern state of Odisha and were 
living and working with adults presumed to be their parents in the brick kiln, 
police said. “We are not sure if the parents are genuine and there is a 
possibility that some of the children were trafficked,” police commissioner 
Mahesh Bhagwat said.

 “The rescue teams spotted girls as young as seven and eight carrying bricks 
on their head. Some of the children were as young as four.“

 In 2015, the International Labour Organization (ILO) put the number of Indian 
child workers aged between five and 17 at 5.7 million, out of 168 million 
globally. More than half work in agriculture and over a quarter work in the 
manufacturing sector, the ILO said.

UN’s ban on child labour is a ‘damaging mistake’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/child-labour-un-ban-damaging-mistake>
P. Achyuta Rao, member of a local state body responsible for protecting 
children’s rights, said Telangana and neighbouring Andhra Pradesh had become 
hubs for child trafficking and child labour. “Last year more than 3,000 
children were rescued, many from brick kilns and others from domestic 
servitude. In all cases, the children were from easternIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>,” said Rao of the Telangana State 
Commission.

 Many migrant children end up working alongside their parents because of a 
lack of schools and teachers who can provide lessons in their local language, 
campaigners say.

 Local officials said they would investigate why the rescued children had not 
been enrolled in a nearby primary school. 
 