
Up to 2 million Muslims from around the world have arrived in Saudi Arabia for 
the annual hajj pilgrimage amid a diplomatic war of words between the Saudi 
regime and the Iranian government overlast year’s disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/mecca-crush-during-hajj-kills-at-least-100-saudi-state-tv>
.

More than 2,400 pilgrims were crushed to death in 2015, and some fear a repeat 
despite fresh security measures for the hajj, which begins on Friday and lasts 
five days. More than 27,000 security personnel will be deployed around the holy 
sites at Mecca and Medina.

Iran accuses Saudi Arabia of 'murdering' pilgrims during hajj stampede
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/iran-accuses-saudi-arabia-of-murdering-pilgrims-during-hajj-stampede>
A huge increase in international pilgrims over recent decades has increased 
pressure on the holy sites of Mecca and Medina, and the infrastructure needed 
to cope with a massive influx of people.


Pilgrims are required to travel in organised groups, and a Saudi official has 
said that those caught trying to enter the holy sites without a permit will be 
tried and sentenced within 24 hours.


“Verdicts of imprisonment and fines against illegal pilgrims will be issued 
within 24 hours,” said Muhammad al-Anzi, the director of the department of 
expatriates in the directorate general of prisons,Al Arabiya reported 
<http://english.alarabiya.net/en/News/middle-east/2016/09/07/Illegal-hajj-pilgrims-to-be-tried-sentenced-within-24-hours.html>
.


Rulings will be issued by special administrative committees stationed at 
checkpoints along the roads leading to Mecca and other holy sites, and 
violators will be sent to a detention centre within 48 hours, Anzi said. All 
verdicts will be final, he added.

Earlier this week, Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei repeated his 
claim that Iranian pilgrims had been “murdered” by the Saudi regime during last 
year’s hajj, blaming the deadly crush on incompetence. The Iranian government 
urged Muslims to unite againstSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>.


The Saudis “have made the divine sanctuary unsafe for everybody”, Khamenei 
said in astatement posted on his website 
<http://english.khamenei.ir/news/4121/Hajj-hijacked-by-oppressors-Muslims-should-reconsider-management>
. “The heartless and murderous Saudis locked up the injured with the dead in 
containers – instead of providing medical treatment and helping them or at 
least quenching their thirst. They murdered them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F2015-disaster-muslims-saudi-arabia-hajj-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf4bdaa86f285093dc1491a14c176dfbdeef1904%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2015%20disaster%20looms%20large%20as%20Muslims%20descend%20on%20Saudi%20Arabia%20for%20hajj&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F2015-disaster-muslims-saudi-arabia-hajj-iran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2015%20disaster%20looms%20large%20as%20Muslims%20descend%20on%20Saudi%20Arabia%20for%20hajj&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2F2015-disaster-muslims-saudi-arabia-hajj-iran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf4bdaa86f285093dc1491a14c176dfbdeef1904%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Ayatollah Ali Khamenei attends a meeting with survivors of the hajj crush in 
Tehran on Wednesday. Photograph: Uncredited/AP 
He added: “Those who have reduced Hajj to a religious tourist trip and have 
hidden their enmity and malevolence towards the faithful and revolutionary 
people ofIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> under the name of 
‘politicising hajj’, are themselves small and puny satans who tremble for fear 
of jeopardising the interests of the great satan, the US.”


The Saudi grand mufti, Sheikh Abdulaziz al-Sheikh, responded by saying Iran’s 
leaders were not Muslims, but descendants of the Magi, orZoroastrians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/oct/30/religion.uk20>. “Their hostility 
towards Muslims is ancient.”


More than 400 Iranians were killed in the crush, exacerbating tensions between 
the two countries already at breaking point over thewars in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/07/losing-ground-fighter-morale-is-it-all-over-for-isis-syria-turkey>
 and Yemen. For the first time in almost three decades Iranians will not join 
this year’s pilgrimage.

According to the Saudi government, 769 pilgrims were killed at Mina when two 
huge groups of people converged on 24 September. It was the worst hajj disaster 
since 1990, when 1,426 people were suffocated and trampled to death in a tunnel.


Losing ground, fighters and morale – is it all over for Isis?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/07/losing-ground-fighter-morale-is-it-all-over-for-isis-syria-turkey>
However, a report by the Associated Press 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/11/world/middleeast/death-toll-from-hajj-stampede.html>
 found that 36 countries reported a total of 2,411 deaths in last year’s 
disaster – three times the number acknowledged by the Saudis. Among the dead, 
the biggest group was from Iran. Mali claimed 305 dead, Nigeria 274, Egypt 190, 
and Bangladesh 137.

King Salman <https://www.theguardian.com/world/king-salman> ordered an inquiry 
into the disaster, which came 13 days after 111 people were killed when acrane 
collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/15/mecca-crane-collapse-saudi-arabia-king-sanctions-binladin-group>
 at the Grand Mosque in Mecca, but few details have been made public.


Pilgrims are being issued with electronic bracelets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/saudi-arabia-tightens-up-hajj-planning-avoid-repeat-2015-disaster>
 in an attempt to monitor and control crowd flow. The bracelets also contain 
medical and personal identification details. More than 1,000 security cameras 
have been put in place and security and emergency forces have carried out 
practice drills.


About 25,000 pilgrims from the UK are expected to be in Mecca. In July, the 
Association of British Hujjaj (Pilgrims) launched ahealth and safety awareness 
campaign 
<http://www.abhuk.com/awareness-campaign-for-hajj-pilgrims-launched-at-house-of-lords/>
, which highlighted the risks of infectious diseases, such as meningitis and
coronavirus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/may/13/new-coronavirus-mers-cov>, as 
well as the dangers of stampedes and crushes.


“Authorities from around the world must learn lesson from last year’s hajj 
disasters and to set up strategy to help and protect hajj pilgrims in order to 
protect them from becoming casualties in any future hajj tragedy,” said Khalid 
Pervez, the association’s general secretary.


The hajj is one of the five pillars of Islam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, and able-bodied Muslims are expected 
to make the pilgrimage at least once in their lives.

The rituals include the tawaf: circling the holy Kaaba at the centre of the 
Grand Mosque seven times in an anticlockwise direction while repeating prayers. 
In the valley of Mina, pilgrims hurl stones at pillars symbolising the devil. 
All pilgrims wear the same simple white robes, calledthram.


The dates of the hajj depend on the lunar calendar, and move forward each 
year. For the next 10 years the hajj will take place in the summer months, when 
temperatures at the holy sites can exceed 40C (104F), increasing the risk of 
dehydration and heat exhaustion.

 