
The phrase “turning point” is overused, but future historians are likely to 
view the year 2016 as exactly that. The standout event was Donald Trump’s 
surprise victory. Themaverick Republican’s defeat of Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
 produced a shock that reverberated around the world. The billionaire’s White 
House tenancy begins on 20 January. Many will dub that date Black Friday, 
fearful that Trumpism may irreparably damage international security, 
environmental protection and human rights. Others will see it as a sign of 
welcome change. It will be a year of living dangerously.

Yet 2016 was remarkable for many other reasons – good and bad. The fightback 
against Islamic State in Syria and Iraq gathered pace, even asterrorist 
atrocities took lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/29/one-eye-on-the-emergency-exit-the-anxious-mood-in-germany-and-france>
 from Nice to Jakarta. Apeace deal was signed in Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/colombia-signs-historic-peace-deal-with-farc-rebels>
, ending the world’s longest-running insurgency. The European Union was thrown 
into confusion by Britain’s vote to leave. TheParis agreement marked a 
breakthrough on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
.

Elections and referendums

Trump’s protectionist, isolationist stance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-britain-greatest-fear-isolationist-president>
 brought into question the inevitability of globalisation, suggesting a return 
to a pre-1939 age of economic nationalism, punitive tariffs, trade barriers, 
controls on movement of labour and capital, closed markets and minds.

Many hope Trump will take a more pragmatic, less iconoclastic line. But he 
questioned the usefulness of international institutions such as the United 
Nations, the World Bank and Nato. He cast doubt on key security alliances in 
Asia. Trump alsoignited concern for April’s Paris climate change deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-paris-climate-deal-change-open-mind>
.

Trump’s stated support for the unilateral waging of war, for authoritarian 
governance,torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/donald-trump-ohio-rally-isis-torture-tpp-rape>
, indefinite detention without trial, and religious and racial profiling of 
immigrants and refugees could, if copied, destroy the universal legal and human 
rights protections erected via the UN system since 1945.

The first world leader Trump spoke to after his victory was Egypt’s military 
coup leader, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, giving a chilling insight into his priorities.

Britain’s narrow 52%-48% referendum vote in June in favour of leaving the EU 
was unexpected. Many drew parallels with the US, saying similar nationalist, 
populist forces were at work, fuelled byanger that globalisation and 
accompanying immigration were undermining low-paid workers’ way of life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/26/brexit-is-the-rejection-of-globalisation>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6d9d2f95f672c217944d85e31fe9fd5ab42f48f%2F120_117_4044_2427%2F4044.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what's%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what%27s%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6d9d2f95f672c217944d85e31fe9fd5ab42f48f%2F120_117_4044_2427%2F4044.jpg>
 Supporters of the Stronger In campaign react as results of Britain’s EU 
referendum are announced. Photograph: Rob Stothard/AFP/Getty Images 
If the British government’s timetable holds, Brexit will begin in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, when the UK will formally file for divorce. Tough negotiations are expected, 
focused on freedom of movement (which Britain wants to curtail) and unfettered 
UK access to the single market (which other EU members oppose).

Divisions within Britain over Brexit can be expected to deepen, especially if 
sterling devalues further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/08/after-sterlings-terrifying-plunge-bosses-plead-for-clarity-on-the-future-of-brexit>
, and, as expected, thecost of living rises sharply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/oct/14/uk-living-standards-decline-pound-fall-too-high-price-brexit>
. Political strains in Europe will further complicate the post-Brexit picture.

France will hold a presidential election in spring. Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>, of the far-right National 
Front, is expected to do very well. Le Pen wants France to quit the EU and 
euro. Her main challenger is likely to be François Fillon, a Catholic 
Thatcherite, for the centre right. The Socialist president, François Hollande, 
will not stand for re-election. In the Netherlands’ March general election, the 
Islamophobe Geert Wilders could prove an influential warm-up act for Le Pen. 
Wilders advocates a Dutch “Nexit”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe154ac1106342d83d240d58205923b13a8d1310f%2F277_498_4907_2944%2F4907.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what's%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what%27s%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe154ac1106342d83d240d58205923b13a8d1310f%2F277_498_4907_2944%2F4907.jpg>
 Marine Le Pen with supporters. Photograph: Claude Paris/AP 
Germany holds federal elections in September. Angela Merkel is seeking 
re-election for a fourth term as chancellor, but facesstrong opposition from 
the anti-immigrant Alternative for Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/mecklenburg-vorpommern-german-anti-immigrant-party-strong-regional-election-exit-polls-merkel>
.

All this internal uncertainty may paralyse the EU in 2017 as it faces record 
refugee influxes, chronic eurozone weakness, threats from Russia and an 
uncertain partner in Washington. The fashionable idea thatMerkel will pick up 
the torch from Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/germany-daunted-by-great-expectations-as-obama-passes-baton-to-merkel>
 and become defender-in-chief of western liberal democracy looks like wishful 
thinking.

Conflicts and terrorism

Despite repeated UN attempts at peace, Syria’s civil war passed the five-year 
mark in 2016 and approached a bloody denouement. Russia’s intervention made a 
decisive difference. Western-backed rebels were pushed back. The regime of 
President Bashar al-Assad was encouraged to believe it could survive.

The siege of eastern Aleppo became a symbol of the suffering and brutality of 
the Syrian war. Children were killed or maimed in large numbers. Hospitals and 
schools were repeatedly hit and UN relief supplies were suspended after anaid 
convoy was strafed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/un-aid-convoy-attack-syria-us-russia>
. In September, the US, Britain and France staged a diplomatic protest at the 
UN security council,accusing Russia’s forces and leaders of possible war crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/25/russia-accused-war-crimes-syria-un-security-council-aleppo>
 and threatening new sanctions. Moscow was unmoved. Backed by Assad’s other 
main ally, Iran, Russia claimed the west was supporting jihadi terrorists and 
pursuing illegal regime change. By year’s end, the battle for Aleppo appeared 
over as rebel resistance crumbled. Theevacuation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/aleppo-evacuation-buses-delayed-says-monitor-syria>
 of wounded civilians began amid reports of renewed atrocities. Assad and Iran 
claimed “victory”. And fears grew that the civil war would be superseded by a 
new struggle between external forces for control of land and resources.

In Iraq, an offensive to retake Mosul from Isis got bogged down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/battle-for-mosul-stalls-islamic-state-stronghold-iraq>
. Thewar in Yemen showed no sign of abating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/everything-is-over-now-the-last-survivors-in-yemens-ground-zero>
, notwithstanding afurore in Britain and the US about arms sales to Saudi Arabia
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/18/uk-cluster-bombs-used-in-yemen-by-saudi-arabia-finds-research>
, whose airstrikes are blamed for numerous civilian deaths. In Libya, a new 
threat from Isis emerged, centred on the late Muammar Gaddafi’s stronghold in 
Sirte, prompting fierce fighting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff06d3ef25d00d3aae787afa9f71b6b1266b7b967%2F59_324_2818_1691%2F2818.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what's%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what%27s%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff06d3ef25d00d3aae787afa9f71b6b1266b7b967%2F59_324_2818_1691%2F2818.jpg>
 Pupils gather at their school in Saada, Yemen, after it was hit by a Saudi-led 
airstrike. Photograph: Naif Rahma/Reuters 
Isis was also active in Afghanistan, challenging the Taliban for control of 
rural areas.Afghanistan is now America’s longest war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/afghanistan-is-the-dirty-little-secret-of-the-us-presidential-campaign>
. More than 8,000 US troops are still based there, though Nato combat forces 
have left. Will Trump try to finish it in 2017, as Obama vainly tried to do in 
2009? Or will he cut and run, leaving the Afghans to fight it out?

Trump says defeating Isis is his top priority abroad. He appointed Michael 
Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/michael-flynn-national-security-adviser-profile>
, a former general who has claimed it is rational to fear Muslims, as national 
security adviser – one of several nominations of hawks to key posts. The 
thought that he could be tasked with fulfilling Trump’s pledge to “bomb the 
shit out of Isis” unnerved observers.

The year is likely to see a narrowing American focus on hitting Isis in the 
caliphate’s heartlands around Mosul and Raqqa inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, where the jihadis are besieged by 
Iraqi and Kurdish forces.

The Isis threat will persist, however. Western security agencies fear 
displaced jihadis could make their way in increasing numbers to Europe in 2017, 
bent on launching attacks like those inBrussels in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/brussels-airport-explosions-heard>
, which killed 32 people, andNice in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/lorry-rams-bastille-day-crowd-in-nice-killing-at-least-70>
, in which 86 died. Jihadi websites celebrated Trump’s election, anticipating a 
surge in recruits.

Given this polarisation, the global spread of Islamist extremism is likely to 
continue. In Nigeria,Boko Haram is undefeated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/nigerian-clashes-doubt-boko-haram-technically-defeated>
, despite the freeing of many schoolgirls abducted in 2014.

Muslim majority countries such as Pakistan, Indonesia and Bangladesh face 
continuing threats. InDhaka in July, 20 hostages died in a restaurant attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
 by home-grown jihadis targeting westerners and non-Muslims. In Quetta in 
October, more than 50 young police recruitsdied in a massacre blamed on Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/quetta-attack-pakistan-reels-as-more-than-50-die-in-assault-on-police-academy>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54cdc775bb5588f2d8d731353d06ac806af7d9f7%2F0_163_4410_2646%2F4410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what's%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what%27s%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54cdc775bb5588f2d8d731353d06ac806af7d9f7%2F0_163_4410_2646%2F4410.jpg>
 A vigil in Dhaka after a terrorist attack at a restaurant in July. Photograph: 
Zakir Chowdhury/Barcroft Images 
Democracy and dictators 

Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, Russia’s 
president, will keep his title of the west’s top bogeyman in 2017. Syria aside, 
Russia’s military build-up along its border with the Baltic republics, its 
meddling in Ukraine, and its covert political influence-peddling, 
disinformation campaigns and cyber warfare in eastern Europe are expected to 
accelerate.

Trump’s refusal to criticise Putin suggested the US and Russia may see some 
kind ofrealpolitik compromise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/trump-putin-same-side-new-world-order>
 and a return to the concept of “spheres of influence” – a prospect that deeply 
alarms many Nato states. Trump’s nomination of theExxon Mobil oilman Rex 
Tillerson, a Putin pal, as secretary of state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
 added to the unease. If Trump tries another Russian “reset”, the likelihood is 
that Putin will take what he wants and leave the rest.

Putin has been building bridges to Xi Jinping, China’s president. This 
alliance of convenience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/putin-china-internet-great-firewall-russia-cybersecurity-pact>
 will create more headaches for the west in 2017. Xi has enlisted Russia’s 
support in conducting military “exercises” around disputed South China Sea 
islands, where Beijing is rapidly expanding its presence. China defied a 2016UN 
court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
 deeming its activities illegal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e379e820694688b3b48c7dfab4a05457240627a%2F0_150_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what's%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what%27s%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e379e820694688b3b48c7dfab4a05457240627a%2F0_150_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 A billboard in Shandong province with the slogan: ‘South China Sea, our 
beautiful motherland, we won’t let go an inch.’ Photograph: AP 
Even before taking office, Trump went on the offensive against China, speaking 
to Taiwan’s president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/why-donald-trump-chat-taiwan-leader-country>
 and questioning the long-established One China policy, under which the US 
accepts Beijing’s sovereignty. Beijing’s response to Trump was initially angry 
yet restrained. But there were fears the Taiwan issue might escalate militarily 
in 2017.

Internally, Beijing’s harsh treatment of democrats seeking independence for 
Hong Kong mirrored what commentators called the biggest crackdown on civil 
rights and free speech in mainlandChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> since Mao’s Cultural Revolution.

The nuclear brinkmanship of North Korea’s paranoid regime increased regional 
tensions. This problem will possibly come to a head in 2017. Kim Jong-un, the 
country’s dictator, conducted anunderground nuclear test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/north-korea-nuclear-test-earthquake>
 in September, the fifth and biggest, involving nuclear-capable ballistic 
missiles.

In Tokyo, there were calls for Japanese rearmament. Trump suggested Japan and 
South Korea acquire nuclear weapons. His threat to tear up Obama’s 2015 pact 
with Iranstoked fears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/john-brennan-tearing-up-us-deal-with-iran-would-be-disastrous-says-cia-chief>
 that Tehran may seek to acquire nuclear weapons, sparking a regional arms race 
and confrontation between Iran and Israel. Like a mafia boss, Trump demanded 
Japan and South Korea pay more for US bases. In Seoul,scandal forced President 
Park Geun-hye to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/south-koreas-president-calls-on-parliament-to-arrange-her-exit>
. All this uncertainty suggests 2017 could be a problematic year for global 
nuclear non-proliferation efforts.

Democracy in south-east Asia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/observer-view-on-corruption-south-east-asia>
 fared little better. The death of Thailand’s King Bhumibol Adulyadej further 
bolstered Bankok’s military junta.

In Myanmar, there was better news. Aung San Suu Kyi, the veteran opposition 
leader, became the country’s de facto leader, appearing at the UN in September. 
But herfailure to condemn repression of the Muslim minority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/aung-san-suu-kyi-accuses-international-community-of-stoking-unrest-in-myanmar>
 reflected the fragility of her position.

The biggest regional upset was in the Philippines, where the foul-mouthed 
Rodrigo Duterte was elected president. Thousands of alleged gangsters and 
drug-dealers have since died in agovernment crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/philippines-secret-death-squads-police-officer-teams-behind-killings>
. Duterteadmitted killing alleged criminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-personally-killed-criminals>
. Protests from the US and UN prompted him toturn to China for support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/china-philippines-resume-dialogue-south-china-sea-dispute>
, repudiating the long-standing US alliance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40933bb4d6770261d0151ef29b08a17dd2acbbe2%2F0_7_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what's%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20was%20the%20end%20of%20the%20world%20as%20we%20know%20it.%20So%20what%27s%20next%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2F2016-was-the-end-of-the-world-as-we-know-it-so-whats-next%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40933bb4d6770261d0151ef29b08a17dd2acbbe2%2F0_7_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Mourners in Caloocan city, Philippines, pay respects to Jerico Camitan, 21, 
who was shot with his partner, 17. A placard placed nearby said they were drug 
pushers. Photograph: Jes Aznar/Getty Images 
In Latin America, the so-called “red tide” of leftwing governments receded 
amid civil unrest in Venezuela, the crime-ridden home of the late Hugo Chávez’s 
Bolivarian revolution. From Argentina and Chile to Ecuador and Bolivia, the 
left was in retreat. In Brazil, the country’s first female president,Dilma 
Rousseff, was ousted by rightwing foes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/dilma-rousseff-impeached-president-brazilian-senate-michel-temer>
. Exceptions were Nicaragua, where the veteran Sandinista Daniel Ortega was 
re-elected president; andCuba, where the socialist regime hosted Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/20/barack-obama-cuba-visit-us-politics-shift-public-opinion-diplomacy>
. His visit seemed to confirm the Cuban revolution’s survival after bitter US 
enmity, although Trump may try to turn the clock back.Fidel Castro, Cuba’s 
iconic leader, died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies>
. He was hailed as a historic figure and condemned as a tyrant. In Colombia, a
peace deal with the Farc rebels was repudiated in a referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/colombia-referendum-rejects-peace-deal-with-farc>
, but continued to be honoured during a review.

In Africa, Burundi’s president followed his Rwandan counterpart in overturning 
the constitution and grabbing a third consecutive term in office, causing 
considerable instability. In Uganda, Yoweri Museveni extended what looks like a 
presidency-for-life amid claims of poll fraud. In theDemocratic Republic of the 
Congo, presidential elections were postponed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/drc-protests-grow-as-kabila-clings-to-power-despite-his-term-ending>
, while the Gambia’s president, Yahya Jammeh, ceded electoral defeat, then 
refused to step down.

Yet Africa’s democratic deficit was often unfairly exaggerated. In its 2016 
report, Freedom House identified Nigeria, Liberia and Ivory Coast among 
countries experiencingbig advances in political rights and civil liberties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/feb/25/democracy-in-african-countries-five-myths-explored>
. It also praised Botswana, Ghana, Cape Verde and Benin. When Africans consider 
the US in 2017, the self-appointed champion of democracy, they may feel 
blessed. Next time a western politician complains about Robert Mugabe’s 
depredations in Zimbabwe, the ready reply will be: just look at Donald Trump.
 