
Barbie gets a makeover

Barbara Millicent Roberts has a distinctive look. The doll, better known as 
Barbie, was in 1959 either blond or brunette, before ditching her dark locks 
for a long, impossibly sleek golden mane. But even in the early days, Barbie 
was notable for her lithe limbs, large-yet-pert breasts and, of course, 
teeny-tiny waist.

Facially, her evolution has been almost constant: 1969’s eyeliner flicks and 
pixie nose meant Barbie looked likeBewitched’s Samantha 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f5qp3vAVX9s>. By the late 70s, she was bearing 
bright white teeth and in the late 80s/early 90s her already big pupils almost 
doubled in size; who knows why.

Figure-wise, however, little has changed. In 1998, Mattel gave its latest 
doll, Really Rad Barbie, slimmer hips, a wider waistline and smaller bust, so 
Barbie would“have more of a teenage physique” 
<http://fortune.com/2016/03/09/barbie-doll-body-photos/>. And in 2000 she 
acquired a tummy button. Progress, it’s fair to say, has been slow.

But there is hope: in 2016, Mattel acknowledged its “responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/28/barbie-finally-becomes-a-real-girl-with-more-realistic-figure-and-skin-colours>
 to girls and parents to reflect a broader view of beauty” and gave Barbie a 
full-on reinvention. Jawlines were softened, thighs thickened, skin tones 
lightened and darkened. TheFashionistas range 
<http://barbiemedia.com/news/detail/140.html> included three new body shapes 
(tall, curvy, petite), seven skin tones, 22 eye colours, 24 hairstyles and 14 
“face sculpts”.

It’s easy to be cynical – diversity is good for business – and it may be some 
time before children choose to play with anything other than the white, blond, 
skinny doll that has epitomised western beauty ideals for so long. But when 
they do, at least there’s a taller-than-average, possibly mixed-race Barbie 
with a supercool undercut just waiting to steal the show.Leah Harper

Taiwan votes for Tsai Ing-wen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/tsai-ing-wen-former-professor-on-course-to-be-most-powerful-woman-in-chinese-speaking-world>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F490da98895dcfeb37af7afef8962ce4f7fb03510%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F490da98895dcfeb37af7afef8962ce4f7fb03510%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 A supporter holds a picture of Tsai Ing-wen. Photograph: Ulet Ifansasti/Getty 
Images 
In a year that saw America pass on the chance to elect its first female 
president, there was better news from Taiwan: Tsai Ing-wen rose to power as one 
of the rare self-made female Asian leaders to have succeeded through hard work 
rather than family connections. In January, she was elected Taiwan’s first 
female president, becoming the most powerful woman in the Chinese-speaking 
world.

Her Democratic Progressive party’s landslide win was boosted by young voters 
disillusioned with stagnant economic growth and rising inequality, and 
desperate to assert their country’s identity. Taiwan, an island of 23 million 
people about 100 miles off the Chinese coast, has its own government, currency 
and military, but is viewed by China as a renegade province. Most nations, wary 
of offending China, refuse to have formal diplomatic ties with it. However, US 
president-elect Donald Trumpspoke with Tsai  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/trump-angers-beijing-with-provocative-phone-call-to-taiwan-president>
on the telephone in December, breaking decades of US foreign policy protocol.

Tsai, a law professor and LSE graduate, came to power on the back of the 
Sunflower Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/08/taiwan-protesters-end-occupation-legislature-china-trade>
 of 2014, when students occupied government buildings and thousands took to the 
streets to protest at a trade deal with Beijing.

It has, however, seen China retaliate by freezing diplomatic ties and 
allegedly restricting tourism to squeeze Taiwan’s struggling economy. And as 
Tsai has walked the tricky line between public expectations on independence and 
increased jobs and prosperity, her approval rating has plummeted. But the 
president, who has been called the “Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> of the east” for her calm, 
academic style, appears unfazed. “We want to make Taiwan an Asian tiger once 
again,”she wrote 
<http://www.chinapost.com.tw/taiwan/national/national-news/2016/11/27/485128/Tsai-vows.htm>
 in the Economist in November. “My plan for 2017 is for Taiwan to renew its 
role as a pioneer.”Nicola Smith

Puddlewatch makes a splash
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fdrummondpuddlewatch-the-periscope-sensation-thats-making-a-splash-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23Drummondpuddlewatch%3A%20the%20Periscope%20sensation%20that's%20making%20a%20splash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fdrummondpuddlewatch-the-periscope-sensation-thats-making-a-splash-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23Drummondpuddlewatch%3A%20the%20Periscope%20sensation%20that%27s%20making%20a%20splash%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fdrummondpuddlewatch-the-periscope-sensation-thats-making-a-splash-video&media=>
#Drummondpuddlewatch: the Periscope sensation that’s making a splash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/jan/06/drummondpuddlewatch-the-periscope-sensation-thats-making-a-splash-video>
The first week of 2016 seems like an entirely different place. For proof, look 
at#DrummondPuddleWatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/jan/06/drummondpuddlewatch-the-periscope-sensation-thats-making-a-splash-video>
: a livestream of a large puddle in Newcastle. If this happened now, we would 
treat it differently. We’d gnash our teeth about failing infrastructures, 
joylessly share overcooked thinkpieces about how the puddle was Brexit’s fault, 
brace ourselves for the inevitable moment when president-elect Trump would call 
the puddle “sad” on Twitter.

But back in the glory days of early January, #DrummondPuddleWatch was a treat: 
a dog in the playground, the first glimpse of snow. There was real pleasure to 
be taken from the various ways people attempted to traverse the puddle: on 
tiptoe, via an island-hopping technique using a nearby lamp-post, or smashing 
through regardless. It was the most basic personality test, dividing people 
into varying layers of caution; at once breathtakingly mundane and staggeringly 
life-affirming. It felt spectacularly British then, and it feels spectacularly 
innocent now.

At its peak, around 20,000 people were watching the puddle online. Before 
long, people brought lilos and surfboards with them. A crowd formed. Around a 
puddle. It felt like a moment in time, shared by all. One day, we’ll sit our 
grandchildren down and tell them about the time 20,000 people watched an old 
lady leapfrog a puddle, and they won’t believe us. “What’s a puddle?” they’ll 
ask through a gas mask in the concrete bunker they’ve never left, and we’ll be 
lost for words.Stuart Heritage

106-year-old Virginia McLaurin dances with the Obamas
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4c2e3dfe6e7145e0b64b5bc74b206cb3f84f5f1%2F0_211_2502_2950%2F2502.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4c2e3dfe6e7145e0b64b5bc74b206cb3f84f5f1%2F0_211_2502_2950%2F2502.jpg>
 Virginia McLaurin with the Obamas. Photograph: Pete Souza/The White House 
When Virginia McLaurin, aged 106, attended a White House reception in 
February, she wasn’t sure if she would meetPresident Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>. “We were waiting and I kept 
asking, ‘Where is he? Am I going to see him?’” she says, speaking from her home 
in Washington DC earlier this month, apologising for being hard of hearing.

McLaurin, born in 1909, grew up on a sharecropping farm in South Carolina. She 
was used to one entrance for white people at the front of a house and another 
at the back for black people. “I didn’t think I’d ever live to see a black 
president,” she says. “And I really didn’t think a poor person like me would 
get a chance to go to the White House.”

McLaurin, known locally as Ms V, is an active community member: she still 
volunteers up to 40 hours a week at a special needs school and Sundays are for 
church. When she said she wanted to meet the Obamas, a neighbour contacted 
White House staff and she was invited to aBlack History Month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/blackhistorymonth> event.
Good news list 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/series-vertical-good-news-stories-2016/embed.html>
“When I got close to him, I was so excited, I just grabbed him,” she says. 
Video footage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/feb/22/obamas-dance-with-energetic-106-year-old-guest-at-white-house-video>
 shows McLaurin, in a matching blue jacket and skirt, throwing her arms open, 
shouting, “Hi!” and clasping hands with Obama. “I grabbed her, too,” she says of
the first lady <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama>.

In the video, the president jokes that McLaurin should slow down; Michelle 
Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michelleobama> says, “I want to be 
like you when I grow up.” When McLaurin replies, “You can” and wiggles her 
shoulders with excitement, the three are led in some dance steps by Michelle.

As they gather for a photograph, the first lady exclaims, “Look at those 
nails!” McLaurin recalls they were the same blue as her suit and that her 
“fiftysomething” granddaughter had painted them. “You’ll notice I had on boots. 
That was because I didn’t have any shoes. But I thought, ‘I don’t care, I’m 
going anyhow.’”

When the video went viral, people heard of McLaurin’s volunteering and poor 
living conditions, and she received donations to a Facebook page set up by her 
neighbour. She was able to move into a more comfortable apartment in April, a 
few weeks after turning 107. “Everywhere I go, people hug and kiss me and want 
my picture,” she says. “All my joy came out when I met the president. It meant 
so much to me.”Candice Pires

The Archers shines a light 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F183c45d89ab3653970182dff3f2d8a8127b74a52%2F0_0_4242_2828%2F4242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F183c45d89ab3653970182dff3f2d8a8127b74a52%2F0_0_4242_2828%2F4242.jpg>
 The Archers’ Rob and Helen Titchener. Photograph: Pete Dadds/BBC/PA 
Paul Trueman has been a fan of The Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> for more than a decade, 
but at the start of this year, like millions of other devotees of the 
long-running Radio 4 soap, he found himself seized by one particular storyline.

Helen Titchener, born a member of the titular farming family, now married to a 
manipulative bully named Rob, was being dragged ever more under his abusive 
control. Friends started spotting bruises. Now she was pregnant, and 
increasingly fearful for her young son.

Among the soap’s devoted fans on Twitter, Trueman noted, “There was a lot of, 
‘Why can’t we do something? This is awful.’ Then an idea popped into my head. 
If she were real, we could fundraise to get her out of there. So I thought, 
that’s what we should do. We should start a fundraising page for a fictional 
character” – with the profits going to help real-life victims of domestic 
violence.

Within a couple of hours, Trueman had set up a page on the JustGiving website 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/helentitchener> in aid of the charity 
Refuge 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/get-involved/donate-now/?gclid=CKXP0tfR39ACFUy17QoduVwElA>
, with a nominal target of £1,000. “I thought if we were lucky we might reach 
that in a month.”

That was around 9pm. His phone pinged five minutes later, the first alert that 
someone had donated money. By midnight, he had passed his target. “And my phone 
didn’t stop pinging for the next six months. It was bonkers.” He didn’t turn 
off the notifications, “partly because I loved getting them. It was just 
fantastic, a little bit of a drug.”

Within 48 hours, the total passed £20,000; it was £45,000 by the end of the 
first week. Most powerful, for Trueman, were the comments from those donating, 
many anonymous.

“To the charity that saved me and my children, eternal thanks.”

“I was a Helen. I came out the other side. There’s a light there at the end of 
the tunnel.”

Ten months after Trueman’s bright idea – and aided, he stresses, by many, many 
others – the site has raised more than £200,000 (including gift aid) for 
Refuge. It’s still open for donations. “Never before in my 33-year career at 
Refuge have I seen such public support for our work,” saysSandra Horley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sandra-horley>, the charity’s chief 
executive. “It has been incredible to see this storyline, and one Archers fan 
from Devon, inspire so many members of the public to engage with something that 
goes on behind closed doors.”

“2016 has sucked, don’t get me wrong,” Trueman says. “But I am quietly proud 
of the fact that, as a community, Archers listeners have been responsible for 
one of the bright sparks of the year.”Esther Addley

Pink beauty products get a reality check
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77c827bae130b99af413e86bde512ecfe69f1cd0%2F0_958_2585_1553%2F2585.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77c827bae130b99af413e86bde512ecfe69f1cd0%2F0_958_2585_1553%2F2585.jpg>
 Blue for a boy… Photograph: Marlene Ford/Alamy 
It’s long been the case that women pay more than men for virtually identical 
products such as plastic razors and face creams (typically branded pink for 
ladies, black or blue for men).

In February, Boots bowed to consumer pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/02/boots-alters-prices-accusations-of-sexist-pricing>
 over “sexist pricing” of products by changing the cost of its razors and eye 
creams. The high street giant made the pledge aftera change.org petition set up 
by campaigner Stevie Wise 
<https://www.change.org/p/simon-roberts-boots-review-the-sexist-pricing-of-everyday-products>
 highlighted the disparity between equivalent products marketed at men and 
women. Since then, Boots has brought its No7 skincare range into line, ensuring 
products are sold for the same price across male and female ranges.

Superdrug has also reviewed the pricing disparity and cut prices of its 
own-brand razors, adding that it is challenging suppliers that charge more for 
women’s products. Argos, which came under fire after selling pink scooters for 
£5 more than the same blue ones, claimed the discrepancy was an error that had 
been corrected. However, in September, the gender equality group Fawcett found 
in an analysis of supermarket own-brand toiletries (at Tesco, Asda, Sainsbury’s 
and Morrisons) thatwomen are paying on average 31% more 
<http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/2016/09/sexist-pricing-supermarkets-revealed/>
 than men for a basket of comparable toiletries. Fawcett intends to keep up the 
pressure.Rebecca Smithers

Teenage pregnancies plummet
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb137a07f1fda53addda737c91249b3fe976123c5%2F0_0_5200_3466%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb137a07f1fda53addda737c91249b3fe976123c5%2F0_0_5200_3466%2F5200.jpg>
 Teenage pregnancy is now at its lowest level since records began. Photograph: 
Alamy 
The Office for National Statistics published official figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/09/halving-of-teenage-pregnancy-rate-hailed-as-extraordinary>
 that confirmed a staggering 51% drop in the rate of pregnancy among under-18s 
in less than two decades. It is now at its lowest level since records began in 
the late 1960s: in 1998, in England and Wales, 47 out of every 1,000 young 
women under 18 became pregnant; by 2014 (the figures published this year), that 
had plummeted to 23 out of every 1,000.The World Health Organisation is 
exploring how this turnaround was achieved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/24/england-teenage-pregnancy-strategy-global-blueprint>
 and whether it can be replicated elsewhere.

The key engine driving such dramatic change was an ambitious policy known as 
the teenage pregnancy strategy, launched by the Labour government in 1999. It 
was a 10-year project, almost unheard of in quick-fix government circles, with 
work carried out in schools and colleges, among youth and social workers.

Teenage conception rates have also dropped worldwide, for similar reasons, 
including more widely available, high-quality sex education, and greater access 
to more effective contraception. Another theory is the advent of social media - 
youngsters are busy networking at home via Facebook and Instagram rather than 
meeting face-to-face over a six-pack of lager.Sally Weale

A giant rabbit is rehomed
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4311844286eb67f5ab40dc10b4e51a9500203d28%2F0_356_2825_3144%2F2825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20January%20to%20March&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-barbie-makeover-obamas-dancing-giant-rabbit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4311844286eb67f5ab40dc10b4e51a9500203d28%2F0_356_2825_3144%2F2825.jpg>
 Home-seeking giant rabbit Atlas. Photograph: Scottish SPCA/PA 
With spring came the story of Atlas, the giant bunny who was given a new home 
following a nationwide charity appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/feb/09/meet-atlas-the-homeless-giant-rabbit-who-could-grow-to-12m-video>
 by the Scottish SPCA. Atlas was a then seven-month-old continental giant 
rabbit, and about the size of a west highland terrier (too large for his 
previous owner). His new owner, Jen Hislop, 43, from North Ayrshire, was chosen 
from hundreds of applicants around the world who hoped to adopt the rabbit.

“I burst into tears when I got the phone call saying I had been chosen to 
rehome Atlas,” said Hislop, who renamed him Attila The Bun Binky Master Jazz 
Paws – Atty, for short – and who was provided with a buggy to help get him 
around.

The continental giant is one of the largest and oldest breeds of rabbits, and 
can grow to 1.2m long, weigh more than 20kg, and eat a bale of hay a week as 
well as up to 2,000 carrots and 700 apples a year.Nadia Khomami

• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, 
followthe Guardian’s Half Full online series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/half-full-solutions-innovations-answers>
, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. 
Wishing you all a happier new year.
 