
Long, long ago, when the world wasn’t digital and there were only three 
channels on TV, there was a show called Jackanory. It seemed a simple little 
show - a grown-up sat in a peacock chair and read a story straight off the 
autocue, into the camera.

But when I mentioned to Twitter that it was the 50th anniversary of that show, 
my timeline glowed with nostalgia. “School often made me anxious,” said
@L_BuckleyArcher <https://twitter.com/L_BuckleyArcher>, “snuggling up with 
marmite on toast and Jackanory made me feel safe and happy.”@Nicolakidsbooks 
<https://twitter.com/nicolakidsbooks> said just hearing the theme tune made was 
enough to make her purr.

Of course Jackanory wasn’t always cosy. Finding Miss Slighcarp 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wolves_of_Willoughby_Chase> or Charlotte 
Sometimes <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charlotte_Sometimes_(novel)> in the 
slot I associated with that magical woollen muffler of a voice,Bernard Cribbins 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernard_Cribbins>, was like finding a cluster of 
scorpions in my lunch box. As forTom Baker 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tom_Baker>’s crazed, intense reading of the Iron 
Giant… that put me right off my Marmite.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOAHJFRKs7Cs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOAHJFRKs7Cs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOAHJFRKs7Cs&media=>
 Richard Hope reads Peter Harris’s japes about the lazy Fingal who is trying to 
avenge the death of his brothers. Jackanory’s 50th Anniversary Collection is on 
BBC Storebbcstore.com <http://bbcstore.com/> 

Educationalists were worried that Jackanory would mean that children would no 
longer read for themselves. But in fact librarians reported a huge increase in 
borrowing, not only of the featured titles but also of their sequels and 
prequels and other works by the same authors. The show provided a corrective to 
the numbing samey-ness of the commercial mainstream, introducing us to bold and 
challenging stuff from far away, from long ago and from wilder imaginations. I 
would never have knownThe House That Sailed Away 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/house-that-sailed-away.html>, for instance, 
or Swedish detective storyAgaton Saxe <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agaton_Sax>
 or Philippa Pearce’sThe Minnow on the Say 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/minnow-on-the-say.html>, without Jackanory. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjackanory-50th-anniversary-bbc-frank-cottrell-boyce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40189b3a52d7022dd61e4f275f932615876d3745%2F0_234_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=50%20years%20of%20Jackanory%3A%20what%20the%20TV%20show%20gave%20to%20me%20and%20other%20authors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjackanory-50th-anniversary-bbc-frank-cottrell-boyce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=50%20years%20of%20Jackanory%3A%20what%20the%20TV%20show%20gave%20to%20me%20and%20other%20authors&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjackanory-50th-anniversary-bbc-frank-cottrell-boyce%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40189b3a52d7022dd61e4f275f932615876d3745%2F0_234_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Frank Cottrell Boyce: Educationalists were worried that Jackanory would mean 
that children would no longer read for themselves. But in fact librarians 
reported a huge increase in borrowing. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
 I hope it will be remembered that Jackanory actively commissioned some truly 
wonderful work. I think I’m right in saying that Joan Aiken’s Mortimer the 
Raven was made especially for Jackanory. And there’s Helen Cresswell’s sublime
Lizzie Dripping <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lizzie-dripping.html> who 
stepped into the World on Jackanory Playhouse (Joan Aiken and Helen Cresswell 
were the Steven Moffat and Russell T Davies of Jackanory). And of course the 
art work. I’m pretty sure my first encounter with Quentin Blake was on 
Jackanory and that I learnt to appreciate the different voices of illustrators 
from watching the show.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvaQKjh8qkMU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvaQKjh8qkMU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvaQKjh8qkMU&media=>
 Louise Lombard shares Dick King Smith’s highly imaginative story of Harmony, 
the 12-year old with a magical 50p coin in The Queen’s Nose..Jackanory’s 50th 
Anniversary Collection is on BBC Storebbcstore.com <http://bbcstore.com/> 
More importantly it made reading a shared experience. We often talk about 
reading as though it was a solitary, isolating activity. But for most of 
history, and certainly for me, stories are things we share - around the fire, 
at the bedside, on the “story mat” at the end of the day in primary school and 
definitely on Jackanory.

Frank Cottrell Boyce: there’s nothing unusual for me about talking to saints
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/mar/02/frank-cottrell-boyce-interview-the-astounding-broccoli-boy>
@PhilEarle <https://twitter.com/philearle> said that Rik Mayall’s rendition of 
George’s Marvellous Medicine, seemed to burst out of the television. Next day 
at school, everyone was talking about it: a water cooler moment based around a 
book. “None of us could believe what we’d just seen. It broke every rule.” I 
felt very much the same about Kenneth Williams reading Noel Langley’sThe Land 
of Green Ginger 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/land-of-green-ginger-253730.html>. Phil 
called it his first water cooler moment - like watching Doctor Who or Game of 
Thrones.


I learnt so much. I’m not the only one. Brian Minchin, the producer of Doctor 
Who, wrote me a long, lyrical email about how that Tom Baker rendition had 
influenced him.


“Looking at it now,” Brian wrote, “what grips me is the utter belief that 
production had in the importance of the story it was telling. There are no 
layers of irony or nods and winks. This is a full on and committed attempt to 
bring Ted Hughes to life on a tiny budget but with complete conviction… I’m 
only realising it now, but it must have affected me, cos that ingeniously 
created world and that commitment is something I’m trying to recreate now every 
day at work!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6has64kq_KQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6has64kq_KQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6has64kq_KQ&media=>
 The Railway Children read by Jane Asher: E Nesbit’s cherished story of the 
adventures of three Edwardian children.Jackanory’s 50th Anniversary Collection 
is on BBC Storebbcstore.com <http://bbcstore.com/> 
That’s a great legacy but I think there was something more profound going on 
too. One of the unconsidered marvels of human complexity is our ability to 
recognise voices. When I switch on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme half way 
through an item I often know who’s speaking, even if it’s someone who has been 
out of the public ear for years and who didn’t mean that much to me anyway. The 
other morning for instance it was… of all people …Norman Lamont 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norman_Lamont>. It never ceases to amaze and 
delight me that I recognise not just the words and their meaning but the actual 
identity of the speaker. Even if they’re nothing but an ex-chancellor of the 
exchequer.

How much more amazing and delightful to have these voices in my memory bank - 
Bernard Cribbins, Kenneth Williams, Joanna Lumely, Judi Dench, Bernard Holley 
and Liz Crowther. And - someone whose voice I haven’t heard since then but who 
I imitate when I read his stories, whose cadences are part of that intimate 
story-telling moment between me and my children: John Grant, who read 
Littlenose the Hunter.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXjRG_zWtMBg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXjRG_zWtMBg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXjRG_zWtMBg&media=>
 The Rose and the Ring read by Kenneth Williams; the renowned Raconteur and 
Carry on favourite Kenneth Williams brings his storytelling skills to William 
Thackeray’s tale about four royal cousins.Jackanory’s 50th Anniversary 
Collection is on BBC Storebbcstore.com <http://bbcstore.com/> 
Nostalgia is often regarded as a trivial emotion. But the complex magic of 
these voices pull us back to a moment when our minds were fresh. They bless the 
present with the beauty of our past. They bring back to us the open-hearted 
enthusiasm and willingness to listen that we had as children. The rhythms and 
cadences we heard while cuddled up with the Marmite continue to reverberate in 
our work and in our play.

Jackanory laid down in my heart as well as my mind a fund of stories that I 
can draw on now, not just for writing or reading, but for when I’m troubled or 
bored or feeling lost.

Nowadays I’m patron of The Reader Organisation <http://www.thereader.org.uk/> 
- a project whose volunteers read big ambitious books not just in schools, but 
in prisons, in drug rehab, in hospitals, to people who struggle. One of the 
prison reading groups did Henry V. Afterwards one of the prisoners who had 
attended the readings said something which went straight to the heart of what 
Jackanory did to me. This man was in for violent crimes and the story of how 
Shakespeare’s Prince Hal rejected his old friends and began again really hit a 
chord with him. He said that listening to someone else read - knowing he was 
not going to be asked for any “input” or “insight” - was “the first time I had 
ever felt alert without feeling stressed”, the only time he’d felt fully 
switched on without the threat of violence. That’s what human voices do.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU1HtpftqyX4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU1HtpftqyX4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DU1HtpftqyX4&media=>
 Treasure Island read by Christopher Guard.Jackanory’s 50th Anniversary 
Collection is on BBC Storebbcstore.com <http://bbcstore.com/> 
Someone reading a story straight into camera. It seems like a simple idea. But 
it left space for the real complexities that more complicated programmes drown 
out - for the diverse stores that are our common patrimony, for the irreducible 
complexity of our own being. At a moment when the political narrative has been 
reduced to the murderous simplicity of the playground, that seems like an 
urgent and important undertaking.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
Maybe in this time of need, Jackanory - like King Arthur - could come back. 
But that, as Bernard Cribbins might say, is another story.

Jackanory’s 50th Anniversary Collection is availabe for the first time on BBC 
Storebbcstore.com <http://bbcstore.com/>

Jackanory At 50 Event: There are still a few tickets available for the 
Children’s Media Foundations’ anniversary event,Jackanory At 50, at Foyles, 107 
Charing Cross Road, London WC2H ODT on Sunday 13 December 2015 3-6pm. The event 
will feature clips, talk to the stars and relive some of the memorable books as 
it looks atJackanory from every angle, both in front of and behind the camera. 
For further details and to register for tickets seeJackanory 50th anniversary 
<http://www.thechildrensmediafoundation.org/events/jackanory-50th-anniversary>.

Frank Cottrell Boyce’s latest book is The Astounding Broccoli Boy 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/astounding-broccoli-boy.html> 
 