
The first residential Trump-branded development to open since Donald Trump’s 
election victory last month opened for business in Jersey City,New Jersey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/new-jersey>, this week.

The gleaming Trump Bay Street complex, a luxury rental project completed under 
the direction of Jared Kushner, son-in-law andwould-be White House adviser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/stephen-bannon-jared-kushner-reince-priebus-trump-administration>
 to the president-elect, sits across the Hudson river, minutes from Manhattan’s 
financial district by train or ferry.

Trump's conflicts of interest: a visual guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
The project was built by the Kushner family’s Kushner Co operation, which 
boasts of completing more than $7bn in acquisitions under Jared Kushner, its 
CEO, since 2007.

The 50-storey building is not lacking in Trumpian grandiosity. Renters are 
promised a top-hat-wearing concierge and furnishings chosen by the personal 
decorator for Ivanka Trump, Kushner’s wife, in conjunction with the home 
furnishing superbrand Restoration Hardware.

But critics say Trump Bay Street 
<http://trumpbaystreet.com/contact/?utm_source=AdWords&utm_medium=CPC&utm_campaign=Branded-Terms>
, whichuses the Trump name under licence 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-03-07/trump-tower-financed-by-rich-chinese-who-invest-cash-for-visas>
and is now leasing apartments starting at $3,100 a month, is also a showcase 
for something else: the misuse of an controversial immigrant visa program 
originally designed to promote economic investment to disadvantaged areas 
through the sale of visas that can ultimately be converted to citizenship.

Kushner’s development, with its chefs, dining tables and elaborate health and 
sports facilities, was completed with upward of $50m raised through EB-5 
financing, according to a slide presentation by US Immigration Fund.

The EB-5 program is popular with Chinese nationals with $500,000 or more to 
invest in US development projects. In 2014, the most recent year for which 
records are available, the US issued 10,692 of these visas – 85% to people from 
China, according to the Department of Homeland Security.

But Trump Bay could soon become a focal point not only of efforts to reform 
EB-5 but also of the incoming Trump administration’s unresolved family business 
conflicts.

“EB-5 is an extremely complicated, corruption-prone way to bring foreign 
investment into the US,” says David North, a Fellow of the Center for 
Immigration Studies, “and in this case it is part and parcel of the conflict of 
interest issues that are flying around the incoming administration.”

North estimates that more than 60% of all EB-5 investment in the US comes into 
Manhattan and surrounding areas while the majority of applications originate in 
China.

In recent months, the EB-5 program has been the subject of bipartisan 
criticism in Washington, with opponents including Senator Dianne Feinstein, 
Democrat of California, vowing to end the system when it comes up for renewal 
in Congress this month.


On the Republican side, Senator Charles Grassley of Iowa, chairman of the 
Senate Judiciary Committee, has described the program as “riddled with 
corruption and national security vulnerabilities”.

In August, a report issued by the Government Accountability Office said it 
could not be sure that the money used for EB-5 was not coming from “the drug 
trade, human trafficking or other criminal activities”.

Critics of the system say not only is the $500,000 investment threshold too 
low but the funds the program raises frequently go toward luxury developments 
in New York or Miami and not, as originally stipulated, to disadvantaged areas 
as the scheme originally intended.

A New York University study 
<http://www.stern.nyu.edu/sites/default/files/assets/documents/EB5%20paper%20final%205.24.2015.pdf>
found that EB-5 investment was largely financing luxury developments, including 
a Chinese-style casino in Las Vegas, a Waldorf Astoria hotel in Beverly Hills 
and the redevelopment of the Hudson rail yards in Manhattan.


 “It’s hard for smaller states and cities to compete with the glitzy hotels 
and luxurious condo projects,” Grassley argued at a congressional hearing.

But supporters, including the Democrats’ incoming Senate minority leader Chuck 
Schumer, who represents New York, claim EB-5 has pumped almost $9bn into the 
economy and created more than 35,000 jobs since it was created in 1990.

The future of the EB-5 program could now be coloured by Donald Trump’s 
campaign promises to crack down on immigration.

In September, Congress passed a resolution keeping the program alive to 9 
December. Legislators will now have to agree on a reform for the program or let 
it expire.

But some believe Trump will not simply back maintaining EB-5 but expanding it.

'What election?': Trump Village residents aren't enthusiastic about their 
namesake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/19/what-election-trump-village-residents-arent-enthusiastic-about-their-namesake>
“His strong stance is against illegal immigration,” said the former New York 
governor George Pataki at a forum in Shanghai soon after Trump’s election in 
November. “And EB-5 is a legal immigration program. He understands the need for 
capital, the need for investment.”

With Congress being lobbied to extend EB-5 indefinitely, one of the options 
open to the president-elect could be to back raising the investment bar and 
introducing reforms that ensure investment capital flows to disadvantaged areas 
at the expense of New York or other wealthy areas.

But North, for one, was not holding his breath for that. 

“The way the program works now is as an asset transfer program for rich 
Chinese investors to line the pockets of rich New York developers. The 
administration could make the program less useful to the rich of New York and 
more useful for the rest of us. They’re unlikely to do that.”
 