
“Burnt-out cars, drug dealers and bums – there was nothing else here.” Balder 
Lehmann, a 25-year-old professional skatepark builder, is standing beneath a 
bridge in northern Copenhagen. “It wasn’t the nicest part of town,” he says, 
explaining why locals used to avoid the area.

For Lehmann, though, the location was perfect. Last Christmas, using surplus 
concrete, wood and reinforced steel bars, he began building a skatepark. Over 
the course of a few months, he and his friends constructed three adjoining sets 
of ramps.

With its wooden frames filled with rubble and coated in 15cm of smooth 
concrete, Lehmann’s skatepark is much like the oneshe builds for clients 
<http://fsrbeton.dk> – typically municipalities around Denmark – with one 
exception: it’s illegal.

Lehmann never sought permission from Københavns Kommune <http://www.kk.dk>, 
the council that owns the land he built on. And it may not even matter – thanks 
to the city’s liberal approach to urban development, and the role of 
skateboarding.

Dubbed Underbroen (“Under the Bridge”), Lehmann’s construction is a prime 
example of a DIY skatepark – built quickly, cheaply and illicitly, often in a 
neglected part of the city such as an abandoned building. Reclaiming the city 
is a motive, too. DIY skateparks often try to revive long-forgotten urban 
spaces, thus making them busier, livelier and safer.

DIY skateparks exist in many cities, not just Copenhagen. The cluster of ramps 
and bowls <http://www.skateoregon.com/Burnside/Burnside.html> built in the 
early 1990s below Portland’s Burnside Bridge is widely considered the first of 
its kind. Yet no city is as open-minded about their construction as the Danish 
capital.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcity-with-edge-copenhagen-illegal-skateparks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dba24f6d387782739a44f9aceaba9146045ab76%2F0_11_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20city%20with%20edge'%3A%20why%20Copenhagen%20gives%20its%20blessing%20to%20illegal%20skateparks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcity-with-edge-copenhagen-illegal-skateparks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20city%20with%20edge%27%3A%20why%20Copenhagen%20gives%20its%20blessing%20to%20illegal%20skateparks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcity-with-edge-copenhagen-illegal-skateparks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dba24f6d387782739a44f9aceaba9146045ab76%2F0_11_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Hullet (the Hole) is set to be destroyed to make way for luxury apartments. 
Photograph: James Clasper 
A case in point is Hullet (“The Hole”) – a deep concrete bowl built in 
Copenhagen five years ago. Its creation is steeped in myth. In 2010, anAmerican 
construction company called Grindline <http://grindline.com> was hired to build 
a new concrete skatepark in the city. Legend has it the company’s burly 
builders passed on their expertise to local skaters, who scoped out a suitable 
location and started digging. Over the course of a year, they dug down two 
metres and piled up the displaced earth to make the hole deeper, before 
constructing a smooth concrete bowl.

Inevitably, their activity attracted the attention of the council who got on 
the phone to a man named William Frederiksen. As well as managing Copenhagen’s 
largest indoor skatepark, he works for the council’s culture department as a 
kind of ambassador for skateboarding. Frederiksen says his colleagues wanted to 
know why the skaters were digging such a big hole, and feared someone might 
fall into it.

But when he explained what they were doing, the council changed its tune. 
“They said, ‘OK, we love it and we want to keep it – but we have to figure out 
some kind of deal,’” Frederiksen explains. Instead of stopping the diggers, the 
council insisted they put up a fence.

Even though it isn’t always completely legal, sometimes you have to lead the 
way as a citizen
Simon Strange 
According to Frederiksen, the council’s open-mindedness about Hullet – and 
subsequent DIY skateparks such as Underbroen – reflects its broader vision for 
Copenhagen and the role that skateboarding can play. “It wants the city to be 
lively, noisy, agile and progressive – and it’s thinking in a different way 
about how to use city space,” he says.

One measure of the council’s progressive approach is that it consults 
skateboarders such as Frederiksen when itredesigns public squares and streets 
<http://skateparks.dk/kobenhavn/nansensgade/>, to make them suitable for 
skating. Tolerance of DIY skateparks is another reflection of its ethos.

One of the architects of that vision is Simon Strange, a member of the Social 
Democrats, the left-leaning party that controls the council. Elected to city 
hall a decade ago, he has pushed for increased support for skateboarding – such 
as fundingCPH Open <http://cphopen.com/2016-2/>, an annual street-skating 
competition. He also applauds the development of DIY skateparks.

“You want to have people being active and engaging with their city,” Strange 
says. “Even though people are changing public space for their own purposes, 
they do it with love and positive energy because they want to create something.”

In particular, Strange welcomes their regenerative potential. “Very often 
they’re in places that nobody cares about, areas without attention, so they’re 
creating something out of nothing,” he says. “Even though it isn’t always 
completely legal, sometimes you have to lead the way as a citizen.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcity-with-edge-copenhagen-illegal-skateparks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc24e8c31961957237ba0fb172551fc2a5247e4da%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20city%20with%20edge'%3A%20why%20Copenhagen%20gives%20its%20blessing%20to%20illegal%20skateparks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcity-with-edge-copenhagen-illegal-skateparks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20city%20with%20edge%27%3A%20why%20Copenhagen%20gives%20its%20blessing%20to%20illegal%20skateparks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcity-with-edge-copenhagen-illegal-skateparks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc24e8c31961957237ba0fb172551fc2a5247e4da%2F0_0_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Underbroen (Under the bridge) is in a deserted part of town. Photograph: James 
Clasper 
Balder Lehmann agrees. “We could have asked for permission but the council 
might have said no,” he says. “Then what would we have done?” Eventually, of 
course, his skatepark came to the attention of the city’s technical and 
environmental department – and Anders Melamies, in particular, who leads the 
division responsible for streets and parks in northern Copenhagen.

Strictly speaking, Melamies says, he should have called in the bulldozers. But 
last year the technical and environmental department adopted a strategy known as
Fælleskab København <http://www.kk.dk/artikel/f%C3%A6llesskab-k%C3%B8benhavn> 
(Co-creating Copenhagen). Its vision is to develop the capital in collaboration 
with anyone who uses it – residents and tourists alike – to turn it into a 
“living city … a city with edge”.

In that light, he says his job is to find a way “to create space for skaters 
in a way that doesn’t interfere with other citizens’ use of the city”. With 
Underbroen he decided he had three options: “We could tear it down; we could 
leave it, close our eyes and hope that nothing happens; or we could get in 
touch with the people using it, and try to find a lasting solution.”

He chose the third option. “If we can explain our issues and have a dialogue, 
hopefully we can solve them and legalise what they have built,” he says. “It’s 
an impressive creation and a lot of time has gone into it. I would hate to tear 
it down.”

Still, the city’s open-minded approach to DIY skateparks doesn’t guarantee 
their survival. A skatepark built in an abandoned building on the outskirts of
Christiania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/23/copenhagen-christiania-drugs-commune-future>
, the infamous free-town, is on borrowed time. Next year the building will 
become the new home of famous Danish restaurantNoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/12/no-more-noma-from-end-of-2016-as-danish-restaurant-farms-itself-out>
.

The new skate city: how skateboarders are joining the urban mainstream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/20/skate-city-skateboarders-developers-bans-defensive-architecture>
Hullet’s days appear numbered, too. In April, the city decided 
<http://www.kk.dk/nyheder/planerne-beauvaisgrunden-er-klar> to turn the area 
into a “green residential district”, with 69 family homes scheduled to be built 
by 2019. No mention was made of Hullet.

Daniel Mathew teaches at the Academy for Untamed Creativity 
<http://www.afuk.dk> – a school that seeks to motivate teenagers to re-enter 
formal education. He has helped students build three DIY skateparks and insists 
on getting prior permission from landowners. He says it’s a shame that Hullet’s 
builders failed to do so.

“They never started a conversation with the guys who own the land and now it’s 
going to get torn down,” he says. “In two years, it’s game over. It’s a perfect 
skatepark and it could have been there for 10, 15 years. But that’s the DIY way 
– it comes and it goes.”

Lehmann stopped building Underbroen in the summer. Having spent 50,000 DKK 
(£5,660) on it, he’s hoping to get retrospective permission – but is prepared 
to remove it if he doesn’t.

“That’s the gamble. If it gets torn down, that’s how it is,” he says. “But if 
it does, believe me, something else is going to get built – because there are a 
lot of people who want to build their own thing.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 