
Brexit was a political earthquake, but its shocks were felt on our streets 
even before the polls closed. Lakshmi D’Souza felt the early fallout from the 
bitter battle over the EU referendum while pushing a pram through east London 
early on Thursday morning. D’Souza passed a woman who warned her to “be 
careful”. A man in the street was shouting racist abuse at a shopkeeper and 
passersby. As D’Souza walked past with her baby son, he looked at her and spat 
on the floor. D’Souza says that she fears the referendum has unleashed “a 
frenzy of hatred”.

“It takes a lot more than some idiot to bother me,” she says. “But the 
implication that this sort of behaviour will get worse because of a political 
decision … just blows my mind.”

After a campaign scarred by bigotry, it’s become OK to be racist in Britain | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/campaign-bigotry-racist-britain-leave-brexit>
True Vision <http://www.report-it.org.uk/home>, a police-funded 
hate-crime-reporting website, has seena 57% increase in reporting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/27/sadiq-khan-muslim-council-britain-warning-of-post-brexit-racism>
 between Thursday and Sunday, compared with the same period last month. This is 
not a definitive national figure – reports are also made directly to police 
stations and community groups – butStop Hate UK <http://www.stophateuk.org/>, a 
reporting charity, has also seen an increase, whileTell Mama 
<http://tellmamauk.org/>, an organisation tackling Islamophobia, which usually 
deals with 40-45 reports a month, received 33 within 48-72 hours.

In Great Yarmouth, Colin Goffin, who is vice-principal of an educational 
trust, was told about taunts and jeers being directed at eastern European 
workers by 10am on Friday morning – just hours after the results of the 
referendum had been announced. Goffin went to see a Kosovan-born friend, the 
manager of a car wash, to discuss the vote. In the Norfolk coastal town,72% had 
voted to leave 
<http://www.itv.com/news/anglia/update/2016-06-24/great-yarmouth-vote-out-of-the-eu/]>
.

“I wanted him to know that I didn’t agree with the decision, or the way that 
the issue of immigration had been used in the campaign,” Goffin says. But when 
he arrived, the abuse against the multinational staff had already begun. “He 
told me people were slowing down to laugh at his staff, wave and mouth 
‘goodbye’,” Goffin says. “They had clearly not wasted any time in deciding to 
be hateful.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fracism-brexit-eu-referendum-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain%20needs%20to%20talk%20about%20the%20R-word%3A%20racism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fracism-brexit-eu-referendum-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%20needs%20to%20talk%20about%20the%20R-word%3A%20racism%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fracism-brexit-eu-referendum-video&media=>
Britain needs to talk about the R-word: racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/jun/30/racism-brexit-eu-referendum-video>
Unsurprisingly, European staff members were worried by the vote. “What was 
most shocking was that these guys are well liked and go out of their way to 
help people – up until then, they would have felt part of our community. 
Suddenly, people felt it was OK to suggest they should clear off ‘home’. I am 
angry and embarrassed by the way people from my home town acted.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ffrenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5154ef5f8549fd31f216d7139687a10c5436de7a%2F204_105_1159_695%2F1159.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98A%20frenzy%20of%20hatred%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20to%20understand%20Brexit%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ffrenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98A%20frenzy%20of%20hatred%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20to%20understand%20Brexit%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ffrenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5154ef5f8549fd31f216d7139687a10c5436de7a%2F204_105_1159_695%2F1159.jpg>
 Racist graffiti in Newington Green, London. Photograph: Emma Reynolds 
Architect Toni (a Spanish citizen living in Brighton) had barely touched down 
in the UK after a weekend in Alicante when he came across a group of men 
causing a disturbance at passport control. “There were four of them,” he said. 
“One of them shouted: ‘Why are these bloody immigrants in the same queue as we 
are?’ His friends were laughing. They were saying it loudly so people would 
hear. It was very uncomfortable. I have been here four years and I have never 
experienced anything like this.”

Although another British passenger challenged the men, Toni said he was shaken 
by the incident. “I am questioning whether I should stay – will I be a 
second-class citizen now?”

Reports of xenophobia and racism have piled up in the media: the firebombing 
of a halal butchers in Walsall 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/06/28/butcher-hit-by-petrol-bomb-in-latest-racist-incident-5971947/>
,graffiti on a Polish community centre in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/27/brexit-polish-centre-london-reeling-after-graffiti-attack>
 and laminated cards reading:“No more Polish vermin” apparently posted through 
letterboxes in Huntingdon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/racist-incidents-feared-to-be-linked-to-brexit-result-reported-in-england-and-wales>
. Asked about the rise in hate crimes during PMQs on Wednesday, David Cameron 
said the government would be publishing a hate-crime action plan.
 Racist cards sent in Huntingdon. Photograph: Huntingdon Living Facebook 
Why this sudden explosion? Paul Bagguley, a sociologist based at the 
University of Leeds <http://www.sociology.leeds.ac.uk/people/staff/bagguley>, 
points to the gleeful tone of the racism: “There is a kind of celebration going 
on; it’s a celebratory racism.” With immigration cited in polls as the second 
most common reason in voting for Brexit, “people are expressing a sense of 
power and success, that they have won,” he says.

“People haven’t changed. I would argue the country splits into two-thirds to 
three-quarters of people being tolerant and a quarter to a third being 
intolerant. And a section of that third have become emboldened. At other times, 
people are polite and rub along.”

Bagguley stresses that it wasn’t racist to vote leave, and that many people 
were voting about “political control”, yet the Brexit campaign’s relentless 
rhetoric about “controlling our borders” has led people who might previously 
have kept their intolerant views to themselves to feel legitimised. A 
spokesperson from campaign groupHope not Hate <http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/> 
points out that, while not all Ukip voters are racists, it does “swallow up the 
‘respectable racist’ vote that might have once gone to the BNP”. Bagguley 
agrees: “People have to be prepared to be more critical of them and the 
implicit racism that runs through much of what they say.”

Brexit has given voice to racism – and too many are complicit | Miqdaad Versi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/27/brexit-racism-eu-referendum-racist-incidents-politicians-media>
Simon Woolley, the director of Operation Black Vote <http://www.obv.org.uk/>, 
goes further. “The Brexiters, with their jingoistic rhetoric, have put the 
country on a war footing. By framing the debate as ‘we want our country back’, 
they have made immigrants the enemy and occupiers who need to be expelled.”

The turmoil that followed the vote – with sterling in freefall, and the 
leadership of Britain’s two main political parties in disarray – has also 
played a part, according to Bagguley. “At times of generalised social crises, 
people think they can get away with things in public that they would not 
normally do.” On Tuesday, video footage emerged that appeared to show a 
mixed-race man being racially abused on a Manchester tram.Police have made 
three arrests over the incident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/29/manchester-tram-racism-two-bailed-one-remains-in-custody>
.

Corinne Abrahams, 24, witnessed a similar incident in London as she made her 
way home from the Glastonbury festival on Monday. As she sat on the tube at 
around 2pm, a man “began shouting things such as: ‘Russians are all scumbags’ 
and ‘Poles should all leave’”. Another passenger protested and the argument 
grew heated. Other travellers moved away, but Abrahams, who has Jewish 
heritage, says she could not stay silent. “My people have gone through all this 
before. I don’t want it to have to happen to others. I said: ‘You are an 
embarrassment to the country. No one else here agrees with what you’re saying.’ 
He replied: ‘I’m a real British man. This is my country.’ It was unprovoked and 
disgusting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ffrenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e32a43a049ed42f0d173395604b26fd11de271%2F609_694_1401_841%2F1401.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98A%20frenzy%20of%20hatred%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20to%20understand%20Brexit%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ffrenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98A%20frenzy%20of%20hatred%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20to%20understand%20Brexit%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ffrenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17e32a43a049ed42f0d173395604b26fd11de271%2F609_694_1401_841%2F1401.jpg>
 A National Front banner in Newcastle. Photograph: Emma Foster 
Bagguley says that what makes the recent attacks unusual is who they are 
directed at. Central to the anti-EU discourse in the media over the past decade 
has been a sense of British people being fundamentally different from 
Europeans. As Scottish politics and identity moved in a new direction, this 
mutated into a white English nationalism “that has a resonance with racial ways 
of thinking”, he says.

“This has been the bedrock and basis for this xenophobia, directed at 
everybody who is a little different. It is unlike the backlash after terrorist 
attacks, which targeted Irish people in the 70s, or Muslims and those thought 
to be Muslims, more recently. It is a very generalised kind of racism oriented 
against any groups perceived not to be in that narrow category of white English 
identity.”

The hate crimes recently reported to Operation Black Vote seem to confirm 
this. “Two Muslim women in Bethnal Green, east London, had eggs thrown at them 
on the street,” says Woolley. “A black woman on a bus had a bunch of bananas 
placed on the chair next to her and was told to ‘fuck off back to your 
country’. It is not just women. An Italian man was punched to the ground for 
asking another man which way he voted in the referendum.”

Racist incidents feared to be linked to Brexit result
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/racist-incidents-feared-to-be-linked-to-brexit-result-reported-in-england-and-wales>
Nor are attacks confined to areas that voted strongly to leave. A British 
Asian doctor in Urmston, Greater Manchester, tells me she was told to “go back 
to your own country” in a petrol forecourt at the weekend by a woman annoyed 
she had not driven away from the pump quickly enough. “You just don’t expect 
this in Manchester. I have never had that before,” she says.

In Edinburgh, Lauren Stonebanks, 36, was on a bus on Monday when she says a 
woman shouted: “‘Get your passport, you’re fucking going home.’” She believes 
she was targeted because she is mixed race. “As I got off the bus, the woman 
started making threatening gestures, like punching gestures. It made me feel 
absolutely terrified.”

In Cobham, Surrey, British-born Saima, 46, was shopping for her elderly mother 
when she, too, experienced her first brush with racism. “There was a man in his 
mid to late 30s ranting in the street about ‘making Britain great again’. I 
looked over and he pointed at me, saying: ‘People like you will be out of here 
soon.’ It reminds me of the 70s with the National Front, when I remember being 
scared for my family. I feel as if we have gone back in time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ffrenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9047132ed59948c0c49e010cff9d5155b1f8fbff%2F0_126_1536_1536%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98A%20frenzy%20of%20hatred%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20to%20understand%20Brexit%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ffrenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98A%20frenzy%20of%20hatred%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20to%20understand%20Brexit%20racism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Ffrenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9047132ed59948c0c49e010cff9d5155b1f8fbff%2F0_126_1536_1536%2F1536.jpg>
 Neo-Nazi stickers in Glasgow. Photograph: Eoin Palmer 
Woolley is clear, as is Tell Mama, that hate crimes have never gone away. Tell 
Mama’s annual report, released on Wednesday, states that anti-Muslim hatred 
reported to them rose by a staggering 326% in 2015. Women, especially those who 
wear hijabs or niqabs, bear the brunt of this. Hope Not Hate points out that it 
has been arguing for some time that far-right extremism is not getting the 
attention it deserves. Yet the Brexit-inspired racism seems slightly different 
in that slurs are focused on ethnicity over religion. A report to Tell Mama 
included an incident of a man shouting: “Brexit, you Paki” at a taxi driver, 
before assaulting him.

Writer Nikesh Shukla <http://www.nikesh-shukla.com/> was in Bristol on Tuesday 
when he witnessed an argument between a white man and a black man. As they 
separated, the white man shouted: “Well, it’s not your fucking country, is it?” 
On Friday, a tweet about the far right in the US resulted in him being told to 
“go back to brownland”. “The tool of the racist, more recently, has been to 
make you feel you have a chip on your shoulder. Now it is barefaced: ‘Go back 
to your country.’”

BBC journalist Sima Kotecha interviewed a leave voter in her home town of 
Basingstoke who used the word “Paki” 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/sirajdatoo/brexit-supporter-uses-the-slur-paki-while-talking-to-bbc-rep>
. Afterwards, she tweeted: “Haven’t heard that word here since the 80s!” For 
many British Asians, it is a reminder of a darker period in British history. 
Anna Rahman, a psychiatrist, posted on Facebook: “The first time I heard the 
word ‘Paki’, I was five and people were pelting eggs and stones at our windows. 
My father told me no one had the right to make me feel I didn’t belong here, 
telling me: ‘You are as British as the Queen.’ It makes me want to sob that, in 
this climate, I may need to have this discussion with my own kids.”

Stop Hate UK’s Rose Simkin cautions that about 80-99% of hate crimes go 
unreported, making their prevalence hard to estimate. Woolley thinks this could 
be “because they want to cleanse themselves of the experience and forget that 
it happened”. Bagguley is confident that after a spike in incidents, things 
will calm down. Yet he also warns that if these attacks go unchallenged, the 
damage to our social fabric could be lasting, making attacks more frequent in 
the future. “It is the residue that is the problem. If people get away with 
[racist attacks], then the next time there is a reason to have a go, they will.”

Additional reporting by Imran Rahman-Jones. Some names have been changed.
 