
‘Walking reveals layers of history’

London at first light is amazing. There is time to appreciate the 
architecture, to watch the river, to revel in the nooks and crannies and hidden 
bits of green. It is possible to walk the pavements at whatever pace desired 
without the impediment of other people and without breathing in the choking 
pollution of rush hour traffic. Layers of history are revealed in tiny details. 
A poor man’s time travel.(Anonymous)

‘Urban walking for me is therapy’

I live in Vienna and not a single day goes by where I don’t walk. Walking to 
work or university is for me a mental therapy, preparing for what I need to do 
during the coming hours. When I feel down, I go to the city centre. Scrolling 
through the different gardens and look at the architecture always cheers me up. 
Especially when I feel lonely the combination of parks, architecture and 
tourists help me feel like I’m not that alone.(Alejandro Sosa, 29)

‘The paving stones echo my heartbeats’

As I walk along the city centre streets the paving stones echo my heartbeats. 
Pavement cafes jingle with drinking glasses. Traffic stops and starts, time 
hangs. Aimless walkers look round and absorb the scene, the smell, and the 
sound of exhaust fumes as the tall buildings watch.Newcastle upon Tyne is a 
city that combines the ills of an urban space with an enduring love of life. 
(Asit Maitra)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe5612b1e1bc853628d58d7db527390961c1c7bf%2F0_358_5250_3149%2F5250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city'%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city%27%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe5612b1e1bc853628d58d7db527390961c1c7bf%2F0_358_5250_3149%2F5250.jpg>
 Newcastle: ‘Traffic stops and starts, time hangs.’ Photograph: Rich 
LaSalle/Getty Images 
‘I go back and walk around the neighbourhood where I grew up’


I left Buenos Aires 30 years ago and every time I return I walk around the 
Olivos neighbourhood where I grew up. A year ago I walked first on my own and 
later with two children as my guides, to see the neighbourhood through their 
eyes. Saturday, July 4, a wintry afternoon and a soccer game means the streets 
are empty. When I start my walk I can smell logs burning in fireplaces, and 
later popcorn when the game starts. Except for a dog’s bark, maybe a car, or a 
neighbour welcoming friends, everything is quiet. These are the same places I 
remember from my childhood: the three blocks to school, my friends’ homes, the 
York Cinema, the Borges Café. Some of the houses look exactly the same. The 
streets are lined with jacarandas, plátanos and linden. But neighbours are no 
longer lingering on street corners chatting and building the social fabric with 
their everyday interactions.(Silvia Blitzer Golombek) 

‘I walk and feel at home’

I belong to Calcutta, the city the British built long, long ago. The ghosts of 
the sahibs can still be seen in the dark rooms of the stately buildings they 
have left behind. Whenever I walk the streets, I look for this past, which is 
not mine per se but belongs to me as I belong to the city. Esplanade Mansions 
diagonally opposite the governor’s house. Shuttered windows, trellised ledges. 
Curzon Park, named after Lord Curzon, is right across the street. On winter 
nights, I wait there for the tram home. The smell of eggs being fried on 
roadside ovens fills the air like an old friend. As I wait, the city lights 
twinkle in the distance, traffic roars, the trams raise a clamour. Inevitably, 
my tram never arrives. So I start walking again, towards the centre of the 
city. I wade through the filth and feel at home in a city that is like a piece 
of past preserved for present times, for me.(Anusua Mukherjee, 36)

‘You never step in the same city twice’

Nowhere is walking more surreally varied and trance-inducing than in London. I 
began by trekking great stretches of the Duckett’s and Regent’s canals, 
relishing the Victorian grandeur of their engineering and the flashes of beauty 
among the melancholy abandonment. I have boomeranged from Bloomsbury down to 
the river, zipped to the centre of Waterloo Bridge with its peerless view of 
the city (and evocations of the Kinks) and back to the north bank and 
circuitous routes to the eddying chaos of Oxford Circus and on up to the 
circuit round Regent’s Park. London is a strange multiverse of extreme wealth 
in enclaves cheek-by-jowl with mean streets and tat; a thing of monotone heft 
intercut with ‘hidden’ pocket gardens and squares, and threaded through by the 
ebb and flow of the serpentine river. It is so alive, this beast, that it 
changes its skin if you stay away from a spot for longer than a few months: you 
go back and it’s sprouted anew or been unaccountably razed. It’s an evolving 
totality that keeps London quick in all the meanings of that term: live, 
glowing, swift. It’s as if we’re running to keep up. You never step in the same 
city twice.(Anonymous)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc0ecc3341cb51ee406d60d6c66c275fe3bc9873%2F0_179_5079_3047%2F5079.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city'%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city%27%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc0ecc3341cb51ee406d60d6c66c275fe3bc9873%2F0_179_5079_3047%2F5079.jpg>
 London’s Regent’s canal: ‘I relish the Victorian grandeur of engineering and 
flashes of beauty.’ Photograph: amc/Alamy 
‘When you walk through a city you are walking through time’

When I’ve not been able to get to Scottish hills there’s always been Glasgow, 
the town centre with its undulating hills, grid system, and fine Georgian 
architecture able to evoke a small liveable mixture of New York and San 
Francisco on the Clyde. I’d just got my bus pass at 60 and took a bus up to the 
top of the town to look at it. After that I walked home to the south side. 
Firstly down the city centre’s Georgian canyoned, tobogganing hills to the 
river at the heart of the city. Then over Bells Bridge and on to the south 
side. I always feel I’m back in old Glasgow then. On through Pollokshields 
which for me always brings to mind Van Morrison’s Cypress Avenue (different 
city I know). On into Pollok country park: the pace of the city just drops away 
to nothing as you enter the park. Out and past the high flats that they’re 
knocking down. Up past Eastwood church where the Stirling Maxwells used to 
worship at the time of World War One. After that I’m home. When you walk 
through a city you are always walking through time as well as space and that’s 
what I really love about an urban walk.(Bert Thomson, 62)

‘Lunch hour explorations lead me to things I wouldn’t have done’

I’ve been exploring my home town of Leeds on foot for the last two years on my 
lunch hour. This has been in response to my sedentary desk job. I’ve met some 
fantastic folk and have done things that I’d never have done otherwise like 
playing piano in a pub, eating with the Chinese Elderly Association, attending 
lectures, finding small independent art spaces, meditating in the local 
Buddhist Temple, going on a tour of Holbeck, singing in a choir. I’ve also been 
researching the flora and fauna, searching for urban animals. I’ve seen 
migrating salmon jumping up the weir downstream. All in a lunchtime.
(workerslunchtime)

‘Seeing cities by car tends to be devoid of wonder’

I’ve lived carless since around 5 years ago when I moved to Santiago de Chile 
and continued that way when I moved toMexico City. What I’ve discovered is that 
cities by car tend to be ugly, drab and devoid of wonder. By walking I’ve been 
better able to understand the culture of the cities I’ve lived in. In little 
details like if people chose or not to close their apartment curtains or wether 
they create small sacred religious spaces I’ve managed to create a deeper 
empathy and understanding of the way of life, not just ‘life’ in the city. 
(Víctor González, 28) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac264bba4ad94b92eeae87eb1a7df41f170c6b81%2F118_0_958_1197%2F958.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city'%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city%27%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac264bba4ad94b92eeae87eb1a7df41f170c6b81%2F118_0_958_1197%2F958.png>
 Santiago: ‘By walking I’ve been better able to understand the culture of the 
cities.’ Photograph: Vìctor González 
‘It’s a human experience that’s getting rarer’

I spend a couple hours every day walking. It reminds me that we are all in 
this one big urban organism, which I think this is very hard to see if you move 
faster through a city. Even though it can be alienating living in a big city, 
it can also force you not to ignore other people’s stories in a way that you 
lose if you don’t walk. Crucially, it’s a human experience that doesn’t involve 
transaction of money, goods or services, and experiences like that are getting 
rarer and rarer in a rentier, ticket punching society.(Connor Snedecor, 31)

‘The best things can happen when you get lost in cities’

I was walking - on my own - in the old city in Hue, Vietnam. The streets were 
deserted and I was completely lost. I stood in a corner with a map, and a man 
approached. ‘What is your name?’ he said. I didn’t realise those were his only 
words of English, so showed him the map and asked him where I was. He waved to 
me to follow him – and took me to his family home. I spent the day with them. 
Nobody spoke English and I speak no Vietnamese. But I played with the children 
and we all smiled and laughed a lot. At the end of the day the man took me to 
the city wall and waved me on my way. The very best things can happen when you 
get lost in cities. (Jo Carroll, 66)

‘Walking gives me a sense of connection and makes me less afraid’

I am a Kenyan living in Berlin. Ever since I came to Europe I have learnt to 
greatly appreciate and love walking. I love to visit cities and towns in 
different European countries and I always make a point to walk around and ‘take 
in’ the environment. I walk to see the local people, roads, landscapes, parks, 
and how the buildings change in the different parts of the city. Walking also 
lets me discover little cafes, bookshops, restaurants or graffiti that could be 
easily missed when you quickly drive by. I always try to join walking tours 
whenever I can and so far I have met and talked with people from all over the 
world and we’ve exchanged thoughts about the place and our home cities. For me 
walking and seeing what is around me gives me a sense of connection and makes 
me less afraid of being in a new place.”(Chepng’etich Biomndo, 31)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4e55802c9d6c56db69570d3af226d9510701159%2F0_873_3088_1852%2F3088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city'%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city%27%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4e55802c9d6c56db69570d3af226d9510701159%2F0_873_3088_1852%2F3088.jpg>
 Berlin: ‘Ever since I came to Europe I have learnt to greatly appreciate 
walking.’ Photograph: Kay Nietfeld/EPA 
‘London feels like an explosion of streets’

San Francisco wandering is defined by a series of right-angles. Like a 
schoolyard game, a choice between 4 directions is offered up on almost every 
block. The simplicity, regularity and pattern of directions to choose from 
feels reassuring for a newcomer, the grid system makes navigation so easy.London
 by comparison feels like an explosion of streets, a wild web spun out by 
centrefugal force. Narrow and winding, with not a thought for any kind of 
city-wide structure, streets spit you out wherever they choose, split 
unexpectedly, spin like catherine wheels off into multiple roundabouts, and 
occasionally just stop completely. The London Wanderer can wend one’s way 
between, betwixt, up-side, out-side, river-side, bank-side, across and around 
forever. While SF wandering doesn’t hold the same diversity of twists and 
turns, the surprising length and straightness of the inner city roads sometimes 
hits me with an overwhelming vastness, a feeling of rushing fast and straight 
as an arrow along a wide avenue suspended like a mighty trench between two 
horizons.(Alice Malia, 34)

‘Walking makes cities human’

I do wonder around the city for many different reasons. If I need to think and 
concentrate, walking is the best activity I can do. When in a new city, I love 
walking around for miles and miles to get a sense of the space, from the shape 
and colour of the buildings, to the sound of the streets, or to observe how 
people live the everyday. Walking makes cities human.(Laura Ferrarello, 33)

‘Urban walking stimulates thinking, and triggers memories’

Through my personal experience, urban walking is a highly intellectual 
activity. It stimulates thinking, and triggers memories. Some of my most 
important life decisions I have taken while wandering aimlessly in cities. In
Damascus, the city where I was born, I practiced two types of wandering in the 
city. I lived at the end of a highway stretching towards the edge of the city; 
a big busy street with wide sidewalks. For some reason, walking there provoked 
me to think. Apparently my brain worked when my legs did. My other type of 
walking is painfully nostalgia-driven. The old city of Damascus has been 
destroyed and rebuilt in layers over a few centuries now. Modern buildings and 
old courtyard houses stand adjacently in a complex network of intimate 
alleyways which lays over a Roman grid plan. The result is an urban creation 
one can hardly get anywhere else. My walks there were driven by familiarity and 
curiosity at the same time. A maze-like network of streets had me walking the 
small city many times without ever losing my sense of wonder.(Rasha Kanjarawi)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ee965112753a97e89e61428b6e215ed633a353%2F0_335_3333_2000%2F3333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city'%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20good%20wander%20unveils%20the%20wonder%20of%20a%20city%27%3A%20readers%20on%20urban%20walking&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F06%2Fa-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ee965112753a97e89e61428b6e215ed633a353%2F0_335_3333_2000%2F3333.jpg>
 Damascus’s Old City: ‘a complex network of intimate alleyways.’ Photograph: 
Omar Sanadiki/Reuters 
‘Through walking we develop a sense of, and for, places’

I was in Berlin’s Parisier Platz, the platform for the Brandenburg Gate. I 
wanted to use walking as a technique to interrogate the quiet rhythms of 
monumental spaces. I was interested in the things we miss. I cared about how 
something so simple as walking might reveal them. Brandenburg Gate has been 
site of, witness to, and protagonist in some of the most significant inflection 
points in recent human history. But, Brandenburg Gate has more nothing days 
than it does something days. The art of ordinary life is hidden by misplaced 
attention. Now, every day, people just walk on by. But, walking doesn’t have to 
simply be the force that transforms A into B. Through walking we develop a 
sense of, and for, places. Walking occupies the parts of a city and of our 
lives that escapes recognition – too often we wish its wanton laboriousness 
away. Walking is an ordinary practice, embracing it, and not its destination, 
demands attention to ordinary time. That day, my world narrowed to the bricks, 
breeze, sun, clouds, grass, litter, and strangers of the square. Walking 
recalibrates our focus. Our task, then, is simple: pay attention.(Josh Oware, 
25)

‘I find walking without maps similar to cooking without recipes’

Walking is my favourite way to exercise both mind and body. Writer’s block, 
hazy hangovers, beginning-of-relationship highs and breakup lows, antsy days at 
the desk or on the couch, arrivals to new places and bittersweet departures, 
they’ve all been sorted through with walking. I find something uniquely 
appealing about walking, as it effectively clouds the divide between everyday 
life and dedicated reprieve. It’s my primary means of transportation in my 
carless urban life, whether in Baltimore where I lived or now inCardiff, where 
I’ve been the last year. I set off for hours of unplanned, aimless wandering. I 
find walking without maps similar to cooking without recipes; sometimes there 
are unexpected masterpieces, and other times, total flops. Most of the time, it 
falls somewhere in the middle. There’s something satisfying about experiencing 
the subtle differences in window flyers and neighbour’s gardens and weather 
changes (over the course of a few hours and days and months) that one can only 
get by walking the streets of one’s city every day.(Raychel Santo, 24)

‘Only by walking can I really see people and their cities’

Each narrow, dilapidated street in Cairo ran along the veins in my body. To 
this day, my relationship with the city and its multifarious streets, avenues, 
squares, markets, mosques, alleys, bridges, underpasses, remains my most 
lasting connection with Cairo. In new cities, I crave the soothing sway of the 
ordinary. I find beauty in it, in witnessing such intimacy: a clothesline 
piercing the blue sky, street vendors, neighbours chatting, the local 
supermarket, children in the streets. Only by walking can I really see people 
and their cities. Only now can I witness the passing of time and where we are 
all standing today. I walk with a destination and without. I walk into places 
whether I am wanted or not. I walk alone. My walks in the cities that become my 
temporary homes are the one thing that bridges the distance between myself and 
the immensity of the world we inhabit. When confronted with why I rather walk 
thirty minutes than pay a few dollars (or cents if you happen to be in Cairo) 
for public transport, I only have this one certainty: If I didn’t, I would be 
forever adrift.(Lorena Rios, 26)
Jill Hunger Griffin (@JillHunger) 
Firm believer that a good wander unveils the wonder of a city. 
https://t.co/Pd6pua21Aw <https://t.co/Pd6pua21Aw>
 <https://twitter.com/JillHunger/status/760163060749393920> August 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JillHunger/status/760163060749393920> 
Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 