
There was a time when Sidney Nolan was one of the best-known artists in the 
world, yet mention his name in the UK today and there might be a vague flicker 
of recognition. But more likely a shrug of the shoulders.

“It is really hard to imagine just how famous Sidney Nolan was,” said former 
journalist David Lipsey, now a Labour peer. “He was a man absolutely at the 
forefront of art and painting. And yet I meet people now, people who have gone 
to art college for God’s sake, who haven’t heard of him. I say I’m the chair of 
theSidney Nolan Trust <http://www.sidneynolantrust.org/> and they look at you … 
”

Next year could be when all that changes. It will be the centenary of Nolan’s 
birth and the trust is determined to restore a reputation which has, in the UK 
at least, fallen off many radars.

“We are trying to put him back where we feel that he belongs,” said Anthony 
Plant, trust director. “All the galleries we talk to, the Royal Academy, 
Pallant House, they say, ‘Yes, Nolan!’ People say, ‘Why isn’t this guy being 
exhibited all the time?’ We’ve been pushing at an open door, really. He was, no 
doubt, a genius and it is about allowing a new generation to see that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-new-generation-of-art-lovers-should-see-the-genius-of-sidney-nolan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F769a4bd852aec60739390f1e8d545229c250c365%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20new%20generation%20of%20art%20lovers%20should%20see%20the%20genius%20of%20Sidney%20Nolan'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-new-generation-of-art-lovers-should-see-the-genius-of-sidney-nolan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20new%20generation%20of%20art%20lovers%20should%20see%20the%20genius%20of%20Sidney%20Nolan%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-new-generation-of-art-lovers-should-see-the-genius-of-sidney-nolan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F769a4bd852aec60739390f1e8d545229c250c365%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Picture of Sidney Nolan, the Rodd, Herefordshire. Photograph: Dimitris 
Legakis/Athena Pictures 
Nolan was born in Melbourne in 1917 and brought up on the city’s rough 
working-class streets. His breakthrough as an artist came with his remarkable
series of paintings inspired by the outlaw Ned Kelly, made between 1945-47 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/may/02/australia-art-london-show>
, now recognised as being among the most famous images of all Australian art.

He is revered in the nation of his birth, but little remembered in the nation 
of his death. He moved to London in 1953 and was championed by the art 
historian and Civilisation presenter Kenneth Clark, developed a strong 
friendship with Benjamin Britten and later became one of the few artists to be 
both knighted and awarded an Order of Merit by the Queen.

Sidney Nolan: little-known Opera Australia paintings hark back to golden age 
of the arts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/dec/22/sidney-nolan-little-known-opera-australia-paintings-hark-back-to-golden-age-of-the-arts>
Next year’s plans include exhibitions at Pallant House in Chichester 
<http://pallant.org.uk/exhibitions/forthcoming-exhibitions/main-galleries/transferences-sidney-nolan-in-britain>
,the Ikon in Birmingham <https://ikon-gallery.org/>, the British Museum and the 
Australian high commission, where four late spray-painted abstracts will be 
reunited for the first time since his death. There will also be symposiums on 
his life, work and legacy at King’s College London and the Royal Academy of 
Arts. Events will kick off on 26 January, Australia Day, with the launch of 
Nolan 100, an online collection of examples from his vast output, selected by 
collectors, artists, curators, critics, friends and family.

In 1983, Nolan and his wife acquired the Rodd, an imposing Elizabethan manor 
house surrounded by 17th-century barns, nestling in a beautiful, monumental 
valley on the Wales-England border near Presteigne.

Since his death in 1992 the Rodd has been home to the trust, welcoming artists 
and groups of young people, and next year it will be opened to the general 
public for the first time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-new-generation-of-art-lovers-should-see-the-genius-of-sidney-nolan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1071b028461bcc42618f8195028d5678adf32f6d%2F0_129_5256_3154%2F5256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20new%20generation%20of%20art%20lovers%20should%20see%20the%20genius%20of%20Sidney%20Nolan'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-new-generation-of-art-lovers-should-see-the-genius-of-sidney-nolan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20new%20generation%20of%20art%20lovers%20should%20see%20the%20genius%20of%20Sidney%20Nolan%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-new-generation-of-art-lovers-should-see-the-genius-of-sidney-nolan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1071b028461bcc42618f8195028d5678adf32f6d%2F0_129_5256_3154%2F5256.jpg>
 Trustee Simon Mundy in the artist’s studio at the Rodd. Photograph: Dimitris 
Legakis/Athena Pictures 
That will allow people to see his studio, a fascinating time capsule untouched 
for 25 years and a place that bears witness to Nolan’s endless experimentation 
and curiosity, his urge to move on, to try something different.

It is a room chaotically piled with tins of Ripolin express gloss, cans of 
Blair spray paint, bottles of Liquitex gloss polymer and Pelikan ink, little 
models of army trucks and an out of place steam organ which Nolan is said not 
to have played. “I’m not entirely sure why it is here,” admitted Plant. “It is 
clearly something he enjoyed having.”

The studio reflects the fast and furious way Nolan worked, determined to catch 
the moment. “He was such an experimental, innovative artist. Any new material 
that came out, Sidney was straight on it … he never stood still. He was always 
interested in the next phase of what he was doing.”

Nolan had been drawn to the Rodd, his Eden, by the countryside and the Welsh 
black cattle which, for him, were reminiscent of the minotaur. At one point he 
owned four bulls and one cow, “but his poor stockman found it very difficult to 
keep the four bulls apart.”

It was at the Rodd that an elderly Nolan could sometimes be found in the tithe 
barn, strapped to a bosun’s chair, swinging above a large canvas, making 
abstract paintings with two spray cans in each hand.

Or he might have blacked out the windows in his studio and turned on a 
powerful light to recreate the harsh sunshine he enjoyed in Australia, not 
something generally available in the glowering grey of the Welsh Marches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-new-generation-of-art-lovers-should-see-the-genius-of-sidney-nolan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5283b66f0842882085ae46c84618b5b814956164%2F0_19_5516_3310%2F5516.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='A%20new%20generation%20of%20art%20lovers%20should%20see%20the%20genius%20of%20Sidney%20Nolan'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-new-generation-of-art-lovers-should-see-the-genius-of-sidney-nolan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27A%20new%20generation%20of%20art%20lovers%20should%20see%20the%20genius%20of%20Sidney%20Nolan%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fa-new-generation-of-art-lovers-should-see-the-genius-of-sidney-nolan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5283b66f0842882085ae46c84618b5b814956164%2F0_19_5516_3310%2F5516.jpg>
 The exhibition studio at the Sidney Nolan Trust. Photograph: Dimitris 
Legakis/Athena Pictures 
Or he might be at the top of the house musing or reading the secondhand books 
he continually bought from Hay-on-Wye. “Mary [his wife] used to go mad because 
he would leave them in piles all over the place; half of them he never read.”

The sheer variety of Nolan’s work over six decades may be one reason he is not 
better known. Even Plant admitted that you could think you know him and then 
see a painting so different you think it couldn’t possibly be by the same 
artist.

“You feel that in his whole career. It is about never standing still, being of 
the time. He was very difficult to pin down, but you see that in his paintings. 
You can’t say definitively this is Nolan’s art because something else will be 
completely different.”

Mary Nolan obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/19/mary-nolan-obituary> 
Towards the end of his life Nolan was making abstract work in which he seemed 
to be reflecting on his life and relationships – relationships that were often 
complicated and tragic. In the 1940s he was involved in a menage with the arts 
patrons Sunday and John Reed, a situation which led to the end of his first 
marriage to Elizabeth.

His second marriage was to Cynthia Reed, John’s sister, with whom he settled 
in London from 1953. The Nobel prize-winning writer Patrick White was a friend, 
writing in his memoir that Cynthia once told him “that everyone – women, men, 
dogs – fell in love with Sid.”

White was particularly close to Cynthia, a woman he said was steel to Nolan’s 
elastic. He was shaken by her suicide in 1976 and, in his eyes, Nolan’s too 
quick marriage to Mary.

Simon Mundy, a former neighbour and member of the Nolan Trust board, recalled 
Nolan as always good company, but rarely garrulous. “He was quite reserved, 
very quietly spoken but he always had a twinkle … he could be quite owlish. One 
of the reasons he had such a complicated life was that he would stand back and 
let the mayhem happen around him.”

Since Nolan’s death the Rodd has been a place where visiting artists have a 
freedom to experiment, while for the groups of young people who come regularly 
from the West Midlands it is often an opportunity to engage with art for the 
first time.

In the future the trust hopes to make the Rodd an important centre for arts 
and music and the centenary provides an opportunity to seek the money to do so.

At the heart of it will be Nolan, with some of the works the trust owns going 
on display as the story of his life and output is explored. They hope to 
acquire more works to better represent the astonishing variety of his output.

“His idea always was that he would leave a legacy,” said Plant. “He set this 
place up as somewhere people would see his work so it is important the trust 
has a collection. But it is also important when people see the later works to 
see where they came form.”
 