
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will disappoint 
and disillusion his far-right supporters by eschewing white supremacy, 
according to some of the movement’s own intellectual leaders.

Activists who recently gave Nazi salutes and shouted “hail Trump” at a 
gathering in Washington will revolt if the new US president fails to meet their 
expectations, the leaders told the Guardian.

Donald Trump's 'alt-right' supporters express dismay at disavowal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/alt-right-supporters-donald-trump-backlash-disavow-reddit-4chan>
The prospect of such disillusion and internecine squabbling may console 
liberals who fear a White House tinged with racism and quasi-fascism. The 
analysis is all the more reassuring because it comes from far-right influencers 
and analysts, not wishful progressives.

Instead of enjoying proximity to power, according to this analysis, vocal 
parts of the loose coalition known as the “alt-right” could remain on the 
political fringe, wondering what happened to their triumph.

“Their hearts are bigger than their brains,” said Mark Weber, who runs the 
Institute for Historical Review <http://www.ihr.org/>, an organisation 
dedicated to exposing “Jewish-Zionist” power. “Saying they want to be the 
intellectual head of the Trump presidency is delusional.”

Jared Taylor, a white supremacist who runs the self-termed “race-realist” 
magazineAmerican Renaissance <http://www.amren.com/>, said the president-elect 
had already backpedalled on several pledges that had fired up the far-right. 
“At first he promised to send back every illegal immigrant. Now he is waffling 
on that.”

David Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/03/david-stein-cole-holocaust-revisionist>
, a self-proclaimed Holocaust revisionist andTaki magazine columnist 
<http://takimag.com/contributor/davidcole/328#axzz4Tb5UnSTk>, envisaged the 
movement sliding into bickering and in-fighting, stuck in “rabbit warrens” of 
online trolling rather than policy shaping.

“In January Trump will start governing and will have to make compromises. Even 
small ones will trigger squabbles between the ‘alt-right’. ‘Trump betrayed us.’ 
‘No, you’re betraying us for saying Trump betrayed us.’ And so on. The 
alt-right’s appearance of influence will diminish more and more as they start 
to fight amongst themselves.”

In an email interview Peter Brimelow, founder of the webzine Vdare.com 
<http://www.vdare.com/>, which alleges Mexican plots to remake the US, said 
Trump’s failure to deliver “important bones” could trigger a backlash. “I think 
the right of the right is absolutely prepared to revolt. It’s what they do.”

There is, however, a catch: Weber, 
<https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/mark-weber> 
Taylor 
<https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/jared-taylor>
 andBrimelow 
<https://www.splcenter.org/fighting-hate/extremist-files/individual/peter-brimelow>
 – all classified as “extremists” by the Southern Poverty Law Center – said 
Trump’s victory energised the far-right and that the movement can grow with or 
without White House help.


The young crowd that roared “Hail Trump” at last month’s gathering in 
Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/alt-right-conference-richard-spencer-white-nationalists>
will fight for its beliefs no matter what, Brimelow said. “None of them were 
looking for jobs in the Trump administration. These are not party loyalists. 
They know they’re entirely outside the establishment consensus. And they’re 
used to guerrilla warfare.”

Trump’s relationship with the far-right – an unruly grouping which includes 
opponents to illegal immigration, free trade, police reform, political 
correctness, miscegenation and mainstream Holocaust scholarship – will partly 
define his administration.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20guide%20to%20Donald%20Trump's%20potential%20cabinet%20of%20billionaires%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20guide%20to%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20potential%20cabinet%20of%20billionaires%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video&media=>
A guide to Donald Trump’s potential cabinet of billionaires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/22/donald-trump-cabinet-nominees-video>
The casino mogul turned Republican insurgent electrified this group during the 
election by calling undocumented Mexican immigrantsrapists and criminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
. He vowed to deport 11 million undocumented people, ban Muslims from entering 
the US and build a wall on the southern border. He was slow to disavow an  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/28/donald-trump-former-kkk-leader-david-duke>
endorsement fromDavid Duke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/28/donald-trump-former-kkk-leader-david-duke>
, the former Ku Klux Klan leader.

He put Steve Bannon, who turned Breitbart News into a platform for the far 
right, in charge of his campaign and rewarded him with asenior White House post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
.

A few weeks after Trump’s victory the innocuously named National Policy 
Institute, which espouses an “ethno-state” for Americans of European descent, 
held its annual conference in the Ronald Reagan Building a few blocks from the 
White House.

Its leader, Richard Spencer, concluded the event by shouting “Hail Trump! Hail 
our people!” and “Hail victory!”, an English translation of the Nazi 
exhortation “Sieg heil”. Some audience members gave the Nazi salute.

White nationalist Richard Spencer fuels protest as he mocks critics in Texas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/white-nationalist-richard-spencer-texas-am>
Some observers saw their worst fears realised: unbound, exuberant fascism.

But some of the far-right’s intellectuals saw something else: self-sabotage 
and delusion.

It was an “idiot conclusion” to a conference packed with other speeches and 
panel discussions, said Brimelow, who addressed the gathering.

Taylor, another speaker, agreed. “It was going very well until (then). Richard 
Spencer has said that the way he closed the talk was meant as pure irony, and I 
hope that’s the case, that it was all ironic and over-exuberance. I don’t think 
that anything that has any whiff of Nazism is a particularly effective way to 
bring Americans or even Europeans to an effective understanding of race.”

Cole said Spencer, a rising star of the far-right movement, overreached. “He 
blew a lot of goodwill ... and became an embarrassment to some of his own 
people.”

Spencer and his supporters will pay for hubris, Cole predicted. “They’ll burn 
out. After Trump’s victory they had a belief they were behind it, or had a lot 
of clout. All they can hope for is to get something on the immigration 
reform/restrictions. Otherwise they’re enjoying the bragging rights, saying 
they won it, even though they didn’t.”

Asked about that weekend and his impact on the white supremacist movement, 
Trumptold the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/us/politics/trump-new-york-times-interview-transcript.html?_r=0>
: “I don’t want to energize the group, and I disavow the group ... But it’s not 
a group I want to energize, and if they are energized I want to look into it 
and find out why.”

Spencer, unabashed, has continued touring university campuses and is 
considering a congressional run 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-pol-richard-spencer-congress-20161220-story.html>
 in Montana, where he lives. He did not immediately respond to a request for 
comment.

If the critiques are correct he and his supporters will, to co-opt a favoured 
“alt-right” term, have a rude awakening. “In the eagerness for hope many have 
latched on to Trump. They’re trying to get a step on the escalator. I’m 
convinced they’ll be disappointed,” said Weber. Far-right youths are “on fire” 
but Trump, he said, will not be able to turn the clock back to the 1950s, a 
perceived golden age for white America.

Taylor said some on the far-right fell, as did liberals, for what he termed 
media distortions. “Donald Trump was never a racial dissident of the sort that 
I am. He was never one of us. He’s an American nationalist. The left was wrong 
to think that he was dancing to the tune of people like myself.”

Taylor said the far right would need patience. “Racial nationalism has not 
triumphed in America. It will some day. But to think it has done so (already) 
is delusive.”

• This story has been corrected to reflect that Richard Spencer is not a 
native of Montana
 