
Donald Trump’s victory has the potential to radically redraw the geopolitical 
landscape in Asia, where Barack Obama has been trying to counterbalance China’s 
growing regional influence with his“pivot” strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/obama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant>
.

Some believe a Trump presidency could represent the biggest threat to 
Washington’s security ties with its two biggest allies in the Asia-Pacific – 
Japan andSouth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> – since 
the end of the second world war.


Donald Trump's election victory: the winners and losers around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-victory-us-election-winners-losers>
But the rest of the region will be watching intently.


“There is a sense that this is a big epochal change, that this is the end of 
the old order and we are not sure what is coming,” said Nick Bisley, an 
international relations expert from La Trobe University in Melbourne. “And I 
think this is especially true in Asia because it is the place where you have 
seen American influence most obviously challenged, politically and 
economically, by a risingChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

“It doesn’t seem that Trump is going to be interested in defending those old 
verities of US primacy in Asia and carrying the lion’s share of the weight of 
maintaining the strategic balance in the region,” he added. “It is now going to 
be much more self-interested in how it behaves.”

China

On the campaign trail Trump hinted at a more robust policy towards China, 
accusing Beijing of “raping” the US economy and threatening to slap massive 
tariffs on Chinese imports, while simultaneously threatening to pull US troops 
out of Beijing’s regional rivals, Japan and South Korea.


But Bonnie Glaser, the director of the China Power Project at the Center for 
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) think tank in Washington, said Trump 
had shed so little light on his strategy for the region that speculating about 
what might happen was almost pointless.


“On the South China Sea he has said very little. On cyber security, I haven’t 
heard anything.North Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea>, who 
knows?” said Glaser. “On so many of these issues he has just been silent.”


Clinton, Trump and foreign policy: global conflicts await the next president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-foreign-policy-north-korea-syria-russia-china>
John Delury, an expert in US-China relations from Yonsei University in Seoul, 
said he believed the region had been caught off guard by Trump’s triumph.

“Asians had been expecting a Hillary victory,” he said. “Trump is this 
gigantic question mark … The first reaction is simply not knowing who are we 
dealing with. Who is this guy? How is he going to conduct foreign policy? And 
who is he going to give responsibility to?”


Many China experts believe the country’s Communist party leaders will be 
relatively relaxed about having to deal with a Trump White House.


“I just don’t think they would be alarmed by a Trump presidency,” said Glaser. 
“The silver lining that some Chinese [officials] have drawn is that Trump could 
be somebody that they could negotiate with, that as a businessman he is 
somebody who is transactional, who might be able to cut deals on some issues. I 
think they would try to make that work for them.”


Clinton and Obama lead calls for unity as US braces for Trump presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/trump-victory-obama-clinton-unity>
Delury, the author of Wealth and Power: China’s Long March to the Twenty-First 
Century, said Beijing had been gearing up for a Clinton victory and therefore 
“bracing for a harder edge to China policy”.


“So there may be some relief that they don’t have to deal with a formidable 
foreign policy leader in Hillary Clinton. There is probably some hope that 
despite his anti-China rhetoric, Trump is an amateur at foreign policy. Trump 
is an isolationist so the Chinese are going to see that as an opportunity to 
keep strengthening their position and their role in the region.”


Delury said Trump was also likely to ditch the highly contentious 
Trans-Pacific Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/tpp-or-not-tpp-whats-the-trans-pacific-partnership-and-should-we-support-it>
 (TPP) which under Obama had been “a centrepiece of an American resurgence of 
its role in Asia”.


“That’s good for China ... That is definitely a tilt towards the Sinocentric 
order for Asia,” he said.


But if Beijing will be calm about having to deal with a President Trump, 
experts believe other countries in the region are feeling far less sanguine.


Nick Bisley said the region was now in for “a wild ride” over the coming 
months.

“We used to know how things work and we now have no sense that we know how the 
game is played ... It’s 2016. At one end is Leicester City Football Club 
[winning the English Premier League] and at the other it is Brexit and Trump. I 
do think it is the end of the old liberal order and we are into seriously 
uncharted territory.”

Glaser rejected the idea that Trump’s victory meant the US would now 
completely roll over to Beijing in Asia.


“The US is not going to be pulling out of Asia and ceding it to China. So 
where does Trump get tough? Where does he look to make compromises? I just 
don’t know.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fan-epochal-change-what-a-trump-presidency-means-for-the-asia-pacific-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e99d9875ddc5702db2f376ed69d5d7dce2d202%2F0_320_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='An%20epochal%20change'%3A%20what%20a%20Trump%20presidency%20means%20for%20the%20Asia%20Pacific%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fan-epochal-change-what-a-trump-presidency-means-for-the-asia-pacific-region%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27An%20epochal%20change%27%3A%20what%20a%20Trump%20presidency%20means%20for%20the%20Asia%20Pacific%20region&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fan-epochal-change-what-a-trump-presidency-means-for-the-asia-pacific-region%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e99d9875ddc5702db2f376ed69d5d7dce2d202%2F0_320_7360_4416%2F7360.jpg>
 A woman poses for a selfie at an election event organised by the US embassy in 
Seoul, South Korea. Photograph: Ed Jones/AFP/Getty Images 
Japan and the Korean peninsula

While Japanese government officials were cautious about commenting on their 
preference for the next president, Trump has caused consternation and alarm in 
Tokyo with suggestions that he is willing to make dramatic changes to the 
security glue that has held the two countries together for more than 60 years.


Amid rising concern over Chinese military activity in the South China Sea and 
North Korea’s apparently unstoppable acquisition ofa viable nuclear deterrent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/paranoid-north-korea-wont-stop-building-nuclear-weapons-us-spy-chief>
, a Clinton victory would have given Japan the assurance it needed that 
bilateral security ties would remain untouched.


In public remarks over the past few months, however, Trump has hinted that his 
“America first” mantra could mean the withdrawal of 47,000 US troops from Japan 
and another 28,500 ranged along the southern side of the heavily armed border 
that separates South and North Korea.


Tokyo and Seoul, Trump claimed, have benefited from US security largesse for 
too long, protected by vast numbers of personnel and military hardware that 
they pay little to maintain.


“If somebody attacks Japan, we have to immediately go and start world war 
three, OK? If we get attacked, Japan doesn’t have to help us,” he said in a 
speech last year.


The prospect of Trump weakening or even scrapping that guarantee would cause 
alarm in Tokyo, particularly after securing vows from Washington that the US 
would come to Japan’s aid if China attempted to retake the disputed Senkaku 
islands by force. The East China Sea islands, known as the Diaoyu in China, are 
administered by Tokyo but claimed by Beijing.


Koichi Nakano, a politics professor at Sophia University in Tokyo, told the 
Guardian: “We don’t know if he will do what he has said he would do on security 
with Japan and South Korea, or settle down to the status quo.”


A worst-case scenario would involve a US withdrawal from the region, which 
could encourage Chinese expansionist ambitions and compel Japan to beef up its 
own military, Nakano said.


“But it’s also possible that Trump loses interest once he’s in power … we know 
that he doesn’t have much interest in foreign policy so it might be the case 
that he becomes very detached from security issues and leaves them in the hands 
of the usual suspects from the Republican party.”


In response to Trump’s “freeloading” claims, some analysts have pointed out 
that both South Korea and Japan contribute huge sums to the upkeep of the US 
military presence in their countries.


Tokyo contributes ¥192bn ($1.84bn) a year towards maintaining the US military 
presence. US bases in Japan cost about $5.5bn a year, according to the 
Pentagon. South Korea, meanwhile, contributes $850m a year – about half the 
cost of maintaining the US troop presence there.


Trump's impulsive adventurism and security in the Asia Pacific: the risks and 
ramifications | Euan Graham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/trumps-impulsive-adventurism-and-security-in-the-asia-pacific-the-risks-and-ramifications>
And under Obama, both have moved to strengthen their own roles in the security 
relationship.


Just over a year ago Japan passed a controversial law that allows the 
country’s militaryto exercise collective self-defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/japanese-pms-plan-to-allow-troops-to-fight-overseas-angers-voters>
 – or coming to the aid of an ally – in overseas conflict for the first time 
since the war.


South Korea, meanwhile, has agreed to host the US-made Terminal High Altitude 
Area Defense (Thaad) missile defence system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/08/south-korea-and-us-agree-to-deploy-thaad-missile-defence-system>
 – a move aimed at deterring North Korean ballistic missile attacks. China, 
however, says deploying Thaad would upset the regional balance of power and 
compromise its own security.


South Korea’s Yonhap news agency said the country’s national security council 
was due to hold a meeting on Wednesday to discuss the US election result, 
although it is not clear what immediate action could be taken by the South 
Korean president, Park Geun-hye,who is in the midst of a cronyism crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/choi-gate-south-korean-president-forced-to-let-opposition-choose-next-pm>
 that could end in her resignation.


Mark Lippert, the US ambassador to South Korea, said the country’s security 
ties would remain unchanged, whoever become president. “Our alliance has been 
strong for over 60 years, and I see no change in that,” Lippert told reporters 
in Seoul, according to Yonhap.


“Over the 60 years, we have had this special alliance. It’s been through ups 
and downs. [But] it will always get stronger. I am confident that that 
trajectory will continue. The alliance continues to be strong, and it will 
continue to grow.”


Perhaps most alarming is Trump’s suggestion that Japan and South Korea should 
end their dependence on the US nuclear umbrella and develop their own nuclear 
deterrents.


That, many analysts agree, could spark an Asia-Pacific arms race that would 
further destabilise an already tense region.


In April, Trump told Chris Wallace on Fox News: “It’s not like, gee whiz, 
nobody has them. So, North Korea has nukes. Japan has a problem with that. I 
mean, they have a big problem with that. Maybe they would in fact be better off 
if they defend themselves from North Korea.”


When Wallace asked him if he was referring to nuclear weapons, Trump answered: 
“Including with nukes, yes, including with nukes.”

North Korea

Trump has spoken of his desire to meet the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, 
to discuss Pyongyang’s nuclear programme.


While the idea of dialogue will appeal to those who have declared the Obama 
administration’s policy of sanctions and isolation a failure, the North Koreans 
themselves did not take the gesture seriously, with one official dismissing it 
as glib election campaign propaganda.


Philippines and south-east Asia

Barack Obama courted Malaysia, the Philippines, Vietnam and Indonesia during 
his time in office. All have territorial disputes with Beijing over theSouth 
China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, a route for 
about $4.5tn (£3.4tn) in trade that the US is concerned China wants to fully 
control.

Trump’s lack of concise policy on China has led governments in south-east Asia 
to wonder if they should still look the US as a counterweight to Beijing if he 
wins and abandons the “pivot” policy.


Even before the results were in, the US chargé d’affaires in Manila was 
attempting to reassure thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> that the relationship would 
continue, already battered by President Rodrigo Duterte’s repeated anti-US 
rhetoric.


“Whoever wins this election, our country will value the ties with the 
Philippines, as it has over all these many decades. And that, I can say with 
full confidence,” Michael Klecheski said.


Duterte, who also won the election this year as an anti-establishment 
candidate who horrified the Manila elite, has been regularlycompared to Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/10/separated-at-birth-sayings-of-donald-trump-and-rodrigo-the-punisher-duterte>
.


His relationship with the US has spiralled since he took office in June but he 
soon congratulated Trump upon his victory. “I don’t want to quarrel any more, 
because Trump has won,” Duterte said in a speech to the Filipino community 
during a visit to Malaysia.

Although the Philippines has one of the strongest claims against China, 
winning an international tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
 in July, Duterte has tried to ease the relationship with Beijing.


A Trump presidency with less focus on the South China Sea could bolster that 
policy.

And in Thailand, where a military government has increasingly looked north to 
Beijing, US ambassador Glyn Davies also tried to talk up the strength of the 
relationship.


Trump has some allies in the region, or at least admirers. Notably, Cambodian 
strongman Hun Sen has described the Republican candidate as “very talented”.


Trump is perhaps least popular in the region’s majority Muslim counties, 
Malaysia andIndonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>, where 
there was widespread anger on social media and in newspapers when he announced 
his plan to ban Muslims entering the US.


A poll conducted in the region 
<http://www.scmp.com/week-asia/politics/article/2042745/how-asia-would-vote-us-election-exclusive-survey>
 this week revealed that Clinton was overwhelming the preferred candidate 
amongst resident Asians.


India

In India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, Donald Trump’s victory 
could cause short-term economic panic, but may have long-term foreign policy 
benefits, argues Neelam Deo, the director of foreign policy think tank Gateway 
House.


There is complete economic confusion
Neelam Deo, think tank Gateway House 
“There is complete economic confusion, and the short-term response of the 
stock market will be negative. How the economy will respond toDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is a complete unknown and the 
uncertainty itself is already having a negative fallout,” she said.


Close ties between the US and India under the Obama administration could also 
take a turn for the worse. “Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be shocked as he 
had set a close relationship with President Obama, who had become the 
campaigner-in-chief for the Hillary campaign, and who has projected herself as 
the candidate for continuity.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fwe-are-going-to-be-best-friends-trump-talks-up-us-india-relations-under-his-presidency-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20are%20going%20to%20be%20best%20friends'%3A%20Trump%20talks%20up%20US-India%20relations%20under%20his%20presidency%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fwe-are-going-to-be-best-friends-trump-talks-up-us-india-relations-under-his-presidency-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20are%20going%20to%20be%20best%20friends%27%3A%20Trump%20talks%20up%20US-India%20relations%20under%20his%20presidency%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fwe-are-going-to-be-best-friends-trump-talks-up-us-india-relations-under-his-presidency-video&media=>
‘We are going to be best friends’: Trump talks up US-India relations under his 
presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/oct/16/we-are-going-to-be-best-friends-trump-talks-up-us-india-relations-under-his-presidency-video>
Trump has indicated that he would work towards a stronger relationship with 
India, saying he would be “best friends” with India, andbroadcasting a message 
in Hindi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/trump-speaks-hindi-in-indian-american-campaign-ad>
saying “ab ki baar Trump sarkar,” (meaning “this time, a Trump government”) 
referring to Modi’s campaign slogan in 2014 elections.


It is unclear if those statements would translate to foreign policy benefits 
for India. “I wouldn’t take those statements too seriously as they are designed 
to woo a small contingent of American Indians,” said Deo.


“But Donald Trump, who doesn’t seem to overanalyse anything, is likely to take 
a stance against Pakistan, which would be consonant with his stance on Islamic 
terrorism, and would be in India’s favour.”
 