
Police in Los Angeles <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> are 
investigating the vandalism of art galleries in a Latino neighbourhood, 
including the spray-painted message “fuck white art”, as possible hate crimes.

Three galleries were targeted last month amid rising concern in Boyle Heights 
that an influx of galleriesheralds gentrification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/19/los-angeles-la-gentrification-resistance-boyle-heights>
.

A coalition of community leaders and leftwing militants has mobilised over the 
past year to protest, confront and in some cases intimidate galleries whom they 
fear will pave the way for development that will push out residents and erase a 
cradle of Chicano identity.

'Hope everyone pukes on your artisanal treats': fighting gentrification, 
LA-style
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/19/los-angeles-la-gentrification-resistance-boyle-heights>
“We don’t know who actually did [the vandalism], but because it actually made 
a reference to anti-white art or anti-white, it’s basically saying that it’s a 
hate crime based on that,” detective John Parra of the LAPD’s Hollenbeck station
told the Los Angeles Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/california/la-me-ln-boyle-heights-20161102-story.html>
 on Thursday.

Police recently met gallery owners and requested advance notice of future 
exhibitions so that police could consider additional patrols, he said. The 
vandalism incidents remain under investigation.

Boyle Heights is a largely low-income neighbourhood which sits across the LA 
river from downtown, a formerly depressed zone which is being transformed by 
new museums, galleries, loft apartments and skyscrapers.

Over the past year activists, some with masks, others with megaphones, have 
confronted realtors and tour groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/19/los-angeles-la-gentrification-resistance-boyle-heights>
, picketed galleries and used a brass band blowing with all its might to 
sabotage an open air-opera.

Activists scorned the notion that tagging galleries represented a hate crime. 
“The walls in my neigbourhood are the people’s newspaper. That’s people 
expressing themselves,” says Xochitl Palomera of the advocacy group Corazón Del 
Pueblo. “You’re talking about someone spray-painting a wall with truth. Whoever 
wrote that is hurting and is angry.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fboyle-heights-art-gallery-vandalism-hate-crime-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F569293067bd2b1fc491bf99f1ced2236e0dea69d%2F0_0_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Anti-white'%20graffiti%20in%20gentrifying%20LA%20%20neighborhood%20sparks%20hate%20crime%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fboyle-heights-art-gallery-vandalism-hate-crime-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Anti-white%27%20graffiti%20in%20gentrifying%20LA%20%20neighborhood%20sparks%20hate%20crime%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fboyle-heights-art-gallery-vandalism-hate-crime-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F569293067bd2b1fc491bf99f1ced2236e0dea69d%2F0_0_5100_3059%2F5100.jpg>
 Xochitl Palomera: ‘We want these galleries out.’ Photograph: Dan Tuffs for the 
Guardian 
The dozen or so galleries that have crossed the river were almost all 
white-owned and were opening the floodgates to economic forces which could 
drown the culture of Boyle Heights, said Palomera.

“We want these galleries out. They are going to be destructive to the things 
that we have been creating.” She said there was no such thing as reverse 
racism. “Because you know what, we’ve been experiencing oppression for hundreds 
of years. We’re not going to take this sitting down.”

She said the true hate crime was the LAPD’s killing of Jesse Romero 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-jesse-romero-boyle-heights-attorneys-20160812-snap-story.html>
, a 14-year-old boy, in August. Police said he was tagging gang-type graffiti 
and may have fired a gun when confronted by officers. Romero’s family disputes 
that and called the killing excessive force.

Ruben, an activist with Serve the People LA <http://servethepeoplela.org/> 
(STPLA), a Maoist offshoot, said “righteous anger” over the risk of 
displacement fueled the graffiti. “We didn’t do it and don’t know who did it, 
but we celebrate it.”

Race was irrelevant, said Ruben, who declined to give a last name. “We’re not 
hating on white people. We don’t have an anti-white philosophy. We’re the 
colonised resisting colonisation. We love our community and are going to defend 
it no matter what. For LAPD to say this is a potential hate crime when they 
kill young brown people is ludicrous and disgustingly ironic.”

Mynor Godoy, president of the Boyle Heights neighbourhood council, but 
speaking in a personal capacity, said graffiti was common in Boyle Heights and 
that galleries reflected a “certain level of privilege” by calling the police. 
Rising rents and evictions were already forcing out long term residents, he 
said. “It’s worth trying to provide more context about why this may be 
happening.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fboyle-heights-art-gallery-vandalism-hate-crime-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5663116e31c7e269d39833d542f7c51e83cce872%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Anti-white'%20graffiti%20in%20gentrifying%20LA%20%20neighborhood%20sparks%20hate%20crime%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fboyle-heights-art-gallery-vandalism-hate-crime-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Anti-white%27%20graffiti%20in%20gentrifying%20LA%20%20neighborhood%20sparks%20hate%20crime%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fboyle-heights-art-gallery-vandalism-hate-crime-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5663116e31c7e269d39833d542f7c51e83cce872%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 T-shirts for sale in Boyle Heights, which read: ‘People Yes!, Gentrify No!’ 
Photograph: Dan Tuffs for the Guardian 
The Guardian found one dissenting voice: Steven Almazan, a former neighborhood 
council member currently pursuing a Master’s in public policy at the University 
ofCalifornia <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, Berkeley, said 
the anti-gentrification resistance jarred with the area’s melting pot history: 
Japanese and European Jews settled here before Mexicans.

“The fact they’re using racially-based tactics is a bit demoralising. Boyle 
Heights once was seen as the Ellis Island of the west coast. It shouldn’t be a 
place of contention.Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> 
galleries do not cause gentrification. They’re a byproduct of systemic issues. 
There has to be a more productive way for the city, developers and the folks of 
Boyle Heights to [advance] the discussion.”

Jonathan Jones, the Guardian’s art critic, has criticised the Boyle Heights 
“artwashing” asdaft and possessing a destructive logic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jul/18/artwashing-new-watchword-for-anti-gentrification-protesters>
.

One of the twists to the conflict in Boyle Heights is that some of the artists 
who are driving LA’s cultural boom were themselves displaced by tech-driven 
gentrification in San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/26/san-francisco-move-to-la-bohemians-artists-tech-boom>
.
 