
Mornings in Donegal can be so beautiful they take the breath away. Last week, 
soft pinkish light broke through early clouds hanging over Killybegs harbour, 
bouncing off the waters of the port and into the upstairs windows of the Bay 
View hotel. Tourists enjoying their breakfast looked down on fishing boats 
festooned with Christmas lights and bathed in unseasonally warm winter sunshine.

It was moments like this that led National Geographic Traveller to conclude at 
the start of December thatDonegal was the “coolest place on the planet” to visit
 <http://www.natgeotraveller.co.uk/smart-travel/features/cool-list-17-2017/>. 
The magazine predicted big things for a county often overshadowed in tourist 
terms by better-known counties such as Kerry, and cities such as Dublin.

10 of the best coastal swimming spots in Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jun/08/10-best-sea-coastal-swimming-spots-ireland>
“It’s a warm-hearted place, but wilderness always feels just a stone’s throw 
away,” saidNational Geographic Traveller’s UK editor, Pat Riddell. “And it is 
wilderness, world-class wilderness. We think it’s due a big year.”

The global fame of Donegal had already been enhanced by the presence of the 
Star Wars cast shooting scenes for episode eight in the franchise, out in 
December last year.

Inside the Bay View, general manager Tracey McGill said the “coolest place on 
the planet” epithet came as no surprise, but would help put the hotel, 
Killybegs and the entire county back on the tourist map: “National Geographic 
Traveller were telling us something we already knew here in Donegal!”

The 35-year-old native of Ardara, a small town 10 miles to the north in this 
Irish-speaking region of south-west Donegal, said: “It’s going to be a great 
tool for us to market all of Donegal. Because we are so far up north, we often 
lose out to places like Kerry in the south-west. More foreign tourists go there 
than would come up here. This accolade will increase interest all over the 
world in what Donegal has to offer as well.

“In my opinion it is all about the people. I really believe that we have more 
time for tourists and visitors compared with other places. We are already 
seeing an increase in interest in the Bay View since the article appeared, and 
we are hoping that when the season begins for real in March, there will be a 
big upsurge in visits.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonegal-tourism-coolest-place-on-planet-national-geographic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29cfeb5052604a712c4652dde16971919fc4fe6e%2F722_82_4496_2698%2F4496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Coolest%20place%20on%20planet%E2%80%99%20accolade%20stirs%20interest%20in%20Ireland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonegal-tourism-coolest-place-on-planet-national-geographic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Coolest%20place%20on%20planet%E2%80%99%20accolade%20stirs%20interest%20in%20Ireland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonegal-tourism-coolest-place-on-planet-national-geographic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29cfeb5052604a712c4652dde16971919fc4fe6e%2F722_82_4496_2698%2F4496.jpg>
 Ballymastocker Bay, Donegal. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
The hotel itself is a symbol of Ireland’s economic recovery after a brutal 
recession that saw 15% unemployment and the country teetering on the edge of 
national bankruptcy.

It had closed down but was rescued three years ago by a consortium of 
investors who include the father of Seamus Coleman, Republic ofIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> captain and Everton player. The 
footballer is widely admired in the town, and the county generally, for 
supporting local projects and promoting his native town.

Coleman has retained a deep connection with Killybegs despite the riches and 
potential distractions of the English Premier League and international football 
stardom. “I know everyone loves where they’re from but I really do love 
Killybegs. I’m just Seamus, who they’ve known playing the Gaelic and kicking a 
football against the wall on St Cummins Hill, the housing estate I grew up on. 
This is peace and quiet, family and friends, and walks along Fintra beach.

“It’s kids on the estate knocking on the door and asking me to come outside to 
play football with them and chatting about the Premier League. But no one here 
treats me like a Premier League footballer.”

Ten miles west of Killybegs – on the Wild Atlantic Way, a coastal strip that 
runs for 1,600 miles along Ireland’s western seaboard – the narrow coast road 
passes homes where sheep wander into front gardens. There are stunning vistas 
of rugged, bucolic coastal inlets. In the sixth century, Irish monks sailed 
from here to take Christianity to Iceland.

In the village of Carrick, Paddy Byrne runs a business ferrying tourists to 
the dramatic Slieve League cliffs – the largest of their kind in Europe. 
Standing by one of his boats, he said: “The ‘Coolest Place on the Planet’ thing 
will undoubtedly help bring more tourists. I had a call yesterday from a 
foreign tourist to see I could take them out to the cliffs, but I don’t get 
going until March. Yet the call shows you at least that the article has had 
some impact already.”

But as he surveyed the spectacular scenery, with Slieve League mountain in the 
background and the quaint little harbour, Byrne also struck a cautious note.

“This place may be beautiful but you can’t eat beauty. A lot of people, 
especially our young people, have to leave the county to get jobs, an education 
and opportunities.”

Brexit is also a major concern. Donald Smyth, who used to work in the town’s 
fish processing factory, said that while boats in Killybegs are subject to 
strict EU quotas, British competitors freed of such restraints could inflict 
further damage on an already fragile fishing industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonegal-tourism-coolest-place-on-planet-national-geographic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4f2407bf329609202c327e7047f366d62cba42c%2F0_313_5926_3556%2F5926.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Coolest%20place%20on%20planet%E2%80%99%20accolade%20stirs%20interest%20in%20Ireland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonegal-tourism-coolest-place-on-planet-national-geographic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Coolest%20place%20on%20planet%E2%80%99%20accolade%20stirs%20interest%20in%20Ireland%E2%80%99s%20wild%20north&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonegal-tourism-coolest-place-on-planet-national-geographic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4f2407bf329609202c327e7047f366d62cba42c%2F0_313_5926_3556%2F5926.jpg>
 Fintra beach. Photograph: Alamy 
The 67-year-old said: “Our boats are subjected to stringent tests to make sure 
they adhere to EU quotas, while foreign boats out there are no longer checked – 
especially with the Irish Naval Service away on duty in the Mediterranean Sea 
rescuing people and not around much any more on fishery protection. If British 
fisherman after Brexit can take as much fish from the Atlantic as they want, 
and don’t need to worry about EU quotas, then the fishing fleet here will be in 
even deeper trouble.”

And while Donegal’s fishermen worry about how Brexit might give their British 
counterparts the edge, there are further worries over what will happen to the 
border with Northern Ireland when the UK leaves the EU.

Pressure group Border Communities Against Brexit 
<https://www.facebook.com/bordercommunitiesagainstbrexit/>, formed to oppose 
the imposition of any frontier controls or passport checks on the 310-mile 
border that reaches from the north-west Atlantic coast near Derry and stretches 
across to the Irish Sea north of Dundalk.

Its Donegal branch is headed by pharmacist Tom Murray, who points out that 
Donegal has borders with three counties in Northern Ireland – Derry, Fermanagh 
and Tyrone – so any disruption to cross-frontier trade could have a 
“devastating impact” on the county’s economy.

There are also fears that a tourist boom could be detrimental to coastal 
beauty spots such as Carrick and nearby Teelin. “The tourist traffic is already 
increasing massively down in this corner of the county,” Byrne said. “I can 
cycle from the pier here up to Carrick in about 10 minutes but last summer by 
car it took me half an hour because of the traffic jams. We have to be very 
careful to preserve Donegal’s unspoilt, unclogged image even while we bring in 
more tourists.”

Back in the Bay View hotel, McGill produced an Irish tricolour with the 
signature of Seamus Coleman scrawled across it. “It’s a signed flag that I only 
hand out to football-mad kids who stay in the hotel … and of course visiting 
Everton fans,” she said. “He did loads of them for me last time he was home.”

As Donegal heads into a record-breaking tourist year, that kind of attention 
to detail will only enhance the reputation of a region on the rise.

Donegal past and present

■ County Donegal, part of the ancient province of Ulster, encompasses 1,877 sq 
miles, and has a population of 158,755.

■ Ballyshannon in the south of Donegal is one of the oldest towns in Ireland, 
with archaeological sites dating from the Neolithic period (4000-2500BC).

■ Donegal’s Gaeltacht (Irish-speaking area) has a population of 24,744 – 
around 25% of Ireland’s Gaeltacht.

■ The Slieve League cliffs in Donegal are some of the highest sea cliffs in 
Europe. From the highest point, there’s a 2,000ft drop into the Atlantic Ocean 
– twice the height of the Eiffel Tower.

■ Donegal is home to Glenveagh, the second-largest national park in Ireland, 
with 35,000 acres of mountains, lakes and woodland, with Glenveagh Castle at 
its centre.
 