
It is a curious comment on practice in the London theatre and a revelation of 
the extent to which anything American is assured of success that the strongest 
play of the New York theatrical season should be transferred to London in the 
deadest week of the year. Arthur Miller's "Death of a Salesman" was very well 
received at the PhoenixTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> last 
night, yet it disappointed many people including this critic, who saw it in New 
York and there found it something comparable to an American "King Lear." Over 
here we are fortunate in having the full production by Elia Kazan, and the 
setting and lighting of the original, which most subtly annihilates time and 
place and gives us a penetrating series of glimpses into the heart of a man who 
is dying of disappointment. But in much else, and in the acting of the 
principal parts, this performance is less good, and so different is the 
audience's reaction that the play itself is transformed.

Enough remains, however, to constitute a most moving play which chronicles the 
decline of a good little man and the defection of his sons, whom he had tried 
to bully into his own sham philosophy. In the relationship with the situations 
the play may seem foreign, not because the situations are false to human nature 
but because the manner of expressing them is wholly alien: but as played by 
Paul Muni and Kevin McCarthy they are none the less intensely poignant. 
Kathleen Alexander must be mentioned for her success in sustaining the mood of 
the piece. But it is to the producer, Mr. Kazan, that most of the credit must 
go.
 