
Midway through Laura Jane Grace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/03/against-me-laura-jane-grace-transgender-punk>
’s forthcoming memoir,Tranny 
<http://www.hachettebookgroup.com/features/tranny-laurajanegrace/>, the Against 
Me! frontwoman shares an excerpt from a letter she received during a trying 
period of her career in punk rock. Its author? None other than Bruce 
Springsteen. His letter to the then-young artist is a lovely thing: generous, 
wise, honest yet gentle; an artefact worth sharing.

The thrill we feel when we’re able to eavesdrop on our favourite musicians is 
a special sort of vicariousness; it reminds us that stars are fans, too, just 
like the rest of us. Here are excerpts from some of the most noteworthy 
epistles between musicians of the last few decades, from love letters and 
apologies to voicemails and breakup notes.


Courtney Love appeals to Kim Gordon  
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Nt9QtduXd_0C&pg=PA110&lpg=PA110&dq=hugingly+%26+slenchingly&source=bl&ots=XfSrUensHo&sig=_t2NV6QscW_CoPN-Sd73q9NfmGA&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj8n83orPjPAhXhJcAKHTVjCoIQ6AEIHDAA#v=onepage&q=hugingly%20%26%20slenchingly&f=false>

It’s difficult now to imagine the grunge doyenne in anything other than boss 
mode, but here she was in 1991, a young wannabe imploring Sonic Youth’sKim 
Gordon <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kim-gordon> to produce what would 
become Hole’s snarling debut, Pretty on the Inside. The hand-written appeal 
featured a signoff festooned with felt-tip hearts, and, overleaf, a list of 
Love’s kinderwhore essentials: baby barrettes, Max Factor powder puffs, 
Woolworth knickers, vintage white slip, Christian Dior lip pencil in “Holiday 
Red” …

Dear Miss Kim: Here is a tape of our Sub Pop 7-inch which is supposed to come 
out in a week or two. We are looking to make an LP in the next month. We had a 
meeting thinking who to try for a producer and besides the fact that we would 
prefer working with a woman, we really like the way the STP record sounds & we 
all admire your body of work quite hugingly & slenchingly. If you are at all 
interested I will give you a rehearsal tape. We would be completely honored and 
stoked.Thank You, Courtney Love <https://www.theguardian.com/music/courtney>.”

Tupac gives Chuck D his dues 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/read-tupac-shakurs-heartfelt-letter-to-public-enemys-chuck-d-20140623 
http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/read-tupac-shakurs-heartfelt-letter-to-public-enemys-chuck-d-20140623 
https://pbs.twimg.com/media/BqtWM9PCYAAivZd.jpg:large> 

In September 1995, the Californian MC wrote a heartfelt letter to hip-hop 
elder statesman Chuck D 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/read-tupac-shakurs-heartfelt-letter-to-public-enemys-chuck-d-20140623>
. The tract, penned during a prison stint, remained private until 2014, when 
the Public Enemy rapper shared the correspondence – a painstakingly neat piece 
in blue biro – via Twitter. Shakur was released from prison less than a month 
after sending the note – part fan letter, part collaboration offer – and 
murdered less than a year after writing it.

Peace Chuck … Back in the dayz, on tour with u, I learned so much from what u 
did and how u did it. It may be hard 2 C but u have alwayz played a major role 
in what it is I do 2day … I would be honored if u would appear on this track 4 
my next album, Euthanasia [which became All Eyez On Me]. The track is called 
‘Da Struggle Continuez’. It will also feature Sista Souljah, if God will. So 
let me know … Thanks again, Chuck! I believe we can make a difference, and I 
have every intention of doing just that. Stay strong!”

Johnny hearts June  
<http://www.stylist.co.uk/books/johnny-cashs-love-letter-to-june-carter-voted-the-greatest-of-all-time-valentines-day>

Johnny Cash <https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnnycash> and June Carter 
Cash, in the parlance of our times, are #relationshipgoals – legends in their 
own respective careers as well as a couple whose devotion appeared to stand for 
something. The pair married in 1968 and weathered all manner of personal 
tribulations during their 30-year-plus union before dying within months of each 
other, June in May 2003 and Johnny just four months later. This birthday 
valentine, penned for June’s 65th, has been voted the greatest love letter of 
all time:


Happy Birthday Princess. We get old and get used to each other. We think 
alike. We read each others minds … Sometimes we irritate each other a little 
bit. Maybe sometimes take each other for granted. But once in a while, like 
today, I meditate on it and realise how lucky I am to share my life with the 
greatest woman I ever met. You still fascinate and inspire me … You’re the 
object of my desire, the #1 Earthly reason for my existence. I love you very 
much … John.”

Kurt Cobain apologises to Juliana Hatfield 
<http://thetalkhouse.com/juliana-hatfield-battles-whether-not-sell-personal-note-kurt-cobain/>

This short, sweet, handwritten scrawl, sent by the late Nirvana frontman to 
Hatfield in the early 90s, became public knowledge earlier this year, when the 
indie singer-songwriter announced she was considering putting it up for 
auction, “because I have rent to pay”. The estimated worth of this “rare, 
one-of-a-kind, touched-by-Kurt document”, in which he bashfully apologises for 
snubbing her? A cool $20,000.


Juliana. Your song NIRVANA was totally flattering when I first heard it. I 
really liked your new album, especially My Sister … I feel like a creep because 
of the way I acted after our show last night. I was just disorientated because 
of all the classic after show meet and greet grossness that goes on … I wish 
you all the best. Have a good time in England and don’t eat the kebabs, Love 
Kurt.”

Mick Jones extends an olive branch to Viv Albertine

As billets-doux goes, this one – scrawled on a postcard by the Clash guitarist 
during a tour of the States – is more salty kissoff than romantic devotional, 
dispatched in the aftermath of an acrimonious, VD-riddled split that punctuated 
the infamous White Riot tour. As Albertine explains it in her biography, the 
“dreaming” line is a nod to the Slits’ song Ping Pong Affair, which chronicles 
the then-longtime lovers on/off romance:


Dear Viv, I’m just dreaming on a bus. I’m driving from Vancouver to San 
Francisco. I didn’t think much of the way you left me. I hope you are happy now 
and everything is going well for you. Luv Mick.”

Scott Walker reduces David Bowie to tears 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/articles/ec553f4f-cf1b-4912-b9b5-a98ddfe8d6c6>

David Bowie was a hero to many, but he had his own heroes, too. One such 
object of adoration wasScott Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/scott-walker>, a musician Bowie had idolised 
since the 1960s. During a 1997 radio interview, Mary Anne Hobbs surprised Bowie 
with a birthday message from Walker – a recording that leaves the usually 
unflappable trailblazer temporary, endearingly speechless.


Hi David, This is Scott Walker, and I’m coming to you via a very crappy old 
hand-held tape machine so I hope that’s all right. I’m gonna be a devil today 
and not ask you any questions. I’m certain that among the many messages, 
they’ll be loads about how you always embrace the new and freed so many artists 
… Like everyone else, I’d like to thank you for all the years, and especially 
for your generosity of spirit when it comes to other artists. I’ve been a 
beneficiary on more than one occasion … So have a wonderful birthday. And by 
the way, mine’s the day after yours, so I’ll have a drink to you on the other 
side of midnight. How’s that?”




 