

A Rohingyan refugee held on Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> for more than 
two-and-a-half years has pleaded for Australia to “end this political game” and 
find resettlement for refugees in a safe country.


Imran Mohammad Fazal Hoque, 22, who fled Myanmar as a teenager, has written a 
26-page account of nearly 1,000 days spent in the Australian-run detention 
centre on Manus Island. 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/06/30/Mohammad_Jun16.pdf>

Imran, who learned English while in detention and whose written account was 
assisted by teachers on the island and compiled by friends in Australia, said 
his dossier was “the cry of a voice in isolation ... to the whole world”.

“I am a Rohingyan boy from Myanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> 
(Burma). I am 22 years old now. I have been persecuted and deprived of my basic 
human rights since I was born right up to now. I have never known safety or 
peace, and I have never known citizenship or a right to call any country my 
own.”

Immigration department failed to properly oversee healthcare provider, reviews 
show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/28/asylum-seekers-reviews-find-department-failed-to-properly-oversee-healthcare-provider>
Imran describes in comprehensive detail the daily privations, and the 
restrictions on movement and communication on Manus Island. His words offer a 
rarely seen insight into daily life in the Australian-run detention centre.

He writes that there is regularly not enough food in the detention centre, and 
people often miss out on meals. There was no dentist on Manus for 15 months, no 
chance for private conversation with family, and detainees’ personal property 
was often stolen or withheld.

“These types of inhumane and cruel torture devastate us and make us furious 
and, most importantly, put us in a desperate position where the human mind 
loses control. One can do extreme things when pushed to their limits. For 
example, we can take our own lives.”


Imran was a teenager when he fled Rakhine state in western Myanmar – the 
country formerly known as Burma – where the religious and ethnic minority face 
extreme state-sponsored repression and persecution.

Often described as “the most persecuted people on Earth 
<http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21654124-myanmars-muslim-minority-have-been-attacked-impunity-stripped-vote-and-driven>
”, theMuslim minority Rohingya 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=54268#.V3SU9BN96L4> are denied 
citizenship <https://www.hrw.org/asia/burma> and regularly attacked by state 
security forces or anti-Muslim mobs. Rohingya areforced from their homes 
<http://www.smh.com.au/world/are-rohingya--the-worlds-most-unwanted-people-20130813-2rud1.html>
, which are often razed to the ground, into camps, prohibited from moving, 
banned from all but the most basic education, and forbidden from many jobs.

Arriving in Indonesia, Imran was first recognised as a refugee – that is he 
faced a “well-founded fear of persecution” in his homeland and could not be 
returned – by the UNHCR in 2013.


However, with no refugee protection available in Indonesia (the country is not 
a party to theRefugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> Convention) 
and without prospect of resettlement, Imran boarded a boat for Australia, 
ending up on Christmas Island, before being transferred to Manus on 29 October 
2013. He has since been recognised as a refugee for a second time, this time by 
Papua New Guinean authorities.


This is Manus Island. My prison. My torture. My humiliation | Behrouz Bouchani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/19/this-is-manus-island-my-prison-my-torture-my-humiliation>
Imran writes that since the Papua New Guinea supreme court decision in May 
this year –which found the detention centre on Manus Island was 
“unconstitutional and illegal” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
 – conditions have got worse in the camp.

“The safety of our lives has dropped significantly since this centre was found 
to be illegal.”

Imran has pleaded with Australia to “end this political game” and find a 
peaceful, durable solutions for those held in offshore detention.

“We have had more than enough of this torture. We are in a situation in which 
it is difficult to choose what to do because whatever we do, there are negative 
consequences.


“We are neglected, abandoned, tortured, humiliated, beaten to death and most 
notably accused of being criminals and terrorists without committing any 
crimes.”
 