
It didn’t take long for the fascists to come out of the woodwork. On Tuesday, 
Buzzfeed published a long piece by Reggie Ugwu 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/reggieugwu/fashwave?utm_term=.fpLrP7RAP#.yb12ABanA>, 
looking at how a variant of instrumental electronic music had become the 
favoured soundtrack of the “alt-right”, the US-based far-right movement. Within 
hours, a website whose strapline declares it is “destroying Jewish tyranny” had 
picked up on the piece.

“The Jew-owned Buzzfeed blog has done an article about how fashwave has become 
the musical soundtrack of the alt-right,” the piece said. “The fact that sites 
like these are covering this sort of thing reveals how the alt-right and 
anything associated with it is quickly becoming the trendy counter-culture of 
this era. There is no question about this. We have become the cool ones 
rebelling against a tyrannical system. This will become more and more alluring 
to the younger generation who is coming of age as time moves on. Especially 
considering we live in societies polluted with political correctness and all 
sorts of nonsensical bullshit.”

Actually listening to “fashwave” – the fash from fascism, obviously, the wave 
from synthwave, the musical style it derives from – suggests the desire to be 
“the cool ones” is genuine, albeit unlikely. The few makers of actual fashwave 
tend to produce music that’s clunky and derivative, while the best tracks on 
fashwave playlists come from pre-existing synthwave artists who have done 
nothing to associate themselves with fashwave, other than make records that 
members of the far right like.

“I have no control over how my music is shared,” says the Swedish synthwave 
producer Robert Parker, who crops up on fashwave playlists. “I don’t have the 
time to find the people who share my music. I’ve been putting it out for six 
years – it’s not difficult to download or spread it.”

He became aware last week, he says, that his music had been co-opted, and he 
was horrified. He condemns the politics of the fashwave fans and artists, and 
points out he’s never done or said anything to attract them. “I do not use any 
language or imagery that can be connected with it. I don’t want my music to be 
looked on as something that uses stereotypical images of women, for example. I 
don’t want to associate my music with that.”

Still, he thinks there are reasons why synthwave has been picked up by the 
neo-fascists. “I had my suspicions that music like this could be picked up in 
this way,” he says. “it’s not surprising. This style contains a lot of cliches 
from the 80s, and I think [the co-option by the far right] comes from people 
thinking things were better 30 years ago. And it promotes body ideals.”

He notes, too, that synth music was hijacked by the far right in Sweden in the 
1980s, so it’s not a new thing. As for dissociating himself? “I don’t know what 
to do, really,” he says, despairingly.

The proponents of fashwave describe it much as the proponents of synthwave 
would their own music. “It is the sound of driving a futuristic, glistening 
sportscar (top down), through a twinkling neon cityscape, to a space port, to 
catch a light ship heading to an off-world resort, with your children and the 
woman you love,” says one neo-Nazi site. But one thing marks out this off-world 
resort: “Where only whites are allowed!”

Another post on the same site explained the reasoning behind the choice of 
synth music as “the official soundtrack of the movement”: “The forms of music 
associated with previous white nationalist movements, various forms of rock 
music, are pretty dated … In the end, the solution to this problem had been 
staring me in the face all along. The whitest music ever:synthwave.”

The graphics associated with fashwave look like those of synthwave, too: the 
same reliance on 80s sci-fi, especially Tron. It’s the same look and sound that 
was co-opted by the posters and soundtrack for the film Drive. You see and hear 
it in Stranger Things. What fashwave adds is swastikas, pictures of Donald 
Trump or Adolf Hitler, and slogans: “Build a wall, deport ’em all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ffashwave-synth-music-co-opted-by-the-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb7fe0eb9a623dea3606a6dc5331a868a831f5da%2F0_84_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Fashwave'%3A%20synth%20music%20co-opted%20by%20the%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ffashwave-synth-music-co-opted-by-the-far-right%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Fashwave%27%3A%20synth%20music%20co-opted%20by%20the%20far%20right&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ffashwave-synth-music-co-opted-by-the-far-right%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb7fe0eb9a623dea3606a6dc5331a868a831f5da%2F0_84_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
 Tron … A visual inspiration for fashwave Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/DISNEY 
Its compatibility with the mainstream is the potentially poisonous thing about 
fashwave. It’s the first pop music of the far right that doesn’t sound like it 
was made by and for people who had chosen to completely alienate themselves 
from the world.

In the early 80s, the Oi! music that soundtracked the far-right skinhead 
movement in Britain – and which gained a new set of admirers later in the US, 
where a second wave of racist punk bands emerged – made no concessions to the 
mainstream in either music or image. The songs were nasty, brutish and short, 
with lyrics that hammered home their message in the bluntest of sloganeering: 
“If you stand and look around you / You’ll see your cities taken away / We can 
only stand and watch them / As the white youth’s got no say,” as British 
Standard put it in Keep Britain White.

In the early 90s, the Scandinavian black metal movement became associated with 
neo-Nazism, not just because some its prime movers – such as Varg Vikernes of 
Burzum – were public in their support for it, but also because its themes of 
paganism, of longing for rule by force, of reverence for pre-Christian 
mythology, tied in with far-right ideas about national identity. And black 
metal remains a potent force because it managed to create something new 
artistically, which still appeals to music fans, even those who would condemn 
the beliefs of some of the music’s makers. The linkage between metal, norse 
mythology and fascism has been established, and it remains troubling to those 
who are interested in the first two but not the third – in the Faroe Islands 
this summer, I was talking to the manager of a “Viking metal” band who, before 
I could even formulate the question, was at pains to insist they were not in 
any way far-right in their political views.

To be a fashwave artist or fan, you don’t need to have a shaved head and 
18-hole boots, like the Oi! bands. You don’t need to have long hair, lots of 
leather and a tolerance for blast beats, like the black metal bands. Fashwave 
is the music that normalises fascism, even if coolness is a way away. If it 
comes up on your streaming service, you’ll just hear instrumental synth music, 
though maybe with some odd touches – why does the beat sound like marching 
jackboots? It’s only when you check the artist and track title you realise 
something is up: hmmm, this one is called Galatic Lebensraum and it’s by 
Cybernazi.

The Buzzfeed article, though, has woken up those platforms that have been 
unwittingly promoting fascism. Since it was published, Cybernazi has been 
kicked off Soundcloud – or, as his supporters on social media put it, 
“shoah’d”. That said, you can still find Stormcloak there (with antisemitic 
artwork, and tracks including Right Wing Surf Squad), and Xurious, with its 
runic logo.

Nevertheless, it’s perhaps wise not to get in too much of a lather about this 
new wave of fascist music. It may be played at alt-right rallies, but it 
doesn’t seem to have developed much traction beyond the hardest core of 
hardcores. Xurious has just 813 followers on Soundcloud; Stormcloak has 194. 
Cybernazi, the notional “star” of fashwave, has fewer than 3,000 subscribers to 
his YouTube channel.

The chances are fashwave will, like Oi!, never impinge on the mainstream. The 
writer Stuart Maconie described Oi! as “punk’s stunted idiot half-brother, 
musically primitive and politically unsavoury”. It’s hard not think that if 
anyone is still talking about fashwave in 20 years’ time, they’ll be using 
similar language.

• This article was amended on 16 December 2016. An earlier version referred to 
Xurious’s “swastika-adapted logo”. Xurious contacted us after publication to 
point out that the logo is aGibor rune 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Armanen_runes>.

 