
From Bugsy Malone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/how-we-made-bugsy-malone-jodie-foster-scott-baio-alan-parker>
 toMississippi Burning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/11/mississippi-burning-classic-dvd-philip-french-civil-rights>
 toThe Commitments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/20/how-we-made-the-commitments-alan-parker-robert-arkins-interview>
, Sir Alan Parker has a hugely impressive back catalogue of cinema successes. 
But almost two years ago, at the age of 70, he decided to call time on a career 
that touched the heights.

He had written “a contemporary anarchic piece – a sort of Glaswegian 
Commitments,” he says, “only with darker humour. A friend of mine said he’d 
finance the whole thing. When it came to the nitty gritty, however … I had a 
bust-up with him over releasing a piddling amount of money for the art 
department to do a location recce. It was the final straw for me.

“It wasn’t just being let down by a friend, it was that I had become so 
combative over the years. Fighting for the films and punch-ups with money men 
had become my default mechanism and I didn’t like that. I pulled the plug on 
the project and on my career.”

Two years on, he is still active in the industry, representing film-makers as 
honorary president of Fera (Federation of European Film Directors 
<http://www.filmdirectors.eu/>). But there are no regrets for the days spent 
punting scripts in unpromising circumstances. Parker’s passion now is painting, 
and his energy is currently focused on his first major exhibition.

“I was very lucky to find such a creative outlet so late in life,” he told the 
Observer, “and quite separate to my day job as a director. I had been directing 
since I was 24 years old and it was refreshing to do something creative on my 
own, without the help of 100 other people. I can honestly say that since I’ve 
concentrated on the painting full time, the last three years have been the most 
enjoyable of my life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Falan-parker-interview-film-lost-its-lustre-solace-in-art-bugsy-malone-commitments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8ebf62ac812e4c1574863fcbab2f87d51fc9f6f%2F0_0_5540_3466%2F5540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Film-making%20lost%20its%20lustre%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20Alan%20Parker%20found%20solace%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Falan-parker-interview-film-lost-its-lustre-solace-in-art-bugsy-malone-commitments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Film-making%20lost%20its%20lustre%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20Alan%20Parker%20found%20solace%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Falan-parker-interview-film-lost-its-lustre-solace-in-art-bugsy-malone-commitments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8ebf62ac812e4c1574863fcbab2f87d51fc9f6f%2F0_0_5540_3466%2F5540.jpg>
 Art by Alan Parker Photograph: Courtesy of Alan Parker 
He describes his work as “poor man’s [Robert] Rauschenberg, mixed with a 
little [Edward] Ruscha and [Barbara] Kruger, with a touch of [Kurt] 
Schwitters”. The art world, and no doubt a fair few fans of his films, will get 
the chance to make up their own minds. The exhibition is planned for later this 
year.

Clearly considering himself well out of it, Parker is disarmingly frank when 
it comes to the downsides of the film career that eventually wore him down. He 
had simply had enough of holding out the begging bowls to over-powerful and 
interfering studio executives.

Great movies were made on celluloid film, when the studio executives didn’t 
interfere, frankly, because they couldn’t

“I found the whole process of raising the money for a film debilitating,” he 
says. “Whenever I go to the cash machine outside my local Tesco’s, I see this 
guy who sits there nursing his dog in his lap, with his hand outstretched. I 
suddenly thought, that’s me – except, instead of a dog in my lap, I have my 
script. And there I am in the office of some studio executive where I offer up 
my hand to beg for the money.”

Unhelpful and unsolicited advice from studios also became a major bugbear. 
“Their notes on the script can turn great writing into a pedestrian movie,” he 
says.

“Many film scripts could do with a rewrite. But many more scripts are 
overwritten, with too many drafts and too many fingerprints on them. That’s the 
kiss of death for original film-making.”

During his career, Parker was not averse to a certain level of compromise. 
Unlike contemporaries such as Ken Loach, he took the plunge into Hollywood. But 
there too, disenchantment set in. “The only politics that matters in LA is 
green and in the shape of a dollar,” he says. “Serious films of some scale – 
the area where I worked – are rarer and rarer. I had led a charmed life for 
many decades. I made personal films in a European way and sensibility, but 
beneath the disciplines of the Hollywood umbrella. Mostly, I got my way because 
of strength of will and a built-in combativeness. To be fair to the studios, 
they were also encouraging of the work.

“But times changed and making serious films of some scale became less 
fashionable and more difficult to get made as cutting-edge drama migrated to TV 
and other platforms.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Falan-parker-interview-film-lost-its-lustre-solace-in-art-bugsy-malone-commitments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F912e991016e83491bd74337eff292f2f69c9044f%2F0_0_2609_1566%2F2609.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Film-making%20lost%20its%20lustre%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20Alan%20Parker%20found%20solace%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Falan-parker-interview-film-lost-its-lustre-solace-in-art-bugsy-malone-commitments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Film-making%20lost%20its%20lustre%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20Alan%20Parker%20found%20solace%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Falan-parker-interview-film-lost-its-lustre-solace-in-art-bugsy-malone-commitments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F912e991016e83491bd74337eff292f2f69c9044f%2F0_0_2609_1566%2F2609.jpg>
 Gene Hackman and Willem Dafoe in the 1988 film Mississippi Burning. 
Photograph: ORION/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
In the digital age, film-making has become a still more pressured profession, 
he believes, as directorial autonomy is further eroded.

“The new technologies, with a director’s work instantly appearing on Hollywood 
desks as it gets shot, inevitably led to more interference.

“We have gone through the era of the producer, the director, and now we are in 
the era of the studio executive. None of which bodes well if you’ve always had 
complete control of your work.”

The problem is that digital film- making allows the studio executives to see 
the rushes before even the film-makers: “[They] are ready with their notes the 
moment the director leaves the set. Compare that toMidnight Express, where we 
shot for six weeks before the studio ever saw a foot of film. By then, the 
train had left the station and there was nothing they could do about it.

“Great movies were made on celluloid film, when the studio executives didn’t 
interfere, frankly, because they couldn’t: the process was too cumbersome. The 
convenience of digital editing now allows the studios and producers to more 
often assemble their own cuts, ignoring completely the director’s intentions.”

There is one major regret: “My biggest disappointment was not getting Willy 
Russell’sBlood Brothers off the ground. It had run on stage in the West End for 
a couple of decades and was Willy’s masterpiece in my opinion. The two of us 
worked on the script for over a year and it was one of the best things I ever 
did.

“Willy and I did the usual tap dancing for the US producers, but they didn’t 
see how beautiful a film it could have been.”

SCREEN HITS

Bugsy Malone

A 1976 musical starring child actors, the film is set in New York City during 
prohibition and is based loosely on the lives of Al Capone and Bugs Moran.

Midnight Express

The 1978 film follows a young American student imprisoned in Turkey after 
being caught smuggling drugs. It depicts appalling prison conditions and 
brutality. The film won two Oscars and became a cult classic, but was 
criticised for its negative portrayal of Turkey.

Shoot the Moon

A bittersweet comedy about a marriage in trouble. Released in 1982, it was 
written by the Oscar-winning Bo Goldman, best known for One Flew Over the 
Cuckoo’s Nest and Melvin and Howard.

Birdy

The 1984 film, based on the William Wharton novel, tells the story of two 
teenage boys living in working-class Philadelphia in the 1960s and who fought 
in the Vietnam war.

Angel Heart

A psychological horror film released in 1987, it stars Mickey Rourke and 
Robert De Niro and tells the story of a New York private investigator hired to 
solve a disappearance of a man known as Johnny Favorite.

The Commitments

Released in 1991, the musical comedy-drama is an adaptation of Roddy Doyle’s 
1987 novel of the same name. A young, working-class music fan assembles an 
unlikely bunch of amateur musicians to form a soul band. The film won an 
Academy award and four Baftas.
 