
The European Investment Bank (EIB), the money-lending arm of the EU, is to 
launch a new gender strategy to increase women’s participation in global 
economies.

From 1 January the bank will implement new rules designed to ensure its 
lending will help women and men equally, following growing evidence of the 
economic advantages of female equality.

According to the bank, up to $12tn could be added to global GDP by 2025 by 
advancing women’s equality 
<http://www.eib.org/infocentre/videotheque/gender-in-everything-we-do.htm>. It 
says the public, private, and social sectors need to act to close gender gaps 
in work and society, and acknowledges that it, along with other multilateral 
development bank, has a seminal role to play in making this happen.

Eleni Kyrou, senior social development specialist at the EIB, said the bank 
wanted to be “gender aware and gender sensitive”, so that its investments 
benefit women and men equally. “We are saying let’s have the gender lens, be 
aware of gender structural dynamics on the ground and really try to invest 
cognisant of this,” she said.

Young, female and determined: how millennial social entrepreneurs are changing 
the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/20/young-female-and-determined-how-millennial-social-entrepreneurs-are-changing-the-world>
 For example, she added, in societies where the landowner is the male head of 
the household but those working on the land are mainly women, and there is 
damage to that land, without a gender lens, compensation is likely to go to the 
male title owner, but the actual income loss would probably be felt by women. 
“We wanted to flesh out the gender dimension in our sustainability framework 
and make that more robust and responsive to gender inequality,” she said.

The EIB has already loaned money to organisations such as Jordan’s Microfund 
for Women <http://www.eib.org/infocentre/blog/all/womens-microfinance.htm>, 
which helps women start their own businesses. Seventy per cent of those who 
live in poverty in the country are women, and they are often refused bank 
loans, according to the EIB, which lent €2m to the Jordan Microfund in 2014.

Investments aren't gender-neutral when female entrepreneurs face a $320bn 
credit gap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/17/women-entrepreneurs-gender-investment-root-capital-ifc-world-bank>
EIB president Werner Hoyer said involving women in business leads to faster 
economic growth. “There is abundant evidence to show that gender equality and 
the economic empowerment of women leads to faster economic development, 
increased competitiveness and more prosperous communities,” he said. “That in 
turn helps to create more efficient and effective businesses, better management 
of our natural resources and overall more socially cohesive and stable 
societies.”

The strategy will run until 2021 and the EIB plans to set targets as part of a 
gender action plan towards the end of summer 2017.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 