
Back in 1980, a Chilean bank ran a TV advert in which a man cycles across 
Santiago to meet his sweetheart. As he wobbles through the traffic, a bouquet 
of flowers in his hand, motorists, builders and school kids ridicule him. 
“Cómprate un auto, perico!” they shout – “Get yourself a car, mate!”

The hapless cyclist reaches his lover’s house and hands her the bouquet. She 
gazes adoringly into his eyes. But then she sees his bike. “Get yourself a car, 
mate!” she scolds him. As the ad ends, she hauls him off to the bank to take 
out a loan.


The advert was a big hit in Chile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> 
and its message was clear: bikes are for losers. If you wanna get a girl, get a 
car.

 One generation later, and Chileans seem to have heeded the bank’s advice. 
Greater Santiago is home to 7 million people and over 4 million vehicles, and 
the numbers are growing. Chile has prospered in recent years and as people have 
got richer they’ve invested in cars.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DflVb5LehWHk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DflVb5LehWHk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DflVb5LehWHk&media=>
 ‘Get yourself a car, mate!’. Banco de Santiago’s advert from 1980. 
But the lover on his bike is hitting back. As the traffic jams grow longer and 
parking becomes harder, frustrated Santiaguinos are looking for better ways to 
get around their city. The bicycle is enjoying a renaissance.

 As it does, Santiago is changing. Traditionally the city has been notoriously 
segregated along class lines – a legacy in part of thePinochet dictatorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet>. The rich live in the plush 
eastern neighbourhoods, in the shadow of the Andes, while the poor inhabit the 
lower suburbs to the south and west, where the smog is thicker and life is 
harder. Social mobility is low, and people from these two worlds seldom come 
into meaningful contact. But, anecdotally at least, there is some evidence that 
this is changing and that cycling, in its own small way, is playing a part. 
People are pedalling from one neighbourhood to another like never before. They 
are exploring previously unknown worlds. The city’s formidable social barriers 
are slowly being dismantled.

The bicycle is enjoying a renaissance. As it does, Santiago is changing

Let’s be clear from the outset: this is not Amsterdam or Copenhagen. Cycle 
lanes are the exception, not the norm. Motorists still view cyclists with 
suspicion. Saddle up and pedal into Santiago’s rush hour traffic and you’re 
taking your life into your hands.

 But given what it was like a decade ago, when I first arrived in this city, 
Santiago has made progress. The number of cyclists on major routes has risen by 
15-25% a year, says Lake Sagaris, a professor of transport engineering at the 
city’s Catholic University. In 2006, cycling accounted for 3% of journeys. 
These days it’s around 6% – higher than in London or Dublin. “A doubling of 
modal share in a decade!” Sagaris says. “Very few places in the world can match 
that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fcycling-challenging-santiago-chile-social-barriers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20c9d7177e9922f750f96e48d566046a0299d5a3%2F0_0_4853_2912%2F4853.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Get%20yourself%20a%20bike%2C%20perico!'%3A%20how%20cycling%20is%20challenging%20Santiago's%20social%20barriers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fcycling-challenging-santiago-chile-social-barriers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Get%20yourself%20a%20bike%2C%20perico%21%27%3A%20how%20cycling%20is%20challenging%20Santiago%27s%20social%20barriers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fcycling-challenging-santiago-chile-social-barriers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20c9d7177e9922f750f96e48d566046a0299d5a3%2F0_0_4853_2912%2F4853.jpg>
 Around 30,000 people take to Santiago’s car-free roads on Sundays as part of 
an initiative by CicloRecreoVia to encourage cycling. Photograph: CicloRecreoVia
Santiago’s two-wheeled revolution can be traced back to the 1990s when a 
handful of cyclists, inspired by the Critical Mass movement, formed the 
Movimiento de Furiosos Ciclistas (the Movement of Furious Cyclists). They lived 
up to their name, jumping red lights and antagonising motorists with their 
disruptive monthly cycle rides. Forcefully, confrontationally, they pushed 
cycling up the political agenda.


But things have evolved since then. “You can only stage Critical Mass-style 
rides for so long,” says Amarilis Horta, director of cycling campaign group 
Bicicultura. “Once they get to a certain size they become counter-productive. 
They just annoy motorists.”

 The Furiosos also alienated some women, who felt the movement was dominated 
by young male urban warriors with too much attitude. In a bid to encourage 
girls and women to take up cycling, a group of women formed Macleta (Women on 
Bikes) in 2006. Sagaris estimates that 30% of cyclists in Santiago are now 
women, up from 10% a decade ago.

 Then came 2007, a breakthrough year. In February, the government launched 
Transantiago <http://www.transantiago.cl/>, a complete overhaul of the public 
transport system. Initially chaotic, it eventually brought order to the city’s 
bus routes, making roads safer for cyclists.

In the same year, the Dutch came to town. Interface for Cycling Expertise 
<http://www.i-ce.nl/> (I-CE), a Dutch-based NGO, arrived in Santiago to advise 
the regional government on how to promote intelligent urban cycling. They 
taught the Chileans how to design top-notch cycle paths and bike racks, and how 
to install parking facilities for bikes at metro stations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fcycling-challenging-santiago-chile-social-barriers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bfb7acf437577f21fd70d69bfce9fb012797443%2F0_195_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Get%20yourself%20a%20bike%2C%20perico!'%3A%20how%20cycling%20is%20challenging%20Santiago's%20social%20barriers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fcycling-challenging-santiago-chile-social-barriers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Get%20yourself%20a%20bike%2C%20perico%21%27%3A%20how%20cycling%20is%20challenging%20Santiago%27s%20social%20barriers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fcycling-challenging-santiago-chile-social-barriers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bfb7acf437577f21fd70d69bfce9fb012797443%2F0_195_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Transport professor Lake Sagaris says the bottom-up approach of cycling groups 
was unusual for Chile. Photograph: Kirsten Kortebein 
Crucially, I-CE worked in partnership with Living City (Ciudad Viva) 
<http://www.ciudadviva.cl/>, a Chilean NGO. That ensured that Santiaguinos had 
a proper say in the urban planning process. Living City staged neighbourhood 
workshops, gleaning knowledge from cyclists about local danger spots on roads 
and at junctions. They fed this information into the Department of Transport’s 
plans for the city.

Sagaris says this bottom-up approach was unusual for Chile, where 17 years of 
military rule instilled a top-down approach to pretty much everything. “Even 
the memory of simple skills, such as how to chair a meeting, deliberate, or 
make collective decisions was erased during the dictatorship and replaced by a 
profound terror of participation, debate and critique,” she says. That is 
changing, thanks in part to the efforts of community groups like Living City.

Sagaris estimates that 30% of cyclists in Santiago are now women, up from 10% 
a decade ago

At around this time, Chilean Gonzalo Stierling and his Colombian wife Lina 
Zuluaga launchedCicloRecreoVía <http://www.ciclorecreovia.cl/>, an initiative 
to get people cycling on Sunday mornings. They took the idea from Lina’s home 
country. “For years in Bogotá, they’ve closed some roads to cars every Sunday 
morning,” Stierling says. “I saw how it worked in Bogotá and I wanted to try 
the same thing in Santiago.” Despite a battle for funding, CicloRecreoVía has 
continued to grow. On Sunday mornings cars are banned from 40 kilometres of 
Santiago’s roads. Around 30,000 people take to those vehicle-free streets on 
bikes, skateboards, rollerskates or simply on foot.

The other big pull for Santiago’s weekend cyclists is the Parque Metropolitano 
– the city’s answer to Central Park. Twice the size of its New York 
counterpart, the Parque is a gigantic green finger of mountain that reaches 
down into the city from the Andes. Head there on a weekend and it is packed 
with lycra-clad cyclists, winding up and down its paved roads or charging 
through woodlands on mountain bikes. Gonzalo García, the head of the park’s 
technical division, says the number of people using it has jumped 20% since 
2010.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fcycling-challenging-santiago-chile-social-barriers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63f3392f927da8a84da4494204ddeaf462b866ed%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Get%20yourself%20a%20bike%2C%20perico!'%3A%20how%20cycling%20is%20challenging%20Santiago's%20social%20barriers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fcycling-challenging-santiago-chile-social-barriers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Get%20yourself%20a%20bike%2C%20perico%21%27%3A%20how%20cycling%20is%20challenging%20Santiago%27s%20social%20barriers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fcycling-challenging-santiago-chile-social-barriers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63f3392f927da8a84da4494204ddeaf462b866ed%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Cycling is aiding greater social mobility in Santiago, a city with significant 
class divides. Photograph: Kirsten Kortebein 
 Santiago also has a bike-share scheme, similar to London’s Boris bikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jul/26/day-in-life-boris-bike>. 
It started in Providencia, a relatively wealthy district, and in just a few 
years has spread to 14 of the city’s 32 municipalities.

 At Bicicultura <http://www.bicicultura.cl/>, Amarilis Horta says parliament 
is likely to approve a new Transport Law this year. It will give cyclists more 
rights, greater protection and will cut the speed limit in urban areas from 
60km/h to 50. Thanks to Bicicultura’s campaigns, most new buildings in Santiago 
are now required by law to provide bike racks. Bicicultura is also working on a 
smart phone app to show cyclists the safest and quickest routes across the city.

 These initiatives have clearly made Santiago more cycle-friendly but 
anecdotal evidence suggests they have gone further, by helping to bring 
Chileans together. Gonzalo García recalls organising a cycling trip to the 
Parque Metropolitano for children from La Legua, one of the city’s poorest 
areas. “They lived just a few kilometres away and had never been to the park,” 
he says. Later, he and a group of cyclists made the return trip to La Legua. 
“It’s a rough area but we went with the best possible bodyguards – the kids 
themselves,” he says. “Even the drug traffickers came out to applaud us.”

At CicloRecreoVía, Gonzalo Stierling did some research of his own into the 
social mix of his Sunday cyclists. One morning, he stopped cyclists on Avenida 
Andrés Bello, a long avenue running from central Santiago through Providencia, 
and asked them where they lived. Nearly half were from Providencia and Santiago 
Centro, as one might expect. A further 14% were from Ñuñoa, a middle-class 
district just south of Providencia. “But there were also people from other 
neighbourhoods, some of whom had travelled a long way to be there,” he recalls. 
“There was a good social mix.” In a city like Santiago, where class divisions 
run deep, that can only be positive.


Viva la revolución: Mexico City cyclists fight for the right to ride in safety
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/11/viva-la-revolucion-mexico-city-cyclists-fight-right-safety>
There’s also a great age mix on those Sunday morning rides. You frequently see 
kids wobbling along on tiny bikes with stabilisers, alongside their 
grandparents – often seasoned cyclists. Sagaris says many people who had never 
sat on a bike before have been drawn to cycling through local activism. For 
example, back in the 1990s, more than 20 organisations came together to oppose 
a plan to build a highway through northern Santiago. Many of them had nothing 
to do with cycling – they were associations of neighbours or shopkeepers who 
were worried about their livelihoods and their streets. But the campaign 
brought them into contact with cycling groups for the first time and kindled 
their interest in the bike as a mode of transport. Some have never looked back 
and are now keen cyclists.


 Geographically and climatically, Santiago is kind to those on bikes. The city 
is backed by some of the highest mountains in the world but is surprisingly and 
mercifully flat, rising from an altitude of 475 metres in the west to around 
700 metres in well-heeled Las Condes and Vitacura. Only in the eastern 
extremes, where the city extends its tentacles into the foothills of the Andes, 
does the going get tough. It is a dry city too, with around 280mm of rainfall a 
year – less than half of London’s total. For a third of the year between 
November and February it hardly rains a drop.

 Santiago is by no means a cycling Mecca. It cannot compare with the 
bike-friendly towns of northern Europe. But it has come a long way since the 
1980s and that anachronistic TV ad. These days, it’s the cyclist who is likely 
to have the last laugh. As you pedal past cars, stuck in heavy traffic, it’s 
tempting to think of the poor lover with his bouquet of flowers, and to shout 
out to the motorists: “Cómprate una bici, perico!” – “Get yourself a bike, 
mate!”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 