
Vera Watson’s one-bedroom apartment in Washington DC’s Chinatown is bursting 
with memories: family photos, graduation pictures and objects of all kinds 
celebrating the Redskins, the capital city’s football team. “There’s nothing 
like living in your home,” the 60-year-old retired security agent declares 
softly.

Watson has been living in the same 302-unit low-income building named Museum 
Square for over three decades. She says she has brought up a daughter, nieces, 
nephews, and grandchildren here. A discreet woman with clear underlying 
strength and wit, she charmingly apologizes for not putting her teeth in for 
our meeting, before continuing.

The gentrification of Washington DC: how my city changed its colours
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/12/gentrification-washington-dc-how-my-city-changed-colours>
“I just love it. I am going to be here until they take me out.” 

It is unclear whether Watson is joking about being dragged out feet first – 
insinuating she will be here until she dies – or referring to being forced out 
through other means. Perhaps she doesn’t quite know, either; the question has 
been on her mind a lot the last three years.

First, her landlord, Bush Companies, stopped accepting Section 8 vouchers 
<https://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/topics/housing_choice_voucher_program_section_8>
 – a change in policy that was resolved by tenants securing other forms of 
government-issued subsidies.

Next, her landlord informed residents of its intention to demolish the entire 
structure and build a far more luxurious building in its stead. Watson and her 
neighbors were being kicked out. (Bush Companies were contacted for interview 
and comment on this article but did not respond.)

But Watson, who now heads her building’s tenants’ association, hasn’t gone 
anywhere; and, thanks to the use of a 1980 Tenants Opportunity to Purchase Act 
(shortened as TOPA), part of the RentalHousing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> Conversion and Sale Act, she is 
fighting back.

When she first realized her landlord no longer wanted to rent to her 
community, which is three-quarters Chinese and a quarter African American, 
despair struck.

“I thought: why are they doing this to us low-income people? Where are we 
going to go from here? Look at how many people you’ve got out here who are 
homeless. You going to add to that?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35f592afce73a2d15c8fc8c6681fb145afda050d%2F0_366_5496_3298%2F5496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Here%20until%20they%20take%20me%20out'%3A%20DC%20tenants%20use%20the%20law%20to%20fight%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Here%20until%20they%20take%20me%20out%27%3A%20DC%20tenants%20use%20the%20law%20to%20fight%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35f592afce73a2d15c8fc8c6681fb145afda050d%2F0_366_5496_3298%2F5496.jpg>
 Washington DC’s Chinatown Pagoda. Photograph: The Guardian 
At an accelerated pace over the last 15 years, new residents have been slowly 
gentrifying Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/12/gentrification-washington-dc-how-my-city-changed-colours>
. They are legions of wealthier, mostly white workers who are increasingly 
choosing DC, not its suburbs, as their home.


On the streets surrounding low-income Museum Square, residents have been 
thrilled to see cafes and supermarkets pop up within walking distance.

“We saw the neighborhood at its worst. Now that it’s at its best, we want to 
keep being in our community,” Watson says. Thanks to TOPA, luck, and the law, 
may well be on her side.

Once broken down in simplified terms, the TOPA process is remarkably 
straightforward. Building owners wanting to sell tenant-occupied buildings in 
the district are required by law to inform their tenants and give them the 
right to buy their building at market rate – under what is legally referred to 
as a bona fide offer – before anyone else.

If tenants cannot afford to pool their own money together and fully buy the 
building themselves – a reality in most cases – there are other steps that can 
be taken for a successful outcome.

Organized under a tenants’ association, renters will then tend to contact 
third party developers (of the not-for-profit or for-profit kind), explains 
Carolyn Gallaher, a professor of political geography at American University who 
wrote a book on the subject.

Eventually, the tenants’ association, having bargained with different 
potential new developers (and often played them against each other) and struck 
a deal to their liking, will cede their right to buy to this third party 
developer, who will then buy the building off the original landlord on their 
behalf.

Tenants can then decide to convert to a co-op or a condo, or remain renters, 
Gallaher says. “The cool thing about TOPA is its a right-to-buy program that 
doesn’t look likeMargaret Thatcher’s right to buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/dec/07/housing-right-to-buy-margaret-thatcher-data>
. You don’t have to actually buy your unit. The tenants’ association is buying 
the building, and then they get to decide what they want to do with it.”

In other cases still, tenants may have agreed to a future buyout. And as much 
as this may sound like a negative outcome to anti-displacement advocates, the 
reality is the buyout they will have negotiated will be more likely to be large.

“It may be that everyone gets $100,000 and then they leave; they’re certainly 
not going to leave with $10,000. But without TOPA, without that process, they 
wouldn’t have any leverage here,” Gallaher says.

This is where the law’s architecture starts to pose practical questions, as 
well as philosophical and ethical ones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb815cebca367a12a26c718bd620d1c46acdff40b%2F0_0_3542_5313%2F3542.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Here%20until%20they%20take%20me%20out'%3A%20DC%20tenants%20use%20the%20law%20to%20fight%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Here%20until%20they%20take%20me%20out%27%3A%20DC%20tenants%20use%20the%20law%20to%20fight%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb815cebca367a12a26c718bd620d1c46acdff40b%2F0_0_3542_5313%2F3542.jpg>
 Watson is optimistic. ‘We will win,’ she says. Photograph: Zach Gibson for the 
Guardian 
In terms of housing, it empowers tenants within the marketplace and gives them 
a leg up to meet the market on its own level, rather than creating standalone, 
robust laws requiring the market to drastically adjust downwards – or across.

“It’s a market solution, used for non-market ends,” Gallaher puts it.

In a study of seven buildings where renters used TOPA as a tool to stay put 
after 2000, Gallaher found that an average of half of the units remained 
occupied by the same tenants. This translates into an estimated 1,527 people 
being able to keep their homes – in her small sample alone.

The tenant-geared law may not be perfect in all its outcomes, but still, it is 
a twist in the usual gentrification rhetoric, which is often described as an 
unstoppable and sometimes even “natural” force – however tragic, or even wrong.

So far, the Watson-headed tenants’ association of Museum Square is half way 
through the TOPA process. Seizing on their right to buy first, Watson and 
fellow tenants have managed to stay put by claiming the number ($250m) issued 
by their landlord as a sale price did not constitute a bona fide offer – 
meaning it did not represent the building’s current market value (the number 
instead reflected the estimated value of the luxury building that would have 
been built in its stead).

Both times they have gone to court in the last two years, they have had 
rulings in their favor.

Even if they are only halfway through using the TOPA process, it is not 
insignificant that technical elements of the law have already meant that 
tenants have been able to stay put at least two years into their landlord 
wanting them out, even if a little over a quarter of the units have been 
vacated, says Caroline Hennessy, a tenant services specialist with Housing 
Counseling Services who has been working with Museum Square residents.

If we do not fight for our rights, nobody else will
Jenny Tang 
Jenny Tang, a 45-year-old Chinese resident of the building, says that those 
neighbors of hers who have decided to leave over the last three years did so 
after responding to explicit encouragement by their landlord. The landlord 
especially targeted non-English speaking and elderly residents, she says, who 
felt particularly vulnerable, despite the law – including language access laws 
– being on their side.

“People from the landlord’s office, they come knocking on doors. They tell 
people they have to get out. They make people frightened.”

Tang, who speaks fluent English as well as Cantonese and Mandarin, is able to 
help with translation and has tried to act as a coordinator between 
English-speaking and Chinese non-English-speaking residents.

She says she is frightened too, but knows to show a figure of strength when 
she is out and about. If she shows fear, or weakness, she worries more will 
cave and leave.

Inside her one-bedroom apartment, which she shares with her two daughters, 
Jessica and Jasmine Lin, 13 and 11 respectively, Tang, who works in a fast-food 
establishment and emigrated to the US as a young adult amid duress, cannot 
suppress tears.

This is her home, she says, filled with memories. It is what they have. If she 
and her daughters are kicked out, they will have nowhere to go, and will 
probably have to move across the country to be with her brother who lives in 
Ohio. Apart from the fact that she does not want to move from the city, she 
does not want to be dependent on someone else. She worries about losing her 
autonomy.

As her daughters diligently sit on the floor doing their homework, Tang says 
that as Chinese Americans, it is imperative that they stand up for themselves.

“If we do not fight for our rights, nobody else will.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e68dd20454bf1dedfa1900f7226c88a7fb5619f%2F0_113_5422_3470%2F5422.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Here%20until%20they%20take%20me%20out'%3A%20DC%20tenants%20use%20the%20law%20to%20fight%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Here%20until%20they%20take%20me%20out%27%3A%20DC%20tenants%20use%20the%20law%20to%20fight%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e68dd20454bf1dedfa1900f7226c88a7fb5619f%2F0_113_5422_3470%2F5422.jpg>
 Stores display Chinese characters in Washington, DC. Photograph: Zach Gibson 
for the Guardian 
The couple of hundred Museum Square Chinese residents are among the last 
Chinese residents in Washington DC’s Chinatown, Hennessy, the tenants’ rights 
advocate, confirms. With the last Chinese grocery store closing in 2005, and 
the influx of luxury developments that have attracted a much whiter, 
higher-income crowd, the neighborhood’s name is increasingly misleading.


Yi Chen, a documentary film-maker who made a film on the slow disappearance of 
Chinese people and cultural elements in DC’s Chinatown, points out that 
Chinatowns popped up across the US after the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act as 
places Chinese people in the US could feel safe and create community.

“The segregation of Chinatown is a direct outcome of Chinese exclusion,” 
confirms Min Zhou, a professor of sociology at the University of California, 
Los Angeles (UCLA). “Chinatown originally formed to provide a place where 
Chinese immigrants find support from their country fellows in a foreign 
environment. During the Chinese exclusion era, the community served and later 
developed as a safe haven for the excluded Chinese.”

The Chinese Exclusion Act marked the first time in American history that an 
entire ethnic group was barred from entering the country. The official Chinese 
labor entering the country only came to an end 60 years after the law’s first 
introduction with the Magnuson Act in 1943.

Tang says this was the first place she came to in the US where she was really 
able to make friends. But when asked about how she feels about Chinatown, 
Tang’s oldest daughter, Jessica, who is 13, shrugs. “It is not Chinatown 
anymore – they have Chinese signs up but they don’t have Chinese people in the 
shops. It doesn’t mean anything.”

Beyond caring about people’s living situation, the elephant in the room when 
it comes to Museum Square is what happens when the last Chinese residents of 
Chinatown exit.

Zhou, the UCLA professor, does not mince her words. 

“A Chinatown without Chinese people living in it would not be called Chinatown 
as it loses the basis for the ethnic community,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef9eed2d109acf7b3b3f12aedc9ef6dbea323d9e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Here%20until%20they%20take%20me%20out'%3A%20DC%20tenants%20use%20the%20law%20to%20fight%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Here%20until%20they%20take%20me%20out%27%3A%20DC%20tenants%20use%20the%20law%20to%20fight%20gentrification&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fgentrification-washington-dc-housing-topa-right-to-buy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef9eed2d109acf7b3b3f12aedc9ef6dbea323d9e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The Museum Square apartment building. Photograph: The Guardian 
Last month, Donald Trump declared he was nominating his former Republican 
presidential rival Ben Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/ben-carson-housing-secretary-nomination-trump-administration>
 to lead the Department of Housing and Urban Development. Carson, a retired 
neurosurgeon, will be in charge of the annual $50bn budget of the department, 
which oversees the country’s affordable housing programs.

In an op-ed penned 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2015/jul/23/ben-carson-obamas-housing-rules-try-to-accomplish-/>
 in the conservative daily the Washington Times last year, Carson denounced 
“government-engineered attempts to legislate racial equality” in cases of 
housing and de facto housing segregation, making what appears to be a clear 
argument against government intervention, especially as it pertains to 
integration of minorities. In an accompanying statement, Trump referred to his 
own “urban renewal agenda” and his “message of economic revival, very much 
including our inner cities”.

LA's black enclave buffeted by police pressure and tech-driven gentrification
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/venice-gentrification-oakwood-african-american-california>
For many scholars and activists, the term “urban renewal” is a worrying one, 
carrying historically proven racial connotations. In an interview conducted in 
1963 describing an oddly similar case to Watson’s, involving a young black man 
losing his home as his building was being destroyed to make place for a better 
one, the American writer James Baldwin referred to “urban renewal” as nothing 
more than “negro removal”.

Beyond the immediate fear for her lodging, Watson keeps on going back to the 
fact that the threat of being removed at this moment in time feels uniquely 
unfair.

“The city has improved a lot the past years,” Watson says. “It’s more 
expensive, but we want to continue being a part of it.”

In her book on the subject, named the Politics of Staying Put 
<http://www.temple.edu/tempress/titles/2369_reg.html>, Gallaher points out that 
long-term disinvestment in cities creates the potential for lucrative 
re-investment further down the line, but at the expense of those who stayed put 
and suffered disinvestment the first time round.

Watson says she has the local businesses, including the cool, new ones, on her 
side.

“The business people, they say that too. We don’t see why you can’t be here, 
they tell us. You were here before us – you should stay.”
 