
A “horrible spike” in hate crime after Britain’s vote to leave the European 
Union was at least partly linked to the referendum, Britain’s most senior 
police officer has said.

Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, the Metropolitan police commissioner, told a hearing 
at London’s City Hall that hate crime was showing signs of decreasing after a 
sharp rise in June and July, but it had still not returned to pre-referendum 
levels.

Monitoring presented at the hearing by the London mayor’s evidence and insight 
team showed a 16% increase in hate crime in the 12 months to August. It also 
showed that in the 38 days after the referendum there were more than 2,300 
recorded race-hate offences in London, compared with 1,400 in the 38 days 
before the vote.

Hogan-Howe expressed alarm about the figures. “We saw this horrible spike 
after Brexit,” he said. He revealed there was a connection between the 
referendum and many of the incidents and pointed out that many of the victims 
were eastern Europeans.

Hogan-Howe said: “We couldn’t say it was absolutely down to Brexit, although 
there was obviously a spike after it. Some of them were attributed to it 
because of what was said at the time. We could attribute that, and eastern 
Europeans were particularly targeted within the race-hate crime [category]. So 
there certainly was a spike related to it.

“We have fortunately seen it start to come back down, but I’m not sure we can 
say yet it is back to previous levels.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fhate-crime-horrible-spike-brexit-vote-metropolitan-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fbe63ea318470b41243ad634aa7b831f95d98ae%2F0_138_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Horrible%20spike'%20in%20hate%20crime%20linked%20to%20Brexit%20vote%2C%20Met%20police%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fhate-crime-horrible-spike-brexit-vote-metropolitan-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Horrible%20spike%27%20in%20hate%20crime%20linked%20to%20Brexit%20vote%2C%20Met%20police%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fhate-crime-horrible-spike-brexit-vote-metropolitan-police%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fbe63ea318470b41243ad634aa7b831f95d98ae%2F0_138_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, Metropolitan police commissioner: ‘We saw this 
horrible spike after Brexit.’ Photograph: Gareth Fuller/PA 
He added: “The absolute numbers are low, but we think it is massively 
under-reported [crime]. Sadly, people don’t tell us about the harassment and 
the abuse that we know will go on out there.”


Hogan-Howe pledged that more specialist officers dedicated to tackling hate 
crime would be deployed.

Sophie Linden, London’s deputy mayor for policing, who was hosting the 
hearing, said she was still getting daily reports about hate crime in the 
capital. “It is worrying that it does not appear to have gone back down to 
pre-referendum levels.”

Figures from the National Police Chiefs’ Council showed a 49% rise in hate 
crime incidents to 1,863 in the last week in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/hate-surged-after-eu-referendum-police-figures-show>
 in England, Wales and Northern Ireland compared with the previous year.

A survey by the Guardian found that European embassies in Britain have logged 
dozens of incidents of suspected hate crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/19/embassies-alleged-hate-crimes-since-brexit-vote>
 and abuse against their citizens since the referendum.

The vast majority of incidents involved citizens from eastern European 
countries, with more attacks against Poles than against all the other 
nationalities put together.

They include the killing of Arkadiusz Jóźwik in Harlow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/31/harlow-death-arkadiusz-jozwik-exposes-left-behind-town-where-residents-live-in-fear>
, in an apparently unprovoked attack that is being treated by police as a 
possible hate crime. Five 15-year-old boys and one 16-year-old boy, all from 
Harlow, werearrested on suspicion of murdering Jóźwik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/30/five-teenage-boys-arrested-after-man-dies-following-attack-in-essex>
 and bailed until 7 October pending further inquiries. A second Polish man 
survived the attack.
 