
Eugene Monroe has become the latest NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl>
 player to retire early citing fears over CTE, the degenerative brain disease 
found in athletes with a history of head trauma.

The 29-year-old was released by the Baltimore Ravens in June, a move he 
believes was linked tohis support of marijuana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/nfl-medical-marijuana-eugene-monroe-baltimore-ravens>
 as way of relieving pain for athletes. Until his release Monroe was widely 
acknowledged as a solid starting offensive tackle.Writing on the Players’ 
Tribune <http://www.theplayerstribune.com/eugene-monroe-nfl-retirement/>, 
Monroe painted a disturbing picture of symptoms he has displayed associated 
with CTE.

“My wife used to joke about the ‘little things I forget,’ but now she’s more 
concerned about things like me putting my phone in the freezer and then tearing 
up our house looking for it,” Monroe wrote. “Things like that were just a joke 
around the house until this past winter, when my four-year-old daughter said, 
‘Daddy you don’t remember anything!’ Since then, she’s said it a few more 
times.”

Monroe said he plans to consult with a doctor about his health but admits he 
has concerns for his future. “The last 18 years have been full of traumatic 
injuries to both my head and my body. I’m not complaining, just stating a fact. 
Has the damage to my brain already been done? Do I have CTE? I hope I don’t, 
but over 90% of the brains of former NFL players that have been examined showed 
signs of the disease. I am terrified.”

CTE can currently only be diagnosed after death. 

Monroe was the eighth overall pick for the Jacksonville Jaguars in the 2009 
draft. He joins a long list of NFL players who have retired in their prime this 
year: Pro Bowlers Marshawn Lynch and Jerod Mayo both left the league at the age 
of 29, while Calvin Johnson, one of the greatest wide receivers of all time,
decided to retire at 30 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/08/detroit-lions-receiver-calvin-johnson-retires-nfl>
, citing the toll the game has put on his body.
 