
‘I bunked off school to see him at the Royal Albert Hall’

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleonard-cohen-see-you-down-the-road-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leonard%20Cohen%3A%20see%20you%20down%20the%20road%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleonard-cohen-see-you-down-the-road-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leonard%20Cohen%3A%20see%20you%20down%20the%20road%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleonard-cohen-see-you-down-the-road-video-obituary&media=>
Leonard Cohen - video obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-see-you-down-the-road-video-obituary>
I stole money from my mother’s drawer, bunked off school, caught a train from 
South Wales to London, bought a ticket from a ticket tout outside the Royal 
Albert Hall for aLeonard Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonard-cohen>
 concert. I had a seat so near to the stage and a hard core group of the 
audience just stayed and stayed and Leonard just played and played for about 
100 of us. It was magical.

Leonard Cohen’s poetry, words, music, humour, his searing clarity about what 
it is to be human have all been constant companions throughout my life.


Pixcel, a social worker in the north of England having recently completed an 
MA in social work at the age of 59
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15550521> CroneRanger  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15550521> 11 November 2016 3:09am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87305937>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Closing Time for a haunting, luminous and often wryly funny poet and singer. I 
first became a fan in high school about 40+ years ago. My fondest memory was of 
him phoning my school after I had written a poem featuring him and my teacher 
had sent it to his publisher. Somehow they read it to him over the phone and he 
contacted me for a chat. A kind, human gesture.

In recent years, I was lucky to see him on his long 2008-2013 tour several 
times. What set him apart from so many others of his generation was that he 
actually got better over 60 with such brilliant songs as The Future and Almost 
Like the Blues; he didn't just churn out his back catalogue. Thank you and 
bless you, Leonard.

‘Listening to his music again I found the darkness she was at home with’

Another apple had fallen from our musical orchard, very sad news. When i was 
15-years-old my girlfriend sat me down and played me his music, i pretended to 
like what I heard as I imagined the reward. She dumped me. I tuned back in a 
few years later and found the darkness she was at home with. Thank you Diane 
Twigg.

mrdifford
 Leonard Cohen thanking the Berlin audience. Photograph: Greg 
Ross/GuardianWitness 
‘Leonard Cohen, the Jew who reclaimed Berlin’

The Nazis built Waldbuhne for the 1936 Olympics, modeled on the 3rd century BC 
Epidaurus theatre. Seating 25,000 people, Hitler’s box once stood in the middle 
section, but if ever proof was needed that our world has changed forever, it 
was when thousands and thousands of Germans, with tears in their eyes, sang 
First We Take Manhattan, and shouted and yelled along with Cohen the line: 
“Then we take Berlin!” The world’s favourite troubadour loved it, laughing and 
waiting for the crowd to sing the line with him.


Greg Ross 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58257996e4b0eb4ebf272d3d/5013117>
 Flowers outside Cohen’s house on the Greek island of Hydra, where he met 
Marianne and lived in the 1960s. Photograph: guardianUser3779450/GuardianWitness
‘He is the poet of my eternal youth’


I remember Leonard had a concert in Bucharest on his birthday. We all sang 
happy birthday to this humble and brilliant man and he would thank us, his 
friends. And as the sun was setting down, he reflected on our hard past and 
praised the freedom that made it possible for him to come to Romania.


I have been to many concerts, but I have never heard such thoughtful and 
meaningful words from a performing artist. We were all deeply impressed and 
felt more connected to him, as he understood the sorrows of our past and of our 
souls. Hat’s off, you will be remembered for ever and ever! He is the poet of 
my eternal youth.


Viorela, 37-year-old from Bucharest
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58257996e4b0eb4ebf272d3d/5013108> 
Laura hearing 'Take This Waltz' live for the first time  
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58257996e4b0eb4ebf272d3d/5013108>

We were lucky to see Leonard Cohen live at the 02 Arena in 2013. This photo 
captures the overwhelming effect Leonards music has on us; seeing him perform 
live was incredibly special. He made he arena an intimate space, Leonard and 
his band giving "everything we got". An unforgettable memory of an eternal 
legend.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Adam Patrick Boakes <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Adam Patrick 
Boakes> 

11 November 2016, 9:02 

‘I was so captivated I went to every night he played’

On his comeback tour his management weren’t sure that he had still had a 
public. So they held a series of gigs at Manchester Opera House. I had a ticket 
for the opening night but was so captivated I went to every night. The 
reception was superb and the ‘Great Tour’ began. Three hour shows, ecstatic 
crowds.


We drove to Croatia in 2013 and saw him in the beautiful setting of a Roman 
ampitheatre. He didn’t fail. The music transcended generations and brought 
people together, albeit briefly in dark times. He was a man who was gracious, 
tender, vulnerable and, contrary to popular myth, witty and warm.

Dave McMurrugh, a teacher in Sofia, Bulgaria 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fi-bunked-off-school-to-go-and-see-him-readers-tributes-to-leonard-cohen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8a7dfbbc4f9f8a0ba43b7060e3ef1b4b254c2b2%2F0_0_857_857%2F857.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20bunked%20off%20school%20to%20go%20and%20see%20him'%3A%20readers'%20tributes%20to%20Leonard%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fi-bunked-off-school-to-go-and-see-him-readers-tributes-to-leonard-cohen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20bunked%20off%20school%20to%20go%20and%20see%20him%27%3A%20readers%27%20tributes%20to%20Leonard%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fi-bunked-off-school-to-go-and-see-him-readers-tributes-to-leonard-cohen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8a7dfbbc4f9f8a0ba43b7060e3ef1b4b254c2b2%2F0_0_857_857%2F857.jpg>
‘I felt like I knew Cohen even though I’d never met him’


You get to know some people without seeing their faces even once. In fact, you 
know them better than people you’ve actually met, that you’ve shared a bottle 
of wine with, better than the people whose gestures and moves you know. Cohen, 
much like Gabriel Garcia Marquez, was one of those rare people to me.


I remember watching my mom drinking a glass of wine and smoking a cigarette by 
the window, listening to “So Long, Marianne”. She seemed very mysterious and 
sorrowful, it is one of my first memories of her. I was 5.


I remember discovering the old tapes at home while we were moving from 
Istanbul to another city. They were from the times that my dad, actually a 
journalist, had to sell tapes because he couldn’t find a job after the 1980 
coup. He had to make copies of Leonard Cohen tapes, that were hard to be found 
in Turkey at that time, and sold them. I remember listening to “Avalanche” for 
the first time from a very old tape, on which my dad had written “Songs of Love 
and Hate” with a pen. I was 8.

I remember watching him live for the first time ever in a historical 
amphitheatre in Istanbul. I remember feeling paralyzed the whole time, and 
being filled with admiration at his grace. I was 22.

And last, but not least at all, I remember very, very clearly the last gift he 
gave me before he left. I remember drinking the raki I brought there in a 
Nordic country, listening to his last and magnificent album with an amazing man 
who had suddenly sneaked into my life, and who was a Cohen fan as much as I 
was. I remember the magic of that night and how grateful we felt. I was 29.


Eylül Görmüş, 29-year-old founder and partner at Dem Teahouse 
<https://www.instagram.com/demistanbul/> in İstanbul, Turkey
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2651059> MiffledKitty  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2651059> 11 November 2016 7:10am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/87310183>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
I discovered Leonard Cohen at a time when I was very sad, despairing even, in 
my early 20s. People joke about how gloomy he can be, but when you are 
depressed, connecting to that powerful, intelligent voice who talks to you in a 
way that makes sense....it was very uplifting to feel less alone. I will miss 
him.

‘He was the constant in an ever changing world’


I was introduced to Leonard back in 1968 as a 15-year-old schoolboy by my 
chemistry teacher Keith Hender at the after school youth club, of the all the 
music played, his stopped me in my tracks. I may not have understood all of his 
words but I knew he had something important to tell.


Over the years I have stayed faithful, even managing to get to two of his 
concerts, one in Toronto and one at the O2 in London. His songs are the ones 
you always go back to, timeless and poignant. He has been a huge part of my 
musical life and shall always be number one. He was the soul one was searching 
for, the constant in an ever changing world. Rest in peace Leonard.

Jonathan Cox, retired Royal Navy Officer 
 