
Nuno Espírito Santo was in a terrible state, drunk. That, at least, is what 
his president thought, and exactly what Nuno wanted him to think. A young 
goalkeeper at Vitória Guimarães, he had been promised that if anyone came in 
with a $1m offer he could leave, and one day the Spanish club Deportivo La 
Coruña did just that – only for António Pimenta Machado to renege. “I thought: 
‘It’s done, perfect,’” Nuno says. “But I went in and he said: ‘Now it’s five 
[million].’ I thought: ‘This doesn’t make sense.’” Denied the chance to leave, 
he considered giving up. Which was when they hatched a plan.

Nuno’s agent messed up his apartment and told Pimenta Machado that the player 
was in a bad way. “It was an act,” Nuno recalls, pulling faces as he runs 
through his repertoire that day, 20 years ago, slumping back in his seat, 
mumbling and unresponsive. “So, the guy came to visit me, the president of 
Vitória, and my behaviour was … I was acting like I’d come off the streets. And 
he said: ‘Is he drunk?’ When he left, the president said: ‘Take him tomorrow.’” 
Nuno pauses then adds: “‘Take him tomorrow … and don’t let them do a test on 
him!’”

Claudio Ranieri: Danny Drinkwater deal will keep him at Leicester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/claudio-ranieri-danny-drinkwater-leicester-city>
The plan worked; the agent’s name was Jorge Mendes. “Jorge knew exactly what 
time [Augusto César] Lendoiro, the Depor president, left the club every 
evening,” Nuno says. “He would leave the office, go downstairs and walk to a 
restaurant 100 metres away. And Jorge would be there, walking side-by-side. He 
would drive two-and-a-half hours there from Portugal for 100 metres – but he 
knew those 100 metres were golden. Then he would drive two-and-a-half hours 
back to tell me.” Eventually Mendes got the $1m offer; what he didn’t expect 
was to have to persuade Vitória’s president twice.

In the end, Nuno got the move to Spain. It was the first deal Mendes ever did. 
Nuno met him when Mendes ran a video shop and a disco; now he is the world’s 
most powerful football agent. “He deserves it,” Nuno says. “People can’t 
imagine the hours this guy works. [His reputation] is unfair; they don’t know 
him.” Mendes’s most famous clients are Cristiano Ronaldo and José Mourinho; his 
first client is now the manager of Porto. On Tuesday night, he faces Leicester 
City in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>.

Nuno’s journey began on the island of Sao Tomé, and has already taken in 
Portugal, Spain, Greece and Russia. Scotland, too: as a coach, that’s where it 
all started. He is still only 42 and believes that one day it will end in 
England.

“It’s to do with the global vision I have: we’re so connected, [everything is] 
so fast now. Why not? The first thing I did everywhere was learn the language,” 
he says, speaking English with a quiet, almost gentle authority. “I think it 
also has to do with Portugal and with your family. My grandfather is African, 
my grandmother is from a small village in Portugal. He arrived on a boat – it 
was the first time they’d seen a black man. Maybe it starts there; we lived 
near the Spanish border and my sister and I travelled a lot with our parents.”

Nuno crossed the border in January 1997 to play for Deportivo, before going to 
Mérida and Osasuna, Dynamo Moscow and Porto. If “playing” is the right word, 
that is: at Deportivo he made four league appearances in five years. He went to 
Euro 2008 with Portugal, replacing Quim, but never won a cap. In his first 
spell atPorto <https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto>, he won the Uefa Cup 
and the Champions League with Mourinho, but did so from the bench.

That said, he did replace Vitor Baía late in the Intercontinental Cup final 
and go on to win on penalties. And he scored a penalty in one game. It was 
Mourinho’s idea. “It’s strange – I didn’t want it,” he recalls. No? “No. I just 
put the ball down and kick it so hard. Put it down, three steps and bang! It 
could go there, there, there …” he says, pointing around the room.” Instead, it 
went in. “The first thing I did when I scored was hug the other goalkeeper. 
‘I’m sorry. For you this is a big humiliation, so I’m sorry.’”

Besides, it all helped, even from there. Nuno watched, listened and learned, 
ideas forming. He took something from everyone. Emotional management from 
Mourinho, for example. “Mourinho really changed something,” Nuno says. “He 
said: ‘We’re going to win’ and we looked at him like: ‘How can this guy be so 
sure?’ It’s colossal what he did at Porto. When you achieve something like that 
it is in your memory forever. What I take from him is that belief that he could 
create something and show us that we were going to succeed, [even] fighting 
against giants.”

The truism says that goalkeepers don’t make good coaches, so what chance 
substitute goalkeepers? A good chance, he insists. “You see the game from the 
best place. All the analyses I do even now [as coach] are from a camera behind 
the goal. From the side, the perspective is different, you know the exact 
distances, but it’s not real,” he says, shifting his hands to signal a 
goalkeeper’s perspective. “But this gives you a real view of the game as 
players see it. A player never experiences the game from the side.”

“It may not be better but it is my view. I know spaces, distances, and I can 
judge better the decision-making of the players. I know why this player did not 
pass to you – because there was an obstacle in front. From the side [you can 
think]: ‘Why didn’t you pass it …?’ but the lines are different,” he says, 
laughing as he adds: “I also saw a lot of games from the bench. I watched 
games, I listened to my coaches, and I talked to my team-mates. ‘Hey, why is he 
taking off this guy?’”

As a coach, he must know that his players are doing the same to him. “Yeah,” 
Nuno smiles. “Or the other way round: I can turn to them and say: ‘Shut up, I 
know what I’m doing, OK?’”

The decision to coach took him to Scotland at the age of 36. He took his 
coaching badges with the Scottish Football Association.

“They did something I still use,” he recalls. “You know how every meeting 
starts at the SFA? With a video. The best 50 goals from the 1980s: John Barnes, 
Ian Rush … and for three or four minutes afterwards everyone is quiet because 
you get hypnotised. And it was day after day: the best saves, the best 
one-on-ones, the best shots. I thought: ‘This is brilliant.’

“I went to a meeting: ‘Shhh, do you mind?’ Normally a meeting starts and 
everyone is talking. This way, it was focused, quiet. And after the video …” 
Nuno clicks his fingers. “You start and everyone is listening. It’s like 
opening a window. These guys knew what they were doing. I met so many good 
people: Jim Fleeting, Donald Park, so many people. They were a big influence on 
me.”

None more so than Ian Cathro, the young, dynamic Scottish coach who was Nuno’s 
assistant at Rio Ave, where they were runners up in both Portuguese cups in 
2013-14, and at Valencia – where they reached the Champions League places in 
2014-15, before Nuno was sacked early in the following season, only for things 
to getfar worse under his replacements, Gary Neville  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-leaves-valencia-immediate-effect>
and then Pako Ayestarán.

Nuno has called Cathro a “genius”; now he is assistant to Rafa Benítez at 
Newcastle. “We will be connected forever,” Nuno says. “We built together. We 
were young, we started together, we did something nobody believed in. Now Rio 
Ave are in Europe. If I ever went to the Premier League he would be my first 
call, the first person I would tell. We have shared so much.”

And Nuno thinks that day will come, too. “[England] is the league that I enjoy 
most. I love watching the Premier League. One day I am going to coach there, I 
am sure of it. I love it, I want to be there. If it takes longer, I don’t know. 
If it takes less, maybe. But one day.” As Nuno talks through his ideas, the 
influences are clear, the impact of British football. “As a kid, Liverpool was 
big for us [in Portugal],” he says. “I watched all the Wembley cup finals. 
[Neville] Southall with the big belly, the goalie: ‘How can this guy stop … I 
can do that.’ [Bruce] Grobbelaar, too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fporto-leicester-champions-league-nuno-espirito-santo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81d82c1b9e341311aaf8a04a3edbe2d11360e9af%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20saw%20a%20lot%20from%20the%20bench%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20Porto%E2%80%99s%20reserve%20goalkeeper%20became%20manager&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fporto-leicester-champions-league-nuno-espirito-santo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20saw%20a%20lot%20from%20the%20bench%E2%80%99%3A%20how%20Porto%E2%80%99s%20reserve%20goalkeeper%20became%20manager&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fporto-leicester-champions-league-nuno-espirito-santo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81d82c1b9e341311aaf8a04a3edbe2d11360e9af%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Nuno Espírito Santo during his time in charge at Valencia, with another former 
Porto coach, André Villas-Boas, in the background during a Champions League 
game against Zenit St Petersburg. Photograph: Dmitry Lovetsky/AP 
There was also something a little “British” about that Valencia side, he 
agrees: quick, aggressive, pressing high, direct. “All coaches say: ‘We want to 
control the game, we want the ball, blah, blah, blah, blah,’ but it’s 
impossible to have the ball all the time,” he says. “If a team is organised it 
is really difficult to harm them, so you have to search for the moment they are 
unbalanced. And when is that? When you recover the ball.

“I’m a coach who likes to have the ball but what I really think is: ‘How can 
you be in charge of the game?’ I think, but maybe I am the only one, that the 
defensive process can take care of the game. Why is that? Because teams wait to 
defend. If you create something where you go to defend, to steal the ball where 
you want, it’s different. A defensive process, yes, but you go for it.

“English football is changing; it’s not this long ball straight up the pitch. 
There are moments of possession, but the Premier League does allow you a 
box-to-box game and I enjoy that. Every possession has to have sense [a reason] 
and that sense has to be to unbalance the other team. English teams don’t have 
long possession of the ball, but it’s a curious fact: the Premier League has 
more ball in play than any other league. That tells you that your game has to 
be more intense, your players have to be more ready, there is more distance for 
the players to cover.”

The question is obvious: why have Spanish teams done so much better than 
English ones in Europe? “Difficult,” Nuno says. “I was thinking about that the 
other day. In terms of the game, I don’t find it [a reason], I really don’t. I 
don’t see, year by year, why English teams don’t reach a final, with the 
resources they have. But [last season] you see [Manchester] City in a 
semi-final. Liverpool in a final. That tells you that it is not like that any 
more. Premier League teams are ready to [compete].”

Leicester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> among 
them. Nuno knows them well; admires them, too. After he left Valencia last 
season, England became his main focus of analysis, not least because there was 
interest in him going there before he joined Porto, the club where he had been 
twice as a player. As he studied the English clubs, the application of sports 
science was one of the elements that most struck him. He spent time at 
Tottenham watching Mauricio Pochettino, while his assistant coach visited 
Manchester City and Leicester. “You go, you see, you share, you analyse: you 
see it and think: ‘How can I adapt that? How can this fit my philosophy?’” he 
says.

“Leicester winning the league was a surprise to everyone but it proved that a 
united and strong team can achieve big things,” Nuno says. Could it have 
happened in other leagues? “Honestly, I don’t think so: there are huge 
differences between the squads of big teams and the others and in long 
competitions that kind of achievement is very difficult,” he says. “But you can 
never say never.

“It is going to be a big chance for us to face Leicester, a fantastic 
challenge, the opportunity to test our limits against the Premier League 
champions,” he adds. Porto’s limitations are clear, their chances slim. But, 
then, so were Leicester’s. And, Nuno says: “I have this absurd feeling that I 
can win every game with any team.”
 