
I didn’t grow up in an orderly middle-class family with cosy Sunday lunches, 
people laughing and talking. I was brought up in a shabby cottage outside a 
remote Danish village, with cold water and a lavatory in the back garden. 
Hot dogs were a special treat on Sundays. My mum and stepdad were always drunk 
and didn’t work – they lived off benefits. It was not the sort of environment 
that teaches you universal moral values and ethics.

And yet, I learned, mostly from my three brothers, that people look after one 
another. We help each other. Even if we don’t have much, even if we wear 
hand-me-downs to school and dig up potatoes for dinner, we still help each 
other. It’s when life is tough and your back is to the wall that we matter the 
most to each other.

When I was introduced to the Bible and Christian teachings as a teenager – 
nobody ever took me to church as a child – I learned the story about the good 
Samaritan. I knew what that meant already. Where I grew up, if you saw somebody 
walking along the road and you were fortunate enough to have a car, you stopped 
and offered them a lift. That was normal; it’s what we all did.

My brothers were removed from our family home one at a time and put into 
institutions. All three turned to crime and drug abuse. Two are dead, much too 
young; the third has Aids. They never had a real chance at life. Not really. 
The abuse and the beatings they took at home, which they protected me from – 
crippled their hearts, their minds and their souls.

For some reason, I managed to escape and make it through school. I graduated 
from the University of Copenhagen as an economist, and got a job at Danske 
Bank, the largest bank inDenmark <https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark>. 
At school I was lucky enough to meet good people, who understood how to coach 
the aggressive and emotionally disturbed young girl I was. Believe me, it was 
no easy task. At one institution for especially difficult girls, I met Karen, 
who saw through my anger and loathing, and was patient enough that I eventually 
came to trust her. She became my mentor. Today, 34 years later, she still is. 
She was the person who pushed me on to university. I would never have thought 
it possible without her.

Some years ago, I received an invitation from the Danish social minister. It 
was strange, I had never been invited to coffee with a member of the government 
before, but of course I accepted. The minister wanted to know if I would chair 
the National Council for Children, a Danish organisation that works to 
safeguard the rights of young people. I was astounded. I didn’t even know what 
the National Council for Children was at the time. So I called Karen. She 
wasn’t surprised at all. “Well, I actually thought you’d be perfect as the next 
CEO of Denmark’s Radio and Television (the Danish BBC),” she told me, “But the 
National Council for Children, that’s pretty good too.”

Karen always believed that I could do anything. She’s a follower of the 
developmental psychologist Urie Bronfenbrenner, who wrote: “In order to develop 
normally, a child requires progressively more complex joint activity with one 
or more adults who have an irrational emotional relationship with the child. 
What do I mean by ‘irrational emotional relationship’? Well, somebody’s got to 
be crazy about that kid.” I think that’s Bronfenbrenner’s way of saying “love”, 
which is a difficult thing to implement in a professional institution, where 
many children would never have experienced it at home. But Karen managed it for 
me.

And so I became the chair of Denmark’s National Council for Children. It was a 
chance to make a difference, and took me from an anonymous business career to 
debating social policy in the national media. I launched a campaign to improve 
the conditions for socially challenged children in Denmark; wrote a book about 
my childhood, in order to share what it’s like on the dark side of the welfare 
society; I even ended up in a documentary – My Childhood in Hell. In short, I 
threw myself into the job, and loved every minute of it.

After three years I decided to establish my own non-profit company, The House 
of Zornig, dedicated to developing better ways to help troubled families – not 
just the children, but parents, too. And that’s what I still do today. I don’t 
want any more children to end up like my brothers. I don’t want anyone to have 
to live through what I did.

Part of my work is giving presentations around the country, talking about my 
own experiences, trying to inspire people to do what Karen did for me, and 
promoting more effective social initiatives. On Monday, 7 September 2015, I was 
in southern Denmark, close to where I grew up, making one of these 
presentations. That was the day the greatwave of refugees hit Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/03/sweden-to-impose-id-checks-on-travellers-from-denmark>
. Thousands of people fleeing the war in Syria had made their way through 
Europe, many of them heading for Sweden, where the prime minister at the time 
was welcoming them. I heard on the news that hundreds of refugees had entered 
Danish territory from Puttgarten in Germany, on the ferry to the southern 
harbour town of Rødbyhavn, and werenow walking towards Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/09/refugee-crisis-denmark-police-close-road-germany>
. It’s a long walk, about 160km (100 miles), and it was a hot day. To get to 
Sweden, you need to go to Copenhagen, and cross over from there. I was heading 
towards Copenhagen already, and I had six empty seats in my car. So?

We weren’t sure if it was legal to offer the refugees a lift, so Mikael called 
the police to ask. They didn’t know

I went to Rødbyhavn and was met with scenes that I’d never seen before in 
Denmark. There were refugees everywhere. Complete chaos. Adults, children, 
single mothers, teenagers – wary people with tired faces, most of them with 
just small plastic bags containing their belongings and some with nothing but 
the clothes they wore. Those faces. Not desperate but stern. Weary. Committed. 
I phoned Mikael, my husband, and said: “Listen, I’m going to offer some of them 
a lift.” He said: “But of course you are. Bring them home, I’ll make coffee.”

We weren’t sure if it was legal to offer the refugees a lift, so Mikael called 
the police to ask. They didn’t know, they said. Nobody seemed prepared for what 
was unfolding. At the scene there were a lot of police. They didn’t stop the 
refugees from walking towards Sweden. So I parked the car and spotted a group 
of six, among them two small girls who turned out to be five years old. Sweet 
children, but very quiet – I wondered what they had seen.

I asked them if they wanted a ride. They did. There was a policeman standing 
next to my car, and I asked him if he was going to stop me. He said no. While 
the refugees were climbing into the car a TV journalist came over and filmed 
us. I explained that I had empty seats, and that I was offering them a lift. 
And off we went.

We have a house in Solrød Strand, just south of Copenhagen, and I took the 
family there with me. The girls immediately fell asleep in the car – they had 
been travelling for 40 days: on foot, by train and on bus. They had lost all 
their belongings when they crossed the Mediterranean to Greece, and had nothing 
left but the clothes on their backs. They were from Damascus. One of them, 
Younes, had studied pharmacology at university. His brother was a 
physiotherapist. They were leading a normal life, working and studying, when 
the bombs started to fall and destroyed their home. Their father was already in 
Sweden with a brother, living in Helsingborg, and that’s where they were 
heading.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fprosecuted-helping-syrian-refugees-denmark-people-smuggling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb78ebb65e483e172b083084569f79fecf646f45f%2F0_18_2883_1730%2F2883.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20was%20prosecuted%20for%20helping%20Syrian%20refugees%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Lisbeth%20Zornig%20Andersen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fprosecuted-helping-syrian-refugees-denmark-people-smuggling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20was%20prosecuted%20for%20helping%20Syrian%20refugees%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Lisbeth%20Zornig%20Andersen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fprosecuted-helping-syrian-refugees-denmark-people-smuggling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb78ebb65e483e172b083084569f79fecf646f45f%2F0_18_2883_1730%2F2883.jpg>
 Refugees on the E45 motorway in Denmark, in September 2015 Photograph: 
Benjamin Nolte/dpa/Corbis 
We got to Solrød Strand and Mikael was ready with coffee, soda and cinnamon 
buns. We talked and offered them a place to rest, dinner and a good night’s 
sleep. They politely declined – they just wanted to get to Sweden as quickly as 
possible. It had been a long journey and they were very close now. So my 
husband offered them a lift to the train station on the Danish side of the 
border. He bought them tickets to Helsingborg and made sure they got on the 
right train. A few hours later, we got a call from their father. He was 
overjoyed, and grateful. That was good. But we also felt bad. We had done so 
little, and yet it had meant so much to these six people. We could see on the 
news that hundreds of refugees were still on the roads, and more were coming. 
We thought about driving more people, but we realised that would just be a drop 
in the ocean. So we turned to Facebook and wrote about what we had done; we 
wrote about the family – ordinary people in desperate circumstances. And we 
asked other people to help. Our post was instantly shared by thousands; we 
later estimated that it had probably reached 300,000 people. Hundreds of cars 
heading towards Rødbyhavn to help. Our Facebook page was flooded with requests. 
“I’m going – where are they?” “We have SUVs, where do we pick them up?” “I have 
housing and food, bring them here.” “I have a boat, I can take 50 to Sweden.” 
Even a former government minister called. He said he’d like to pay for buses to 
go and pick up refugees, which would be more efficient. Mikael called a bus 
company and asked if he could rent a number of buses. “Are they for refugees?” 
the man in charge asked. Mikael said yes, expecting a no. “You can have my 
buses, there’s no charge,” he said. That was wonderful, but we had no bus 
drivers. So we asked for volunteers on Facebook, and immediately we had more 
drivers than busses.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdanish-government-spokesman-defends-controversial-refugee-assets-bill-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Danish%20government%20spokesman%20defends%20controversial%20refugee%20assets%20bill%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdanish-government-spokesman-defends-controversial-refugee-assets-bill-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Danish%20government%20spokesman%20defends%20controversial%20refugee%20assets%20bill%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdanish-government-spokesman-defends-controversial-refugee-assets-bill-video&media=>
Danish government spokesman defends controversial refugee assets bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/26/danish-government-spokesman-defends-controversial-refugee-assets-bill-video>
All that happened on the Monday. The next day, the police issued a statement 
declaring that giving rides to refugees was illegal. That scrapped the bus 
idea. Many people continued to drive south to offer people lifts, regardless. 
The consensus was that we do not accept that refugees from a war, people in 
distress, have to walk on the highways in Denmark and sleep in the open, when 
so many of us have cars and beds. Some used the term civil disobedience, 
infuriated by the statement from the police. On Wednesday, the police again 
changed their position. It was no longer illegal – now people offering lifts 
were merely “leaning towards breaching the law”. And at the same time the 
police allowed the refugees they had detained in Rødbyhavn to travel freely. 
All were let go and picked up by waiting cars to be driven towards Copenhagen. 
After that, refugees were allowed to make their way through Denmark to Sweden, 
where they were welcomed – until it became too much and Sweden closed its 
borders.

Things calmed down. Instead of offering the refugees a lift, hundreds of 
civilian volunteers manned the train stations from Hamburg in Germany to Malmö 
in Sweden to keep the refugees safe, and make sure they had tickets for Sweden. 
Thousands of people were donating money, time, clothes and food for what came 
to be known as operation Safe Corridor.

It was a strange to be interrogated by the police. It turned out that about 15 
people had filed complaints against me

Along the way, the footage of the refugees climbing into my car made the news. 
I was interviewed and invited to a debate with a member of the Dansk Folkeparti 
(Danish People’s Party), which is vehemently anti-immigration. I was accused of 
shamelessly publicising myself on Facebook and on TV. Another politician asked 
how I could know whether the people I helped were not carrying bombs. My 
Facebook page was flooded with hate mail. I was called a traitor, an idiot and 
a Muslim-lover. People sent pictures of guns, or obscene scenarios of what they 
would like 10 African men to do to me.

That was in September. The following month, my husband and I were contacted by 
the police. They were investigating us on the charge of people-smuggling, and 
wanted us to come in for questioning. Actually, I think the correct term is 
interrogation. I turned up at the police station and answered a lot of 
questions about what I had done. It was a strange experience, to be 
interrogated by the police. It turned out that about 15 people had filed 
complaints against me and that five or six had filed complaints against my 
husband. One had even been in our garden and peeked through the windows of the 
living room to be certain that ours was the house where refugees had been 
sheltered. The police did not initiate the investigation by themselves, they 
did it because of the number of complaints from Danish citizens.

In judicial terms our crime consisted of aiding, transporting and harbouring 
persons without valid travel documents. That’s the lift and the coffee. I had 
to ask what “valid travel documents” meant. They explained that it is a valid 
passport and a valid visa. I was not aware of the law, and the idea of asking 
the family for valid travel documents never entered my mind. I have never asked 
anybody for valid travel documents before when offering them a lift. And when 
we had asked the police at the time, both by phone and at the site, none of 
them had mentioned anything about valid travel documents. Even if they had 
presented Syrian passports to me, I wouldn’t have been able to judge whether 
they were valid or not.

Time passed. We visited the Syrian family in Helsingborg just before 
Christmas. They were doing well and learning Swedish fast, in order to commence 
their studies and find jobs. My husband connected them to a Swedish family who 
were happy to provide support and to help them learn the language. On our 
visit, they served lots of wonderful Arabic food – and a plate of cinnamon 
buns. We thought that was sweet and funny. But best of all, for the first time 
I saw the girls smile.

On 11 March, we had our day in court. The prosecutor was unable to locate the 
policeman my husband talked to, while the policeman I talked to did not 
recollect our conversation. The prosecutor suggested a combined fine of 45,000 
Danish kroner (about £4,000), or 14 days in prison. Our lawyer stressed that 
what we had done was motivated by humanitarian reasons and that the 
circumstances were extraordinary – the police had not known what to do and the 
government was quiet on the subject. It took the judge about 20 minutes to 
consider before he passed his verdict, which was in accordance with the 
prosecutor’s suggestion.

When a Danish court punishes people for helping refugees, it contradicts our 
core human values

I was angry. Outside, the media was waiting, and I told them I was angry. 
Angry about being criminalised for acting with simple human decency. “We are 
not people smugglers,” I told them. “We are ordinary people helping fellow 
human beings in distress.” Many other people were angry – astonished, even – 
and journalists from all over the world were soon in touch: the Guardian, the 
Independent, the BBC, Reuters, Associated Press, Al-Jazeera, the Washington 
Post, El País, El Mundo; Swedish, Finnish, Norwegian, German, Dutch and 
Canadian media outlets all wanted to tell the story of the Danish court order 
that criminalised ordinary human decency.

We were not surprised by their interest. The judgment challenged universal 
human values, the simple drive to help people in distress. Most of us, 
regardless of religion, are brought up with a set of values that underlines the 
importance of doing just this. Even I, growing up in a socially dysfunctional 
home on the wrong side of the tracks, had learned that. This is what we teach 
our children.

When a Danish court punishes people for helping refugees, it contradicts our 
core human values. This is especially poignant in a country known for its 
universal welfare system, designed to help everyone in need. I never knew that 
decency, generosity, charity – whatever you choose to call it – was reserved 
for people with valid travel documents.

What message does the judgment send to our children? Just hours after the 
court order was passed, a young man called us about some hungry refugees he had 
met on the street in Copenhagen. Fearing legal repercussions, he did not know 
whether he should help them or not. That is what the judgment teaches our 
children. We used to teach them that helping Jews flee to Sweden during the 
second world war was a heroic effort. How things have changed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fprosecuted-helping-syrian-refugees-denmark-people-smuggling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F667cc36a511354deffdf785549cf4282118625ac%2F0_261_3246_2061%2F3246.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20was%20prosecuted%20for%20helping%20Syrian%20refugees%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Lisbeth%20Zornig%20Andersen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fprosecuted-helping-syrian-refugees-denmark-people-smuggling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20was%20prosecuted%20for%20helping%20Syrian%20refugees%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Lisbeth%20Zornig%20Andersen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fprosecuted-helping-syrian-refugees-denmark-people-smuggling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F667cc36a511354deffdf785549cf4282118625ac%2F0_261_3246_2061%2F3246.jpg>
 Lisbeth Zornig Andersen and her husband, Mikael, outside the court, in 
Nykobing Falster, Denmark, where they were fined for helping refugees to travel 
through Denmark. Photograph: Per Rasmussen/AP 
We appealed against the judgment, and the case went to the Danish high court. 
Our anger was shared by many people. A Danish jazz musician, Benjamin Koppel, 
set up a fundraiser to cover the fine. Contributions poured in. Within a few 
days people had donated more than DKK 160,000 (£15,000), far exceeding the 
target. Most of the donations were small, but there were many of them. We saw 
this as a public demonstration against the court order – our opponents, 
however, attacked the fund, claiming that is was illegal. They reported us to 
the tax authorities. I have never met so much hatred as I have in this period, 
all for helping refugees. The fund was in good order. We decided to use the 
money to help pay the fines of others who have been prosecuted for doing the 
same thing we did. There are hundreds – some are young students, some 
pensioners, some have large families and little to spare. Any surplus from the 
fund is donated to unaccompanied child refugees.

The Journey: A refugee's odyssey from Syria to Sweden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/jun/09/a-migrants-journey-from-syria-to-sweden-interactive>
Surprisingly, there was almost no political reaction to our case. One 
parliamentarian on the far left did criticise the judgment, otherwise nobody 
commented. The question of changing the law, or challenging it, was not raised. 
But anti-Muslim sentiment is very strong in Denmark today, and people vote 
accordingly. Kindness towards Muslims scares away voters, so there is no room 
for kindness in government. On the contrary, measure after measure is being 
taken to make the life of the refugees as miserable as possible. People are 
housed in tents, even in winter, even though better accommodation is available. 
The refugees are searched for valuables when they enter Denmark, and met with 
ludicrous demands when applying for asylum, reunion with their families or 
permanent citizenship. The Danish government has published advertisements in 
Middle Eastern newspapers warning refugees to stay away from our country. To 
me, it seems that we have sacrificed the human decency Danish society is built 
on.

To put our court order in perspective, a Danish man who spat on refugees 
passing below a motorway bridge received a fine of DKK 5,000 (£450). While it 
should be recognised that our legal system still finds it a criminal offence to 
abuse people in distress – hooray for small victories – it also shows that 
spitting on refugees is a milder offence than helping them.

On 21 September 2016, the Danish high court ruled on our appeal. The verdict 
was upheld. We now know that it is a criminal offence to help refugees in 
distress on Danish highways, even if it’s just a lift down the road or a cup of 
coffee, no matter what the circumstances. We applied to take our case to the 
Danish supreme court, but last week our application was turned down.

We must continue discussing the refugee situation, and how our society and the 
countries aroundEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> should 
react to the human disaster currently unfolding in Syria. How many people are 
we able to help, and where, and how, should we help them? This is a debate with 
many questions and seemingly few answers. Refusing to help the people standing 
right in front of us, needing care and assistance, corrupts our moral values 
and perceptions about decency and common humanity. It is a dangerous path to 
choose. It breeds a cynicism that may well poison the remnants of solidarity in 
Denmark, and unravel the social fabric that some of our opponents, in a 
misguided way, are trying to protect. Right now, too many people are quietly 
looking on while our core values are being undermined, because defending them 
may prove too expensive in terms of public opinion. I thought we were better 
than that. Really, I did.

The Danish state church is Protestant, and we call ourselves Christians. We 
tell our children the story about the good Samaritan who did not turn his back. 
We demand that immigrants in our country learn, and adopt, our Danish values. 
So how are they expected to understand that in Denmark we punish people for 
compassion?

My husband and I could not have acted differently. It would have been a 
betrayal of everything we hold dear and believe in, including what we teach our 
children.

This article first appeared on Granta.com <https://granta.com/>

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 