
Among the coalition of artists denouncing Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, the White Stripes went one 
step further this week by creating a T-shirt targeting the Republican nominee.

The front of the shirt reads “Icky Trump”, a play on their song Icky Thump, 
while the back features searing lyrics from the track , “White Americans? What? 
Nothing better to do? Why don’t you kick yourself out? You’re an immigrant too.”

The release of the shirt comes a few days after the White Stripes released a 
statement <https://www.facebook.com/thewhitestripes/posts/10154412880610042> 
expressing outrage that Donald Trump had used their music for his campaign 
video.

The White Stripes <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thewhitestripes> join a 
long list of artists, writers, and musicians that have made some form of 
protest art targeting the Republican presidential nominee this election cycle.
 White Stripes release shirt targeted at Donald Trump 
Artists have been galvanized in their opposition to Donald Trump, evidenced 
most clearly by the range of anti-Trump groups that have emerged. Celebrities 
have lent their names to groups such asUnited Against Trump 
<http://unitedagainsthate.com>, #StopHatredDumpTrump 
<http://www.stophatedumptrump.com>, and 450 American writers signed a petition 
<http://www.ipetitions.com/petition/WritersOnTrump> against Trump. Two weeks 
ago, actors including Robert Downey Jr, Scarlett Johansson, and Mark Ruffalo, 
among many others, madea video <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nRp1CK_X_Yw> 
imploring people to register to vote to make sure Trump does not get elected.

Don Cheadle described Trump as a “a racist, abusive coward who could 
permanently damage the fabric of our society”.

Several artists have also penned songs targeting Trump. The Mexican American 
singer Becky G released We are Mexico in response to Donald Trump’s 
inflammatory remarks about Mexican immigrants in the US.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbE-U1HQl-o8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbE-U1HQl-o8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbE-U1HQl-o8&media=>
 Becky G’s song We Are Mexico, targeting Trump. 
Many examples of visual protest art have emerged since Trump announced his 
candidacy. Naked depictions of Trump have been a recurring theme. Los 
Angeles-based artist Illma Gore made a nude painting of Trump, whose penis size 
was discussed during the Republican primary season.

The pencil illustration, titled Make America Great, received a huge response; 
the artist was even suspended from Facebook for posting the painting. She said 
she later received threats of legal action and death threats, and a Trump 
supporter reportedlypunched her in the face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/07/donald-trump-penis-painting-ilma-gore>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ficky-trump-white-stripes-music-russell-simmons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F491c8aa31f121915a9c2afe2d4be3328f0f24ec5%2F35_773_4020_2411%2F4020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Icky%20Trump'%3A%20White%20Stripes%20T-shirt%20is%20latest%20artwork%20to%20condemn%20Republican&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ficky-trump-white-stripes-music-russell-simmons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Icky%20Trump%27%3A%20White%20Stripes%20T-shirt%20is%20latest%20artwork%20to%20condemn%20Republican&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Ficky-trump-white-stripes-music-russell-simmons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F491c8aa31f121915a9c2afe2d4be3328f0f24ec5%2F35_773_4020_2411%2F4020.jpg>
 Painting of a naked Donald Trump by the artist Illma Gore. Photograph: 
Courtesy of Illma Gore 
Nude statues of Trump were erected in New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles, 
Cleveland and Seattle in August and instantly captured the public’s attention. 
The statues show Trump wearing a grim expression and portrayed with saggy 
features and missing testicles. The artist responsible said the statues, named 
The Emperor has No Balls, were meant to humiliate Trump while highlighting his 
authoritarian tendencies. The statues, however, receivedcriticism for body 
shaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/aug/19/naked-donald-trump-statue-satire-ageist-body-shaming>
.

The Emperor Has No Balls. Los Angeles #INDECLINE . . . . . . (photo: 
@birdmanphotos) <https://www.instagram.com/p/BJQa7Hgj5Zr/>

A photo posted by INDECLINE (@indeclineofficial) on Aug 18, 2016 at 9:21am PDT

Trump’s star on the Hollywood Boulevard has been targeted by artists several 
times during this election cycle. The Norwegian street artist Pøbel released a 
video of himself spray-painting a mute symbol on Trump’s star on Hollywood 
Boulevard.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmRyfOVm70hc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmRyfOVm70hc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmRyfOVm70hc&media=>
 Video of artist spraying mute symbol on Trump’s Hollywood star. 
Former Def Jam Records CEO Russell Simmons is among 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/america-ferrera/thank-you-donald-trump_b_7709126.html>
 the celebrities to havepenned an open letter 
<http://globalgrind.com/2015/12/08/donald-trump-open-letter-by-russell-simmons/>
 to Trump, in which he called Trump a longtime friend and implored him to “stop 
the bullsh*t”.

YG and Nipsey Hussle’s Fuck Donald Trump is probably the most pointed of all 
when it comes to Trump protest music. YG recently invited fans onstage at his 
concert to smash a Trump piñata.

However, YG’s label censored 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/06/yg-donald-trump-song-censored.html> certain 
lines from the song, leaving awkward gaps in the rap. Lines such as “Surprised 
El Chapo ain’t try to snipe you” were blocked by his label.
 Fans beating a Donald Trump piñata at YG concert  