
Saracens made European Cup history by fulfilling their vow of ending Toulon’s 
unbeaten home record in the tournament. Sarries, who won the cup for the first 
time in May when they defeated Racing 92 in Lyon,stunned the partisan home crowd
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/toulon-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 at Stade Mayol by taking a 25-6 lead in the first-half after a display of 
almost total rugby.

“We have thrived in the last few seasons on doing something we have not 
achieved before,” said the captain, Brad Barritt. “That was a huge motivating 
factor this week and to come here where neitherSaracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> nor any other side in Europe has 
won in this competition makes me very proud.”

Saracens make history by downing Toulon in clash of the heavyweights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/toulon-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
Toulon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon>, who won the European Cup in 
the three seasons before Saracens, have signed players from all over the world 
but it was an England hardcore of the Vunipola brothers, Maro Itoje, George 
Kruis, Jamie George and the returning Owen Farrell that left the Top 14 side 
unable to find answers.

“It was a performance from us that had everything,” said the Saracens director 
of rugby, Mark McCall. “We played some beautiful, outstanding attacking rugby 
in the first half and showed resilience in the second when we were twice 
reduced to 14 men as Toulon showed there was probably a reason why they had 
never been beaten at home in Europe before.

“They have some outstanding players and they stepped up in the second half. We 
had enough composure to complete the job and it feels very good right now. I 
cannot say enough about the players and the fight they showed. The way Owen 
played was remarkable, having the stamina at the end to chase down attackers 
and make tackles.

“We were determined not to let Toulon dictate the game defensively and that 
meant moving the ball. We showed our attacking qualities and Mako Vunipola 
showed that as a prop he has the skills of a centre.”
 