
I should have known we couldn’t handle the wave. Far from the beach, my 
four-year-old daughter and I clung to each other in water up to my chest. 
Swimmers around us screamed in anticipation. I backed up and stumbled as we 
braced ourselves to meet the wall of water that was now a whitecap above our 
heads.

“Look away!” I shouted at the moment of peak pointlessness. The water shot 
into our nostrils, scouring sinuses with a chlorine burn. We gasped and rubbed 
our faces before staggering to the vinyl-clad shoreline, laughing like the 
fools we clearly were for having paid roughly £55 to (almost) drown in the 
world’s largest indoor wave pool.

World Waterpark <http://www.wem.ca/play/attractions-at-wem/world-waterpark> is 
one of the many super-sized attractions in my local shopping centre – which 
happens to be the largest mall in North America, and was once the biggest in 
the world.

Recently, I have questioned whether time spent at West Edmonton Mall is time 
well spent. Only a five minute drive from my home in the Alberta capital, and 
with a car park that can accommodate 20,000 vehicles, I used to be embarrassed 
that my hometown’s reputation could depend so heavily on it. I sniffed at the 
culture of consumerism it represented – and what it took away from the 
character of the community.

My mother offers the best example of the mall’s effectiveness as an insulator. 
On 31 July 1987, Edmonton was hit bya tornado 
<http://www.ctvnews.ca/5things/flashback-friday-black-friday-tornado-rips-through-edmonton-in-1987-1.2494809>
 that killed 27 people and destroyed 300 homes. My mother, who adores West 
Edmonton Mall, was shopping there with her sister, who was visiting from 
England.

“When we came out all the streets were flooded,” she recalls. “We missed the 
whole thing. We had a fabulous day, but we were shocked when we came out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fshopping-north-america-biggest-mall-west-edmonton-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3295b4077e4c9da738442f12123726f2a8f6c7e0%2F0_121_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20not%20just%20shopping%2C%20right%3F'%3A%20life%20in%20the%20shadow%20of%20North%20America's%20biggest%20mall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fshopping-north-america-biggest-mall-west-edmonton-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20not%20just%20shopping%2C%20right%3F%27%3A%20life%20in%20the%20shadow%20of%20North%20America%27s%20biggest%20mall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fshopping-north-america-biggest-mall-west-edmonton-canada%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3295b4077e4c9da738442f12123726f2a8f6c7e0%2F0_121_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 World Waterpark at West Edmonton Mall claims to be the world’s largest indoor 
wave pool. Photograph: Dan Riedlhuber/Reuters 
The North American enclosed mall emerged to make the onerous tasks of domestic 
hunting and gathering convenient and enjoyable. Since opening in 1981, 
Edmonton’s mall has strived to add “wondrous” to that list, landing somewhere 
between grand and garish.


In an era when about a third of US malls are expected to close 
<http://time.com/money/4327632/shopping-malls-closing/> because of failing 
department stores and lapsing consumer interest, West Edmonton Mall appears to 
thrive.


It’s not just about filling a space with people. It’s about connecting people 
with one another
Mack Male, Edmonton blogger 
Thirty years ago, it drew roughly 20 million people a year, about twice the 
number who visited Disneyland, California. Today, its800 shops draw 30 million 
visitors <http://www.wem.ca/about-wem/facts> a year, and it sees almost 10 
times thetraffic of Banff <http://www.pc.gc.ca/eng/docs/pc/attend/table3.aspx> 
– Alberta’s most popular Rocky Mountain park – making it the province’s top 
attraction. But then, wilderness isn’t our natural habitat anyway ... thanks to 
climate control and myriad spectacles for our shortened attention spans, maybe 
the mall (and West Edmonton Mall in particular) still is.


“There’s something about the formula they’ve created that warrants it’s going 
to be busy,” says Renee Williams, director of Edmonton Tourism. “It’s not just 
shopping, right?”

A retail ‘city’

After more than three decades, West Edmonton Mall remains one of the defining 
features of my city. Despite having two toddlers who get as much fulfilment 
from the mall as I once did by getting as far from it as possible, this 
surprises me.

The biggest reason is that enclosed malls don’t align with the tenets of 
modern city building. They’re destinations that amass people, but not 
exercises, in“placemaking” 
<http://www.europeanbusinessreview.com/economic-development-its-about-placemaking/>
 – that activity city planners deem essential to creating community. AsMack Male
 <https://twitter.com/mastermaq?lang=en>, a prominent Edmonton blogger on local 
affairs, has said about such efforts in the city: “It’s not just about filling 
a space with people. It’s about connecting people with one another. That’s what 
turns space into place.”

Generally, malls struggle to make the transition in two significant ways. 
Firstly, shopping doesn’t promote unity; it’s a form of personal fulfilment 
that requires no collaboration other than with a sales clerk (or, when online, 
no one). By nature, the mall cuts us off from one another by encouraging the 
individual pursuit of stuff.

Secondly, enclosed malls cut us off from the world. Or in the case of West 
Edmonton Mall, it can seem tobecome that world (its owner, TripleFive, calls it 
an entertainment and retail “city”). I would even argue that it undermines 
placemaking efforts beyond the 48 city blocks it occupies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fshopping-north-america-biggest-mall-west-edmonton-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62731a1d9ef3a8ee2be0313429755413b32c6fd5%2F0_91_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20not%20just%20shopping%2C%20right%3F'%3A%20life%20in%20the%20shadow%20of%20North%20America's%20biggest%20mall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fshopping-north-america-biggest-mall-west-edmonton-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20not%20just%20shopping%2C%20right%3F%27%3A%20life%20in%20the%20shadow%20of%20North%20America%27s%20biggest%20mall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fshopping-north-america-biggest-mall-west-edmonton-canada%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62731a1d9ef3a8ee2be0313429755413b32c6fd5%2F0_91_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 A pedestrian bridge crossing to the West Edmonton Mall, which attracts 30 
million visitors a year. Photograph: Dan Riedlhuber/Reuters 
When it first opened at a mere 1.1m sq ft <http://www.wem.ca/about-wem/history>
, “the new mall was just considered another suburban shopping centre”, 
according to a 1987 report by the city of Edmonton in response to public 
concern over the mall and “its impacts”.

That naivety was remedied by – among other ill effects – an 8% economic 
decline in the downtown core, only now recovering thanks to arecently built 
National Hockey League arena 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/edmonton-s-new-world-class-arena-rogers-place-opens-its-doors-1.3753743>
. A mall actually opened downtown in 1987 in answer to West Edmonton Mall, with 
the hope it would pull people back to the core.

Today, revitalisation efforts tacitly focus on drawing people away from both 
malls, and on encouraging the proliferation of street level, independent cafes 
and businesses that “inject the gaiety, the wonder, the cheerful hurly-burly 
that make people want to come into the city and to linger there”, asJane Jacobs 
once wrote 
<http://fortune.com/2011/09/18/downtown-is-for-people-fortune-classic-1958/>. 
Of American cities’ new breed of self-contained civic centres, she was 
scathing: “They banish the street. They banish its function. They banish its 
variety.” That was 1958. Now we’re beckoning all of that back.

I love downtown with its growing collection of patios and the way people waste 
time doing little but watching each other – in summer, at least. As I write, 
however, the wind chill is driving the temperature to -28 C, and I can’t 
imagine a worse place to be than the city’s currently icy heart, especially 
with children.

Inside the bubble: the air-conditioned alternate reality of Jakarta's megamalls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/24/jakarta-megamalls-air-conditioned-alternate-reality>
So, there’s the mall. For many local parents (including my wife, who 
mall-walked the kids during two maternity leaves), West Edmonton Mall can 
resolve the terrifying uncertainty of what to do in Alberta’s cryogenic 
mid-winter. I remember my mother turning to it for salvation, bringing us in 
from the nearby small suburban city where I grew up. “I can’t believe that 
you’ll take the girls there now,” she says now. “Because you hated it.”

The fact is, West Edmonton Mall fulfils a need in the city as a vast expanse 
of quasi-public space. It is, at certain times of the year, an easy access 
biosphere in inhospitable terrain. Apart from the rare treat of a visit to the 
water park, the kids and I rarely spend a penny on the attractions; there’s no 
need.

Instead, we watch skaters glide across the Olympic-sized rink, visit 
forlorn-looking puppies at the pet store, eat cheap doughnuts. We merge in and 
out of a meandering crowd of shoppers, and participate as fully as one can in a 
community united only by big name brands and the bizarreness of the 
surroundings.

“The mall is, at heart, just another ancient organising principle that hasn’t 
yet outlived its usefulness,” writes Paco Underhill in Call of the Mall, the 
consumer-habit expert’s look at the culture of shopping.


In the effort to build better cities, West Edmonton Mall may not qualify as a 
maker of “place”. But is it more than just space? It’s popularity suggests it 
might be. “It’s not dying,” Williams says. “It’s got a good long life ahead of 
it.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion. You 
can revisit ourGuardian Canada Week here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/guardian-canada-week>
 