
Colin Kaepernick’s protest against racial injustice in the US appears to be 
slowly spreading with the soccer international Megan Rapinoe kneeling during 
the national anthem before Seattle Reign’s NWSL game against the Chicago Red 
Stars on Sunday.

Barack Obama: Kaepernick has right to protest over 'real, legitimate issues'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/barack-obama-colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest>
Kaepernick’s protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/27/colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest>
 first came to prominence last week, andhas sparked debate across America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest-debate-racism-america>
. His latest refusal to stand for the Star-Spangled Banner came on Thursday 
when his team, the San Francisco 49ers, played the San Diego Chargers.He was 
joined by his team-mate Eric Reid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/colin-kaepernick-eric-reid-kneel-national-anthem-protest-san-francisco-49ers>
.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20Colin%20Kaepernick%20not%20standing%20for%20the%20national%20anthem%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20Colin%20Kaepernick%20not%20standing%20for%20the%20national%20anthem%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fwhy-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video&media=>
Why is Colin Kaepernick not standing for the national anthem? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/02/why-colin-kaepernick-not-standing-national-anthem-video>
On Sunday, Rapinoe said her gesture was a nod towards Kaepernick. “It was very 
intentional,” Rapinoe told American Soccer Now after the game. “It was a little 
nod to Kaepernick and everything that he’s standing for right now. I think it’s 
actually pretty disgusting the way he was treated and the way that a lot of the 
media has covered it and made it about something that it absolutely isn’t. We 
need to have a more thoughtful, two-sided conversation about racial issues in 
this country.


As Kaepernick's racial injustice protest hits the road, a country begins to 
talk | Dave Schilling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/colin-kaepernick-national-anthem-protest-debate-racism-america>
“Being a gay American, I know what it means to look at the flag and not have 
it protect all of your liberties. It was something small that I could do and 
something that I plan to keep doing in the future and hopefully spark some 
meaningful conversation around it. It’s important to have white people stand in 
support of people of color on this. We don’t need to be the leading voice, of 
course, but standing in support of them is something that’s really powerful.”


Rapinoe is one of USA’s most talented players, and helped her team to gold at 
the 2012 Olympics as well as victory at the 2015 World Cup. She has long been 
known to speak her mind and is an ambassador for Athlete Ally, a charity that 
combats homophobia in sports.

Megan Rapinoe (@mPinoe) 
It's the least I can do. Keep the conversation going. https://t.co/qwfHcqgV6J 
<https://t.co/qwfHcqgV6J>
 <https://twitter.com/mPinoe/status/772611178652504064> September 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mPinoe/status/772611178652504064> 
Kaepernick has received criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/police-union-boycott-49ers-games-kaepernick-protest>
and support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/colin-kaepernick-protest-support-military-veterans>
 for his protest with some saying it is disrespectful to the military, with 
others insisting his stand represents the freedom of Americans to express 
themselves. On Thursday, the quarterbackpledged to donate $1m to community 
projects 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/sports/colin-kaepernick-pledges-1-million-charity-anthem-protest-spreads-n641886>
 as part of his drive towards equality.
 