
London, UK

“It took a while until I actually felt at home here. But everything that had 
unsettled me about London in the beginning – the hectic pace, the constant 
noise, the onslaught of people – became an essential part of my daily routine, 
one that gave me comfort.”(Anonymous, moved from Berlin to London in 2013)


“Arriving in London was like putting on the best pair of shoes you’ve ever 
worn. I realised London was my home the day I arrived 32 years ago; it still 
is. I came to study ballet, and to arrive and swim in such culture-rich waters 
was a homecoming. Irish by nationality, European by inclination, Londoner by 
choice ... 32 years and counting.” (Connor Byrne, moved from Limerick to London 
in 1984)

“There have been several moments that made me realise London is my home. The 
first was when I got the tube for the first time to meet a friend and I didn’t 
have to use the tube app on my phone to get around. I just strolled straight 
through the underground with ease.”(Esra Gurkan, moved from Leicester to London 
in 2015)

New York, US

“I began to realise New York City was home when the hustle and bustle became 
soothing. Also, when you see the same people on the subway every morning, 
leaving their flats at the same time and getting off at their respective stops. 
The community feeling comes alive once you have familiar faces during the 
commute.”(Olivia Graham, moved from Boston to New York in 2014) 

“New York is the antithesis of the pristine natural beauty and calm in 
Seattle, where I had a yard. I found it impossible to ignore the roar of the 
adjacent six-lane highway in my new home. About a year in, I began walking a 
lot. I realised every walk in New York is an epic saga for people-watching 
alone, but on top of that, it got me involved in eclectic local communities.” 
(Helen Brew, moved from Seattle to New York)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9d3490cf6586b5442453046d278af97118b7a10%2F73_731_3635_2181%2F3635.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20was%20cold%2C%20confusing%20and%20foreign'%3A%20your%20stories%20of%20moving%20to%20a%20new%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20was%20cold%2C%20confusing%20and%20foreign%27%3A%20your%20stories%20of%20moving%20to%20a%20new%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9d3490cf6586b5442453046d278af97118b7a10%2F73_731_3635_2181%2F3635.jpg>
 Lima: ‘I found it huge, noisy, congested’. Photograph: zxvisual/Getty Images 
Lima, Peru

“It was my first time ever living in a big capital city. I found it huge, 
noisy, congested and I was exhausted and with the feeling of being constantly 
on guard. I was also amazed by the cultural diversity. I felt at home when I 
fell asleep on the public transport, when I realised I was able to cross the 
entire city changing from one bus to another a hundred times and when I was no 
longer afraid of going out at night and coming back home on my own. Also, when 
the taxi driver thought I was ‘limeña’ after singing the full lyrics of one 
salsa song played on the radio. (Patricia, moved from Barcelona to Lima in 2004)

Berlin, Germany

“Finding an apartment in Berlin is not easy when you are effectively 
unemployed, barely speak the language and have not yet amassed all the 
necessary paperwork. After about nine months of bouncing from sublet to sublet, 
we found a home of our own. Arriving to collect our keys and seeing our names 
on the doorbell felt like a massive milestone, even though it was only a tiny 
one-room apartment.”(Kate, moved from Melbourne to Berlin in 2011)

How I found 'my Toronto thing': when does a city become home?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/31/how-i-found-my-toronto-thing-when-does-a-city-become-home>
Jakarta, Indonesia

“It was strange arriving here. People are less likely to smile at strangers. 
But Jakarta is the most developed city in Indonesia – you can get everything 
here. I can order food at 2am delivered right to my door. In Indonesia, that’s 
awesome. What made it familiar to me was when I realised that Jakarta is the 
most progressive and open-minded city in Indonesia. I feel safe knowing that.”
(Irawan, moved from Malang to Jakarta in 2011) 

Ljubljana, Slovenia

“I tried to make Ljubljana mine by making mental perky to-do lists – walks 
that would last several hours through the lesser-known parts of the capital, 
comparing and then bitching about the prices of coffee in the most popular 
cafes, remembering fun facts about the names of all of the streets that meant 
something to me (the street where my faculty is located, for instance, is named 
after an 19th century Slovenian priest who couldn’t resist writing mildly 
sensual poetry, because he was just too curious). And now, after three years, I 
can safely say that I have become something else, something more than a tourist 
and less than an immigrant.”(Marija Jeremić, moved from Užice to Ljubljana in 
2013)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ce11fdb4661b293f3e3600e9fa96b71f60e00a0%2F0_239_5122_3073%2F5122.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20was%20cold%2C%20confusing%20and%20foreign'%3A%20your%20stories%20of%20moving%20to%20a%20new%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20was%20cold%2C%20confusing%20and%20foreign%27%3A%20your%20stories%20of%20moving%20to%20a%20new%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ce11fdb4661b293f3e3600e9fa96b71f60e00a0%2F0_239_5122_3073%2F5122.jpg>
 Amsterdam: ‘Everyone bikes here.’ Photograph: Karen Desjardin/Moment 
Editorial/Getty Images 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands

“Amsterdam was so different than the busy, bustling, dirty and unpredictable 
Athens. Everything was clean, manicured, ordered. It was very alienating at 
first. I also found it a bit boring. The moment I realised I was home was when 
I was biking to work – everyone bikes here – and I came across some tourists on 
rented bikes going the wrong way on the bike path. Instead of smiling 
permissively (which is what my Athenian self would have done), I shot them the 
‘Dutch Blaming Look’: a look of derision and disdain, preserved for everyone 
who breaks any rule. I myself had been the recipient of that stare many times, 
and my friends and I had given it its name. The moment I gave that look, I knew 
that I had become a bona fide Amsterdammer.”(Tania Theodorou, moved from Athens 
to Amsterdam in 2002)

Manchester, UK

“When I started riding a bike to work it transformed the way I viewed the city 
– everything felt easier to get to, and I felt much calmer. I started really 
noticing my surroundings for the first time, and appreciating things like the 
change of seasons. My itchy feet gradually went away, and I finally began to 
really enjoy living in Manchester.”(Joe Paxton, moved to Manchester in 2007)

Katowice, Poland

“Every day I would walk for hours in the city, getting to know street 
patterns, nice cafes, local groceries etc. There was this ‘map Katowice’ 
project I helped with (the result of which, a map of all buildings in the city 
colour-coded by age, is stunning), and then I started going to the museum for 
lectures about local architecture. And if someone would criticise the city, I 
would defend it.”(Szymon, moved to Katowice in 2012)

Austin, US

“I feel more like an Austinite as I have come to terms with nature over the 
years,. Hearing coyotes howl in the middle of the night (and losing one of our 
cats to them); our son discovering a scorpion hiding under a pail and being 
stung; myself needing surgery from a brown recluse spider bite; and pulling a 
10-inch long centipede out of a window box planter are some of the highlights. 
Now we live in Austin’s ever-expanding downtown where the wildlife is more of 
the alcohol-infused variety, but it still feels like a small town and very much 
like home.” (Melanie, moved to Austin in 1997) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89f0bcb56fc2f4232900b09c0efcf2d3517c961%2F0_1383_3446_2066%2F3446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20was%20cold%2C%20confusing%20and%20foreign'%3A%20your%20stories%20of%20moving%20to%20a%20new%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20was%20cold%2C%20confusing%20and%20foreign%27%3A%20your%20stories%20of%20moving%20to%20a%20new%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa89f0bcb56fc2f4232900b09c0efcf2d3517c961%2F0_1383_3446_2066%2F3446.jpg>
 Melbourne: ‘The parks made me feel at home.’ Photograph: Chad Ehlers/Getty 
Images 
Melbourne, Australia

“It was cold, it was confusing, it was foreign. But soon I realised Melbourne 
has a lot of things that Jakarta doesn’t have. The first thing you notice is 
proper public transport. Despite the fact that I’ve encountered quite a few 
locals who complain about the tram being slow, I don’t care. To me, it’s an 
upgrade from Jakarta’s transport system. The second thing that makes me feel at 
home are the parks. There aren’t that many open public spaces in Jakarta that 
are comfortable and relatively non-threatening.”(Anonymous, moved from Jakarta 
to Melbourne in 2016)

Abu Dhabi, UAE

“When we first arrived in Abu Dhabi, we greeted our new city somewhat treading 
precariously. But we soon realised that there can indeed be many homes for 
those living the expatriate life. Being Indians in the Middle East means you 
can feel relaxed knowing that India is a short flight away and the city is 
inhabited by others hailing from the Asian subcontinent.

What really clinched it for me was the taxi drivers and their warmth. A 
Pakistani taxi driver who goes out of his way to make an Indian passenger feel 
welcome and comfortable in today’s world when the two countries are embroiled 
in political turmoil speaks volumes of people and their need for camaraderie 
that can make them forget all else.

Home is instinctively waking up from a nap seconds before it’s time to step 
out at my intended metro stop
Sarah McMahon-Sperber 
These taxi drivers in Abu Dhabi certainly fuelled a feeling of comfort in me 
and reinstated that belief that echoes in many of us: that home is where the 
heart is, and where you find good people to share it with.”(Anonymous, moved 
from Munich to Abu Dhabi in 2015)

Oslo, Norway

“Oslo felt like a quiet, small village in comparison to the hustle and bustle 
of London. I took the ferry from Harwich to Gothenburg and drove to Oslo, my 
first long solo drive. I realised I was home in Oslo when I started to read Jo 
Nesbø (in English) and I recognised all the landmarks and areas he described 
and understood the Norwegian characters and their quirks.”(Homa Jansen, moved 
from London to Oslo in 1997)

Dubai, UAE

“There used to be no street signs in Dubai – strange for such an advanced city 
– and with the rapid growth, roads and intersections were changing every other 
day, so navigating the city was via landmarks (like the ‘clocktower roundabout’ 
in Bur Dubai), buildings, or billboards. You’ve finally clicked with the city 
when you’re able to get from A to Z easily.”(Olivia Roqua, moved from Australia 
to Dubai in 2010)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24a4f502852ad404ea0d00e6d42ad63431b6e0f4%2F28_128_1341_805%2F1341.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It%20was%20cold%2C%20confusing%20and%20foreign'%3A%20your%20stories%20of%20moving%20to%20a%20new%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%20was%20cold%2C%20confusing%20and%20foreign%27%3A%20your%20stories%20of%20moving%20to%20a%20new%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Fhustle-bustle-soothing-stories-making-new-city-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24a4f502852ad404ea0d00e6d42ad63431b6e0f4%2F28_128_1341_805%2F1341.jpg>
 Montreal: ‘Home is knowing which of the network’s hallways have the best 
acoustics.’ Photograph:Chris M Forsyth <http://www.chrismforsyth.com/> 
Montreal, Canada

“Thirteen years in, I often describe my relationship with Montreal as my 
longest love affair. Just like any love affair, our beginnings were ravenous. I 
wanted to know Montreal intimately. I went looking for her in the city’s 
restaurants, bars, parks and festivals; and I found hints of her in these 
iconic and tangible spaces. But my real sense of understanding came when I 
started intuitively navigating the city’s metro system.

All of a sudden, something clicked. I started carving paths for myself across 
the whole city. I knew where to wait for the doors to open in a busy crowd, 
knew which end of the platform to embark on depending on my final station, knew 
which of six confusing exits would take me exactly where I needed to go. I like 
to think I literally know parts of Montreal inside and out.

These days, I’ve been making a point of stopping to read all of the plaques 
around the metro network. Turns out, there are tons of them sprinkled across 
the city, and they tell rich and insightful stories. They help me add context 
and intricacy to my city’s narrative.

After the flood: Vienna's struggle to make its refugee residents feel at home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/04/vienna-migration-crisis-refugees-refuge-cities-residents>
Since I first arrived here, my definition and sense of home has changed. I’ve 
found home in a feeling and in the familiar rhythm down new metro steps. Home 
is in the three notes that play right before Montreal’s metro staff announce a 
system-wide shut down. Home is instinctively waking up from a nap seconds 
before it’s time to step out at my intended metro stop. Home is knowing which 
of the network’s hallways have the best acoustics and echo. Today, home is most 
definitely Montreal.”(Sarah McMahon-Sperber, moved to Montreal in 2003) 

Brussels, Belgium

“Belgium is a notoriously hard country to integrate into, but after the 
bombings in March this year I have felt more a part of the social fabric than 
ever before. I have spoken to many people outside of my normal social 
structures and I now feel like Belgium is my turf. All our opinions matter and 
we all need to share our experiences; this process brings us closer together.”
(Anonymous, moved from Dublin to Brussels in 2001)

Paris, France

“I knew I was well-assimilated the first time I dropped my keys and said ‘merde
’ to myself instead of its English equivalent.”(John Agee, moved from Los 
Angeles to Paris in 2006)

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 