
There are several activities for tourists in the riverside villages south of 
Myanamar’s biggest city Yangon. Some take rickshaw rides around the fruit 
market or visit local pagodas. Others go to a private orphanage and spend the 
day unsupervised with a child.

“Tourists take the children out, to the zoo or downtown,” said the head of one 
orphanage of 16 children, a small wooden house built on stilts in flooded 
fields.

As Myanmar braces for mass arrivals following decades under military rule, 
Unicef <http://www.unicef.org/> is warning against the spread of “orphanage 
tourism”, whereby the institutionalised care of minors turns into a business, 
with children from poor families recruited to pose as orphans and extract money 
from well-meaning foreigners.

Myanmar's absent generation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/sep/29/myanmars-absent-generation>
Already firmly established in Cambodia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia> and Indonesia, children separated 
from their families are exploited as fund-raising tools, and in some cases 
their living conditions are kept deliberately unsightly to extract donations 
from visitors.

In its worse form, sexual predators have exploited the unrestricted access to 
children.

“Myanmar could see an exponential increase in the number of orphanages over 
the coming decade, especially in tourist destinations,” Aaron Greenberg, Unicef 
Myanmar’s chief of child protection, told the Guardian.

“Such an increase in orphanage care could violate the rights of tens of 
thousands ofMyanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> children,” he 
added. “We need to act before orphanages dot the landscape.”

The country already has a culture of children from impoverished backgrounds 
being placed in government-run facilities, called training schools, where their 
parents believe they will receive a better education. And many thousands of 
others go to live in monasteries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Forphanage-tourism-fears-of-child-exploitation-boom-as-myanmar-opens-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91b0afb22a636a8e7f34d3a9c061e44f5174d7de%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Orphanage%20tourism'%3A%20fears%20of%20child%20exploitation%20boom%20as%20Myanmar%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Forphanage-tourism-fears-of-child-exploitation-boom-as-myanmar-opens-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Orphanage%20tourism%27%3A%20fears%20of%20child%20exploitation%20boom%20as%20Myanmar%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Forphanage-tourism-fears-of-child-exploitation-boom-as-myanmar-opens-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91b0afb22a636a8e7f34d3a9c061e44f5174d7de%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Children’s shoes lined up outside the front door of a private orphanage in 
Myanamar. Photograph: Oliver Holmes for the Guardian 
There is no data on how many unregistered private orphanages there are in the 
country but guides and hotels report that tours are in demand. One five-star 
hotel in Yangon had an orphanage visit on a stop for its river trip but has 
since ceased.

Many of Myanmar’s visitors are socially minded backpackers or retirees wanting 
to help the developing country, donating their dollars or euros to a worthy 
cause.

But Unicef points to nearly 100 years of research which it says shows that 
even the best institutionalised care puts children at risk of abuse and makes 
them vulnerable to psychological and developmental disorders.

It says the levels of violence in orphanages are known 
<http://www.thinkchildsafe.org/thinkbeforevisiting/resources/Families_Not_Orphanages_J_Williamson.pdf>
 to be higher than in families; children raised in orphanages are known to have 
problems making healthy social attachments in adulthood; are more likely than 
their peers to have problems with substance abuse or come into conflict with 
the law; and children’s intellectual and emotional development is negatively 
impacted by orphanage care.

Even the word orphanage can be a misnomer, as in most cases of 
institutionalised care around the world the children still have one or both 
parents alive, Unicef says.

Of the 17,322 children at registered orphanages in Myanmar, only 27% 
<http://www.unicef.org/myanmar/Residential_Care_Survey_Report_-english.pdf> are 
actual orphans, Unicef found. It fears that the growth of orphanage tourism 
could separate many more minors from their families.

The children at the facility visited by the Guardian appeared to be in good 
health, drawing pictures in books on the floor and playing games. The owner, a 
Christian pastor, said he established the orphanage 18 years ago to help 
children from all over the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Forphanage-tourism-fears-of-child-exploitation-boom-as-myanmar-opens-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12154ae1374dd4fe32a9358f836d35618ea3b841%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Orphanage%20tourism'%3A%20fears%20of%20child%20exploitation%20boom%20as%20Myanmar%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Forphanage-tourism-fears-of-child-exploitation-boom-as-myanmar-opens-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Orphanage%20tourism%27%3A%20fears%20of%20child%20exploitation%20boom%20as%20Myanmar%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Forphanage-tourism-fears-of-child-exploitation-boom-as-myanmar-opens-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12154ae1374dd4fe32a9358f836d35618ea3b841%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Piled-up clothes and mattresses at a private orphanage in Myanmar. Photograph: 
Oliver Holmes for the Guardian 
However, immediately on entering, he made clear that donations were normally 
given and lamented the poor conditions of the orphanage — the small kitchen 
with a wood-fire oven, the single toilet, the one room where all 16 sleep. And 
he lauded how tourists had donated considerable sums of money. Some had bought 
bags of rice laid out in the room, he said.

The children had been found from across the country, he said, taken from 
“aunts, uncles and grandparents” deemed unable to look after them. “Sometimes 
the father is a drunk,” he said.

Unicef and other aid organisations promote kinship care, whereby children are 
looked after by living parents or extended families, who are provided with 
financial support as well as frequent supervision by social workers. The cost, 
Unicef says, is still much lower than institutionalised care.

But these alternatives do not exist in Myanmar, Greenberg said. “Currently 
there is no strategy in Myanmar for preventing children growing up in 
institutions,” he said, although he added the government has shown an interest 
in getting this issue on the agenda.

Leaflets warning visitors not to visit orphanages are placed in hotels and 
airports. And to show the government the industry’s damaging impact, Unicef 
arranged for a delegation of senior officials to visit Cambodia in 2014 where 
15 years of orphanage tourism has led to an entrenched crisis.

The damage to the lives of thousands of children in Cambodia is a startling 
case study for Myanmar.

Unicef says that as the numbers of tourists in Cambodia grew by 75% over the 
last few years, the number of orphanagesalso grew by 75% 
<http://www.unicef.org/eapro/Study_Attitudes_towards_RC.pdf>, sprouting up 
around tourist areas.

Sinet Chan, a 26-year-old Cambodian whose parents died from Aids, was taken to 
an orphanage by her neighbours when she was nine but was immediately put to 
work on a nearby farm and was often punished and denied food.

The director of the orphanage raped her, she said.

Foreign tourists would make day trips to the orphanage of around 100 children 
and leave donations, which the director pocketed. If they gave books, clothes 
or food, he would sell them back to the market, Chan said.

Story of cities #47: Myanmar rising – how democracy is changing Yangon's 
skyline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/20/myanmar-democracy-yangon-changing-skyline>
“The director wanted us to dress up poorly,” she said. “We needed to perform 
to make the tourists happy, like a dance or a show.”

Some tourists would volunteer for several months and she developed strong 
attachments. When they left, she felt abandoned.

One volunteer was Tara Winkler, an Australian woman who subsequently rescued 
Sinet and others and set up a theCambodian Children’s Trust 
<https://www.cambodianchildrenstrust.org/> to help reintegrate children with 
families from institutions involved in orphanage tourism.

“We realised that these kids weren’t orphans at all. They missed their 
parents,” she said.

“The important thing to note is that institutions that are corrupted and 
keeping children in poor conditions, that is the worst of the worst. But even 
the very best institutions are harmful to children. It kind of doesn’t matter 
how bad the institution is. It’s causing child-parent separation. The damage 
lasts generations.”

Myanmar plans to conduct more research into orphanages with Unicef’s support 
over the coming months and senior officials will meet again with their 
Cambodian counterparts at aconference on child rights in Malaysia 
<http://billion-brains.org/> in November.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Forphanage-tourism-fears-of-child-exploitation-boom-as-myanmar-opens-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4fd9addc8c1b082581b7292bdbe15b7c45e4503%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Orphanage%20tourism'%3A%20fears%20of%20child%20exploitation%20boom%20as%20Myanmar%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Forphanage-tourism-fears-of-child-exploitation-boom-as-myanmar-opens-up%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Orphanage%20tourism%27%3A%20fears%20of%20child%20exploitation%20boom%20as%20Myanmar%20opens%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Forphanage-tourism-fears-of-child-exploitation-boom-as-myanmar-opens-up%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4fd9addc8c1b082581b7292bdbe15b7c45e4503%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 Flooded fields in Dala, an area south of Yangon in Myanmar where tourists can 
visit orphanages. Photograph: Oliver Holmes for the Guardian 
After the Myanmar delegation returned from its Cambodia trip, the government 
issued a temporary moratorium on registering new orphanages, although in 
practice it is still possible to set up an unregistered facility.

Swiss child relief agency Terre Des Hommes is already working to reintegrate 
children 
<https://www.tdh.ch/en/projects/reintegration-children-detained-city-streets-myanmar>
 back into their families. Starting with government-run training schools it has 
moved more than 700 children home, some of whom were picked up by police on the 
streets and considered to be orphaned.

And Swe Zin Oo, secretary general of the Myanmar Tourist Guides Association, a 
body of around 4,000 guides, said her group is now trying to stop travel agents 
from selling orphanage visits.

In one part of Yangon, she said, there was an orphanage run by a Korean man.

“He was working it as a business,” she said. “There were 20 to 30 children 
trapped in a house.”

But with an emergent tourism industry, she says, many guides work alone and do 
not know how harmful the tours can be.
 