
Earlier this week, according to Twitter, Miley Cyrus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/miley-cyrus> died. “What an awful thing to 
wake up this morning and one of the first things you see is#RIPMileyCyrus 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23RIPMileyCyrus&src=typd>!” tweeted Perez Hilton 
<https://twitter.com/ThePerezHilton/status/765176194425688065>. “My heart sank! 
THANKFULLY she’s fine!!”. Having spent most of the day near the top of 
Twitter’s list of worldwide trends – so often in 2016 a morbid roll call of 
genuine celebrity deaths – it took a while for people to work out how and why a 
hashtag proclaiming the death of a very much alive pop star had captured 
people’s imagination. The answer? Fan wars.

Twitter has tended to be a safe-ish medium for pop stars to manipulate when 
they have something to promote, with the more rabid fans (or “stans”) 
encouraged to get things trending in order to unlock “exclusive content”. 
Increasingly, however, hashtags are being used by groups of fans – “fandoms” – 
not to promote stars, but as weapons in the murky world of online wars. Various 
fandoms, used to feeding off the thrill of interacting with their idols, and 
emboldened by being grouped together and named (Lady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lady-gaga>’s Little Monsters, Justin Bieber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/justin-bieber>’s Beliebers, Rihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna>’s Navy), have decided to make their 
own entertainment. Namely, they start Twitter “parties” that prematurely 
celebrate the end of a pop star’s career (#CharliePuthIsOverParty 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/charlieputhisoverparty?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Ehashtag>
 trended on Wednesday after the singer allegedly replied to a fan with the word 
“die”).

So what brought about Cyrus’s Twitter-only death? The hashtag was traced back 
to a fallout between fans of Bieber and those of K-Pop boyband Exo 
<http://www.inquisitr.com/3420254/miley-cyrus-racist-twitter-exo-kpop-trend-ripmileycyrus/>
. Both said their idols were more popular after the two performed on the same 
night in separate venues. A fan of Cyrus, perhaps noticing an opportunity to 
throw the cat in among the already excitable pigeons, made some fairly 
derogatory comments about K-pop fans, and the hashtag emerged shortly after (as 
with most of these trending hashtags, it’s unclear exactly who started it; some 
K-pop fans even accused Cyrus fans of doing it to make them look bad).

K-pop fan Ram, whose tweets trying to explain the whole sorry situation were 
retweeted nearly 700 times, thinks these new, more chaotic fan wars are a 
demonstration of loyalty. “I don’t know about other fandoms, but here in the 
K-pop fandom if you see someone bashing your idols you should stand up and 
defend them,” she says. “I feel like my fandom is my family. They’re people you 
love and you should defend people you love. Them being happy is important to 
us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4690d6280bff622b62b2569f5969bd3bef4ff3d%2F0_0_2992_2323%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23RIPMileyCyrus%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20online%20fan%20wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23RIPMileyCyrus%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20online%20fan%20wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4690d6280bff622b62b2569f5969bd3bef4ff3d%2F0_0_2992_2323%2F2992.jpg>
 Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez in 2012. Photograph: PictureGroup/Rex Features 
Another soldier of the short-lived #RIPMileyCyrus Twitter war was Jorge 
Flores, a K-pop fan from Baytown, Texas. Like Ram, he was moved to act by a 
need to defend the honour of his idols. “The K-pop community is definitely a 
family,” he says, citingTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>
 as the only way someone from a small US Midwest town has of interacting with 
his idols. “We argue here and there about small stuff, but when someone attacks 
any of us, we gather together and put people in their place. The positive thing 
about being part of a fan army is that you always have someone watching your 
back – we have a shoulder to lean on, and someone to cry with who understands 
where we are coming from. We are supporting our idols, too. When they are 
having a hard time, we step in and make them feel better, and fight off any 
negativity.”

Another fan “fighting off negativity” is Selena Gomez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/selena-gomez> and Taylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> fan Sean Arcilla, who lives in 
the Philippines. More a messenger of peace, Arcilla’s aim is to spread unity, 
one hashtag at a time. “First of all, fans with hatred in their hearts started 
these hashtags,” he says. “Some people are joining in because they want to 
defend their affected idol, but some people are just making fun of it, and 
enjoying tweeting the hashtag so it will trend easily. I miss the old days, to 
be honest.”

For Bradley Stern, editor-in-chief of the PopCrush website 
<http://popcrush.com/>, these hashtags are part of the fans’ sense of 
entitlement in an age of direct digital access. “This all lends itself to the 
false notion, especially by young fans, that we are owed something from these 
people,” he says. “The air of mystery has now entirely gone as a result, as 
more and more pop stars attempt to cultivate this relatable brand of 
interaction with their fans. So we’re invited to feel this false sense of 
intimacy becauseNick Jonas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/09/nick-jonas-last-year-was-complicated-review-single-sad-and-highly-sexed-pop>
 tweeted you directly with a winky face, for example.” Arcilla, however, sees 
things differently. “I am a fan of Selena and Taylor, but if I’m owed something 
from them, then what is it? It’s the music. The speeches. The help they give to 
us fans. If they make a mistake then I will prove to them that a mistake is 
only a mistake. Because our idols are people, too.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ff52845ba1b1921db7a167d5c930c1065c98784%2F20_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23RIPMileyCyrus%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20online%20fan%20wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23RIPMileyCyrus%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20online%20fan%20wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ff52845ba1b1921db7a167d5c930c1065c98784%2F20_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 The Necki Menij Show. Photograph: YouTube 
Increasingly, this sense of direct connection between pop star and fan, and 
the allure that link holds, is blurring the power dynamic. Some fans seem to 
want to cause online chaos to get the attention their slightly wary idols are 
now not so keen to give them. “I think celebrities are starting to distance 
themselves from the voices of their stan communities, which maybe drives some 
people to come up with something so controversial that the artist is forced to 
speak out,” says David Monger, creator of popstar parody YouTube channelThe 
Nekci Menij Show <https://www.youtube.com/user/GingerTheHorse>. “At this point, 
things move so quickly you have maybe a few hours to get your campaign going by 
any means necessary. It’s an environment where attention is the most valued 
commodity, and if you’re trending, I guess you’re rich.”

Justin Bieber quits Instagram after feud with Selena Gomez
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/16/justin-bieber-quits-instagram-selena-gomez>
One recently trending topic, #SorryJustinBieber 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/sorryjustinbieber> – started after Bieber closed 
down his Instagram account following a spat with ex-girlfriend Selena Gomez (
#JustinDeactivatedParty 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/justindeactivatedparty?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Ehashtag>
) – was actually used as a trap by Bieber’s fans. Rather than showing a stream 
of tweets apologising, it was full of anger at Bieber for daring to close his 
Instagram account in the first place (shutting down a social media account, a 
fan’s best way into your world, is tantamount to slamming a door in their 
face). “I think there are a certain amount of fans who love their favourite 
artists so much, they are actually mean to them. It’s almost the same as making 
fun of your sibling, in a way,” says Stern. “You love them, but you’re allowed 
to pick on them because you really ‘get’ them. And that can get scary.” For 
Flores, it’s a fan’s only way of showing the pop star how their behaviour 
affects them, even if it means grabbing their attention under false pretences. 
“When a fandom is hurt, they will literally try anything to get the message 
across to their idol.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb866a43caf724607fdf15bb5871f36b7fb4a121c%2F0_53_4352_2814%2F4352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%23RIPMileyCyrus%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20online%20fan%20wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%23RIPMileyCyrus%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20online%20fan%20wars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fhashtags-hatred-ripmileycyrus-rise-online-fan-wars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb866a43caf724607fdf15bb5871f36b7fb4a121c%2F0_53_4352_2814%2F4352.jpg>
 Demi Lovato. Photograph: RMV/Rex/Shutterstock 
In the days of 80s and 90s pop megastars, it was fairly easy to gauge how 
successful they were using sales figures, chart placings and ticket sales. Now 
the water is murkier, with the less controllable world of social media playing 
a crucial role in galvanising a fanbase into streaming songs, watching videos 
and showing off their loyalty, with sites such as Billboard running online 
competitions to find out “Whose Army is the Strongest? 
<http://www.billboard.com/fan-army-bracket/>”. With fans conditioned to monitor 
their idol’s every movement, there’s a real sense of investment that heightens 
the scrutiny the pop star finds themselves under. Earlier this week, for 
example, singer Demi Lovato’s mum posted a video on Snapchat in which she made 
a joke about the Zika virus. Demi could be heard laughing in the background. 
Within minutes the hashtag#DemiLovatoIsOverParty 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23DemiLovatoIsOverParty> was trending, leading 
to an apology from Lovato 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/demi-lovato-forced-apologise-after-8625740>
. “Nowadays, one dodgy comment can literally end your career,” Monger says. 
“These ‘party’ hashtags are a massive exaggeration, but in that moment, fans 
might feel like that person has just alienated their whole fanbase 
permanently.” For rival fandoms looking to stick the knife in, such slip-ups 
are seized upon. “Pop fans have never been thirstier to police and label 
someone problematic or petty or shady, because above all else, it provides them 
with some added entertainment,” Stern says.

As with most things in pop, there’s a sense of transience, with thetrend of 
pop-star-bashing hashtag “parties” hopefully a fad that will die out. The 
trending hashtags usually only last a couple of hours, with their shelf life 
only extended by confused fans trying to work out the conversation or people 
jumping on the bandwagon. “A Twitter trend explodes and disappears, and then 
another rises up,” Stern says. “The cycle continues.” Somewhere along the line, 
however, that cycle has morphed, with the passion that’s always been at the 
heart of pop now strangely mutated.
 