
Samer al-Ahmed remembers the size of the small hatch near the bottom of his 
cell door because he was regularly forced to squeeze his head through it. The 
prison guards would then straighten it out, so his throat was pressed against 
the edge of the hatch, and jump on his head with all their weight, until blood 
started flowing across the floor.

It is one of the many methods of torture used in Saydnaya military prison, 
Syria’s most notorious jail, a hidden complex now brought to life in aharrowing 
interactive digital model <https://saydnaya.amnesty.org/> as part of Amnesty 
International’s work to raise awareness of the darkest untold stories of 
President Assad’s brutal regime.

A black spot on the human rights map, the high-security prison has been off 
limits to journalists and monitoring groups in recent years. It stands 25km 
north of Damascus, near the ancientSaydnaya monastery <http://saidnaya.com/> 
where Christians and Muslims have prayed together for centuries. A mute 
concrete trefoil isdiscernible from Google Earth 
<https://goo.gl/maps/XbNt3fC2ieo>, standing in the centre of a 100-hectare 
desert compound. Nothing has been known about what goes on inside until now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsaydnaya-prison-syria-assad-amnesty-reconstruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45335949e61f53814dcc3fd77f91e56337b9b525%2F0_0_866_481%2F866.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20worst%20place%20on%20earth'%3A%20inside%20Assad's%20brutal%20Saydnaya%20prison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsaydnaya-prison-syria-assad-amnesty-reconstruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20worst%20place%20on%20earth%27%3A%20inside%20Assad%27s%20brutal%20Saydnaya%20prison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsaydnaya-prison-syria-assad-amnesty-reconstruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45335949e61f53814dcc3fd77f91e56337b9b525%2F0_0_866_481%2F866.jpg>
 Amnesty’s reconstruction of Saydnaya prison. Photograph: Amnesty 
International/Forensic Architecture. 
To coincide with the launch of a damning new report, 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-37113748> which estimates that 
17,723 people have died in custody in Syria since the crisis began in March 
2011, Amnesty has collaborated with theForensic Architecture 
<http://www.forensic-architecture.org/> agency at Goldsmiths, University of 
London, to reconstruct the site.

“As we pieced together the model, we realised the building isn’t only a space 
where incarceration, surveillance and torture take place,” says Eyal Weizman, 
director of ForensicArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>, “but that the building 
is, itself, an architectural instrument of torture.”

Weizman’s provocative work – tagged “the architecture of public truth 
<http://www.sternberg-press.com/?pageId=1488>” – has tackled everything from the
spatial strategies 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Hollow-Land-Israels-Architecture-Occupation/dp/1844678687>
 of the Israeli Defence Force in Palestine tomapping drone strikes 
<http://www.forensic-architecture.org/case/drone-strikes/> in Afghanistan and 
thetopography of genocide 
<http://www.forensic-architecture.org/case/guatemala-operacion-sofia/> in the 
Guatemalan jungle. His team is practically unique in the field of 
“architectural forensics”, using the designer’s spatial toolkit to build 
damning bodies of evidence used in both UN investigations and trials in the 
international criminal court.

For Amnesty, the team began an intensive process of interviewing former 
detainees of Saydnaya prison who escaped across the border to Turkey, to build 
up a detailed picture of the facility.

The prison is an echo chamber: one person being tortured is like everyone 
being tortured. You cannot escape it
Abu Hamdan 
“Architecture is a conduit to memory,” says Weizman, describing how an 
Arabic-speaking architect built a digital model on screen as detainees 
described specific memories and events. “As they experienced the virtual 
environment of their cells at eye level, the witnesses had some flashes of 
recollection of events otherwise obscured by violence and trauma.”

Inmates were constantly blindfolded or forced to kneel and cover their eyes 
when guards entered their cells, so sound became the key sense by which they 
navigated and measured their environment – and therefore one of the chief tools 
with which the Forensic team could reconstruct the prison layout. Using a 
technique of “echo profiling”, sound artistLawrence Abu Hamdan 
<http://lawrenceabuhamdan.com/> was able to determine the size of cells, 
stairwells and corridors by playing different reverberations and asking 
witnesses to match them with sounds they remembered hearing in the prison.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsaydnaya-prison-syria-assad-amnesty-reconstruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88e0a8deeec7507130c8e26f00aac5f446b93d26%2F0_0_2856_1338%2F2856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20worst%20place%20on%20earth'%3A%20inside%20Assad's%20brutal%20Saydnaya%20prison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsaydnaya-prison-syria-assad-amnesty-reconstruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20worst%20place%20on%20earth%27%3A%20inside%20Assad%27s%20brutal%20Saydnaya%20prison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsaydnaya-prison-syria-assad-amnesty-reconstruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88e0a8deeec7507130c8e26f00aac5f446b93d26%2F0_0_2856_1338%2F2856.jpg>
 Samer and Jamal’s group cell – part of the Amnesty reconstruction. Photograph: 
Amnesty International/Forensic Architecture. 
“Like a form of sonar, the sounds of the beatings illuminated the spaces 
around them,” says Abu Hamdan. “The prison is really an echo chamber: one 
person being tortured is like everyone being tortured, because the sound 
circulates throughout the space, through air vents and water pipes. You cannot 
escape it.”

“Ear-witness” testimonies have become a crucial form of evidence, he says, 
citing the recent examples of the shootings ofTrayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trayvon-martin> and Michael Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michael-brown-shooting>, as well as the 
Oscar Pistorius case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/reeva-steenkamp-shooting>, where sound 
played a crucial role in unpicking what happened. “Unlike vision, sound leaks 
into other people’s spaces,” he adds. “People might not be facing an incident, 
but they can still have an acoustic experience of it.”

Deprived of their visual sense for months and years on end, the Saydnaya 
detainees developed an acute aural sensitivity, able to identify the different 
sounds of belts, electrical cables or broomsticks on flesh, and the difference 
between bodies being punched, kicked or beaten against the wall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsaydnaya-prison-syria-assad-amnesty-reconstruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5876d0f298668b705acb3018d4450430ca7ae2fd%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='The%20worst%20place%20on%20earth'%3A%20inside%20Assad's%20brutal%20Saydnaya%20prison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsaydnaya-prison-syria-assad-amnesty-reconstruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27The%20worst%20place%20on%20earth%27%3A%20inside%20Assad%27s%20brutal%20Saydnaya%20prison&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fsaydnaya-prison-syria-assad-amnesty-reconstruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5876d0f298668b705acb3018d4450430ca7ae2fd%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 The digital modelling team at work. Photograph: Amnesty International/Forensic 
Architecture. 
“You try to build an image based on the sounds you hear,” says Salam Othman, a 
former Saydnaya detainee, in a video interview. “You know the person by the 
sound of his footsteps. You can tell the food times by the sound of the bowl. 
If you hear screaming, you know newcomers have arrived. When there is no 
screaming, we know they are accustomed to Saydnaya.” During punishments, 
inmates were forbidden from making a sound. Any squealing only prolonged the 
torture.

This shameful betrayal of humanity in the face of mass suffering must stop

Another detainee recounts details of the “welcome party” 
<https://saydnaya.amnesty.org/?kind=video&id=12> – the terrifying initiation 
ceremony that awaited new arrivals, fresh off one of the“meat fridge” trucks 
<https://saydnaya.amnesty.org/?kind=location&id=reception> used to transport 
prisoners, clueless to their whereabouts until the doors clanged open. Beatings 
with metal bars and cables were followed by so-called “security checks”, during 
which women in particular were subjected to rape and sexual assault by male 
guards. “As we waited for our turn, we heard the sounds of beating, of people 
falling out of the truck, we heard people scream,” says Jamal Abdou. “Everyone 
was screaming – the guards and the prisoners.”

6×9: A virtual experience of solitary confinement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/apr/27/6x9-a-virtual-experience-of-solitary-confinement>
Abdou and Ahmed spent the first five months of their incarceration underground 
in a freezing-coldsolitary confinement cell 
<https://saydnaya.amnesty.org/?kind=location&id=solitary-1>, a space just 2.35m 
by 1.65m, designed for one person but used to hold up to 15 people at a time, 
forced to take turns sitting down in the cramped room. They recall days at a 
time when the water was cut off, forcing them to drink from the toilet gutter, 
inducing hallucinations and waves of hysteria when the sound of water dripping 
through the pipes returned. “When I closed my eyes, I started seeing 
waterfalls,” says Ahmed.

The point of recreating this gruesome torture centre in such vivid detail, 
says Weizman, is twofold. It is not only a tool to induce further testimony, 
but serves as a powerful form of advocacy: “The aim is to get this place shut 
down and ensure that Assad is no part of any future peace deal.” Links on the 
Amnesty site direct readers to send a message to “tell Russia and the US to use 
their global influence to ensure that independent monitors are allowed in to 
investigate conditions in Syria’s torture prisons”.

“For years Russia has used its UN security council veto to shield its ally, 
the Syrian government,” says Amnesty’s Philip Luther, “and to prevent 
individual perpetrators within the government and military from facing justice 
for war crimes and crimes against humanity at the international criminal court. 
This shameful betrayal of humanity in the face of mass suffering must stop now.”

For Diab Serriya, who was imprisoned in Saydnaya from 2006 to 2011, the 
reconstruction serves as a lasting reminder.

“I lost five years of my life there, I nearly died there,” he says. “I just 
want it to remain so that other generations will see this horrible place, where 
we were tortured. The world should know it’s the worst place on earth.”
 