
Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370> disappeared 
on 8 March 2014, mid-flight from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing with 239 people 
onboard. Two and a half years later, despite the multi-million-dollar 
investment and efforts of three countries, the plane has yet to be found.

There have been traces. Two pieces of aircraft debris found washed up on 
remote beaches of the Indian Ocean have been confirmed as being fromMH370, with 
the latest – an outboard flap from Pemba Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/malaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane>
 – discovered only this month. Four more pieces are almost certain to be from 
the lost plane.

MH370: debris found in Madagascar in June still not collected by Malaysia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/mh370-debris-madagascar-malaysia-not-collected>
Earlier this month, the Malaysian transport minister, Datuk Seri Liow Tiong 
Lai, said that 22 potential pieces of aircraft debris had been found so far, 
along the coastlines of South Africa, Mozambique, Mauritius and Tanzania. 
Fourteen of these fragments have been found by one man, Blaine Alan Gibson, the 
result of an independent, self-funded investigation he began 18 months ago. 
Several are under investigation or awaiting pickup by authorities, but one –a 
horizontal stabiliser, stencilled with the words “NO STEP” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/mh370-debris-finder-says-he-thought-it-was-from-a-smaller-plane>
, which Gibson found on a sandbank in Mozambique in late February – is almost 
certainly from MH370.

Gibson is most often described as a Seattle-based lawyer. He prefers 
“adventurer”. He can speak six languages, and has said it is his dream to go to 
every country in the world. Mozambique, where he was technically on holiday, 
was number 177 on the list. “I’ve stopped at that because I’m trying to find 
the plane,” he says. “There are other places I want to go, but the plane isn’t 
there.”

Wearing hiking boots, head-to-toe khaki tones and a slouch hat – a new 
acquisition – atop a thatch of hair, he dresses as if he is courting 
comparisons with Indiana Jones (a Google search reveals that the strategy has 
worked).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32ace03d9a7a75a85bcd81fa9c6a7f6b2b904382%2F0_0_4096_2731%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%8BThe%20man%20on%20a%20solo%20mission%20to%20find%20%E2%80%8Bthe%20wreckage%20o%E2%80%8Bf%E2%80%8B%20flight%20MH370&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%8BThe%20man%20on%20a%20solo%20mission%20to%20find%20%E2%80%8Bthe%20wreckage%20o%E2%80%8Bf%E2%80%8B%20flight%20MH370&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32ace03d9a7a75a85bcd81fa9c6a7f6b2b904382%2F0_0_4096_2731%2F4096.jpg>
 Volunteers gather debris found on Réunion island, in August 2015. Photograph: 
Arnaud Andrieu/EPA 
The look, topped off with a badge reading “The search for MH370: Keep it on”, 
is striking when we meet in a bookshop-cum-cafe in an inner-city Sydney suburb, 
but Gibson has been living out of his suitcase for a while. He passed his bar 
exams in 1993, but has rarely practised (his father, Phil S Gibson, served as 
chief justice of the California supreme court from 1940 to 1964). It’s been 
decades, in fact, since his life has conformed to a standard nine-to-five.

Malaysia confirms debris found near Tanzania is from missing MH370 jet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/malaysia-confirms-debris-near-tanzania-missing-mh370-plane>
Now in his late 50s, he is not married. He does not have children. He has an 
apartment in Seattle, but no car any more. “Everything I spend is on travel, 
and I’ve always liked the travel to have a purpose.” In the past, that has 
meant being present for significant political or historical events – he was in 
Red Square “when the red flag came down” on the last day of the Soviet Union. 
Or it can be “to solve some mystery”, such as his trips to Guatemala and 
Belize, to uncover the fate of the Mayan civilisation, or Siberia, to learn 
about the Tunguska meteorite, thought to have created a blast as powerful as 
1,000 Hiroshimas in 1908.

MH370 is his latest mission and, he says, his most successful. “This one is 
special because the others have been for history and interest, and this one is 
for the families, because it means so much to them to get some traces of 
answers.”

When the plane disappeared, he was on an infrequent trip back to the US, 
tasked with selling the family home in California that – with his parents both 
gone, and his constant globetrotting – had become a burden. “I sat glued to the 
TV more than I normally would because I had to be there to sign documents, do 
inspections, sort through all my family memories.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febb3858f5a4b4f80bb7c58a99218851bd43a8359%2F203_0_2572_1544%2F2572.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%8BThe%20man%20on%20a%20solo%20mission%20to%20find%20%E2%80%8Bthe%20wreckage%20o%E2%80%8Bf%E2%80%8B%20flight%20MH370&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%8BThe%20man%20on%20a%20solo%20mission%20to%20find%20%E2%80%8Bthe%20wreckage%20o%E2%80%8Bf%E2%80%8B%20flight%20MH370&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Febb3858f5a4b4f80bb7c58a99218851bd43a8359%2F203_0_2572_1544%2F2572.jpg>
 Plane debris from MH370 found in South Africa. Photograph: EPA 
Gibson spent much of the next year in Laos, helping friends set up a karaoke 
bar, but maintained an active interest in the search in discussion groups on 
Facebook. One such group,MH370 In Search of the Truth 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/MH370InSearchOfTheTruth/>, now has more than 
3,600 active members; Gibson was one of the first.

He flew to Kuala Lumpur for the public service marking the first anniversary 
of the plane’s disappearance, and was moved by a “heart-rending” speech given 
by Grace Subathirai Nathan, whose mother was on the plane and who continues to 
speak on behalf of the families of missing passengers.

“That made me think this is something that maybe I can do – to do what I love 
doing anyhow, travel and solving mysteries, but also have a reason for it.” He 
is now friends with Nathan, and many other MH370 families.

Scorched debris could suggest missing MH370 plane suffered fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/scorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire>
First, he flew to Myanmar and Cambodia, not far from Laos, to explore the 
possibility that the plane had flown north. Then he interviewed local people in 
the Maldives who had reported seeing a jet plane the morning MH370 disappeared 
(their accounts contradicted satellite data and were set aside). In July 2015, 
a six-foot flaperon wing wasfound on Réunion island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/reunion-debris-flaperon-malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-confirmed>
, east of Madagascar – and Gibson’s search area was narrowed down.

Since finding the horizontal stabiliser panel in February, he seems to have 
tracked down potential pieces of MH370 faster than investigators can assess 
them, or even pick them up – he says six itemshave been awaiting collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/mh370-debris-madagascar-malaysia-not-collected>
 in Madagascar by Malaysian authorities for more than three months.

He has come to Sydney from Canberra, where he handed six further fragments 
found in Madagascar over to Australian investigators for analysis. Two 
apparently showed signs of charring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/scorched-debris-missing-mh370-plane-fire>
, raising the possibility there was a fire onboard the plane before it crashed. 
(Two weeks later, the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) found the dark 
colouration was not caused by exposure or fire, but did not rule out a possible 
link to MH370.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b7e9963c2348b00b53b6fe906fd70b5444b024%2F0_0_3000_2271%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%8BThe%20man%20on%20a%20solo%20mission%20to%20find%20%E2%80%8Bthe%20wreckage%20o%E2%80%8Bf%E2%80%8B%20flight%20MH370&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%8BThe%20man%20on%20a%20solo%20mission%20to%20find%20%E2%80%8Bthe%20wreckage%20o%E2%80%8Bf%E2%80%8B%20flight%20MH370&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b7e9963c2348b00b53b6fe906fd70b5444b024%2F0_0_3000_2271%2F3000.jpg>
 An Australian investigators’ map showing the Indian Ocean search area in 2015. 
Even allowing for misses, Gibson’s successes have been remarkable, especially 
given his lack of professional expertise and resources. He has no prior 
aviation experience, although he says he is learning. “I know now what pieces 
of a plane look like. I’ve probably held in my hands more pieces of Malaysia 
370 since it crashed than anyone alive.”

His methods are simple: he looks on beaches, he puts the word out with locals, 
he checks shacks, because large pieces of metal are valuable construction 
materials. It’s slow and labour-intensive in comparison with the initial search 
effort in March 2014, two weeks after the plane disappeared, when 22 military 
aircraft and 19 ships from eight countries covered areas of more than 4.6m sq 
km.

Although Malaysia holds overall responsibility for the accident investigation, 
the ATSB has led the underwater search since April 2014. When Gibson finds 
debris, he notifies Australian and Malaysian authorities, although it is 
Malaysia’s responsibility to retrieve potential evidence.

Search for MH370 may be extended by Australia if funding can be found
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/search-for-mh370-may-be-extended-by-australia-if-funding-can-be-found>
The official search of a 120,000 sq km arc of ocean, determined from satellite 
data and drift modelling as the most likely site of the wreck, is expected to 
be completed in December. With less than 10,000 sq km to go, itseems 
increasingly likely it will be unsuccessful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/17/mh370-search-decreasing-possibility-plane-will-be-found-say-authorities>
. But Gibson rejects the idea that he is doing a better job than the ATSB. 
“They’re out there in 20-metre waves, miserable, cold, trying to find something 
6,000-metres deep. I’m walking along a beach picking things up after the ocean 
has done its work,” he says. “It’s not fair to compare the two of us ... and 
what they have the possibility of finding, which is the black boxes – I mean, 
that’s the holy grail.”

In early September, he and relatives of the missing passengers met the crew of 
the Fugro Equator, one of the search vessels, in port in Fremantle, Western 
Australia. “There were choked-back emotions and tears from these tough guys out 
on the boat,” says Gibson. “They really care, they’re really dedicated, and I 
hate to see the media trash them, trash the ATSB ... they really want to find 
this plane.” For the ATSB’s part, a spokesman says Gibson’s efforts have 
reinvigorated public interest in the search, and led to more members of the 
public coming forward with items.

Gibson is less effusive about the Malaysian authorities, who he has found to 
be slow to retrieve potential evidence. But “more frustrating” are people, 
particularly journalists, who cherrypick evidence to suit their “pet theories” 
– of which there are plenty. “Sometimes it seems to me that I’m the only person 
who doesn’t know where the plane is and what happened to it,” he says.

He singles out an Australian primetime current affairs programme that claimed 
in its “special investigation” that the plane’s fuselage was intact under 
water, even though he believes he has found debris from the cabin interior. “I 
was holding pieces – you’ve seen the pictures. I’m not under 600 atmospheres of 
pressure, it’s not dark, I’m breathing normally. I wasn’t underwater,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb607c2dd4ebc472b0dcc20b0de7b701a5d83190%2F0_155_3457_2074%2F3457.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%8BThe%20man%20on%20a%20solo%20mission%20to%20find%20%E2%80%8Bthe%20wreckage%20o%E2%80%8Bf%E2%80%8B%20flight%20MH370&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%8BThe%20man%20on%20a%20solo%20mission%20to%20find%20%E2%80%8Bthe%20wreckage%20o%E2%80%8Bf%E2%80%8B%20flight%20MH370&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fthe-man-on-a-solo-mission-to-find-the-wreckage-of-flight-mh370%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb607c2dd4ebc472b0dcc20b0de7b701a5d83190%2F0_155_3457_2074%2F3457.jpg>
 Gibson, second from left, with relatives of passengers on MH370 including 
Grace Subathirai Nathan, second from right, after a meeting in Canberra, 
Australia. Photograph: Mark Graham/AFP/Getty Images 
Worse still, he says, are theories implicating the captain of MH370, Zaharie 
Ahmad Shah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/flight-mh370-was-flown-into-water-says-crash-expert>
. New York magazine reported in July that aroute plotted on his home flight 
simulator “closely matched” that taken by the plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/mh370-pilot-flight-simulator-plot-course-southern-indian-ocean>
. The story was authored by Jeff Wise, a high-profile but controversial 
commentator on the search for MH370 who has posited a number of theories, 
including that it was hijacked and flown to Kazakhstan on Vladimir Putin’s 
instruction. But, says Gibson, even if it wasn’t a stretch to interpret a 
simulated route as evidence of planning, to say the two routes “closely 
matched” is just not true.

The evidence thus far points to a high-speed impact that shattered the plane, 
including the main cabin – inconsistent with a controlled glide by a suicidal 
pilot.

“There is nothing in the background of this pilot to indicate that he would 
want to end his life or everybody else’s – nothing,” he says. “The only 
evidence against him is the absence of any other explanation. That’s not 
enough.”

MH370 pilot's flight simulator plotted course over southern Indian Ocean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/mh370-pilot-flight-simulator-plot-course-southern-indian-ocean>
Gibson says he has been “trolled, attacked and slandered” by an “online army 
of armchair assassins”, who have accused him of having reported planted debris, 
even planting it himself. A cyber-attack on The Hunt for MH370 website, after 
it published his report on the possible sighting in the Maldives, seemed 
professional, he says, although he does not know if his detractors are paid to 
discredit him, or “just mean people”.

He insists that he is driven only by the desire to find out what happened to 
the plane. “The problem with Malaysia 370 is there are too many theories and 
not enough evidence. I can tell you what we do know. The plane crashed in the 
Indian Ocean, somewhere south of the equator and north of 39 degrees south 
[latitude] – probably more likely north of 34 degrees south.

“It did not crash in the Gulf of Thailand. It did not crash in the Bay of 
Bengal. It is not buried in the sand of Kazakhstan. It is not south of 40 
degrees, because then debris would have gone to Australia and Tasmania – and it 
wasn’t abducted by aliens.” He says it is possible that there was an emergency 
that crew members tried and failed to respond to. It is also possible that the 
plane was hijacked.

There is no neat narrative, which, he accepts, people find difficult. But 
speculation at least fuels the search.

“As long as the interest remains in solving this mystery, I am content, 
because we need the search on until we do [solve it],” says Gibson. “What 
bothers me are the easy answers that cause us to say: ‘Mystery solved, sweep it 
under the rug for ever, pin it on the pilot.’ I don’t like the easy answers.”

Gibson is hopeful the search will continue, in some form, beyond December. His 
investigation continues: “I’m hooked now.” However, he believes governments, 
airlines and manufacturers – even those not directly linked – should play their 
part.

“We have to solve this mystery. It’s not just for the families, it’s for the 
flying public, who need to be sure what happened never happens again. We need 
to know that when we get on a plane, yeah, it may crash, things happen. But 
it’s not going to just disappear.”
 