
When visitors arrive at my unconventional street, their first comment is 
usually: “This isn’t at all like London”. Nestled among trees on a hillside, 
the 13 half-timbered boxes are routinely mistaken for prefabs, an artists’ 
colony, Swiss chalets, eco-houses, a kibbutz, Scandinavian holiday cabins, 
Jamaican beach houses – or even a Japanese temple.

In fact, they are the product of an unusual 1980s self-build housing project 
designed by the pioneering architectWalter Segal <http://www.waltersegal.org/>, 
and run by the London Borough of Lewisham in south London.

The cul-de-sac is the result of a collaboration between enlightened 
councillors keen to shorten the housing waiting list, a group of determined 
locals and a visionary Berlin-born modernist architect. Walter Segal may not be 
a household name, but he was the only living architect to have twoLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> streets named after him: Walters Way 
and Segal Close – names chosen by the residents.

Segal died 30 years ago, in October 1985, before Walters Way was finished. The 
street has welcomed visitors as part ofLondon Open House 
<http://www.openhouselondon.org.uk/> weekend since 1989, but this year’s event, 
from 19–20 September, will be extra special, with a day of talks followed by
three Segal/self-build streets 
<http://events.londonopenhouse.org/Venues?q=segal> being opened to the public 
on the Sunday: Walters Way, Segal Close and Greenstreet Hill. The Architecture 
Foundation has also made a new short filmabout our housing estate 
<http://www.architecturefoundation.org.uk/programme/2015/walter%E2%80%99s-way-the-anarchist-housing-estate>
.


Segal was the only living architect to have two London streets named after 
him: Walters Way and Segal Close
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0JbqJNAUOR8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0JbqJNAUOR8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0JbqJNAUOR8&media=>
Although there are only around 200 Segal buildings in the UK, he has a strong 
fan-base among architects and designers, especially those with an interest in 
community and sustainability. Enthusiasts include Grand Designs’ Kevin McCloud,
whose self-build company HAB <http://www.habhousing.co.uk/> is partly 
Segal-inspired. Architecture columnist Tom Dyckhoff describes Segal as one of 
his three design heroes. Modern interpretations of the Segal ethos includethe 
WikiHouse <http://www.wikihouse.cc/> and projects of the Turner Prize nominated 
design collective Assemble. 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tramway/exhibition/turner-prize-2015/turner-prize-2015-artists-assemble>

Neighbours have grown used to a steady stream of architects, students, 
photographers and filmmakers who want to sample the Segal experience. We mostly 
welcome the attention, because we want to see more of this type of housing and 
hope those responsible – councillors, town planners and developers – take note 
and remember Segal when they are designing the cities of the future.

Walter Segal was born and educated in Berlin. He spent his childhood in 
Switzerland near an artists’ community, and his first commissioned building was 
a small wooden summerhouse there. In the 1930s, he lived in Mallorca where he 
studied and built houses in the local style. There are signs of Swiss, 
Mediterranean and German modernist influences in the Lewisham self-build 
houses. In 1962, while rebuilding his own house in Highgate, London, he created 
a temporary home in the garden for his family. The wood cabin cost £800 and 
took two weeks to build. Known as the Little House in the Garden, this 
temporary structure lasted over 50 years. Segal was surprised to find that the 
Little House got more attention than his permanent new home. Colleagues and 
clients were intrigued by this quick and economical way of building. The design 
– a wooden frame, insulation and weatherproof shell – was the prototype for 
what became known as the Segal self-build method.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec9039e1605a10f40f587b19e21424a2e5a1cfd6%2F0_379_5686_3412%2F5686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20isn't%20at%20all%20like%20London'%3A%20life%20in%20Walter%20Segal's%20self-build%20'anarchist'%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20isn%27t%20at%20all%20like%20London%27%3A%20life%20in%20Walter%20Segal%27s%20self-build%20%27anarchist%27%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec9039e1605a10f40f587b19e21424a2e5a1cfd6%2F0_379_5686_3412%2F5686.jpg>
 Segal was impressed by the potential of people building their own houses. 
Photograph: James Drew Turner for the Guardian 
The Little House was built by carpenters. The self-build element came later, 
when a client fell out with his builders. Jon Broome is an architect who worked 
with Segal and managed the Lewisham projects. He explains: “[The client] told 
Walter he had sacked the builders and was going to do it himself, and Walter 
was very impressed by the potential of people just building their own houses.”

What Segal did was design lightweight, simple, cheap buildings made mostly of 
timber. He removed the need for bricklaying and plastering, and reduced the 
foundations to simple concrete bases. As Broome describes: “Walter reinvented 
building from first principles and reduced it to its simplest terms which led 
to the post and beam frame. His idea was that you would use readily available, 
inexpensive materials and you would use them in their bought sizes.”

In the late 1970s, after much negotiation, self-building emerged as a way to 
help people into low-cost home ownership. Broome recalls how Segal had a 
natural affinity for the self-builders: “He was dead keen on people having 
input into how they were designed. He sat down with each household and figured 
out the plans with them.”

Dave Dayes and his partner Barbara Hicks were chosen to join the scheme in 
1983. At the time, they were living in a small council flat and jumped at the 
chance to build their own home, despite their experience being limited to 
putting up shelves. Dayes remembers Segal reassuring him that “all you need to 
do is to be able to cut a straight line with a saw and drill a straight hole”. 
He admits: “It looked rubbish to start with, but by the time we’d done it for 
the umpteenth time, we were quite professional.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36f0cb5b13379b670b6bce108b340a811c373d58%2F0_0_3349_5027%2F3349.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20isn't%20at%20all%20like%20London'%3A%20life%20in%20Walter%20Segal's%20self-build%20'anarchist'%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20isn%27t%20at%20all%20like%20London%27%3A%20life%20in%20Walter%20Segal%27s%20self-build%20%27anarchist%27%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36f0cb5b13379b670b6bce108b340a811c373d58%2F0_0_3349_5027%2F3349.jpg>
 In the late 1970s, self-building emerged as a way to help people into low-cost 
home ownership. Photograph: James Drew Turner for the Guardian 
It took two years – fitting in construction work around day jobs and young 
children. Barbara Hicks remembers a community spirit developing quite early on: 
“There was a lot of peer-group support. If you needed more hands to lift 
something up, they’d come and help you. We’d be working on our individual 
homes, but when it was time to raise the main frame of the house, the whole 
group would stop what they were doing and come and help.”

At the end of the project, the builders had the chance to buy their homes and 
all eventually took up the offer. What was social housing is now privately 
owned. But despite newcomers like myself, the sense of community started by the 
self-builders has remained.

I hadn’t heard of Walter Segal before moving in nearly a decade ago. The house 
was cheaper than others in the area. The estate agent’s only comment was that 
they were “a bit different”.

What I saw when I first visited was: children playing outside in the street, 
neighbours discussing where to put solar panels and lots of trees. There seemed 
to be a combination of calmness and community spirit that is quite rare in a 
big city such as London. This was Walter’s intention. The shape of the street 
seems to encourage interaction. The tiny turning gently curves down a slope, 
with houses placed at different angles. The shape is especially noticeable at 
the street’s annual party, when guests congregate around a music stage placed 
at the bottom.

As it’s a private road, inhabitants are responsible for certain utilities such 
as street lighting and road maintenance. Residents regularly gather for Sunday 
morning street-cleaning sessions to brush away the leaves that fall from the 
numerous trees.

As the houses are lightweight and timber-framed, they don’t need foundations. 
Instead, the houses are built on stilts – meaning they can be much closer to 
trees. So, for example, our tiny garden has two London plane trees, and next 
door there is a Wellingtonia. The stilts also mean houses can be built on land 
unsuitable for conventional houses.

Segal believed that a house should adapt to its occupants, not the other way 
round. The construction method means the walls can be moved and the homes 
extended more easily than in most houses. Dave Dayes explains: “Walter Segal 
said that the house should be able to adapt to your changing needs. It did for 
us, because when we first started building we had two children. Just after we 
finished, a third one arrived and we had a fourth six years later. So we have 
extended the house in stages.”

Being adaptable, the homes are also a great canvas for eco-innovation. The 
Dayes family has added solar panels, a ground source heat pump and clad the 
house in fast-growing, durableAccoya wood <http://www.accoya.com/>. Other 
neighbours have added insulation and triple-glazed windows.

The Segal scheme has now inspired a new generation to create well-designed 
eco-friendly community housing. Kareem Dayes is the son of Dave Dayes and 
Barbara Hicks. He was inspired by his parents’ self-build experience to launch 
his own community self-build project. His project,Rural Urban Synthesis Society 
<http://www.theruss.org/>, is a community land trust. They are negotiating with 
Lewisham council to build low-cost homes on a nearby vacant site.


We hope those responsible remember Segal when they are designing the cities of 
the future
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5b21c4fc1cea53cc292544eea1f2eaee55e546%2F0_50_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20isn't%20at%20all%20like%20London'%3A%20life%20in%20Walter%20Segal's%20self-build%20'anarchist'%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20isn%27t%20at%20all%20like%20London%27%3A%20life%20in%20Walter%20Segal%27s%20self-build%20%27anarchist%27%20estate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F16%2Fanarchism-community-walter-segal-self-build-south-london-estate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5b21c4fc1cea53cc292544eea1f2eaee55e546%2F0_50_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 “There seems to be a combination of calmness and community spirit that is 
quite rare in a big city such as London” … Resident Alice Grahame. Photograph: 
James Drew Turner for the Guardian 
He explains: “The houses probably won’t have the Segal aesthetic, but they 
will have the ethos. Growing up in Walters Way – and knowing that my parents 
built our house – taught me that there is an alternative to buying on the open 
market, and that houses don’t need to be made from bricks and mortar. Even 
though most of the self-builders have gone, the spirit of collaboration lives 
on.”

No one has come up with a good explanation of why these designs never went 
mainstream – either as social housing or private developments.

It is not surprising that most of us who live in Segal houses want others to 
know about this remarkable architect’s contribution to city life. He brought a 
modernist European aesthetic with clean lines and big windows to London’s 
conservative housing mix. Segal made good architecture available at low cost 
and empowered ordinary Londoners to build their own homes, which, in turn, 
brought people together as a community.

Alice Grahame (@alicesangle 
<https://twitter.com/alicesangle?ref_src=twsrc^google|twcamp^serp|twgr^author>) 
is a London-based freelance journalist focusing on the built environment and 
sustainability. Follow Guardian Cities onTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

 * The headline on this article was amended on 17 September 2015. Quotation 
marks were added to reflect that it was the Architecture Foundation that had 
referred to the estate as anarchist.
 