
On a hot practice field at the Hale Football Center in Piscataway, New Jersey, 
Chris Ash rolls a large rubber ring across the FieldTurf. A member of the 
Rutgers defense runs forward, low-slung, helmet glinting in the sun, and hits 
it with his right shoulder.


NFL limps toward modernity after severing ties with maligned CTE 'expert'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/20/elliot-pellman-nfl-doctor-cte-brain-trauma>
The head coach picks up the ring, barks advice, then rolls it again. The 
player runs low and hits with the left, head tucked to the side, legs driving 
through the tackle. A rugby tackle, in other words, carried out over and again 
next to a glistening scarlet endzone.

“This game is under attack,” Ash says later, sitting in the shade of the 
stadium on the last day of summer, fall and football looming. “We want it to be 
a safer game, we want it to be a game that’s around for a long time, we want it 
to be a game that parents feel safe about their sons playing.

“It’s our job to make that happen. If there are safer ways to coach and teach 
and improve the game, then that’s our obligation.”

Hence the ring, and hence Rutgers’ work with, and Ash’s seat on the advisory 
board 
<http://rugby.atavus.com/atavus-creates-technical-advisory-board-comprised-of-leading-minds-in-football/>
 of,Atavus <http://www.atavus.com/>, a Seattle-based company that wants to 
improve safety in football tackling via the introduction of rugby techniques.

Football – pro, college, high-school, Pop Warner – has a serious problem with 
head injuries. Suicides among former pros –Dave Duerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/jul/19/nfl-star-brain-injuries-destroyed>
,Junior Seau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/19/junior-seau-brain-concussion-gq> 
– have shone a brutal light on a sport built on collision, much of it 
head-to-head and head-to-body. Hollywood madea conspiracy thriller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/concussion-will-smith-nfl-head-trauma-review-mark-kermode>
. In real life, the NFL reacheda $1bn, 65-year settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/18/nfl-concussion-settlement-upheld-retired-football-players>
 with affected ex-players. There have beendeaths in high-school games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/05/second-high-school-football-player-dies-in-space-of-a-month>
.

Ash, a defensive specialist, is in the first year of a contracted five at 
Rutgers, a deal worth$11m guaranteed 
<http://www.nj.com/rutgersfootball/index.ssf/2015/12/here_are_the_contract_terms_for_new_rutgers_footba.html>
. He previously worked at Drake, San Diego State, Iowa State, Wisconsin and 
Arkansas and for his new team’s opponents on Saturday, Ohio State. Two years 
ago, while with the Buckeyes, he saw a YouTube video in which Pete Carroll 
explained why his Super Bowl-winning Seattle Seahawks,inspired by rugby and 
working with Atavus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/02/seattle-seahawks-coach-pete-carroll-tackles-safety-rugby>
, were seeking to take the head out of the tackle.

Players naturally were doing rugby-style tackling. We felt it was a more 
effective way to tackle, a safer way
Chris Ash 
“My son found it.” Ash says, “It wasn’t me that was looking for something. But 
I studied it over and over and over. It was thought-provoking, it made me 
listen to the coaching points [Carroll] was making about how they tackle and 
why they tackle, so I went on a couple of months’ research project, 
re-evaluating what we taught and what was actually showing up on game film.

“I was teaching tackling a certain way, the way that most coaches have been 
taught themselves, but as I studied game film from everywhere that I’d been … I 
couldn’t find it on film. So I said, ‘There’s something really wrong here. 
Either we’re really bad coaches or our players are resistant to what we’re 
coaching them to do, because it’s not there.’”

Traditional football tackling, head across the body and “bite the ball 
<http://www.bucsnation.com/2012/4/23/2967681/greg-schianos-defensive-philosophy-explained>
”, was not just dangerous. It didn’t really work and the players seemed to know 
it.

At Ohio State, Ash said, this “caused us to basically self-evaluate, to make 
what was happening on film happen on the practice field. And what we found was 
… players were doing rugby-style tackling on the game field. We felt it was a 
more effective way to tackle, it was a safer way to tackle and it’s what our 
players did naturally anyway.”

Game film is Ash’s lodestar. Watch the game film, study the game film, show 
the game film. At practice, three cameras watch from cranes as the defense runs 
against the offense of the next foe. That’s two and a half hours’ more film to 
analyse and, where tackling is involved, to send foranalysis by Atavus 
<https://football.atavus.com/>.

‘It’s a violent tackle but the head’s out of it’

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7HihjPApzCg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7HihjPApzCg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7HihjPApzCg&media=>
 In a video from 2014, Seattle Seahawks coach Pete Carroll discusses his use of 
rugby tackling. 
World Rugby’s zero tolerance on head injuries is not just a pipe dream
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/25/world-rugby-head-injuries-sean-ingle>
On the sideline, as linemen the size of Alps amble past, Ron Lloyd 
<http://q13fox.com/2016/08/28/former-uw-qb-damon-huard-and-ron-lloyd-of-atavus-talk-huskies-season-preview-rugby-style-tackling/>
 shows me the other way of tackling, the football way. Basically, he headbutts 
me – gently – in the kidneys. I imagine such contact at full speed, the 
incoming head rattling in a shell of Riddell plastic.

Lloyd has a business background and missionary zeal. A high-school coach, he 
is ever-ready with an anecdote about his own days as a quarterback, a spiral 
pass with a spare ball, a stat or a fact on the game. He’s also president of 
football for Atavus.

Practice and game film from teams working with Atavus – Rutgers, Washington, 
Ohio State, Nebraska, a spread of high-school programmes – is sent to Seattle 
for analysis. Under Lloyd andcoach Rex Norris 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rKP3ulEXRK8>, Atavus also provides coach 
training, designed drills and bespoke online support, all designed to make 
coaches and players “Atavus Tackle Trained <https://football.atavus.com/>”. 
Such services have a price: Nebraska,the Associated Press reported 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/80435d5d352c46dcaf21282a8d1b7256/huskers-other-teams-see-rugby-style-tackling-heady-move>
, is paying Atavus $100,000 in 2016 and $80,000 in 2017.

At Rutgers, players keep hitting the ring, rolling on the turf with the hit. 
To a rugby eye, it’s a slightly odd sight.


“We don’t coach the roll,” Lloyd says, with attention to minutiae typical of 
football. “The roll is the outcome of a good tackle in a negative situation. A 
positive situation is a hit to stop the ball-carrier for no gain or a loss. A 
negative situation involves momentum: the man is brought down but he will gain 
yardage.


We are about helping get players in place to make a higher percentage of 
positive tackles – to dominate in the tackle
Ron Lloyd, Atavus 
“We are about helping get players in place to make a higher percentage of 
positive tackles in a game – what we call to dominate in the tackle.”

And therein lies the crux, and possibly the paradox, of the Atavus project. 
Teaching rugby tackling is meant to make tackles safer, not safe. Contact and 
collision sports can never be truly safe, and those who play or coach them will 
never wish them so.

“When we started teaching here,” says Ash, a driven and forensic coach who 
happily uses the word “clinic” as a verb, “we showed ’em video clips of rugby 
tackles, we showed ’em the physical nature of rugby tackles, how it is a 
violent tackle but the head’s out of it.


“If [rugby players] can do it, why can’t we? If they’re able to dominate 
ball-carriers the way they do, if they’re able to track ball-carriers the way 
they do, why can’t we do it out here in football?”

The “violent” hit remains the aim of the game. Nate Gerry 
<http://www.huskers.com/ViewArticle.dbml?ATCLID=206284439>, a safety for 
Nebraska, told the AP that though it took a while to get the rugby tackle into 
“muscle memory … the science behind it, the explosion of power and using your 
hips more … I like it.

“It’s supposed to be just as violent but safer than what we’ve been learning.”

By any standard, rugby is not safe. In union and league, concern is rising 
over the effects of head injuries. In the UK, scientists and doctors have 
called forjunior play to be non-contact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/02/rugby-union-debate-tackling-banned-schools>
 while former players tellalarming tales 
<http://www.bbc.com/sport/rugby-union/37171363> of a pro culture become 
obsessed with the hit.

I know from watching film we have reduced the number of blows to the head in 
tackling
Chris Ash 
Nor, in either sport, is the tackle the only collision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/07/some-teenage-rugby-injuries-as-bad-as-in-road-crashes-study-finds>
. In football, linemen clash in a clacking blur of helmets and padding. In 
rugby, without serious padding or helmets – which some say makes the game 
inherently safer, the head and body not having been weaponised – forwards 
nonetheless hit rucks and mauls at top speed, smashing bodies into bodies in a 
bid to win the ball.

Asked how Rutgers’ switch to rugby tackling is working, Ash says: “We don’t 
yet have any empirical data that says we’ve reduced the number of concussions. 
But I know from watching film we have reduced the number of blows to the head 
in tackling.


“Tackling hurts, let’s be honest. You’re going to throw your body in there, 
especially if you’re doing it head first, it hurts. But I see my players now 
attacking the ball carrier more, with more confidence and more violence, 
because their head is out of it.”


‘Rugby-like rules’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Frutgers-chris-ash-football-rugby-tackle-safety-atavus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2de37a6c73b1a2d41f6030ac38acb819dc8c4274%2F0_0_1792_1277%2F1792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20game%20is%20under%20attack'%3A%20Rutgers'%20Chris%20Ash%20uses%20rugby%20to%20tackle%20football%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Frutgers-chris-ash-football-rugby-tackle-safety-atavus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20game%20is%20under%20attack%27%3A%20Rutgers%27%20Chris%20Ash%20uses%20rugby%20to%20tackle%20football%20safety&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Frutgers-chris-ash-football-rugby-tackle-safety-atavus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2de37a6c73b1a2d41f6030ac38acb819dc8c4274%2F0_0_1792_1277%2F1792.jpg>
 Iowa Hawkeyes running back Akrum Wadley breaks a Rutgers tackle. Photograph: 
Langish/CSM/REX/Shutterstock 
Rutgers is 250 years old. A shade under 150 years ago, in November 1869 and on 
a field now buried under a gymnasium, it hostedthe very first game of college 
football <http://www.scarletknights.com/trads/history.html>: a 6-4 win over 
Princeton. It was 25-a-side, the Rutgers team wore scarlet turbans and the 
rules were “rugby-like”.

In September 2016, there isn’t much rugby-like about practice. Vast speaker 
systems play hip-hop – House of Pain, inevitably – as drills and reps runs in 
five-minute periods, everything at military clip. Coaches wear camo hats and 
shout at their men like sergeants. The more senior the coach the more raw the 
fury, the more commendations and condemnations peppered with parade ground 
f-bombs and, towards the end of the morning, the more hoarse the voice.

'It's been devastating': former NFL players count the cost of concussion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/25/former-nfl-players-concussion-movie-will-smith>
It’s a very male environment, very football, although other than when the 
linemen retreat to a small grid field-side and hurtle at each other to practice 
blocking, there isn’t much actual contact. This is a cultural development, 
partially underthe direction 
<http://www.ncaa.org/champion/limit-head-trauma-reducing-potential-collisions> 
of the all-powerful NCAA.

Some programmes have taken contact completely out of practice. In the Ivy 
League, for example,Dartmouth use a robot tackle dummy 
<http://thelab.bleacherreport.com/the-future-of-football-practice/> called the 
Mobile Virtual Player, orMVP <http://www.mobilevirtualplayer.com/>. Big Green 
coaches say players make between 500 and 800 tackles in practice each year, and 
figure that removing player-on-player contact has brought practice-field 
concussions down by 80%.

Other advocates of tackle-free practice cite studies 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/f2e42ca8fae040b0b70a177854108a07/dartmouth-coach-tackle-free-practice-reduces-concussions>
 that show that 60% to 75% of head-trauma incidents in high-school football 
happen in practice, not in games.

I ask Coach Ash how his players, none of whom had ever played or seen rugby 
before, are taking to their new tackling style.

“I look at when I was at Ohio State when we first started doing it in 2014,” 
he says. “We didn’t start doing it until training camp … it wasn’t really until 
the middle of the 2014 season that we saw it take off.

“Here we started in the spring, and I’m hoping everyone will be all in on what 
we’re doing, the confidence will be extremely high, and we’ll be a very 
effective football tackling team.”

The next measure of success will be taken on Saturday in Columbus, Ohio, when 
Rutgers face another Atavus-aidedBig Ten 
<http://www.bigten.org/library/stats/fb-confsked.html> team, its defense 
<http://www.sbnation.com/college-football/2016/9/22/13000126/ohio-state-defense-basic>
part-built by Ash 
<http://www.elevenwarriors.com/ohio-state-football/2016/09/74672/rutgers-coach-chris-ash-not-at-all-surprised-by-ohio-states-defense-this-season>
 and now led bya former Rutgers head coach 
<http://www.nj.com/rutgersfootball/index.ssf/2016/08/chris_ash_and_greg_schiano_a_player_who_knows_best.html>
, Greg Schiano.

In the AP <http://www.ncaa.com/rankings/football/fbs> rankings, Urban Meyer’s 
3-0 Buckeyes are No2 in the nation. Rutgers, at 2-2 aftera 14-7 home loss 
<http://www.nj.com/rutgersfootball/index.ssf/2016/09/rutgers_vs_iowa_honor_roll_3_starring_3_stumbling.html>
 to Iowa that was equal parts encouraging and frustrating, do not place. If 
nothing else, in front of more than 100,000 at the Horseshoe, the Scarlet 
Knights will have a chance to show the benefits of all that rugby tackling 
practice.
 