 Cities is supported by  
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/?source=100RC_Guardian_Banner_9.22&utm_medium=display&utm_campaign=100RC_Guardian_Banner_9.22>
About this content <> 
“China is so big,” marvels Victor Li, using his fingers to count all the 
cities he has flown to over the last 12 months to meet with cash-rich Chinese 
buyers interested in buying into a real-life game ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Monopoly.


Li, a director of international project marketing for the US real estate giant 
CBRE, is predicting a surge of eastern investment in British homes over the 
next decade, as increasingly affluent Chinese investors acquire a taste for 
international property.

“I think it is just beginning,” says Li, of the amount of money pouring into 
property around the world from mainland China. “You do the figures:China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has a population of 1.4 billion. If 
you target only 1% of China’s population, that’s 14 million people – so it’s 
already almost two Londons.”

Sitting in his office overlooking Hong Kong’s skyscraper-dotted Victoria 
Harbour, Li estimates that just 3% of potential Chinese investors in overseas 
property have so far been found – meaning a virtually untapped goldmine lies 
over the border in mainland China. “China is a big market, you know?” he says. 
“They are getting wealthier and wealthier.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96a400034ecdf8a49484e2f0fd3dd54dca508ba2%2F0_110_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20just%20the%20start'%3A%20China's%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20just%20the%20start%27%3A%20China%27s%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96a400034ecdf8a49484e2f0fd3dd54dca508ba2%2F0_110_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Victor Li in his Hong Kong office 
Rich Hong Kong investors have been ploughing money into British bricks and 
mortar for decades, snapping up off-plan apartments at weekly property fairs 
that can then be rented, flipped, held as investments or used as second homes.

“I have one [London property] in Canary Wharf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/28/canary-wharf-timeline-london-building-docklands-thatcher>
, one inCity Island <http://www.londoncityisland.com/>, one in Wembley Park, 
one in Elephant and Castle,” said one investor matter-of-factly at a recent 
expo in Hong Kong’s chic Mandarin Oriental Hotel, as he eyed a new development 
near the Thames Barrier in E16.

But many real-estate agents and property experts in east Asia believe a new 
wave of investment is just getting under way, as mainland investors develop a 
taste for international real estate, including postcodes up and down the UK.

“Our thesis – and this is supported by quite a lot of evidence – is that in 
many ways the international Chinese investment journey is probably just 
starting,” says Charles Pittar, chief executive ofJuwai.com 
<http://www.juwai.com/>, a website that aims to pair mainland buyers with 
property developers in places such as Australia, the US and the UK.

Pittar’s company, which lists 2.5 million properties and calls itself China’s 
largest international real-estate website, estimates that in 2014, Chinese 
outbound investment into residential and commercial property was more than 
$50bn (£38bn).

“I guess the key is: what is it going to become?” Pittar says. “Our view is 
that … it could be growing to somewhere around $200bn [annually] over the next 
10 years.”

And Britain, despite its decision to leave the EU, is expected to be one of 
the key focuses, he adds. “The UK market,particularly post-Brexit, is really 
picking up 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/london-property-house-prices-brexit-overseas-buyers-first-time-eu-referendum-housing-market-a7108026.html>
.”

Pittar traces mainland China’s hunger for overseas property back to the turn 
of the century, just beforeChina’s entry into the World Trade Organisation 
<https://www.wto.org/english/thewto_e/acc_e/s7lu_e.pdf> signalled the latest 
phase of its integration into the global economy. But the outflow of money has 
gathered pace over the past decade, and is set to grow further as middle-class 
investors from second- and third-tier cities get in on the game.

“It’s a big market now, but it is likely to be anywhere from two to four times 
the size in 10 years’ time,” Pittar says. “The exciting thing about China is 
that there are 168 cities with more than a million people. So this is just such 
a huge market.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0281f1262ee25c2a98163d135b56af4ea3cc2ab2%2F136_181_3128_2267%2F3128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20just%20the%20start'%3A%20China's%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20just%20the%20start%27%3A%20China%27s%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0281f1262ee25c2a98163d135b56af4ea3cc2ab2%2F136_181_3128_2267%2F3128.jpg>
 A poster for the new Royal Wharf development in London from a recent property 
show in Hong Kong. Photograph: Tom Phillips for the Guardian 
Li, who specialises in London properties worth up to £4m, concurs with the 
notion thatBrexit is helping to accelerate the boom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/08/confidence-housing-market-house-prices-rising-brexit-vote-rics-surveyors>
 in interest in the UK: “Some of my clients at the beginning of the year, they 
said: ‘OK Victor, let’s wait, wait, wait.’ And then, after they found out about 
Brexit and[the] sterling came down more than 10%, I got more calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/07/overseas-buyers-keen-to-exploit-weak-pound-to-buy-london-homes>
 – they want to go back into the market. It’s lots of saving,” he says with a 
grin.


According to Pittar, Chinese who buy property overseas have four main 
motivations: investment, lifestyle, emigration and education. Many are looking 
for a foothold in the UK, where they hope their children will go on to study.
“Some people are buying for their family to use it,” says Li, “some are buying 
to diversify, some are buying because they want to own a property for 
investment – and some people are buying for prestige, to say: ‘I own a piece of 
property in London.’”

Crucially, he says, London is also seen as a secure place to store money that 
investors want to move out of China, to guard against thedevaluation of the 
Chinese currency, the yuan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/13/perils-of-china-currency-devaluation-yuan-renminbi>
. “People in mainland China, they want to get their money out ... They believe 
that money out of China is safe money. And London is a safe-haven to park that 
money.”

The 50-year-old property salesman made his first foray into mainland China in 
2001, pitching a slice of Lambeth’s St George Wharf to would-be investors at a 
five-star hotel on Shanghai’s answer to Oxford Street.

People in mainland Chin​​a, they want to get their money out. London is a 
safe-haven
Victor Li 
Over the past year alone, Li has made almost 20 such trips, jetting out from 
his base in Hong Kong to cities includingGuangzhou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/10/china-pearl-river-delta-then-and-now-photographs>
,Chongqing <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/mar/15/china.china> and 
Chengdu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2014/dec/02/garden-cities-china-chengdu-letchworth>
 to meet with cash-flush Chinese buyers.

“This one is Macau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/macau> … This one is 
Shanghai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/23/inside-shanghai-tower-china-tallest-building-green-skyscrapers>
,” he says, flicking through photographs on his smartphone of recent seminars 
where he advertised luxury London developments such asClipper Wharf 
<http://www.berkeleygroup.co.uk/media/pdf/9/l/St-George-London-Dock-Clipper-Wharf.PDF>
 in E1 andCarrara Tower 
<http://www.berkeleygroup.co.uk/new-homes/london/islington/250-city-road/carrara-tower>
 on City Road.


Li says some mainland investors agree to buy apartments on the spot. “If they 
are interested, they reserve the unit – they just use a credit card. They have 
Union Pay, Mastercard or Visa: £5,000.”


Many of his mainland investors are real-estate tycoons who have made a fortune 
from their country’s economic boom, and now “just want to take the profits, 
cash out and move some of their wealth overseas”.

But Pittar believes the story of ordinary, middle-class investors is more 
significant than that of China’s globe-trotting, Ferrari-driving elite. “What 
we read in the newspapers is always about the very wealthy Chinese who come and 
buy a £5m, £10m, £15m property. But the middle class is key. How big is the 
middle class? It could be 120 million. We tend to think it’s probably closer to 
150 million.

“Once they’ve got somewhere to live in China, the reality is that the domestic 
market is quite expensive, so that’s why they are looking more for 
international opportunities. Like anyone who wants to preserve their wealth, 
diversification is important.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec48f66e3b0b2fcc7facf0d19629d955d283dd87%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20just%20the%20start'%3A%20China's%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20just%20the%20start%27%3A%20China%27s%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec48f66e3b0b2fcc7facf0d19629d955d283dd87%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
 London’s Nine Elms redevelopment: property in the UK capital is seen as both 
prestigious and secure in China. Photograph: Frantzesco Kangaris for the 
Guardian 
Predictions that a new wave of investment from mainland China is on the 
horizon will stir further debate over the measures British politicians might 
use toprotect local home buyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2015/nov/21/foreign-buyers-british-property>
.

The anticipated influx of money from mainland China into the UK is set to 
affect not only London – historically the focus for much east Asian investment 
– butcities such as Manchester 
<http://www.todaysconveyancer.co.uk/news/slough-manchester-top-foreign-property-investment-outside-london/>
, Liverpool and Birmingham, to which more of the investment is now heading.

“Those seem to be the hotspots,” says Neil Jensen, the Hong Kong-based 
regional director for London estate agent Fraser & Co, who promotes 
developments in the capital to Asian investors.

A particular spotlight has been shining on Manchester since last October, when 
Chinese presidentXi Jinping toured the city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/23/chinese-president-xi-jinping-manchester-visit-northern-powerhouse-status>
 to lend his support to George Osborne’s “northern powerhouse” project during 
his first state visit to Britain.

Jensen says Fraser & Co, founded in 1995 
<https://www.linkedin.com/company/fraser-&-co>, has traditionally specialised 
in London properties which it markets internationally through offices in Dubai 
and Hong Kong. Now, however, he is preparing to offer his clients their first 
major investment opportunity outside the capital, in a project specifically 
designed to attract Chinese money.

Called “New Chinatown” – or Xinhua Bu (New China Wharf) 
<http://www.newchinatownliverpool.com/> in Mandarin – the £200m venture in 
Liverpool describes itself as “one of the most important and exciting 
developments in the UK today” and promises to be “one of the UK’s most 
luxurious and desirable residential destinations”.


You can’t just put up a block of flats in Liverpool and expect people to buy 
it – there has to be a story
Neil Jensen 
The development’s website boasts: “It is the burgeoning energy and dynamism of 
modern China transplanted into the heart of an historicWorld Heritage City 
<http://www.ovpm.org/en/cities>.” Adding: “This is an historic moment … This is 
a unique investment opportunity.

“Underpinning the whole masterplan is the idea and motif of the awakening 
dragon – a powerful symbol of China’s resurgence and status as a new global 
power.”

Jensen says improving transport infrastructure in the northwest and relatively 
low prices meant New Chinatown – wheretwo-bedroom duplex penthouses are on 
offer for up to £546,427 
<http://www.rightmove.co.uk/new-homes-for-sale/property-61725386.html> and 
ordinaryone-bedroom flats from £119,211 
<http://www.zoopla.co.uk/new-homes/details/41305302> – would be a hit with 
Chinese investors.

“You can’t just put up a block of flats in Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> and expect people to buy it … If you 
want foreign buyers there has to be a story,” he says, adding: “They’ll 
probably go quite quickly.”

The fringes of London have also come onto the radar of Chinese investors, 
thanks toCrossrail, a £14.8bn, 73-mile metrolink 
<http://www.crossrail.co.uk/news/articles/new-images-show-crossrails-london-tunnelling-marathon-making-good-progress>
 cutting west to east across the capital, which is set to open in 2018.

“Most of your investors 20 or 30 years ago would have been going more towards 
the bullseye in dartboard terms,” Jensen says, referring to the centre of 
London. But improved transport links are now drawing foreign investors to 
places such asSlough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/slough-has-most-foreign-owned-properties-outside-london>
, Ilford and Canning Town.

“The commuter area – anything within a 20-30 minute travel time [of central 
London] is hot,” says Jonathan Gordon, a director atIP Global 
<http://www.ipglobal-ltd.com/en/>, a Hong Kong property investment firm that is 
promoting projects in Ilford and Croydon and has previously invested in Slough.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66b43a68b6ce9bc62843ebec3b10ca20f3e33b96%2F0_229_2469_1481%2F2469.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20just%20the%20start'%3A%20China's%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20just%20the%20start%27%3A%20China%27s%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66b43a68b6ce9bc62843ebec3b10ca20f3e33b96%2F0_229_2469_1481%2F2469.jpg>
 Mercury House, a new development in Slough being marketed in Hong Kong. 
Illustration: Fraser & Co 
“Slough has got Crossrail going through it so you can get to Bond Street in no 
time,” he says. “It is those sorts of stories we are interested in as opposed 
to buying in Bond Street itself.”

Crossrail is not the only reason foreign investors are now looking to the 
outskirts of the capital, though. Investors and industry insiders say stamp 
duty increases targeting wealthy foreign investors have pushed up the cost of 
buying more expensive properties in prime locations.

That has led many foreign investors to buy a larger number of cheaper 
properties in more peripheral, suburban areas 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/foreign-investors-buying-up-flats-in-suburbs-after-stamp-duty-hike-a3336676.html>
, says Gordon, where “transaction costs are lower.”

One veteran Hong Kong investor, with a portfolio that includes properties in 
London,Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> and Liverpool, 
explains: “You buy a large number of properties, but lower-priced ones … You 
pay something like £200,000 or £250,000, rather than £1m for zone one in 
Mayfair, places like that.”

This new wave of Chinese investors includes people such as Jody Ye, a 
30-year-old from Chongqing, a metropolis in south-west China. In July, Ye paid 
£200,000 for a flat in Bristol, where she went to university and now lives. She 
is planning to buy her second UK property.

“Buying property back home is too expensive,” she says. “Investing in the UK 
is much more cost-efficient.” Bristol is not only “a great place”, but, she 
adds: “British people think Bristol is posh.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcd7350e982f7d7bc0017e85b9c458771e7ec4ff%2F0_417_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20just%20the%20start'%3A%20China's%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20just%20the%20start%27%3A%20China%27s%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcd7350e982f7d7bc0017e85b9c458771e7ec4ff%2F0_417_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 The Hong Kong headquarters of Juwai.com 
Fan Feifei, 34, from Xi’an, is another Chinese buy-to-let 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/buying-to-let> investor. She is preparing to 
purchase her third property in Birmingham. “I bought it purely for investment,” 
she says of her second purchase, a £135,000 home in B29, which she rents to 
overseas students.

“Since 2014, Chinese people have been rushing to buy houses in the UK,” adds 
Fan, pointing to high rental yields and stable property prices as key driving 
factors. “All of the Chinese people around me are buying houses or have already 
bought several houses in the UK. I’m the one who has bought the least, with 
only two.”

Song Dongzhe, a third mainland investor, from the north-eastern city of 
Dalian, bought his first British property – a three-bedroomed house in Selly 
Oak, south-westBirmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> – in 2012 
for £125,000. Earlier this year he bought two more.

Song says the UK is “very attractive to Chinese property investors”, largely 
because it does not have the high duties that have been introduced in Canada 
and Australia targeting foreign buyers.

High prices in London make it “too risky” to buy there, he adds. But “as the 
UK’s second biggest city, I thought Birmingham was a choice that made sense”.

A fourth mainland investor, who declines to be named, says President Xi’s tour 
of the UK convinced him Britain was the right place to invest his family’s 
fortune. Property in major Chinese cities such as Beijing, Shanghai and 
Shenzhen is now too expensive, the Shanghai investor says, andChina’s stock 
market is “extremely unstable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/china-stock-market-crisis-explained>
 – so I think it’s a good time to invest in [the] UK.”

As well as London, he says he is now looking at opportunities in cities such 
as Birmingham, Manchester and Edinburgh.

Underlying discontent

Speaking in his Hong Kong office, property promoter Gordon predicts that, as 
has happened elsewhere in the world,concern over foreign investment in British 
property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/25/sadiq-khan-condemns-foreign-investors-london-homes-gold-bricks-housing-policy>
 will eventually lead to the introduction of measures to protect local buyers. 
“There is that underlying discontent in some camps to say: ‘Well, it’s not on, 
it’s not fair – releasing and selling all this property overseas.’

“I wouldn’t be surprised if, going forward, there is some legislation that 
says a certain percentage of properties have to be sold or marketed locally for 
a period of time, and then it is fair game overseas [after that].”

Australia, currently the second biggest destination for Chinese property 
investmentafter the United States 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/chinese-investment-in-australian-real-estate-doubles-1460265591>
, has beencracking down on foreign buyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/03/foreign-investors-face-crackdown-on-australian-property-purchases>
 since last year, after complaints thatChina’s voracious appetite for property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/12/chinas-rich-seek-shelter-from-stock-market-storm-in-foreign-property>
 in cities such as Sydney and Melbourne was pricing local buyers out of the 
market.

Hong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong>, a semi-autonomous 
city that returned to Chinese control in 1997, has also been fighting to quell 
a huge wave of often speculative mainland investment in residential property. 
In a bid to rein in sky-high prices, authorities in the former colony have 
rolled out a series of cooling measures in recent years, including tighter 
lending rules and higher stamp duties.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94451892758ac936b2dcdfa1e88820e24ba4f47d%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20is%20just%20the%20start'%3A%20China's%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20is%20just%20the%20start%27%3A%20China%27s%20passion%20for%20foreign%20property&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Finside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94451892758ac936b2dcdfa1e88820e24ba4f47d%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Hong Kong has been battling a huge wave of investment from mainland China in 
its residential property. Photograph: Marco Wong/Getty Images 
Victoria Allan, an Australian real estate entrepreneur who specialises in 
leasing and selling property on Hong Kong island, says: “The price point has 
moved so high in Hong Kong that it’s hard to buy a house any more for under 
US$10m that, five or six years ago, you could buy for $5m.”

Allan, founder of Habitat Property <http://www.habitat-property.com/>, says 
efforts to stem the flow of mainland money into Hong Kong have diverted a 
significant amount of Chinese investment elsewhere. “It’s moved into Australia 
and the UK; it’s moved into the US. And it has really pushed those markets up 
as well.”

Allan believes that the Hong Kong government pushed back too hard against the 
influx of mainland money, and advises British policymakers to avoid taking too 
drastic steps.

“I would definitely say: don’t shut it out totally. That was our mistake. I 
think Hong Kong has approached it too harshly. Why shut the door totally?”

By locking mainland Chinese real estate investors out, Allan argues, “the 
whole economy suffers, not just the property market. There has to be some kind 
of balance. We are supposed to be an international city.

“Maybe some tax is applicable,” she says, “but I think there is a way to 
manage it in a really positive way for everyone. Particularly if that is done 
in conjunction with town planning and helping direct the investment into towns 
and city centres that need assistance with good housing. There are great ways 
to take the investment.”

Buying property back home is too expensive. Investing in the UK is much more 
cost-efficient
Jody Ye 
Jensen also warns against demonising foreign investors, who he says play an 
essential role inhelping developers build new homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/05/london-housing-why-hong-kong-cash-in-colindale-is-not-all-bad>
. “You can’t be a world city and not have foreign investment.

“There’s a lot of schemes going up, but how on earth are they going to fund 
them?” he asks. “The banks don’t have the money … So you’ve got to rely on 
overseas investment, be it funding by way of people buying them, or by someone 
saying, ‘OK, we’ll buy the site and the development and we’ll sell it back to 
the Brits’.”

Li says he recognises the controversy surrounding foreign investment, but 
shrugs it off as a natural phenomenon: “I think even in Hong Kong we face the 
same problem. You just can’t avoid it; it’s supply and demand. Everybody wants 
to live in the best location, right?”

But not everyone is convinced Chinese investment in overseas property will 
continue to soar. Gordon says the scale of future investment will depend on the 
health of the Chinese economy, and the enthusiasm with which Beijing enforces 
capital controls limiting how much money individuals can remove from the 
country. Others believe the uncertainty caused byBrexit will put the brakes on 
further moves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/28/fall-uk-living-standards-foreign-investment-brexit-budget-recession>
 into the UK.

Concerns over the risk involved in some UK developments may also curb 
enthusiasm for off-plan investment. For months, rumours have been swirling in 
Hong Kong about major developments that appear to have collapsed after the 
developer went bust, leaving investors struggling to recoup their money.

Gentrification is a global problem. It's time we found a better solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/29/gentrification-global-problem-better-solution-oliver-wainwright>
During a demonstration outside the British consulate in July, protesters held 
up placards reading 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/economy/article/1990711/victims-call-british-help-over-property-scams>
: “Home is where the fraud is” and “A scam of two cities.”


Property <https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> industry insiders argue 
foreign investment from places such as China is helping to transform urban 
centres around the globe, and is the only way to finance affordable new homes 
in cities such as London.

“I think a lot of it will be positive on the basis that this is fuelling 
regeneration,” Gordon says of the coming wave of Chinese investment in UK 
property. “It’s creating jobs, it’s improving infrastructure, and it is making, 
generally speaking, the quality of life better.”

But London mayor Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> 
has warned against the capital’s homes being used“as gold bricks for investment”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/25/sadiq-khan-condemns-foreign-investors-london-homes-gold-bricks-housing-policy>
, and has spoken out over how some new developments are touted to foreign 
investors before local buyers.

“There is no point in building homes if they are bought by investors in the 
Middle East and Asia,”the mayor said in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/sadiq-khan-developers-housing-plan-london-mayor-affordable>
. “I don’t want homes being left empty. I don’t want us to be the world’s 
capital for money laundering. I want to give first dibs to Londoners.”

Additional reporting by Christy Yao in Beijing


Are you experiencing or resisting gentrification in your city? Share your 
stories in the comments below, through ourdedicated callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/19/city-resist-gentrification-displacement>
, or on Twitter using #GlobalGentrification
 