
Throughout our live week of in-depth reporting on Jakarta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/guardian-jakarta-live>, we’ve been 
asking residents to share their thoughts, photographs and experiences of life 
in the city, what needs to change, and what the biggest issues are. The 
response was overwhelming – thank you to everyone who contributed.

Best and worst of city life
ANISA (@naanisaaa) 
Jakarta is a mess. Jakarta is heaven. Jakarta is home. Jakarta is hell. 
Whatever it is, I always find my way back to it#guardianjakarta 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/guardianjakarta?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/naanisaaa/status/800746938203152384> November 21, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/naanisaaa/status/800746938203152384> 
“The best could be the worse, and vice versa. I once lived in one of the most 
sterile cities in the world and found myself longing for the crazy hustle 
bustle of Jakarta. The traffic and pollution may drive you crazy, but one thing 
that Jakarta will never be is boring.”(Anonymous, resident for 32 years)

“Best: the people (they’re among some of the hardest hustlers I’ve ever met), 
the city skyline at night, the resident cats, Gojek (motorbike taxi app). 
Worst: the traffic, the sheer non-existence of pedestrian facilities, the 
public transportation system, the pollution, the heat.”(Kalista, resident for 
27 years)

“The best thing is that Jakarta has never been a city that criticised anyone 
who took a chance.”(Alwinsyah, resident for 21 years)

“What I love most about Jakarta is how alive it is. It’s a city that never 
sleeps and you can feel the energy of life whenever and wherever. You can also 
find all kinds of people in the city, with different experiences, backgrounds 
and stories that you’ll never get bored, even if you try.”(Aninda, resident for 
18 years)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe38f17f2339dea5f7f65bcd8a856d9f4d9210083%2F0_37_1280_922%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe38f17f2339dea5f7f65bcd8a856d9f4d9210083%2F0_37_1280_922%2F1280.jpg>
 Thamrin road in central Jakarta. Photograph: Dwiyanto via Whatsapp 
“Jakarta is a city that grows on her residents in spite of, or because of, all 
the mess and chaos. Of course we hate the endless traffic jams, annual floods, 
filthy rivers, and creaking bureaucracy. We lament the lack of a rapid rail 
system and the depressingly small area of parks. Our roads are riddled with 
potholes and electrical blackouts occur. Our football team hasn’t won the 
national league in fifteen years, a source of local frustration in football-mad
Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>.


We have each other’s backs, united in our identity as Jakartans, and no one 
can mess with our city but us

But beneath all that is the most gracious and kind people, always willing to 
drop anything to help any stranger with a wide smile, the kind that you’d 
expect from a close-knit village rather than a bustling metropolis of ten 
million and counting.

Sure, we mock our own city through memes and on social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/21/twitter-city-facebook-jakarta-live-week-social-media-obsession->
. And yet as shown during the Sarinah bombing earlier this year, Jakartans of 
all creed, colour, race, or religion will not hesitate to pour on the streets 
and rally against anyone who threatens the city we deeply love with all our 
hearts. We are a people who have had and will always have each other’s backs, 
united in our identity as Jakartans, and no one can mess with our city but us.”
(Felix Utamah, resident for 20 years)
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58234f21e4b0199b93895305/5015465> 
All That Remains 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/58234f21e4b0199b93895305/5015465>

A few months ago this place was alive with an abundance of small restaurants 
built on stilts . People were grilling fishes on the side of the road and there 
was a little kiosk where you can buy prawn cakes from just at the end of the 
bridge. Children were striking poses as I photographed them playing on the edge 
of the water. To my surprise, when I came back to this place, all that remained 
was this dismantled kiosk on a completely dark bridge. "It was all bulldozed 
over some time ago," said a lady whose cafe remained open on the other side of 
the bridge. The steel frames in the background might be a clue as to what's 
planned for this area.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By vemmmv <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/vemmmv> 

24 November 2016, 15:38 

“I lived in a quiet small town in Central Java and used to be afraid of 
Jakarta. My mom used to say that she’d actually prefer to send me off to the US 
than letting me go to the capital city, but in the end she told me to take the 
risk and go. So I took off to Jakarta to study and yes, the capital does enable 
me to seize many life-changing opportunities and develop myself for the better. 
I won’t regret leaving my hometown for what I’ve achieved in Jakarta.

At the same time, the city creates a lot of tension and stress, with very 
limited or no relief in sight. There are only a few parks, even fewer trees and 
shaded sidewalks. In short, it seems like the city is only habitable as long as 
you’re in a cool air-conditioned room.

'My house was turned to debris': Jakarta's evicted write their story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/23/house-turned-debris-voices-evicted-kampung-pulo-jakarta>
Then when you go off to the mall or cinemas, you’ll find it even more 
depressing, because of the big gap between your monthly salary and the cost of 
the goods you want to buy. So for me, or perhaps many others, Jakarta is one 
hell of a tough place to live. It does make us tougher and stronger if we 
survive it.”(Langit, resident for 5 years)

“Bagusnya Jakarta dijadikan sebagai tempat untuk mncari penghidupan yg layak 
yg bisa saja tdk didapatkan di tempat tinggalnya. Setiap hal pasti ada baik 
buruknya bgitu juga dgn Jakarta, dimna hampir smua orang brpikir akan mndapat 
hal yg baik jika tinggal dijakarta. Hal ini tentu sja membuat Jakarta makin 
lama makin terasa sempit sehingga sulit untuk mendapat kehidupan yang baik 
seperti mngkonsumsi udara yg bersih dan lingkungan yg bersih dan sehat.[The 
good thing about Jakarta is that it is a good place to make a living that might 
not be available in other places. The bad thing is because there are more 
people coming to the city, it gets increasingly crowded and harder to make a 
living here and also to have clean air and a healthy environment.]”(Reres, 
resident for 1 year)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8900628b703a358ff7d0dc049c6c7927672421a8%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8900628b703a358ff7d0dc049c6c7927672421a8%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 A child hunts for crab in Kamal Muara, the last fishing village nearby 
reclamation island ‘D’ in northern Jakarta. Photograph: jonartho/GuardianWitness
What should improve?

“We need to humanise the city. Better sidewalks, better open space such as 
parks.”(Anonymous, resident of 32 years)

“Jakarta definitely needs a better alternative to malls, some public space 
that reaches beyond the limits of consumerism. It is worrying to see that it is 
absolutely normal for Jakartans to spend time with their children in malls, 
instilling the mentality that shopping is identified as ‘family time’ or 
‘quality time’ and a completely acceptable way to relax.”(Ingrid Tambunan via 
Whatsapp)

“High housing rental prices near the city centre and horrible public transport 
services have been the greatest hampers in fully accessing my job 
opportunities. The safety of minorities is beginning to concern me. Diversity 
and urban vibrancy are what attract me to live here so I hope that they are not 
diminishing” (Maria, resident for 9 years)

“One thing I would like to see change in Jakarta, and Indonesia as a whole is 
acceptance towards other cultures.”(Anonymous, lifelong resident)

“I want to see a better environment in Jakarta. I want to inhale fresh air not 
the polluted one. I hope Jakarta can be a better place for various kinds of 
people from different backgrounds, races, religions”(Anonymous, resident for 7 
years)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbcb04f7ac7738ca06fac5dc419517e4ac18da74%2F0_287_5098_3059%2F5098.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbcb04f7ac7738ca06fac5dc419517e4ac18da74%2F0_287_5098_3059%2F5098.jpg>
 A bridge in Marunda, North Jakarta. Photograph: Vemmy via Formstack 
“Jakarta should be liveable for all, not just rich people, because everyone 
deserves to live in the city. That’s my hope.”(Rana, lifelong resident)

“I would like Jakarta’s government to hold participatory discussions with all 
Jakartans. Stop gentrifying neighbourhoods, and ask people what they want 
instead. What their aspirations are. Listen to them, engage them in a dialogue. 
The government should also help create a culture that is safe for 
women/trans/non-binary to walk on the street without harassment. It involves a 
lot of community awareness building.”(Prili, commuter for 16 years)

“Pemerintah dan gerakan masyarakat harus lebih kreatif mengelola lahan, 
sehingga tidak perlu ada lagi penggusuran yang memberikan dikotomo masyarakat 
yang berhak dan tidak berhak tinggal di sebuah daerah. Saatnya masyarakat dan 
pemerintah kota untuk selalu bisa duduk bersama membicarakan hak untuk tinggal 
bagi warganya.[The government and communities must be more creative to manage 
the land so that there will be no more evictions that segregate people between 
the entitled and non-entitled. The community and the government must sit down 
together to discuss life in Jakarta.]”(Johanes, resident for 22 years)

Pedestrian nightmares

“I am a regular walker, and I notice this city is designed for cars, not for 
people. I’ve had some troubles during my everyday walk, either because of 
motorcycle interruption, or because of the street vendors that occupy pretty 
much the entire space for pedestrians. That’s the worst thing about Jakarta. It 
might seem simple, but actually it implies bigger picture, with regard to how 
to design a people-centred city.”(Nurulitha, resident for 1 year)
Traci (@sudana_t) 
Cars colonise even the footpaths on Jl Hayam Wuruk #GuardianJakarta 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GuardianJakarta?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/R97S8MkswX <https://t.co/R97S8MkswX>
 <https://twitter.com/sudana_t/status/800665344318652416> November 21, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/sudana_t/status/800665344318652416>  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c79055350395ec338fd90cb401444df308edfb%2F170_146_651_814%2F651.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c79055350395ec338fd90cb401444df308edfb%2F170_146_651_814%2F651.jpg>
 ‘This is what happen if we design city for cars, not for people.’ Photograph: 
Nurulitha Andini Susetyo 
“The state of Jakarta’s footpaths (or lack thereof) means walking anywhere is 
nearly impossible. The number of people I know who have fallen into 
potholes/drains/gutters/something else (including myself) is ridiculous.” 
(Kate, resident for 4 years)

Traffic and transport
Malindo Andhi S. M. (@MalindoAndhi) 
Oh Jakarta. What a great city if you have no teriffic traffic #GuardianJakarta 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GuardianJakarta?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/iQxGJT6asp <https://t.co/iQxGJT6asp>
 <https://twitter.com/MalindoAndhi/status/800970058952380416> November 22, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/MalindoAndhi/status/800970058952380416> Dwimirnani 
(@putrimoxi) 
10 millions inhabitants with no metro lines operating. When I told my friends 
this, nobody believed me#JakartaTraffic 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/JakartaTraffic?src=hash> #GuardianJakarta 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GuardianJakarta?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/putrimoxi/status/801391449187045376> November 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/putrimoxi/status/801391449187045376> 

Yosef Riadi (@joestargazer) 
Transit at Tanah Abang station. #GuardianJakarta 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GuardianJakarta?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/PtUgJe9Clu <https://t.co/PtUgJe9Clu>
 <https://twitter.com/joestargazer/status/801025632423452674> November 22, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/joestargazer/status/801025632423452674> Arnaldo Pellini 
(@ArnaldoPellini) 
Bicycle commuters struggle in #jakarta 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/jakarta?src=hash>. We need bicycle lanes. 
#GuardianJakarta <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GuardianJakarta?src=hash> 
#Bike2Work <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Bike2Work?src=hash> #streetphotography 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/streetphotography?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/7AOKMZPFcu <https://t.co/7AOKMZPFcu>
 <https://twitter.com/ArnaldoPellini/status/801040035013271552> November 22, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/ArnaldoPellini/status/801040035013271552> 
“The congestion is terrible. But come on, you can find a solution, just take 
the commuter line, Transjakarta, or just ride your bike. Don’t be a part of the 
problem, be the solution and contribute more to this planet.” (R N Afifah, 
resident for 4 years)

“The traffic is just so so so so bad. People tell me ‘Bangkok’s traffic is 
crazy’, ‘Manila’s traffic is terrible’, ‘You don’t even want to know about 
Beijing’s traffic’, and all I can say is ‘Have you been to Jakarta? Then you 
still don’t know what traffic is.’ I love Jakarta. I always do. Even with the 
crazy traffic. The most amazing feeling is to drive around Central Jakarta at 
3am, when the road is clear and the tall buildings are around you. The city 
lights, the night sky, everything feels so right. In those moments you’ll 
forget all the craziness from the day, and you’ll love Jakarta again.”(Jeehan, 
resident for 23 years)

“It is hard to build a social life as it is hard to meet due to traffic.” 
(Anonymous resident for 15 years)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdaf0cc51e044c7c7a993565c2cbd478b8674d27%2F0_204_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdaf0cc51e044c7c7a993565c2cbd478b8674d27%2F0_204_2448_3060%2F2448.jpg>
 Friday night traffic. Photograph: Ismi Damayanti 
“I’ve been using commuter trains for years because it’s the fastest and safest 
way to get to the office. But, it’s often problematic; track disturbances, 
queues and delays are a routine challenge. Can you imagine, being trapped in an 
overly crowded railway coach during rush hour, and when the disturbance came, 
the train stopped, it just stopped, and we don’t know for how long. Could be 
hours. It’s so uncomfortable. In other words, it’s a nightmare.

I didn’t know I have this phobia, until one day, this panic attack came on. My 
train on the way home was experiencing disturbance. Suddenly I couldn’t 
breathe, and my head felt like it was going to explode. I had the urgency to 
scream and wanted to get out from the coach, but I couldn’t. I felt helpless. 
Since then, I was traumatised using the train again, afraid that I’d experience 
another attack. But I also had no choice. Jakarta’s road traffic during rush 
hour is way worse than that.”(Ficky, resident for 15 years)

“Berharap jakarta bisa seperti kota2 besar di negara lain. Yg tdk selalu 
mengandalkan krndaraan pribadi. Melainkan menggunakan transportasi umum. Atau 
mungkin bisa menggunakan sepeda dan berjalan kaki.untuk mengurangi banyaknya 
kendaraan pribadi yg memadati jalanan. Memberikan dampak terhadap lingkungan 
dan terhadap kesehatan yang baik.[I hope Jakarta can emulate other modern 
cities, where people don’t rely on private cars but use public transport, 
bicycles or even walking to ease the traffic and create a healthy environment.]”
(Anonymous, resident for 11 years)

Discrimination, harassment and tolerance

“My wish is simple: that someday I can walk all over Jakarta on a decent 
sidewalk, without toxic pollution, without worrying that I look Chinese or the 
fact that I was baptised, without the harassment, whistling or comments just 
for having a female body. Human rights is a big issue here. We all should have 
the freedom of choosing religion – or no religion – without feeling threatened. 
We are all free to choose our sexual orientation without being socially exiled. 
We should not experience racial discrimination.” (Katarina, lifelong resident)
Anna Himmelreich (@annahimmelreich) 
Buses in Jakarta - good to be explicit i guess. This was in the 'women's only' 
section of the bus too.#GuardianJakarta 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GuardianJakarta?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/eOg0FMvJJ2 <https://t.co/eOg0FMvJJ2>
 <https://twitter.com/annahimmelreich/status/800599393363599360> November 21, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/annahimmelreich/status/800599393363599360> 
“I’ve experienced a bit of discrimination, from racism to sexism. As a woman, 
almost every day I hear some form of sexist retort, usually about how women 
should marry instead of work or about how ungentlemanly it is for men to be 
driven by women, even if the car belongs to the woman. Most people view women 
as inferior drivers, and the word ‘woman’ is synonymous with the word 
‘unskilled’ on the road. I find it quite upsetting that people still throw 
around all these sexist stereotypes and have incorporated it into their daily 
life to create this huge division between men and women.

As for racism and other discrimination, I think the city, and the country for 
that matter, has a lot to improve if it wants to live up to its ‘unity in 
diversity’ motto. There is so much intolerance of diversity. People with 
different religions, different sexualities, even different clothes are viewed 
almost as a different species. Instead of focusing on the fact that we are all 
humans, diversity is viewed as a threat; it makes people so insecure that they 
have to pick on those differences and force others to conform.”(Vemmy, resident 
for 20 years)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e9781a3cee02547c1b10d977a4b18b2708f55e3%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e9781a3cee02547c1b10d977a4b18b2708f55e3%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘We say prayers for peace in Indonesia with its diverse religions and 
beliefs’: Jakarta’s Unity in diversity parade on November 19. Photograph: Maggy 
Horhoruw/GuardianWitness 
Waste, pollution and green space

“Maksudnya ‘waste management’ di sini bukan sekadar membersihkan ruang kota, 
termasuk sungai, tetapi bagaimana meningkatkan kepekaan warga untuk mereduksi 
sampah dan polutan lainnya. Jakarta masih terlalu sibuk ‘bekerja’ untuk 
memikirkan limbahnya sendiri.[Poor waste management is not only about cleaning 
the city and the rivers, but generating public awareness about reducing waste 
and other pollutants. Jakartans are too busy working to care about its waste 
management.]” (Anonymous, resident for 12 years)

“There are not enough trees on the side of the road to absorb all of the 
pollution. As for public spaces, it’s rather difficult to find a park that we 
can go to just for having fresh air or a sit. The available parks are usually 
not very nice to go.”(Anonymous, resident for 27 years)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47bda59b69b07cd07f8314e77ceb3fe9f6ca15cc%2F0_188_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47bda59b69b07cd07f8314e77ceb3fe9f6ca15cc%2F0_188_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Children play among waste on the Jakartan coast. Photograph: Rahmad 
Azhar/National Geographic 
“Unfortunately, the lack of awareness about recycling plastic makes waste 
management a lot worse. In Jakarta, tonnes of garbage is piled up along the sea 
coast. Waste is produced from human activities in the city, then flows through 
nine rivers that flow into Jakarta bay. Waste contamination reaches a radius of 
around 60km.” (Rahmad, resident for 1 year)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb81340ff3a915d1c1bf567ca85c5e6199213306f%2F0_51_2861_1716%2F2861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb81340ff3a915d1c1bf567ca85c5e6199213306f%2F0_51_2861_1716%2F2861.jpg>
“This land (pictured left) used to be an open field. Now it has become a trash 
re-sorting area. I find it appalling that nothing has been done related to 
building a proper, clean, hygienic trash processing plant within the city. If 
you look closely to our sewers, you’ll know we don’t live in a safe and healthy 
city.”(Anonymous via Whatsapp)

“Sebagai sebuah ruang komunal di mana anak-anak dari beragam latar belakang 
bisa berinteraksi secara sehat, keberadaan Ruang Bermain anak di tengah-tengah 
kota belum dipandang sebagai sebuah isu urban yang penting. Kalau ruang terbuka 
hijau dapat dianggap sebagai paru-paru kota, ruang bermain (ruang komunal) 
memiliki peran sebagai hatinya sebuah kota.[As a communal space where children 
from diverse backgrounds can interact in a healthy manner, the existence of 
playgrounds in the city has not been deemed an important issue. If green open 
space is the lungs of the city, playgrounds serve as the heart of the city.]”
(Sri, resident for 12 years)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb9de10375978e1c57566c2590403c984f88b219%2F0_291_4272_2565%2F4272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb9de10375978e1c57566c2590403c984f88b219%2F0_291_4272_2565%2F4272.jpg>
 Children in central Jakarta’s Petamburan neighbourhood play football on the 
bank of the West Flood Canal. Photograph: Sri Sadono via Formstack 
Food and street life
Hanna Nabila (@itsmisshanna) 
Kue putu - a traditional green-colored steamed cake, which sold at 10pm-12am. 
Jakartans love to eat around the clock.#GuardianJakarta 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GuardianJakarta?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/2y9gOIykhd <https://t.co/2y9gOIykhd>
 <https://twitter.com/itsmisshanna/status/800746900353912832> November 21, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/itsmisshanna/status/800746900353912832> Bramantyo Adi 
(@bramantyoadi09) 
Street workout or calisthenics community is a current trend among teenagers 
and young adults in Jakarta.#GuardianJakarta 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GuardianJakarta?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/7RV0oESwxI <https://t.co/7RV0oESwxI>
 <https://twitter.com/bramantyoadi09/status/801006645123813376> November 22, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/bramantyoadi09/status/801006645123813376>  <> Facebook
 
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a77c9cf8391ff2f15e8ceb671607bbdc61b35b5%2F204_0_3060_1836%2F3060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents'%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27This%20city%20is%20designed%20for%20cars%2C%20not%20people%E2%80%99%3A%20residents%27%20voices%20on%20Jakarta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcity-designed-cars-people-local-views-jakarta-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a77c9cf8391ff2f15e8ceb671607bbdc61b35b5%2F204_0_3060_1836%2F3060.jpg>
 ‘Young girls play happily in our neighbourhood, even though they must stop 
when motorcycles come by. Their playground is in the street.’ Photograph: 
Syamrotun Fuadiyah Kamil 
And finally...


“I have heard rumours that there is a new café opening soon, with its theme 
being Charlotte Brontë’s ‘Shirley’. I do not like this idea. It is a novel few 
people in Indonesia will have any knowledge of, or any great affection for. So 
I suppose my hopes for the future of Jakarta are that there will be fewer 
literary-themed cafés.”(Sukarno, lifelong resident)
meki (@mekitron) 
i tattooed the history of jakarta into my arm. #StockholmSyndrome 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/StockholmSyndrome?src=hash> should be renamed 
#JakartaSyndrome <https://twitter.com/hashtag/JakartaSyndrome?src=hash> 
#GuardianJakarta <https://twitter.com/hashtag/GuardianJakarta?src=hash> pic by 
István Takácspic.twitter.com/ZYnV4R7WZ1 <https://t.co/ZYnV4R7WZ1>
 <https://twitter.com/mekitron/status/800951252930568192> November 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mekitron/status/800951252930568192> 
 * Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join in the discussion  