
As we’re all too aware, 2016 has been a strange and news-packed year. For 
cities around the globe, it’s been a year of challenges:worsening air pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/smog-refugees-flee-chinese-cities-as-airpocalypse-blights-half-a-billion>
,increasing social divisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/frenzy-hatred-brexit-racism-abuse-referendum-celebratory-lasting-damage>
,community displacement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2016/aug/02/how-evictions-have-laid-bare-rios-real-olympic-legacy>
,housing crises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/vancouver-mayor-gregor-robertson-interview-housing-crisis>
,resource shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/venezuela-breaking-point-food-shortages-protests-maduro>
,environmental disasters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/may/07/alberta-wildfires-fort-mcmurray-damage-pictures>
 andstreet violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/04/chicago-gun-violence-unsolved-murders-deadly-year>
 – and for some, war and terrorism.

But cities have also been the stage where desire for change has been 
articulated, from the Black Lives Matterprotests across US cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/jul/10/black-lives-matter-protests-across-the-us-in-pictures>
 toanti-government marches in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/13/brazil-anti-government-protests-dilma-rousseff-rio-de-janeiro>
 and theNuit Debout sit-ins across French cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/08/nuit-debout-protesters-occupy-french-cities-in-a-revolutionary-call-for-change>
. Meanwhile, some cities have taken the lead inbattling climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/four-of-worlds-biggest-cities-to-ban-diesel-cars-from-their-centres>
 and promotingsocial integration 
<http://news.trust.org/item/20161021161151-9hts8/>.

We asked a range of writers, architects and activists around the world to 
share their 2017 wishlist for their city – from better inclusivity in Accra to 
“walking school buses” inNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>
. Wherever you live, share your own wishes for urban change and improvement in 
the comments below.

London, UK

Oliver Wainwright, the Guardian’s architecture and design critic

Next year, I’d like to see the the return of council housing. Over the last 
decade, around 50 council estates across London have undergone regeneration, 
doubling the number of homes in the process. Swathes of inefficient postwar 
slabs have been intensified, or bulldozed and replaced with sparkling 
high-density visions. Surely this doubling of house numbers can only be a good 
thing – until you realise that it represents aloss of 8,000 council homes 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/assembly/knock-it-down-or-do-it-up> 
and the relentless displacement of existing communities, with the overall 
proportion of social and “affordable” rented homes reduced by a fifth.

I hope 2017 can finally see a reversal of this trend. For the first time in 
decades, the boroughs are building again, in many cases without relying on 
private development partners and their profit-hungry shareholders. Each is 
trying its own different model: from Croydon’sBrick by Brick programme 
<https://www.croydon.gov.uk/planningandregeneration/regeneration/brick-by-brick-small-sites-programme/brick-by-brick>
, a private council-owned company set to build 1,000 new homes in the next 
three years (half for affordable rent and half for private sale) to Southwark’s 
ambition to build11,000 new council homes by 2043 
<http://www.2.southwark.gov.uk/11000homes>. Yet too many of these plans are 
still predicated on atabula rasa mindset 
<http://35percent.org/aylesbury-estate/>, wiping the slate clean rather than 
remodelling existing estates and working intelligently with the value of what 
is already there.
 Demolition Of the Aylesbury council estate in Southwark. Photograph: Oli 
Scarff/Getty Images 
London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, described the mayoral election as a referendum on 
housing, and hisrecent draft guidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/29/sadiq-khan-sets-out-key-plans-for-more-genuinely-affordable-london-homes>
 set out some pragmatic steps in the right direction. A third of all new homes 
will be set at “London affordable rent”, which will be around 44% of market 
rate, not up to 80% as it was defined under the previous mayor. The remainder 
will be shared ownership and “London living rent”, for the first time pegged to 
local income, rather than market rent. But Khan must get tougher on how 
councils approach their existing estates, which are too often thought of as 
“brownfield” land, and make them recognise the value in their bricks and mortar 
– and the people who actually live there.

Mumbai, India

Aditi Mittal, stand-up comedian, actress and writer

The fact that it’s a reigning punchline that 2016 was a terrible year makes my 
“glass-half-full” self believe that 2017 is a year in which things can only go 
up.

This is a pipe dream (literally), but one wish for my city is waterways. 
Mumbai has one of the longest coastlines in the world and with swathes of the 
city connectable by water, I really wish we had a water commute. Getting to 
work would be like a picnic if it started off with a boat ride everyday – I’d 
even risk the wet shoes if it means I wouldn’t have to sit in legendary Mumbai 
traffic. We named Mumbai after the Goddess of the Sea (Mumba Devi), so maybe we 
could appeal to her powers to reduce traffic and pollution on her land?

These days in Mumbai, you can’t turn a corner without smacking face first into 
a hoarding that promises “a home fit for royalty.” That’s great for them, but 
where does the common man go? Having a home is the acid test of our generation 
and I hope 2017 sees a kinder market towards the unfortunate or the tragically 
un-royal like myself.


Whenever something bad happens in Mumbai, we often use the words “Spirit of 
Mumbai” to describe how resilient the city is. This “spirit” is a euphemism for 
the fact that as people, we don’t trust the system and so we end up dependant 
on each other for survival and scraping through. This jaded fatalism is touted 
as our “spirit”. Next year, I hope we can work towards the physical 
manifestation of that spirit, to demand a better life from our politicians. 
That no matter our “spirit”, we realise that our “body” deserves better and we 
demand it.

Bring it on 2017. We’re primed. 

 ‘Manhattan is at risk of becoming a monoculture – a jungle of luxury towers.’ 
Photograph: Drew Angerer/Getty Images 
New York, US

Saskia Sassen, sociologist and author <http://www.saskiasassen.com/>

I love New York, but less than I used to. Manhattan is now at risk of becoming 
a monoculture – a jungle of luxury towers, more than half of them empty. There 
are rapidly disappearing low-income areas mostly in the south-east and north of 
Manhattan; but they are still cultural zones where interesting stuff is 
happening.

The larger city is vast. It should be multi-polar, with far more transversal 
transport – too much is still radial. There should be multiple economic 
centres, with more walking to one’s job. We should encourage local shops rather 
than bring in franchises – do we really need a multinational to have a cup of 
coffee in our neighbourhood?

Local talent in modest and low-income areas should be enabled. Simple digital 
systems <https://osf.app.box.com/s/qlnbrl95vm79720kpvuj3iqgs8ldhc00> can 
announce the knowledge and skills present in every neighbourhood – not simply 
the jobs people hold. I know janitors who are immigrants with medical degrees 
(waiting to get clearance). We should have “walking school buses”, as Seattle 
has <http://www.seattle.gov/transportation/saferoutes_wsb.htm>, where children 
have a guarded walking path to their schools – thus reducing cars on the roads 
and improving safety. The list of minimalist interventions to improve urban 
life is long. They would make all the difference to modest neighbourhoods in a 
city where 50% of households are under the poverty line.

And then there is the urgent need to make each surface in a city work with the 
biosphere – policy is not enough. We have enough specialised knowledge in New 
York to make this happen (egTerreform <http://www.terreform.org/>). No building 
in the city can simply be there to house something: there is more work to be 
done.

Tokyo, Japan

Kengo Kuma, architect

Tokyo is fidgeting at the moment. Most Japanese people believe optimistically 
that, at least until 2020, the economy will be fine and tourists numbers will 
continue to rise.

Based on this assumption, piles of hotels and commercial complexes are being 
built. But the buildings all look the same – they are being designed and 
erected like makeshift structures, as if to represent the attitude that “it’s 
OK as long as buildings can be finished by the 2020 Olympics”. I have no doubt 
that in 2017 we will see multitudes of urban development projects that could 
end up being nothing but garbage.

I believe the post-Olympics city will be calm, but silent and gloomy. The task 
for us is to create a Tokyo that can still gleam from the bottom.
 ‘I dream of a city where all women could walk without fear.’ Photograph: 
Hassan Ammar/AP 
Beirut, Lebanon


Joumana Haddad <https://twitter.com/Joumana333>, poet, activist and writer

I dream of a city that nurtures our ambitions instead of slaying them in the 
womb. A city where racism has no place, and indifference is an impossible word.

I dream of a city where all women can walk without fear, dream without 
boundaries, and achieve without barriers. A city where men defend equal 
opportunities more vehemently than I do, and take pride in having capable 
partners instead of trophy wives.

I dream of a city with green spaces, sustainable energy and decent souls. A 
city where we’d finally have electricity 24/7, wouldn’t need to buy water and 
in which roads wouldn’t become blocked every time it rains. A city whose 
citizens stop at red lights, sort their waste, and hold their leaders 
accountable.

I dream of a city where creativity is more valued than mischievousness, 
critical minds more than blind allegiances, real merits more than influential 
connections, and human ethics more than bank accounts. Where politicians 
actually serve the interests of their people, and where deputies are chosen for 
their competence and integrity, not for their religious affiliations.

I dream of a city that stands by its wronged, defends its victims, and cares 
for its underprivileged. A city that admits its mistakes instead of denying 
them, and punishes violence instead of glorifying it.

I dream of a city that my youngest son would not want to leave, and that my 
eldest would want to return to.

I dream of the Beirut that we deserve. The Beirut that deserves us.

Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


Pedro Rivera, architect and co-founder of Rua Arquitetos 
<http://www.rualab.com/perfil>

During the 2016 Olympic Games, Rio inaugurated a new promenade along the edge 
of the bay, in the city centre. This is part of a major redevelopment of the 
port area of Rio, which for over two centuries remained closed to the public 
under the control of the navy forces, disrupting the continuity of the street 
grid and blocking the city’s relationship with water. Once opened, the 
promenade was immediately embraced by the residents as well as tourists, who 
could enjoy the previously hidden historic buildings and beautiful views of the 
waterfront. Among all the urban transformations that Rio has gone through over 
the last years – some positive, some negative – this intervention celebrates 
the urban history of the city and of the joy of being together in public space.

Earlier this month, the promenade was fenced off. The navy forces took control 
of the area blocking public access, arguing that the City of Rio hadn’t 
fulfilled the terms of their agreement. Although they had to partially step 
back after a large public outcry, in these strange times when our young 
democracy is being threatened in so many ways, this gesture is more than a 
clumsy move. It makes the statement “we don’t play by the rules”.

This blatant disregard for the rights of others is part of a larger pattern 
that stretches from local issues to national conflicts. We built our cities in 
order to live together, and I believe that in 2017 we must re-examine the basic 
means we have to engage respectfully with each other.
 ‘We come to Accra because it’s a city of opportunity.’ Photograph: 
Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Accra, Ghana


Victoria Okoye, founder of African Urbanism <http://africanurbanism.net/>

For years I have talked about Accra’s bifurcated urban development 
<http://www.urbanafrica.net/news/whose-city-it-anyway/> as a city of “haves” 
and “have nots” that aspires to global city status, yet is constrained by and 
disconnected from on-the-ground realities: urban sprawl, inequality, and 
infrastructure and economic challenges. 2016 more fully manifested this 
phenomenon: load shedding (scheduled time periods where the electricity is shut 
off in specific areas in order to spread the limited supply across the 
country), informal settlement demolitions,increased water and electricity 
tariffs 
<http://www.graphic.com.gh/news/general-news/electricity-rates-goes-up-140-percent-instead-of-59-2-percent-research.html>
 amid high-rise residential developments and aplanned coastal redevelopment 
project 
<http://thebftonline.com/business/tourism/21438/govt-sells-accras-coastline-to-investors-as-cabinet-approves-marine-drive-project-.html>
 in Osu, exclusive mixed-use developments in Cantonments, 11 planned market 
redevelopments, and new international brands headquartered in Airport 
Residential.

Each development targets the transient expatriate class and affluent 
Ghanaians, connecting them to global experiences, trade and transactions, while 
continuing patterns ofurban displacement for private sector-led urban renewal 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/tran.12105/full>. These new islands 
of affluence create physical spaces where the majority of Accra’s residents can 
perhaps physically enter and snap a selfie, but can’t afford to fully 
participate.

2017 brings a new president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/nana-akufo-addo-wins-poll-to-become-ghanas-president>
 (and expectation of a newly appointed city mayor), and potential for change. I 
hope for dramatically more inclusive planning and design that builds 
relationships between the city’s different classes, rather than reinforces 
their differences. We can start with planning for accessible and 
multifunctional public spaces, connecting commuters with affordable homes and 
productive work. We come to Accra because it’s a city of opportunity; the 
change I hope for is city planning for the average city dweller – the young 
person starting a career, thestreet vendor 
<http://wiego.org/blog/how-new-kind-%E2%80%9Cmodern%E2%80%9D-urban-development-can-include-street-vendors>
 – how can we transform this city to make every space and opportunity more 
accessible for these individuals?
 Commuters on a ferry in Sydney Harbour. Photograph: Jason Reed/Reuters 
Sydney, Australia

Rob Lake, accessible transport activist

Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> is a city in 
transition. The fabric of the city is stretched; both unaffordable housing and 
gentrification pressure the people who can’t buy their way up or out. I wish 
for a meaningful response to these challenges: city leadership that values 
diversity, meaning the support and promotion of inclusive, accessible, and 
multicultural communities – young and old, LGBT, people with disabilities and 
the Aboriginal communities which dot the city and which face so many new 
pressures to maintain connection and a sense of ownership, value and belonging.

Related: The curse of urban sprawl: how cities grow, and why this has to change
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jul/12/urban-sprawl-how-cities-grow-change-sustainability-urban-age>

Sydney has a harbour, a climate and a geography that is beautiful. We should 
enhance what we have, not build over it. At a local level, new technologies – 
many based on sharing – have helped people try and develop new ways to live, 
earn a living and build community. The refugee-led food markets at Addison Road 
community space are a great example, as is Goget car sharing. Westconnex and 
the light rail typify both ends of the transport challenge: freeways that would 
make even a 1960s LA resident ashamed, and a light rail solution finally 
getting some traction but bulldozing through communities. Council 
amalgamations, community leadership, activism and progressive, thoughtful 
politicians can help us maintain the things that make Sydney great. Lockout 
laws, pollution, car dependency are the challenges to be faced – but together, 
we will.

How should your city improve in 2017? Share your thoughts in the comments below
 