
The conclusion of the underwater search for the wreck of MH370 is another blow 
to the families of Australian victims, as the third anniversary of the plane’s 
disappearance nears.

Six Australian citizens and two residents were among the 239 people on board 
theMalaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> Airlines flight bound 
for Beijing from Kuala Lumpur when it was lost on 8 March 2014.

Related: Malaysia Airlines flight MH370: underwater search called off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off>

Bob and Cathy Lawton and Rod and Mary Burrows, two married couples from 
Brisbane, were travelling toChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
together on a much-anticipated holiday.

Bob Lawton, 58, had worked for more than 30 years at Sharp Plywood in Wacol, 
where his father had been a factory manager before him.

Cathy, 54, was visually impaired with advanced glaucoma and had reportedly 
pushed 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/doomed-flight-mh370-was-to-be-start-of-dream-trip-for-brisbane-couple-cathy-and-bob-lawton/news-story/5169ec838461180652dfd18e77dda23b>
 to go on the trip before, she feared, she would lose her sight entirely. Their 
trip was due to take them to Hong Kong, Vietnam and Singapore after Kuala 
Lumpur and China.

Rod Burrows, 59, had worked for Energex, but had accepted redundancy in late 
2013. Mary, 54, had been a civilian employee of the Queensland police force for 
16 years at the time of her death.

Only a fortnight before their holiday, the couple had moved out of the Middle 
Park home in which they had lived for 22 years and raised three children. The 
park next door wasrenamed in their honour 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/brisbane-park-named-after-rod-and-mary-burrows-who-disappeared-with-mh370/news-story/d5c9f28b9f53f2de941001b41e8a29ef>
 in June 2016.

“This was their time, they were all about the kids,” their former neighbour, 
Wandy Watt,told Brisbane’s Courier-Mail 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/two-queensland-couples-and-sydney-couple-missing-on-malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-are-remembered-by-family-and-friends/news-story/3b186a859945d060f9379b135dc0f87a>
 shortly after the plane disappeared. “The kids had moved on … they’re all 
successful, all happy. This was their time.”

The Burrows and the Lawtons each had three adult children, who in April 2016 
lodged proceedings against Malaysia Airlines for compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/18/compensation-battle-stalls-for-families-of-mh370-victims>
 in Australia’s federal court.


Rodney Burrows’s sister, Kaylene Mann, lost her stepdaughter in the MH17 air 
disaster in July 2014, four months after MH370 disappeared.

The third Australian couple on board the flight were Naijun Gu and Yuan Li, of 
Sydney’s southern suburbs, who were believed to be going to Beijing to visit 
their two daughters who were living there with their extended family.

Related: Compensation battle stalls for families of MH370 victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/18/compensation-battle-stalls-for-families-of-mh370-victims>

Li, 33, was born in Beijing and Gu, 31, in Shanghai. The couple – known by 
their adopted English names, Carlos and Carrie – had met as students in Sydney, 
and lived in an apartment in Hurstville.

In the weeks after MH370’s disappearance, it was reported that they had 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/sydney-couple-on-missing-malaysia-airlines-jet-off-to-see-children-20140310-34h12.html>
 been beset by business problems, selling their home in Sylvania and their 
petrol station in nearby Miranda in 2013.


Also lost on the plane were Paul Weeks, 39, and Chong Ling Tan, 48.

Weeks, a mining engineer and New Zealander living in Western Australia, was 
bound for Mongoliafor his first shift in his new job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/09/queensland-families-mourn-couples-malaysia-airlines-flight>
 with Transwest Mongolia. He had moved to Perth with his wife and two children 
from Christchurch, in the South Island, after the earthquakes there in 2011.

His relatives filed proceedings against Malaysia Airlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/13/mh370-malaysia-airlines-sued-by-family-of-victim-paul-weeks>
 in the West Australian supreme court in March 2016, days before the second 
anniversary of MH370’s disappearance.

On Wednesday his wife, Danica Weeks, told Australian Associated Press the 
Malaysian government should realise that she and other relatives would never 
stop fighting for the truth.

“It is their plane, their responsibility, they’re the ones that promised they 
would bring them home and now they are just giving up,” she said. “We will keep 
fighting. If Malaysia thinks it’s just going to disappear on them then they 
have got another think coming … I’m not going to leave him out there or 
wherever he is, we’re not going to leave our loved ones out there.”


Related: Queensland families mourn couples feared dead on Malaysia Airlines 
flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/09/queensland-families-mourn-couples-malaysia-airlines-flight>

Tan was a Malaysian citizen living in Melbourne with his wife of 22 years, 
Jennifer Chong, and their two sons, aged 17 and 13 at the time of their 
father’s death.

Chong was the first Australian to file proceedings against Malaysia Airlines 
over the plane’s disappearance. Shine Lawyers lodged documents in the Victorian 
supreme court on her behalf in February 2016.

She remains in touch with other victims’ families and campaigns for the search 
to be continuedon Twitter <https://twitter.com/jannilixious?lang=en>, which she 
joined shortly after MH370 disappeared.

Her bio on the site reads: “MH370. 239 persons vanished. To the world they 
might be a NUMBER, but to a number of us, they are the WORLD.”

 One Wednesday she told Guardian Australia even though the planned search 
suspension was publicly known last year, she still found the decision 
unacceptable.

“The governments made a commitment to the families and public to find the 
plane and to see them go back on their promise is frustrating,” she said.

“Finding the plane is an inescapable duty owed to the families and the flying 
public – in terms of aviation safety there is too much at stake to cancel the 
search halfway. Until we know what caused the crash, it is irresponsible to 
dismiss the chances of this happening again. Anyone that flies regularly should 
find it unacceptable that one of the most popular planes today can vanish 
without a trace.”

Chong said it was a mistake to suspend the search without extending it to the 
new, small, area recommended by the Australian Transport Safety Bureau.

“I hope that the governments will not let the ATSB’s findings be a wasted 
exercise, keep investigating, and continue to review the available evidence,” 
she said.

“The governments cannot passively wait and rely on a breakthrough to guide 
them to the exact location of MH370.

“The possibility that what happened to our loved ones will never be known 
terrifies me. The Malaysian government may want to bury the issue but the 
families will never forget and never stop working to reopen the search.”
 