
As the Japanese and American flags stood side by side, fluttering in gusty 
trade winds, Shinzo Abe –the first sitting Japanese prime minister to visit the 
USS Arizona Memorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/shinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-visit-obama-japan>
to Pearl Harbor – offered his “sincere and everlasting condolences” for the 
attack that killed more than 2,400 Americans and prompted the US to enter the 
second world war.

Standing next to US president Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> he solemnly vowed that Japan 
“must never repeat the horrors of war again”.

'Alliance of hope': US and Japan leaders meet for historic Pearl Harbor first
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/pearl-harbor-anniversary-obama-japan-shinzo-abe>
On a historic, warm, December day, that will likely be their last official 
meeting, both men spoke of the power of reconciliation and the strength of the 
US-Japanese alliance.

Standing on Kilo Pier before the USS Arizona Memorial —one of the most 
powerful symbols of modern battle — and a monument to war and loss, Abe made 
the case for peace.

“As the prime minister of Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, I 
offer my sincere and everlasting condolences to the souls of those who lost 
their lives here, as well as to the spirits of all the brave men and women 
whose lives were taken by a war that commenced in this very place … We must 
never repeat the horrors of war again.”

Abe continued: “We, the people of Japan, will continue to uphold this 
unwavering principle, while harboring quiet pride in the path we have walked as 
a peace-loving nation over these 70 years since the war ended.”

Just as Obama did not offer an apology when he became the first sitting US 
president to visit Hiroshima Peace Memorial in May, Abe did not explicitly 
apologise but instead repeatedly spoke of reconciliation and what he called an 
alliance of hope between the two countries.

President Obama followed Abe’s remarks, saying the US-Japan alliance was “a 
reminder that the deepest wounds of war can give way.”

As he described laying flower wreathes on “waters that still weep,” Obama paid 
tribute to the “more than 2,400 patriots — fathers, husbands, wives and 
daughters manning heaven’s rails for all eternity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-horrors-of-war-memorial-hawaii-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdbf5f099b8236d9ec98aa5439670e6baac1b35c%2F66_168_3488_2094%2F3488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20must%20never%20repeat%20the%20horrors%20of%20war'%3A%20Japanese%20PM%20makes%20pledge%20at%20Pearl%20Harbor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-horrors-of-war-memorial-hawaii-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20must%20never%20repeat%20the%20horrors%20of%20war%27%3A%20Japanese%20PM%20makes%20pledge%20at%20Pearl%20Harbor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-horrors-of-war-memorial-hawaii-obama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdbf5f099b8236d9ec98aa5439670e6baac1b35c%2F66_168_3488_2094%2F3488.jpg>
 Shinzo Abe and Barack Obama toss flower petals into the Wishing Well at the 
USS Arizona Memorial. Photograph: Dennis Oda/AP 
Obama’s statements weren’t confined to messages of reconciliation. He also 
reflected on “how war tests our most enduring values,” stating that even as 
Japanese-Americans were deprived of their own liberty during the war, they 
served the United States military with distinction.

Among a gathering that included staid suited Japanese dignitaries and 
officials, active duty US military members, second world war veterans and their 
families, was congresswoman Colleen Hanabusa, a fourth-generation 
Japanese-American.Both of her grandfathers were sent to internment camps and 
she had an uncle who was killed in the atomic bombing of Hiroshima.

Hanabusa said the most important thing about the visit was that both Abe and 
Obama were physically present together.

“The lesson from all this, was that we do not forget the past … but we have to 
move ahead,” Hanabusa said. “For us to all collectively survive in the 
Asia-Pacific region, we need have to have an understanding of both the roles in 
the past and the roles in the future.”

Also in attendance were three Pearl Harbor survivors, now in their nineties 
and cheerfully dressed in bright green, red and white Hawaiian aloha shirts. 
One of the survivors was 95-year-old Sterling R Cale who recalled the morning 
of the attack.

Enlisted in the navy at the time, Cale said that on the morning of 7 December 
1941 he had just finished night duty at the shipyard dispensary and was heading 
home when he looked up at the sky. “The planes were already diving. I saw one 
of the planes turn around — the rising sun on the fuselage. ‘My god! Those are 
Japanese planes,’” he recalled saying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-horrors-of-war-memorial-hawaii-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd4cdbfd9fbd0d0f90f270b374d6b7f56dafc442%2F0_111_1900_1139%2F1900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20must%20never%20repeat%20the%20horrors%20of%20war'%3A%20Japanese%20PM%20makes%20pledge%20at%20Pearl%20Harbor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-horrors-of-war-memorial-hawaii-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20must%20never%20repeat%20the%20horrors%20of%20war%27%3A%20Japanese%20PM%20makes%20pledge%20at%20Pearl%20Harbor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fshinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-horrors-of-war-memorial-hawaii-obama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd4cdbfd9fbd0d0f90f270b374d6b7f56dafc442%2F0_111_1900_1139%2F1900.jpg>
 Shinzo Abe embraces a second world war Pearl Harbor survivor after he and 
Barack Obama spoke on Kilo Pier, overlooking the USS Arizona Memorial. 
Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
He and others broke down the door of the armory and rushed to hand out 
single-shot rifles to anyone able to help defend the base. Cale remembers 
spending four hours pulling 46 men, some already dead, from the water.

Seventy-five years on, Cale was not asking for an apology from the Japanese 
prime minister. The fact that Abe came to Pearl Harbor, he said, was enough.

“He might say ‘we’re sorry.’ So what?... I say the action is better than 
saying anything because it actually means they’re sorry,” then, speaking in 
Japanese, Cale asked, “wakarimasuka?” — do you understand?

Cale was one of three Pearl Harbor survivors present, all of whom Abe shook 
hands with and embraced.

. 

Brad Glosserman, executive director of the Pacific Forum Center for Strategic 
and International Studies, a Honolulu-based think tank, called Abe’s visit a 
“big deal” that signified an eagerness to close the door on the postwar-era, 
but added that Japan must make similar gestures to its Asian neighbours if it 
is to “play the role to which it aspires in Asia and the world.”
 