
The most valuable thing in Devganga Sawra’s hut is a memory card wrapped in 
lined notepaper and hidden in an earthen pot by the family shrine. The card, 
barely the size of his fingernail, has the only four images of his youngest 
son, Vishwarnam. “You have to put this in a computer,” he says. “There are some 
pictures – two or three. You see, in our village, the tradition is that when 
someone dies, we bury all their things with them so that they don’t cause the 
family any more pain.”

Vishwarnam died in his mother’s arms aged two years and two months. He weighed 
just 6.5kg,less than half of what a child his age should 
<http://www.who.int/childgrowth/standards/Chap_4.pdf?ua=1>. “I was sitting in 
my house, holding him in my lap. He didn’t make a sound, he was sleeping, and 
then suddenly he opened his eyes for a moment, and then he closed them 
forever,” recalls his mother, Sunder. “His brother and sister cried all night 
for him. He was very ill,” she says.


“He barely ate,” Devganga says. “We didn’t have anything to give him. What do 
people have here to eat? A bit of rice, a bit of wheat. That’s all.”


Stunting and poverty 'could hold back 250m children worldwide'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/04/stunting-poverty-hold-back-250m-children-worldwide-lancet>
The blurry images on Devganga’s memory card show the frail toddler in an 
oversized T-shirt weeks before he died of hypothermia, a common cause of death 
among underweight babies.

Thousands of children have died because of malnutrition-related conditions in 
the west Indian state of Maharashtra in the past year.

Devganga, whose work as a road builder earns him a daily wage of roughly 100 
rupees (£1.19), says he – like many others in his village of Khoch – had not 
been paid for months, and food supplies were running low. “He was very sick. We 
took him to see the doctor in Mokhada,” he says, referring to the nearest 
clinic, which is a 10km walk from the Sawra home. “They told us they couldn’t 
do anything to treat him, and we’d have to take him to Nashik [a town about 
60km away], but where do poor people like us get the money to go all the way to 
Nashik? We decided to start saving but then, two or three days after that, he 
died.”


The prevalence of malnutrition in Maharashtra is alarming. A series of 
government schemes in India over the past two decades has led to a dramatic 
fall in under-nutrition and stunting since the 1980s. According to a Unicef 
report, the percentage of underweight children in India under the age of five 
fell from55% to 29% between 1988 and 2014 
<http://data.unicef.org/resources/joint-child-malnutrition-estimates-2016-edition/>
.

Between 2005 and 2014, Maharashtra had one of the country’s most effective 
state-run nutrition programmes. The efficacy of the scheme was lauded in 
Unicef’s global nutrition reports, including the2016 edition 
<http://data.unicef.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/130565-1.pdf>, and 
replicated in states around India. But five years of drought, coupled with the 
withdrawal of government nutrition schemes in the past two years, has led to a 
dramatic regional increase in malnutrition.


In the Pahlgar district alone, where the Sawra family live, malnutrition was 
linked to315 child deaths between January and September 2016 
<http://www.dnaindia.com/health/report-report-shifts-blame-for-palghar-deaths-from-malnutrition-2270584>
, according to the latest government figures.

Corrupt officials often pocket money meant to feed children. Lack of awareness 
among mothers means they go questioned

The Bombay high court 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/bombay-hc-concerned-over-17000-deaths-due-to-malnutrition-in-maharashtra-3042795/>
 claims malnutrition caused the deaths of more than 17,000 people in 
Maharashtra between September 2015 and September 2016. Judges criticised the 
government for inaction over the deaths.

At the Mokhada hospital, near the Sawra’s home, Dr Mahesh Patil says women 
come to him daily with underweight children. “Most of the cases are mild, but 
around 20%-30% are severe, and of those around 30%-40% are near death.”

Patil is one of only two doctors at the government hospital, which lacks the 
facilities to deal with malnutrition cases. Each day, Patil sees about 250 
patients with various ailments, which gives him barely two minutes with each 
one. Villagers complain that field doctors who do rounds often don’t have 
medicines, which means families have to walk miles to reach the nearest medical 
centre. Patil says: “I am a gynaecologist, the other doctor here is a [GP]. We 
don’t have a paediatrician here. That’s why I have to tell some of the people 
who come here to go to a bigger city.”


Vinita Ved Singal, spokesperson for Maharashtra’s department for women and 
child development, says the government has introduced various initiatives to 
help mothers look after undernourished children. “We have a whole plethora of 
programmes and schemes at district level which are area-specific, and are 
designed to help malnourished children,” she says. “These people have been 
given money through employment in government schemes, and meals are provided 
every day for children at the localanganwadis [mother and child care centres]. 
The children who come there should be getting at least one hot meal a day, plus 
four eggs a week.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnothing-to-give-human-cost-malnutrition-maharashtra-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd676e713526ace65864be08c32e8112e722a1130%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20had%20nothing%20to%20give%20him'%3A%20the%20human%20cost%20of%20malnutrition%20in%20Maharashtra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnothing-to-give-human-cost-malnutrition-maharashtra-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20had%20nothing%20to%20give%20him%27%3A%20the%20human%20cost%20of%20malnutrition%20in%20Maharashtra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fnothing-to-give-human-cost-malnutrition-maharashtra-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd676e713526ace65864be08c32e8112e722a1130%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
 Children wait for food at a care centre in Khoch. Photograph: Vidhi Doshi 
However, the government’s nutrition schemes have been criticised for failing 
to provide balanced diets, while supplies of rice, grain and pulses to be 
delivered under the ration system werereportedly found crawling with insects, 
or containing small stones 
<http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-newdelhi/Tribal-malnutrition-crisis-haunts-Maharashtra/article16909459.ece>
.


A visit to the Khoch anganwadi suggested the government’s welfare standards 
are not being met. Small children wandered into the childcare centre holding 
empty metal bowls, but there was little for them to eat. A woman from a 
neighbouring hut says: “Whatever of my own money I have to spare, I use it to 
make rice for the children who come. The government is supposed to reimburse me 
but for many months they haven’t done that. So where do I get the money to keep 
feeding them?”


According to Swati Narayan, from the Right to Food Campaign 
<http://www.righttofoodcampaign.in/>, such scenes are common across India. 
Corrupt district level officers andanganwadi workers often pocket the money 
meant to feed children, and a lack of awareness among mothers means they are 
never questioned. “According to the National Food Security Act, children should 
be getting a morning snack, a hot meal at lunch, and be given rations to take 
home every day,” she says. “But in areas like Pahlgar, where extremely 
marginalised tribal communities live, national data shows a lot of children 
don’t get that.


“They’re supposed to give rice, eggs, milk, pulses and proteins provided for 
by the government. But the people don’t know what their kids should be getting, 
so they don’t ask.”

In his new year’s address to the nation 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/full-text-pm-narendra-modi-new-years-eve-address-to-the-nation-4453587/>
, the prime minister, Narendra Modi, addressed the nutrition crisis. “We are 
introducing a nationwide scheme for financial assistance to pregnant women. Six 
thousand rupees (£71) will be transferred directly to the bank accounts of 
pregnant women who undergo institutional delivery and vaccinate their children 
… This will help ensure nutrition before and after delivery, and improve the 
health of mother and child,” he said.


However, Modi’s nutrition scheme is a repackaged version of maternity 
entitlements already guaranteed to women in the 2013 National Food Security Act 
<https://thewire.in/91011/modi-maternity-entitlements/>, which his own 
government has failed to deliver since he came to power.


According to Patil, the number of deaths in Mokhada district has fallen since 
the monsoon, but the residents of Khoch say their children are still going 
hungry. Devganga says he was promised compensation of 1,100 rupees for the 
death of his child, which has still not been paid. He is struggling to feed his 
two older children.

In his hut, he replaces the memory card in its hiding place at the shrine. 
“God gave him to us, and God took him away,” he says. “But I do miss him.”

 