
Amsterdam, the Netherlands: ‘When scarcity is applauded, that’s very wrong’

“Here gentrification happens very quickly. Every month some ‘nice’ restaurant 
or shop opens. The old name of my neighbourhood (Kinkerbuurt) was changed and 
rebranded to ‘Hallenkwartier’. I would enjoy many of the changes if I knew 
others could enjoy it as well. But poor people have to leave, social housing is 
sold off, and rich people and tourists move in.

There was a squatting action, a demonstration and protests against the 
rebranding of the neighbourhood. I have seen posters and banners on houses. But 
the city council is just selling off social housing. Waiting time for a house 
in this neighbourhood used to be eight years, now it is 18 years. The biggest 
ruling party has even worse plans; they want to give the social houses only to 
working people, saying jobless people should leave the city.

I can’t believe what Amsterdam has become, it was very different 10 years ago 
(I’ve lived here for 22 years). Generally rent is easier to control with rent 
caps than housing prices, so this ideal of having property should be 
discouraged. We have a great tradition of social housing corporations in the 
Netherlands – some cities had 50% social housing. Now the whole way of thinking 
is about extracting money, not creating communities. When prices go up, they 
say ‘the market is doing well’. When scarcity is applauded, that is very wrong.”
(Pieter Voogt)

Montreal, Canada: ‘New restaurants can’t be located near existing ones’

“Various parts of Montreal have been experiencing gentrification. In 
Saint-Henri, a former manufacturing neighbourhood, urban renewal has been very 
contentious, particularly with regards to the commercial strip, Notre-Dame 
Street, becoming well known as a restaurant district. The borough council has 
just introduced a new bylaw restricting the number of restaurants on the strip, 
imposing a 30-metre restriction, whereby new restaurants cannot be located 
within 30 metres of an existing restaurant.”(Giovanni Paquin)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f0880e89330c19aa68c692e1b23741f4ad186e4%2F0_59_863_901%2F863.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f0880e89330c19aa68c692e1b23741f4ad186e4%2F0_59_863_901%2F863.jpg>
 A member of the Mountain View Tenants Coalition. Photograph: Daniel DeBolt 
Silicon Valley, US: ‘$1,000 a month rent hikes are not uncommon’

“Gentrification has been business as usual for Silicon Valley for decades. My 
entire family has left over the years to more affordable places for the working 
class. Today gentrification is even more extreme thanks to Google headquarters 
being here. Every time there’s a boom inSilicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley>, something like six 
times more jobs are created than homes built. People are casually displaced 
every day and $1,000 a month rent hikes are not uncommon. We have hundreds of 
people living on the streets now in RVs.

In the end gentrification will create huge social unrest and we shall all – 
rich and poor – suffer the consequences

Mountain View should implement policies that restrict office growth unless it 
correlates with commensurate housing growth. City councils are hesitant to 
advocate that way because they’re scared a company like Google would leave and 
go to another city.The Mountain View Tenants Coalition 
<https://mvtenantscoalition.org/> is now campaigning for ballot measure V, 
which is a rent control law. We collected 7,311 signatures in a monumental 
community effort.”(Daniel DeBolt)

Bath, UK: ‘Gentrification will create huge social unrest’

“In Foxhill, 544 homes are being threatened with demolition by a ‘social 
housing landlord’ who is also a developer: their plans would result in a loss 
of 241 social homes. Owners would be forced out of the city. Tenants would be 
rehoused in the area but probably with much higher rents. The prospect of 
seeing our lovely peaceful village-type estate being demolished and replaced 
with upmarket homes at top market prices is creating anxiety and illness. A 
petition byour Foxhill Residents Association 
<http://www.bathchronicle.co.uk/foxhill-residents-curo-don-t-split-community/story-28616135-detail/story.html>
 opposing the demolition was submitted to Parliament. A lot of residents hope 
the project will not receive planning permission.

There are 6,000 people on the housing waiting list in Bath, so a project that 
would create a loss of social homes is not acceptable. The people who keep our 
city running are needed and need homes: what will Bath do if the dustmen, the 
waiters, the chefs, the nurses, the childminders, the recyclers are forced to 
live outside of this expensive city? In the end gentrification will create huge 
social unrest and we shall all – rich and poor – suffer the consequences.”
(Frieda Buckley)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc30fef21a5a417c513c9f32780ee00ce1f69fa97%2F0_200_4287_2572%2F4287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc30fef21a5a417c513c9f32780ee00ce1f69fa97%2F0_200_4287_2572%2F4287.jpg>
 ‘Lisbon’s historic centre has suffered a growing gentrification process.’ 
Photograph: Alamy 
Lisbon, Portugal: ‘Landlords evict people to start tourist businesses every 
day’

“I live in Lisbon’s historical centre, which has been suffering a growing 
gentrification process in the last four years with rising tourism and no 
regulation for short-term rentals. Rent prices are now completely unaffordable. 
Entire blocks of homes are being converted to short-term rental apartments and 
hostels. Landlords are evicting people to start a touristic business every day.

We need new laws that encourage landlords to choose long-term renting, instead 
of short term or leaving apartments vacant. We should also have rent controlled 
apartments and a centralised office, like inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>, that decides a price ceiling for 
every rental apartment in the city.

This is a turning point. The city is becoming an entirely segregated, 
exclusive place. Local and national governments are doing nothing to stop this 
happen. The issue of gentrification has been dismissed or called collateral 
damage. Some activist groups have been stirring the waters, but it is very 
difficult to fight the power of money especially when it’s supported by 
government.”(Catarina)

Newcastle, UK: ‘I want to believe that cities can be both regenerated and 
inclusive’

“Twenty-five years ago there were riots near where I live, in the west end of 
Newcastle. Fifteen years ago there was talk of demolition. Now, after 
regeneration efforts, we’ve got cleaner streets, reduced crime, and a revived 
local economy - due in no small part to immigration, by the way. The housing 
crisis is a scandal. But conflating it with regeneration, and damning cafes, 
cycle lanes, enterprise and opportunity as ‘gentrification’ runs the risk of 
undermining efforts to make places better. It also lets our policy makers, 
whose actions are making matters worse, off the hook. I want to believe that 
towns and cities can be both regenerated and inclusive.” (Jo Ellis)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e1f3702bb8df26ed189d86fa35ac92d05891e55%2F0_255_3960_2376%2F3960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e1f3702bb8df26ed189d86fa35ac92d05891e55%2F0_255_3960_2376%2F3960.jpg>
 ‘What does it mean to build a new Chicago? There is already a Chicago here.’ 
Photograph: George Rose/Getty Images 
Chicago, US: ‘I’m afraid of the day when the stores, the people, the library 
are all gone’

“You can’t live on the north-west side of Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago> without talking about 
gentrification. There is a lot of action being taken to counteract it. From 
civil disobediences on the luxury towers being constructed on Milwaukee Avenue 
to rallies against evictions throughout the neighbourhood, gentrification is 
one of the most contentious issues facing our city.

The push for affordable housing is coming from the community, not elected 
officials. Mayor Rahm Emanuel has a slogan called ‘Building a new Chicago’; 
what does that mean? There is already a Chicago here. There is obviously an 
agenda to gentrify and attract tourists to make Chicago a ‘global city’. We 
should be subsidising affordable housing, instead of downtown hotels. We need 
rent control and eviction laws. As a lifelong resident of the north-west side 
of Chicago, I’m afraid of there coming a day when I don’t recognise my 
neighbourhood, when the stores, the people, the library are all gone. That gets 
to the root of gentrification: this loss of familiarity and home.”(Lynda Lopez)

Buenos Aires, Argentina: ‘Most people have to move away when they start a 
family’

“Vivo en un barrio (Palermo), que se fue transformando de un barrio familiar 
hace 20 años atrás a una atracción turística y muy caro, donde un apartamento 
es prácticamente incomprable. El gobierno de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires no hace 
absolutamente nada por esto, y en todo el perímetro de la ciudad existe una 
aumento del valor muy superior al del ingreso, lo que origina que la mayoría de 
la gente cuando forma una familia deba mudarse lejos ... o vivir amontonada en 
pocos metros cuadrados.La existencia de vivienda social y la construcción de 
casas construidas especfícamente para familias en vez de apartamentos de lujo, 
ayudaría evitar la gentrificació.” (Raùl Enrique Rodriguez)

(“I live in a district (Palermo) that has transformed from a family district 
20 years ago to a tourist attraction and is very expensive, where an apartment 
is practically unaffordable. The city government has done absolutely nothing 
for this, and the surrounding areas of Greater Buenos Aires have increased in 
value far exceeding people’s incomes, meaning that most people have to move 
away when they start a family, or live piled up into a few metres squared. The 
existence of social housing and the construction of family homes instead of 
only luxury apartments would help prevent gentrification.”Translation by 
Natalie Pilato)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe52638d8236caadf697430d8ef0ada42030bf09%2F0_101_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe52638d8236caadf697430d8ef0ada42030bf09%2F0_101_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 These #boycottairbnb posters in Berlin complain that the service is 
contributing to gentrification. Photograph:Agata Lisiak 
<https://twitter.com/agatskil> 
Berlin, Germany: ‘Rent caps and Airbnb restrictions need to be more strictly 
enforced’


“While gentrification in Berlin is harder to recognise than in New York or 
London due to the low base from which rent prices started at, the percentage 
increases are extreme. The city has taken some steps to keep prices down (for 
instance by capping rent increases) but this has also ignited the popularity of
Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> and similar sites, where 
renters can take advantage of these laws by paying low rents themselves, but 
making huge profits through short-term rentals. This then takes a number of 
apartments off the market, increasing rent prices and shortages.

An acquaintance has rented four flats at a low rate, and rents them all out 
through Airbnb. It’s become a very profitable full-time job for him. The city 
has put some restrictions on the amount of days you can rent your property, but 
these are apparently easy to evade and not well enforced. The city is still 
catching up to the use of new technologies. Rent caps and restrictions on 
Airbnb are a start, but they need to be more strictly enforced.”(Daniel)

Somerville, US: ‘We need more community control of land’

“Gentrification is out of control here in Somerville, Massachusetts. Property 
values are increasing at an average of 10% per year, condo conversion and rent 
increases are rampant, and new development is pricing out small businesses and 
contributing to displacement of low-income and immigrant residents.

I’m part of Union United <http://www.unionunitedsomerville.com/>, a 
broad-based coalition of residents, businesses, churches, unions, and community 
organisations. We are fighting for a voice in new development, so that we can 
have decision-making power over the future of our neighbourhood and ensure 
affordable housing, good jobs, small business protections, and other amenities. 
A binding community benefits agreement between community members and developers 
would be a great first step. Longer term, we need more community control of 
land through land trust and public housing, along with rent control and a real 
living wage.”(Anonymous)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac8fcceb43de643d0f149375220726b4ad96d36d%2F0_252_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac8fcceb43de643d0f149375220726b4ad96d36d%2F0_252_3872_2325%2F3872.jpg>
 Mexico City: ‘La voz de Polanco is rejecting the transformation of local 
houses into commercial uses.’ Photograph: fitopardo/Getty Images 
Mexico City, Mexico: ‘Nothing can stop gentrification in my city’

“My neighbourhood is called Polanco. Recently shops and restaurants have been 
moving into the old mansions and their occupants have moved elsewhere. I 
believe gentrification is a positive and natural mechanism in the city. Some 
organisations such as ‘La voz de Polanco’ are rejecting the recent 
transformation of houses into commercial uses and land development in general, 
but I don’t support them.

I think nothing is capable of stopping gentrification in my city. Its negative 
effect such as displacement of people should be tackled by a housing plan that 
includes affordable apartments for rent inside more expensive buildings, 
sponsored by the state. Displacement of poor people out of gentrified 
neighbourhoods is a serious issue here: people have to move to housing projects 
that are located 50km away from the city centre. But land developers are not to 
blame, they respond to the free trade economy. Their effects expose the 
irresponsibility of the state in providing affordable housing to those in need.”
(Lorenzo Rocha)

Gentrification is a global problem. It's time we found a better solution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/29/gentrification-global-problem-better-solution-oliver-wainwright>
London, UK: ‘It has created a class and race divide’

“I have a council flat that I was given after 15 years of being homeless. I’m 
from a working-class background and have always worked. Affordable housing has 
always been an issue for my friends and family. No one wanted to live here when 
I first moved in, but now it is considered a highly desirable area. We have 
seen the mass selling-off of council flats on the estate to property 
developers, the private and buy-to-rent markets. This has put a lot of pressure 
on tenants like myself, with our homes constantly under threat as the council 
tries to find ways to evict or move you out of the area to free up properties 
to sell, creating anxiety and vulnerability.

What gets forgotten is that we have a diverse community of people in my block 
who know each other and help each other out. My experience of people who have 
bought flats is that they don’t actually want to live in a diverse community. 
Shop prices have gone up locally, expensive coffee shops and restaurants have 
opened. It has created a class and race divide that didn’t exist here before. 
The tenants’ association has been good at campaigning to stop flats from being 
demolished to make space for luxury apartments – but they’ve been unable to 
stop the sell-off of flats. My issue is not with areas being improved, it is 
how gentrification is about one demographic of our society changing an area for 
themselves and not for the benefit of everyone.”(Anonymous)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2933670d304560ef78d499a94d199b242d9c1f4c%2F0_272_4084_2451%2F4084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2933670d304560ef78d499a94d199b242d9c1f4c%2F0_272_4084_2451%2F4084.jpg>
 ‘Goutte d’Or is maybe one of the last areas in central Paris trying to resist 
gentrification.’ Photograph: Lucas Schifres/Getty Images 
Paris, France: ‘The city is very diverse, but this is being threatened’

“Gentrification has been happening in Paris since the 1970s, reaching most 
neighbourhoods. But there is a district called Goutte d’Or which is maybe one 
of the last areas in the inner city trying to resist it. Despite the loss of 
some of the shops and communities which create the identity of this area, there 
are a few initiatives that are trying to resist the present trend. In order to 
preserve the ethnic and social diversity in Goutte d’Or, the city has been 
trying to slow down the process of gentrification by developing social housing. 
One third of the flats created were reserved for emergency housing, one third 
for regular social housing and one third for middle class “pioneers”. This 
policy has been criticised for dragging the middle class in to this area and 
increasing real estate prices.

Gentrification <https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gentrification> is a 
natural trend but it has to be regulated especially in a multicultural and 
socially divided city such as Paris. This city is very rich in terms of 
diversity, but this is now being threatened, especially because private housing 
is deregulated and many foreigners are investing in real estate, making prices 
grow artificially. I think people who own flats and leave them empty should be 
taxed, and the city council should encourage owners to transform unused spaces 
such as abandoned offices into residential units to create more offers on the 
market.”(Alexia Chauliac)

Callao, Peru: ‘The government here doesn’t even know what gentrification is’

“Callao is a city full of history and traditions and is undergoing a process 
of gentrification, specifically in the historic centre. Even though Callao is 
really close to Lima, it has been an independent city since 1836. Nobody uses 
the term gentrification when referring to what is currently happening. If you 
see the news in Peru, they will refer to the process as ‘a project to improve 
and change the face of Callao’. They will not speak about the houses being 
bought up and the people who are being displaced.

In Peru the term gentrification is not recognised

You may think that this area needs more good schools and employment 
opportunities, but the government agrees with the gentrifying group that 
opening art galleries, cafes, and expensive restaurants will solve things. Also 
there are weekend events where the cost of alcohol is too expensive for locals 
and the advertising is targeted only to the wealthy sectors of Lima; people in 
the area say they don’t feel these events are for them.

In Peru the term gentrification is not recognised. The government here doesn’t 
even know what gentrification is. Even worse, city government said that it 
won’t put zoning plans to the public until the year 2036. I think sharing 
information and broadening knowledge about gentrification would help.”
(Anonymous)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F025d10f148d9fcde8f1ad752a3fd2f5c89b500cb%2F0_310_5150_3091%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20building%20our%20way%20to%20hell%E2%80%99%3A%20tales%20of%20gentrification%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fbuilding-way-to-hell-readers-tales-gentrification-around-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F025d10f148d9fcde8f1ad752a3fd2f5c89b500cb%2F0_310_5150_3091%2F5150.jpg>
 Portland: ‘Beauty is being replaced by tastelessness.’ Photograph: Rich 
Iwasaki/Alamy 
Portland, US: ‘We are currently building our way to hell’

“I am a 70 year old carpenter and I have seen more decay in the quality of 
life in the last three years inPortland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/portland>, Oregon – pearl of culture in 
the Great Northwest – with the one-term mayor ‘Chainsaw Charlie Hales’ who was 
previously a lobbyist for the the ‘home builders’ – read developers. Towers 
built into the sky on alluvial soil – the stuff that turns to pudding in an 
earthquake. Hundred-year-old classic neighbourhoods injected with ‘cereal box’ 
buildings invalidating residents’ privacy and daylight.

'Regeneration should be for all': will change in Johannesburg benefit its 
poorest residents?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/26/regeneration-gentrification-johannesburg-south-africa-change-poorest-residents-gentrification>
From my perspective, I would call this a travesty: ‘Bankers gone wild’. A 
spreadsheet vision of creating investments that spread the risk, with total 
disregard for community culture which, prior to this, was well protected by 
zoning. The people here have a campaign calledStop demolishing Portland 
<http://www.stopdemolishingportland.org/>. Such beauty is being replaced by 
such tastelessness, as though the reason the people want to live here is to be 
housed like gerbils. The cult of efficiency, unchecked and ungrounded is the 
universal salve that greases the way to community destruction and dislocation. 
We are currently building our way to hell.”(David Chinook Bean)

Thank you to everyone who contributed. You can follow Guardian Cities on 
Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 