
The rumour was there would be chicken.

Word had spread that a delivery of poultry meat was due at the Central 
Madeirense supermarket, and long before dawn a queue of shoppers was snaking 
around the block.

Kattya Alonzo was one of them. The 48-year-old mother of three was already 
planning to make the traditional chicken and rice disharroz con pollo – if she 
could also find some rice.

“I haven’t been able to buy chicken in more than a month, so I was there early 
at about 4am,” she said.


At about 6.30, two trucks finally drew up outside the store, but before the 
drivers could start to unload, national guardsmen told them to drive on.

Venezuelans on the food and economic crisis blighting their daily lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/18/venezuelans-on-food-shortages-economic-crisis-blighting-daily-lives-maduro>
Venezuela <https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela> is rich in oil, but 
dogged by chronic shortages of basic goods and essential medicines, electricity 
and water rationing, spiraling inflation and rampant crime.

Perhaps it was not surprising that the mood outside the supermarket quickly 
turned ugly: frustration turned to despair, anger to violence. Before long, the 
incident on Tuesday had escalated.

Mobs tried to loot several bakeries and delis and another food delivery truck.

The unrest soon spread throughout this city of 200,000 just outside the 
capital, Caracas. Protesters shouted “We want food” as they blocked 
intersections with burning tyres and clashed with security forces.


Police and the national guard quickly controlled the outburst, with some 14 
people reportedly arrested, and at least one person was injured, according to 
witnesses.


The protests were not related to marches in Caracas and other major cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/18/venezuela-police-fire-teargas-protesters-crisis>
, which were called this week by opposition leaders seeking to cut short the 
term of PresidentNicolás Maduro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolas-maduro> who they say has driven the 
country into the ground through mismanagement.

But spontaneous outbursts such as the one in Guarenas may present a more 
serious challenge to Maduro’s rule than any efforts by his political rivals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fvenezuela-breaking-point-food-shortages-protests-maduro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff55ee5033c397b5b223fb89243e1e14710f002d%2F0_225_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20are%20like%20a%20bomb'%3A%20food%20riots%20show%20Venezuela%20crisis%20has%20gone%20beyond%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fvenezuela-breaking-point-food-shortages-protests-maduro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20are%20like%20a%20bomb%27%3A%20food%20riots%20show%20Venezuela%20crisis%20has%20gone%20beyond%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fvenezuela-breaking-point-food-shortages-protests-maduro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff55ee5033c397b5b223fb89243e1e14710f002d%2F0_225_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 A woman with a sign reading ‘There is no food’ protests against new emergency 
powers decreed by President Nicolás Maduro on 18 May. Photograph: Federico 
Parra/AFP/Getty Images 
The opposition won control of parliament in December elections, but Maduro has 
blocked all attempts at reforms passed in the legislature though the 
government-controlled supreme court.


Maduro blames the country’s woes on an “economic war” against his government 
by rightwingers and foreign interests. Last week Maduro decreeda 60-day state 
of emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/14/venezuela-maduro-emergency-powers>
 because of the “threat” against his government.

Maduro has described the referendum push as an attempt to justify a coup 
d’état or a foreign intervention, and on Friday the Venezuelan armed forces 
began two days of military exercises as show of force in the face of such 
threats.

But as the events in Guarenas show, the country is on a knife-edge.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fblackouts-looting-and-venezuelas-state-of-emergency-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blackouts%2C%20looting%20and%20murder%3A%20Venezuela's%20state%20of%20emergency%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fblackouts-looting-and-venezuelas-state-of-emergency-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blackouts%2C%20looting%20and%20murder%3A%20Venezuela%27s%20state%20of%20emergency%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F17%2Fblackouts-looting-and-venezuelas-state-of-emergency-video-explainer&media=>
Blackouts, looting and murder: Venezuela’s state of emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/17/blackouts-looting-and-venezuelas-state-of-emergency-video-explainer>
Venezuelans have been living with shortages of food and essential items for 
nearly three years as the oil-dependent economy began to buckle. And patience 
is wearing thin.


The Venezuelan Observatory of Social Conflict registered 2,138 protests 
between January and April, most of them spontaneous manifestations of anger or 
frustration. Incidents of looting have nearly quadrupled in the same time.


“We are like a bomb going tick-tock, tick-tock,” said Zenovia Villegas, a 
54-year-old housewife who waited in line at a Guarenas supermarket since the 
early hours of Thursday only to be told at 3pm that the store would not be 
opening its doors that day. Dejected, she went home empty-handed.


Authorities have reason to be nervous of unstructured shows of dissent, 
particularly in protest-prone Guarenas.


It was in here that protests in 1989 against neoliberal reforms and a hike in 
bus faressparked a wave of looting and violence that came to be known as the 
“Caracazo” <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caracazo> in which as many as 3,000 
people died.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fvenezuela-breaking-point-food-shortages-protests-maduro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ccc3b7d4bb414974511db339b97b1d9bcfa15eb%2F0_85_2995_1797%2F2995.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20are%20like%20a%20bomb'%3A%20food%20riots%20show%20Venezuela%20crisis%20has%20gone%20beyond%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fvenezuela-breaking-point-food-shortages-protests-maduro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20are%20like%20a%20bomb%27%3A%20food%20riots%20show%20Venezuela%20crisis%20has%20gone%20beyond%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fvenezuela-breaking-point-food-shortages-protests-maduro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ccc3b7d4bb414974511db339b97b1d9bcfa15eb%2F0_85_2995_1797%2F2995.jpg>
 A public bus burns in Caracas during riots to protest increases in gasoline 
and transport fare hikes in 1989. Photograph: AP 
Those events are said to be what motivated an attempted coup in 1992 by an 
army lieutenant-colonel namedHugo Chávez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hugo-chavez> who would later become 
president and set the country on a “revolutionary” path under the banner of 
21st-century socialism.


At the entrance to Guarenas a sign boasts that the city was the “birthplace of 
the revolution”.


The charismatic and wily Chávez, who led the country from 1998 till his death 
in 2013, enjoyed unprecedented support for his oil-funded social programs that 
brought health services, education and housing to poor Venezuelans.


Maduro, his successor, has not managed to win the same levels of popular 
support and as oil prices dropped the country’s economy has gone into a 
tailspin.


President says Venezuela won't be next to fall, but he may not have a choice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/venezuela-unrest-nicolas-maduro-protests>
An opposition coalition, known as MUD, is trying to force a recall referendum 
on Maduro, which would cut his six-year presidential term in half. They have 
collected the first batch of signatures to begin the process but accuse 
electoral authorities of stalling in processing them.


But for people on the street that’s just politics.


“We don’t care who’s in Miraflores,” said Marlene Pineda who runs a newsstand 
in Caracas, referring to the presidential palace. “What we want is food,” she 
says reflecting the sentiment of many Venezuelans far removed from politics who 
are struggling to get by day to day.


“Food is what moves people,” says Carlos Perdomo, who sells unrefined 
sugarloaves known aspapelón in an area called Samán where protesters 
congregated on Tuesday.


But so does the feeling of impotence. A rash of mob justice has gripped 
Venezuela as violent crime soars with little response from security forces.


In the Mesuca neighbourhood of Caracas – considered the most dangerous area of 
the world’s most murderous city – motorcycle taxi drivers swap horror stories 
as they nervously wait for fares.

Accepting the wrong fare may cost any one of them their motorbike or their 
life.


“When a passenger comes the first thing we do is look at their waist” for any 
sign of a gun, said Carlos Paredes. “For us, going to work is like a lottery.”


Impunity is so widespread that lynchings have now become common.

Several months ago a thief stole a motorcycle at gunpoint in one of the steep 
winding streets of the neighbourhood. A group of motorcyclists chased down the 
thief, beat him, doused him with gasoline and set him on fire.

John Díaz, 25 said he didn’t participate in the mob but saw the man’s charred 
remains on the street.


“People are fed up. With everything,” he said.


The lynching and looting are manifestations of anger and impotence that 
clinical psychologist Liliana Castiglione is seeing in her practice where 80% 
her patients’ problems are related to the country’s economic and social crisis.


“People are desperate, they are depressed and they’re angry,” said 
Castiglione, who launched a blog called Psicólogas al Rescate (Psychologists to 
the Rescue) where she and partner Stefania Aguzzi offer low-cost or sometimes 
free consultations for Venezuelans struggling to cope.


“One woman this week told me straight out that she wanted to kill people,” 
said Castiglione. “Like many Venezuelans she feels trapped.”


One way to channel that frustration is by standing up and expressing through 
protests, Castiglione said, but security forces are quick to stifle them.


At the time of the Caracazo, police and soldiers at first stood by when the 
looting and protests started. Today security forces are under orders to quell 
any sign of protest immediately.


Several days after the unrest in Guarenas, the city remained tense. Groups of 
national guardsmen in riot gear watched over a busy informal street market to 
prevent any further turbulence.


“If you complain too loudly, they arrest you,” says María David, a 71-year-old 
retired nurse. “As soon as people protest, the military is there.”


“That’s the reason things haven’t blown over, yet,” she says. “Fear.”



 