
In our era of ever-more rapid technological development, the deep-seated 
connections we have to our urban landscapes are at real risk of being lost. The 
abundance of information available on a portable screen – telling us where to 
go, what to do and who to meet – mediates our relationship to the city, 
distancing us from its physical and, to some degree, psychological realities.

To reclaim some of what is being lost, I propose walking in the night. This is 
not the chest-beating, public declaration of protest as commonly understood, 
but a gently recalcitrant act against the confines of the daily grind. To 
venture into the “thickness” of the night is to experience, in a powerful and 
visceral way, a much broader world than that which exists during the daytime.

Recent years have seen lines drawn across many of our urban landscapes: 
previously tangible city limits hewn in stone or set in concrete, joined by 
invisible ones scanned by cameras. The digital panopticon of CCTV and other 
surveillance technologies ensures those same landscapes are mapped, recorded 
and classified almost out of existence.

Cities at night: why our right to use public spaces after dark is under threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/19/cities-at-night-right-to-use-public-spaces-after-dark-curfews-lockout-laws>
It is not just cities that are changing, but us too. Increasing demands on our 
attention skew and stretch time.Leisure time as indistinct from work time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/nov/07/work-and-leisure-used-to-be-separate-now-its-just-247-anxiety>
 – arguably one of capitalism’s finest constructs – is being constantly sucked 
into an internet wormhole: work emails penetrating outside office hours; 24/7 
concentration required for our always-on, always-connected existence;
just-in-time delivery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/18/how-hermes-couriers-shoulder-insecurity-of-internet-shopping-boom>
 lifestyles encroaching effortlessly into our evening and night.

The old crutch of recuperation and “temporary social distance”, as Murray 
Melbin 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Night-Frontier-Colonizing-World-after/dp/0029209404> 
termed it, that the nocturnal hours used to provide is now little more than a 
matchstick, worn down by instant and incessant communication, 140-character 
epistles and thefear of missing out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2016/jan/18/fomo-five-more-feelings-angst-social-media-acronyms>
.

Given the subtle changes being made to our cities, as well as the constant 
demands on our attention, it may be seriously questioned whether most of us 
have the time or inclination to engage with a sense of place anymore. But out 
there beyond our homes, an alternative, liminal habitat awaits us in the 
nocturnal city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnocturnal-night-city-nick-dunn-streets-supernatural-joy-walking-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6c559e0e353874512000cf0851590b1d38df9a%2F0_213_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='When%20streets%20become%20supernatural'%3A%20the%20joy%20of%20walking%20in%20cities%20at%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnocturnal-night-city-nick-dunn-streets-supernatural-joy-walking-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27When%20streets%20become%20supernatural%27%3A%20the%20joy%20of%20walking%20in%20cities%20at%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnocturnal-night-city-nick-dunn-streets-supernatural-joy-walking-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6c559e0e353874512000cf0851590b1d38df9a%2F0_213_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Seoul’s restored Cheonggyecheon stream has ‘put the city’s inhabitants and 
visitors back in touch with darkness’. Photograph: EPA 
To go out walking into the night allows us to feel “present”, and connect with 
our surroundings in a profound way. AsHenri Bergson 
<http://www.angelfire.com/md2/timewarp/bergson.html> states: “Though all of the 
photographs of a city taken from all points of view indefinitely complete one 
another, they will never equal in value that dimensional object: the city along 
whose streets one walks.”

This is exactly the point of apparent purposelessness: that we can go and 
enjoy our urban landscape without recourse to purchase or online activity, the 
digital umbilical cord disconnected at least for a while. This is the city of 
the imagination laid over the topography of manufacture, commerce and 
consumerism. Our bodies become translators between these two cities, decoding 
and reinventing with each footstep.

'A good wander unveils the wonder of a city': readers on urban walking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/06/a-good-wander-unveils-the-wonder-of-a-city-readers-on-urban-walking>
Of equal importance to the reading of the city is the physiological 
alteration: our internal weather system changes, increasingly attuned and 
tethered to our immediate surroundings. Outthere is the endless possibility of 
night stretching out in every direction; inhere, the thoughts and emotions ebb 
and flow in response to the body’s changing isotherms.

The crepuscular fabric of cities has featured in many fictional narratives, 
but it is an essential part of our lived experience too. Streets can become 
supernatural and even magical at night, can appear otherworldly and beyond any 
pressing social concerns, gilded by the glow of streetlamps.

Rather than being daunted by the penumbra of the built environment, walking 
into the night can be a refractory act against the restraints of daily chores; 
a means of dissipating the heft of familiar roles and responsibilities. Even in 
those parts of the city with the greatest light pollution, the absence of 
people can be a strange and exhilarating experience. This is when we are most 
able to engage all our senses with the city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnocturnal-night-city-nick-dunn-streets-supernatural-joy-walking-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe742be2b0bf3436d08e6ee64226d7b72d36bd8aa%2F85_738_2094_1256%2F2094.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='When%20streets%20become%20supernatural'%3A%20the%20joy%20of%20walking%20in%20cities%20at%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnocturnal-night-city-nick-dunn-streets-supernatural-joy-walking-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27When%20streets%20become%20supernatural%27%3A%20the%20joy%20of%20walking%20in%20cities%20at%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnocturnal-night-city-nick-dunn-streets-supernatural-joy-walking-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe742be2b0bf3436d08e6ee64226d7b72d36bd8aa%2F85_738_2094_1256%2F2094.jpg>
 ‘When our eyes are less dependable, the city transforms.’ Photograph: Shams 
Qari/Barcroft Images 
But that is not to say you always need to be alone. On a short visit to Seoul 
a couple of years ago, its permanent neon aura (coupled with jet lag) led me 
down to theCheonggyecheon public park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/25/story-cities-reclaimed-stream-heart-seoul-cheonggyecheon>
. This is a relatively recent development replacing the highway that once 
bifurcated the district and covered the original stream that ran there.

As well as fostering natural habitat, improving cooling of neighbouring areas 
and increasing the uptake of public transportation, the park has put 
significant numbers of the city’s inhabitants and visitors back in touch with 
darkness. And while some areas along the waterway were well lit, considerable 
stretches were not. Families, young couples, elderly groups and solitary 
walkers from a broad demographic all wandered along, enjoying the night air and 
coursing water as it streamed past.

‘A labyrinth for the newcomer’

Our reliance on visual perception is overrated in the city. Many of us have 
experienced near-collisions with other pedestrians who are focused on the 
device in their hand rather than the world around them; a situation exacerbated 
by headphones. This kind of retreat into oneself provides even greater 
delineation between the city and its people.

Our lack of attention to the immediate environment is driven by the belief 
that we are being more productive by inhabiting two worlds at the same time. We 
are not. Instead we move about in relative limbo: neither fully engaged in the 
here and now, nor completely devoted to the matters that distracted us in the 
first place. Our slavishness to anything new is debilitating. Our desire to 
mediate the world through technology assumes we are able to successfully 
operate a dual existence – in reality, we do well to negotiate our way around 
each other on the pavement.

So what if we leave all these virtual versions alone, and engage with the 
actual? Another question slides into view: how to make sense of any city – let 
alone at night, when our reliance on the visual is at best diminished, if not 
completely misleading? Finding one’s way around is essential , but our 
understanding of cities does not always correlate to the descriptions offered 
by plans and cartography.Walter Benjamin describes 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=WsnLaDgGnaoC&pg=PA24&lpg=PA24&dq=Now+the+city+turns+into+a+labyrinth+for+the+newcomer.+Benjamin&source=bl&ots=kX4L4gtBUR&sig=iTmPU75NygFhkx813gPz8LOS7gM&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwi__uqfoKvQAhUsCcAKHcPdCccQ6AEIHjAB#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 this disorientation between the actual experience of the city and its many 
representations:

Now the city turns into a labyrinth for the newcomer. Streets that he had 
located far apart are yoked together by a corner like a pair of horses in a 
coachman’s fist. The whole exciting sequence of topographical dummies that 
deceives him could only be shown by a film: the city is on its guard against 
him, masks itself, flees, intrigues, lures him to wander its circles to the 
point of exhaustion. But in the end, maps and plans are victorious: in bed at 
night, imagination juggles with real buildings, parks and streets. 

More than half a century ago, Kevin Lynch undertook pioneering research on how 
individuals perceive and navigate cities, in order to better understand such 
phenomena. His seminal work,The Image of the City 
<https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/image-city>, explained that people understood 
their built environment via cognitive maps that facilitated their recall of 
information from the urban landscape. Whether the contemporary city is equally 
legible is highly questionable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnocturnal-night-city-nick-dunn-streets-supernatural-joy-walking-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dfa8279713ead73a7fc00492183c6cb3f1258af%2F167_0_1566_1956%2F1566.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='When%20streets%20become%20supernatural'%3A%20the%20joy%20of%20walking%20in%20cities%20at%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnocturnal-night-city-nick-dunn-streets-supernatural-joy-walking-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27When%20streets%20become%20supernatural%27%3A%20the%20joy%20of%20walking%20in%20cities%20at%20night&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fnocturnal-night-city-nick-dunn-streets-supernatural-joy-walking-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dfa8279713ead73a7fc00492183c6cb3f1258af%2F167_0_1566_1956%2F1566.jpg>
 ‘Depictions of cities at night are often dramatic and threatening.’ 
Photograph: Courtesy Everett Collection/Rex 
Further complications arise when we transpose this mapping to the nocturnal 
city, which may resist familiarity and congruence. Indeed, we may experience 
alarm and discomfort due to our overreliance on the visual during the day. Dark 
space is frequently perceived as the unnerving harbinger of the unseen, as
Anthony Vidler discusses 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=kVKxBIB-En4C&pg=PA167&lpg=PA167&dq=is+assumed+to+hide,+in+its+darkest+recesses+and+forgotten+margins,+all+the+objects+of+fear+and+phobia+that+have+returned+with+such+insistency+to+haunt+the+imaginations+of+those+who+have+tried+to+stake+out+spaces+to+protect+their+health+and+happiness.&source=bl&ots=Hgk6QB234g&sig=xfujAhuwAwljWU4eL8O9qjFwD9Q&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjsstGZ_KrQAhUKcRQKHY92DFcQ6AEIJjAD#v=onepage&q&f=false>
:

Space is assumed to hide, in its darkest recesses and forgotten margins, all 
the objects of fear and phobia that have returned with such insistency to haunt 
the imaginations of those who have tried to stake out spaces to protect their 
health and happiness.

Separating fear and darkness is no small task, especially given the depiction 
of cities at night which, whether fictional or factualised, is often dramatic 
and threatening. It is here we enter what Bert de Munck 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=bert+de+munck>
 defines as “the prosthetic paradox”. This is a condition where the 
accumulation of surveillance technologies in our cities corresponds with 
heightened anxiety and fear.

So is it possible to embrace darkness positively? To do so, rethinking our 
perception of it as not merely being the absence of light may be important. 
“There is something positive about [darkness],” wroteRoger Caillois 
<http://www.generation-online.org/p/fpcaillois.htm>. “While light space is 
eliminated by the materiality of objects, darkness touches the individual 
directly, envelops him, penetrates him, and even passes through him …”

Architecture is undoubtedly a spatial art, yet it may also be understood as a 
temporal one. The architect Peter Zumthorobserves 
<http://www.arcspace.com/bookcase/atmosphere-/> that our perception of 
atmosphere is intuitive, having evolved through an advanced emotional 
sensibility: “Not every situation grants us time to make up our minds on 
whether or not we like something – or whether, indeed, we might be better 
heading off in the opposite direction.”


Such emotional sensibility is further sharpened in the nocturnal city when our 
eyes are less dependable as a means to make sense of what surrounds us. 
Moreover, the city itself transforms in character: simultaneously revealing and 
obscuring different elements as its architecture morphs and melds. At night, 
the entire city can become spolia for new monuments.

It is these rich, otherworldly qualities of the everyday environment cast into 
shadow that stir what the poet Louis Aragondescribed 
<https://orangemanor.wordpress.com/2010/10/14/paris-peasant-le-paysan-de-paris-poem-by-louis-aragon-1926-rolf-venner/>
 as “the whole fauna of human fantasies, drifting and luxuriating in the dimly 
lit zones of human activity, as though plaiting thick tresses of darkness.”

City lights quiz: can you identify these world cities from space?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/17/night-lights-quiz-identify-world-cities-space-iss-nasa>
The night-time city is full of opportunities to probe, examine and elucidate. 
One of the considerable pleasures of nightwalking is the personal character of 
it, to be engaged with at whatever frequency, duration and scale suits the 
individual. It opens up both the city and ourselves.

Walking with another person at night gives the experience a shared outlook, 
and an implicit confessional structure. Walking alone, whilst perhaps unnerving 
to begin with, provides the full spectrum of intuition and multi-sensory 
attention to be navigated.

To walk in the city at night is to extemporise. It is an escape from the 
interdictions of daily life; an exaltation of endless discovery and joy in 
being alive, attuned and attentive to the immediate surroundings. In whichever 
of these ways appeals to you, before the sun rises again, the nocturnal city 
awaits you.


Dark Matters: A Manifesto for the Nocturnal City by Nick Dunn is published by 
Zero Books. Order a copy for £8.19 (RRP £9.99)at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/dark-matters-451042.html>, or call 0330 333 
6846.

Do you wander, wonder, wake or work at night? Share your experiences and 
reflections in the form below
 