
‘Change is happening!” says the message stencilled, in bright green, on a 
peeling wall just behind Hull’s new marina. And if that sounds a little 
wistful, given that right now it’s overlooking an empty car park surrounded by 
wire fencing, it has the underlying ring of truth.

It’s two decades since I was last in Hull, frozen in my memory as one long 
Saturday night – short skirts, hot chips, scuffles in taxi queues, excitement 
edged with nerves. Back then I was working just over the Humber Bridge in 
Grimsby, and Hull was the bright light across the water, home of gigs and 
cavernous nightclubs and all the exotic thrills small towns lack. Those clubs 
are now mostly gone, but the tingling anticipation in the air is back. A city 
long buffeted by the wrong kinds of change now stands on the verge of potential 
renaissance; forHull is next year’s official UK City of Culture 
<https://www.hull2017.co.uk/>, beneficiary of a public art project aiming to do 
here what similar European programmes did for Liverpool in 2008 and Glasgow in 
1990.

Hull: 10 reasons to visit the UK city of culture 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/nov/20/hull-10-reasons-uk-city-culture-2017>
The official opening spectacular isn’t until 1 January but the buzz has begun. 
Over summer, thousands of locals stripped naked and had themselves painted blue 
for aSpencer Tunick installation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/09/sea-of-hull-by-spencer-tunick-in-pictures>
 celebrating the city’s relationship with the sea;the Turner prize 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/context-comment/articles/turner-prize-2017-hull-announced>
 is coming here next year, plus a one-off gig from David Bowie’s old backing 
bandthe Spiders from Mars 
<https://www.hull2017.co.uk/whatson/events/the-rise-fall-of-ziggy-stardust-the-spiders-from-mars/>
. “Go on the terraces at Hull City football club, and one of the chants now is, 
‘You’re only here for the culture’,” says Daren Hale, deputy leader of the city 
council.

But this isn’t just about rebranding Hull as a tourist destination – although 
it has madeRough Guide’s list of top 10 world cities to visit this year 
<https://www.roughguides.com/best-places/2016/top-10-cities/#> and a stroll 
through the old city’s narrow cobbled streets, studded with cosy pubs, reveals 
a rather different place from the one outsiders imagine. City of Culture is 
really a shot at economic redemption, and if the idea of building a future on 
poetry and song feels hopelessly airy-fairy, beneath it is a hard-headed 
attempt to portray Hull as a feelgood city to which big employers might want to 
bring their staff. For it’s jobs that will ultimately revive those pockets of 
the city tourists don’t come to see, as Hale points out: “Once you come here 
you see there’s a real creative buzz, and people say: ‘This is the sort of 
place you could do business and you could settle’.”

But that’s no longer the only vision of Hull’s future on the table. In June, 
despite warnings that Brexit risked its future as a port city that trades daily 
with the outside world, Hull voted to leave Europe. If it was already a city at 
a crossroads, in the words of filmmaker and opening ceremony curatorSean 
McAllister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/20/a-syrian-love-story-review-microcosm-of-global-crisis>
, it’s even more so now. One road harks back to bygone days when other 
countries sent their ships here, but not their people; the other evokes a 
bright, high-skilled future that nonetheless sounds uncertain to people who 
have heard such promises before. Of all the jaunty City of Culture slogans 
plastered across the city, the most evocative is a banner near the pierhead. 
“Where have you been all our lives?” it asks, in a way that could be plaintive 
or mildly acerbic.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F085f494d12b14d12d2db448ce5d7607a576c1531%2F0_139_5478_3590%2F5478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You're%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture!'%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%27re%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture%21%27%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F085f494d12b14d12d2db448ce5d7607a576c1531%2F0_139_5478_3590%2F5478.jpg>
 Sign of confidence on a Hull street. Photograph: Alamy 
Hull <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> isn’t a swaggering big city, a 
noisy Manchester or Leeds, and like a child whose older sibling gets all the 
attention, it has learned to conceal any resulting hurt with defiance. It’s 
friendly enough to tourists but as the Hull-born author and poet Russ Litten 
writes in My People Come From The Sea, there’s a tendency to “ignore the rest 
of the country, face away/lips pursed, arms crossed”.

Yet there’s a lot going on behind those masks. As the poem goes on, “My people 
come from deep waters/My people are deep waters/My people are in deep water.” 
They are indeed – Hull was the third most deprived local authority in England 
last year, with household disposable income a third less than the national 
average – but suspicion of City of Culture’s proffered lifebelt lingers. There 
have been complaints about local artists being overlooked in favour of famous 
outsiders, and scepticism about what commercial regeneration means for the kind 
of non-conformist city that remains proud of holding out for years against 
getting a Starbucks.

Litten has long been a driving force on Hull’s musical and literary scene, and 
while the 2017 programme excites him, he worries too little of it is created by 
or for locals. “For people inside the city, I hope it doesn’t make us feel 
self-conscious,” he says, when asked how he hopes people will feel by the 
year’s end. “I’d like to think that people would feel empowered to create stuff 
rather than just consume stuff. And for people from the outside, to be 
perfectly honest, I couldn’t care less. The minute you start to worry about 
what people think and how they view you, you’ve had it.”

Litten grew up in the Hessle Road area, a working-class community ripped apart 
in the 1970s whenterritorial battles with Iceland 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cod_Wars> scuppered its fishing industry, and 
he’s not alone in linking that history with Hull’s flinty resilience.My People 
Come From The Sea 
<https://filthybroke.bandcamp.com/track/my-people-come-from-the-sea>, 
improvised for a spoken word album with local musician Steve Cobby, is based on 
their grandfathers’ stories. “Our families lived close to death,” he says 
simply. “Six times more people died in fishing than in mining. Where I’m from 
was like a village within a city and it bred a specific type of person, very 
stoic.” When Sheffield and Hull both flooded a few years back, he says, TV 
crews descended on Sheffield to film stricken householders but Hull just 
cracked on, out of sight and mind.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcde1c87bc87d22a6b49ca183fe9881232c190ab8%2F0_8_5175_3104%2F5175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You're%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture!'%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%27re%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture%21%27%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcde1c87bc87d22a6b49ca183fe9881232c190ab8%2F0_8_5175_3104%2F5175.jpg>
 Hull marina ... the business development alongside includes a hub for tech 
startups... Photograph: Alamy 
The lazy stereotype of this city as a grumpy backwater at the end of a railway 
line, redeemed only byPhilip Larkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/sep/07/poet-philip-larkin-trail-hull> 
andthe Housemartins <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/London_0_Hull_4>, is 
self-evidently wrong. It has a quirky, almost eccentric side supporting a 
thriving artistic scene, and Litten argues that it’s a great place to be 
creative; rents are cheap, geographical isolation fosters originality, and so 
does the landscape of sea to the east and rolling fields to the west. “It’s 
flat, and artists like a horizon, don’t they?”

But years of being laughed at by outsiders – famously, the book Crap Towns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/oct/02/britishidentity.regeneration> once 
called it Britain’s “worst place to live” – has left its mark.

“Culturally and psychologically, because the city was run down by people 
outside for so long, it kind of bites,” says Andrew Young, a strategic 
consultant to universities whose Twitter account@Hullbhoy 
<https://twitter.com/Hullbhoy> plugs all that’s good about his home town. He 
sees City of Culture both as injecting new ideas and challenging those who 
knock Hull without ever having been: “I think it’s fantastic to have the 
spotlight on the city and big national players on the stage. We don’t get the 
London Philharmonic here, but we’ve got it in 2017.”

Yet he concedes the spotlight isn’t comfortable for everyone. “People in Hull 
can be quite timid in terms of shouting about what they do. If you go to 
Glasgow people aren’t slow in coming forward and telling you what’s going on. 
We don’t do that so much.” And that ingrained reticence can make Hull a hard 
city to help.

Diana Johnson, MP for Hull North, says the city was “late to the party” in the 
boom years for urban regeneration, hesitating to hustle for funding when rivals 
such as Newcastle and Liverpool were doing so. And now it’s finally at the 
front of the queue, the party is winding down. Few envisage Conservative 
ministers spending more now on rundown estates than Labour did during a boom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81cf4e69115fef6f1457287e8095e0dc3e972b86%2F0_156_4932_2960%2F4932.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You're%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture!'%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%27re%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture%21%27%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81cf4e69115fef6f1457287e8095e0dc3e972b86%2F0_156_4932_2960%2F4932.jpg>
 Seagoing heritage ... Hull fishermen unload the catch in 1951. Photograph: 
Bert Hardy/Picture Post/Getty Images 
The good news is that alongside winning its City of Culture bid, Hull recently 
secured a £310m commitment by the German-owned firm Siemensto build new 
offshore wind turbines in the city 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-humber-37775300>, creating up to 1,000 
jobs. Alan Johnson, MP for Hull West and Hessle, has argued offshore wind could 
do for the city what oil did for Aberdeen, and if that was a cheerier analogy 
before the oil price crashed, it’s still a breakthrough for a city that’s 
struggled in the past to woo inward investors. The city’s luck seemed to be 
turning, which in some ways makes the decisive backing for Brexit more 
surprising.

Hale puts it down to a now familiar mix of anti-establishment feeling, 
longstanding anger at the EU’s treatment of the fishing industry, but above all 
immigration.

For decades Hull had experienced relatively little, but then eastern Europeans 
started coming to work on the outlying farms as well as in the city. Drive 
north of the centre, past the leafy university quarter, and you soon find a 
scruffier landscape of pound shops and cut-price carwashes, many of the latter 
immigrant-owned. In the mid-90s the biggest ethnic minority group in town was 
Chinese, according to Hale, constituting about 1% of the population; now, he 
reckons anywhere up to 15% are from immigrant backgrounds. “It’s been massively 
good for the city in lots of ways but it’s a massive change in the culture.”

The incomers have, he says, helped reverse inner-city decline by bringing 
empty shops and homes into use: “People hark back to the day of the butcher, 
baker and candlestick maker but those shops had gone. The eastern Europeans 
were opening up boarded-up, empty shops.”

But Ukip, now second behind Labour in Hull’s three parliamentary seats, is 
finding a ready audience for its message here. The vote, Johnson thinks, was a 
protest not just against immigration but “the fact that Hull hasn’t done as 
well in recent years, people feel their wages don’t go up as fast as prices”. 
And then there were those who, like some of Litten’s friends on the left, voted 
Leave for radical socialist reasons. “It was a ‘fuck you’ to the establishment, 
saying don’t tell us what to do,” he explains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb6fcea1b941f2a74705e705684661f90f4f8cd%2F0_180_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You're%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture!'%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%27re%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture%21%27%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb6fcea1b941f2a74705e705684661f90f4f8cd%2F0_180_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 The Deep ... Hull’s award-winning aquarium. Photograph: Alamy 
There is relief that Siemens remains publicly committed to the city, its new 
factory more than busy enough supplying turbines for British use in the North 
Sea. But it had ultimately hoped to export turbines made here across Europe, 
and local politicians are worried about the longterm prospects for investment 
given uncertainty over life outside a single market. If the worst fears about a 
hard Brexit are realised, Hull may just have voted to shoot itself in the foot.

Walking to a meeting in the city, I cross its last foiled attempt at 
regeneration. The innovativeScale Lane Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/28/scale-lane-bridge-hull-review>
 over the river Hull, which swings aside for shipping, is where Tunick 
assembled his naked blue people but it’s more than just a landmark. It was 
originally conceived to link the picturesque old city on the west bank with a 
largely derelict industrial site on the east, which would then be turned into a 
swanky waterside development complete with new hotel. The hotel was built but 
the banking crash killed off everything else, leaving just an unusually 
spectacular approach to a marooned Premier Inn, and a reminder of Hull’s 
vulnerability to forces beyond its control.

The optimist’s view is that if hard times are coming again, they could at 
least foster creative revival. “All great art is born out of struggle, and the 
need for survival,” says Litten. “Look at punk, reggae, acid house.”

If new artforms are to emerge in Hull, however, they may come from the 
development around the marina, which includes a spanking new hub for tech 
startups. It’s not Shoreditch, but you could live here far more cheaply than in 
London while trying to get a business off the ground –Hull made the Sunday 
Times top 10 urban places to live last year 
<http://www.hulldailymail.co.uk/hull-50-best-urban-places-live-list-8211-sunday/story-26126697-detail/story.html>
 partly for its affordable housing – and the idea is to encourage computer 
science students from the University of Hull to stay around after graduation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff584c57606e017843532bf4526f95d4387a811ef%2F0_291_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You're%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture!'%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%27re%20only%20here%20for%20the%20culture%21%27%20Is%20Hull%20getting%20its%20buzz%20back%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhull-city-of-culture-hope-economic-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff584c57606e017843532bf4526f95d4387a811ef%2F0_291_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Beneath the city’s tough outer skin there’s an offbeat charm ... Ye Olde Black 
Boy pub. Photograph: Gary Calton 
Combine that with the fact that, for the first time this year, none of Hull’s 
secondary schools were ranked inadequate by Ofsted and three were outstanding – 
meaning fewer couples leaving the city when they have children – and the low 
skills base that has held Hull back is improving.

These are, admittedly, little acorns from which to grow oaks. Hull may never 
quite be Liverpool, reinvented as a sexy weekend destination with its Beatles 
Museum and its Tate and its thriving bars. But there’s an offbeat charm beneath 
this city’s tough outer skin and if nothing else, it deserves respect for 
trying. This is a bold roll of the dice, from a city that doesn’t necessarily 
have a plan B. What’s the worst that could happen if you gave it an evening or 
a weekend of your free time?

Walking back later towards the bridge, I pass a karaoke bar where men are 
downing cut-price pints while someone belts out a song I’ve not heard for 
decades: the Beautiful South’s Perfect 10. “I love her body, especially the 
lies/Time takes its toll, but not on the eyes.” Time has taken its toll on 
Hull, but the bones of what it was and could be remain. Change is happening, 
all right. Hopefully for the better.
 