
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was hit by an 
outraged backlash from allies and opponents alike after a tape emerged of the 
Republican candidate bragging about using his fame to try and “fuck” women and 
groping them without waiting for their consent.

The lies Trump told this week: taxes, bankruptcy and the great 'depression'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-lies-this-week-taxes-bankruptcy>
“When you’re a star they let you do it,” Trump says in the recording, which was
obtained by the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html?postshare=3561475870579757&tid=ss_tw>
 and released on Friday. “You can do anything.”

Trump, in a 2005 conversation with a television host that was caught on a live 
microphone, describes a failed seduction, saying: “I did try and fuck her, she 
was married,” and says that when he meets beautiful women he feels able to 
“grab them by the pussy”.

“You can do anything,” he tells Billy Bush, the TV host who is a cousin of 
George W and Jeb Bush.

On Friday night, amid a storm of condemnation and disavowals by other 
Republicans, Trump released a video statement in which he made an almost 
unprecedented apology.

 “Anyone who knows me knows these words don’t reflect who I am. I said it. I 
am wrong. I apologize.

“I’ve never said I am a perfect person, nor pretended to be someone that I am 
not. I’ve said and done things I regret and the words released today on this 
more than decade-old video are one of them.”
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Here is my statement. pic.twitter.com/WAZiGoQqMQ <https://t.co/WAZiGoQqMQ>
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/784609194234306560> October 8, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/784609194234306560> 
But he then went on the offensive. “I’ve said some foolish things but there is 
a big difference between the words and actions of other people. Bill Clinton 
has actually abused women and Hillary has bullied, attacked, shamed and 
intimidated his victims.

“We will discuss this more in the coming days. See you at the debate on 
Sunday.”

Earlier on Friday, Trump had dismissed the conversation as “locker room 
banter” and said former president Bill Clinton “has said far worse to me on the 
golf course – not even close”. “I apologize if anyone was offended,” he said.


Hillary Clinton, the Democratic candidate for president, said via Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/784497331647422464>: “This is 
horrific. We cannot allow this man to become president.”


Meanwhile the list of Republicans withdrawing their support from Trump was 
growing.


Trump had been scheduled to appear with the House speaker, Paul Ryan, at a 
Republican event in Wisconsin on Saturday, his first appearance on the campaign 
trail with the most powerful elected Republican official. But Ryan said late on 
Friday that Trump would no longer be in attendance.


Ryan released a statement on Friday night saying: “I am sickened by what I 
heard today. Women are to be championed and revered, not objectified. I hope Mr 
Trump treats this situation with the seriousness it deserves and works to 
demonstrate to the country that he has greater respect for women than this clip 
suggests.”

On Friday night Jason Chaffetz, the chair of the House oversight committee, 
declared that he would not vote for Trump. The Utah congressman joined his 
state’s governor, Gary Herbert, in abandoning Trump in the aftermath of his 
remarks.

Chaffetz, who sounded beside himself with anger in an interview with CNN, said 
he could not face his wife and 15-year-old daughter if he continued to support 
Trump. He said Trump had not properly apologised for his lewd remarks and had 
only expressed regret for “getting caught”.

Mike Coffman, a congressman from a swing district who had already declined to 
endorse Trump, directly called on the Republican nominee to drop out. “For the 
good of the country, and to give the Republicans a chance of defeating Hillary 
Clinton, Mr Trump should step aside.”

After the controversy first erupted on Friday, Trump released a statement 
saying this his running mate, Mike Pence, would be “representing me tomorrow in 
Wisconsin” while he was in New York preparing for Sunday’s second presidential 
debate with Republican National Committee chairman Reince Priebus, New Jersey 
governor Chris Christie and Alabama senator Jeff Sessions.

Earlier, Priebus had issued a statement about Trump’s remarks in the leaked 
recording, saying: “No woman should ever be described in these terms or talked 
about in this manner. Ever.”

Trump’s remarks are the latest in a series of statements about women that have 
sent him plummeting to near-historic unfavorability ratings with female voters. 
Arecent poll from the Economist/YouGov 
<https://d25d2506sfb94s.cloudfront.net/cumulus_uploads/document/82ukqyqyn7/econTabReport.pdf>
 showed that 68% of female voters had either a somewhat unfavorable or very 
unfavorable view of Trump.


The released audio, accompanied by a video, was apparently recorded during an 
interview with Access Hollywood host Bush in September 2005, eight months after 
Trump married the model Melania Knauss, his third wife.

Bush, now a co-host 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/billy-bush-donald-trump-lewd-comments-tape-arianne-zucker>
 on NBC’s Today show, apologized later on Friday, saying in a statementreleased 
to Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/billy-bush-reaction-donald-trump-video-apology-1201881989/>
 he was “embarrassed and ashamed” by something that “happened 11 years ago” 
when he “was younger, less mature, and acted foolishly in playing along. I’m 
very sorry.”

Who is Billy Bush: the man egging on Trump in tape about groping women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/billy-bush-donald-trump-lewd-comments-tape-arianne-zucker>
Trump and Bush had been on a bus headed to the set of the soap opera Days of 
Our Lives, in which Trump was set to make a cameo. The media obtained by the 
Post included audio from inside the bus and video shot as the bus arrived on 
set.

At the beginning of the audio, Trump relays to Bush a past attempt to seduce a 
married woman. “I moved on her and I failed – I’ll admit it,” he says, 
continuing: “I did try and fuck her, she was married. And I moved on her very 
heavily.

“In fact, I took her out furniture shopping. She wanted to get some furniture. 
I said: ‘I’ll show you where they have some nice furniture.’ I moved on her 
like a bitch, but I couldn’t get there. And she was married. Then all of a 
sudden I see her, she’s now got the big phoney tits and everything. She’s 
totally changed her look.”

Trump and Bush then apparently see actress Arianne Zucker outside the bus. 
“Your girl’s hot as shit, in the purple,” Bush says.

“Whoa!” Trump responds. “Whoa! I’ve gotta use some Tic Tacs, just in case I 
start kissing her. You know I’m automatically attracted to beautiful. I just 
start kissing them. It’s like a magnet. Just kiss. I don’t even wait.”

“Whatever you want,” Bush replies.

“Grab them by the pussy,” Trump replies. “You can do anything.”

After commenting on the legs of a woman walking near the bus, Bush and Trump 
then emerge in view of the Access Hollywood cameras, to greet Zucker.

Throughout the presidential campaign, Trump has made controversial statements 
about women or had previous remarks brought to light by opponents. In last 
month’s first presidential debate, he came under attack from Hillary Clinton 
for callinga Venezuelan winner of the Miss Universe competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/alicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton>
 “Miss Piggy” and “Miss Housekeeping”. In response, Trump used Twitterto 
falsely claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/30/donald-trump-alicia-machado-sex-tape-accusations-clinton>
 that the woman in question, Alicia Machado, had made a sex tape.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
The media is so after me on women Wow, this is a tough business. Nobody has 
more respect for women than Donald Trump!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/713747213801938946> March 26, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/713747213801938946> 
 In August 2015 Trump insinuated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/08/donald-trump-black-balled-by-conservatives-over-menstruation-comment>
 that Fox News anchor Megyn Kelly asked him tough questions in the first 
primary debate because she was menstruating. He alsoattacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/16/donald-trump-carly-fiorina-beautiful-face-misogyny>
 a rival, Carly Fiorina, as being unattractive.

In March 2016 he tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/713747213801938946>: “The media is 
so after me on women[.] Wow, this is a tough business. Nobody has more respect 
for women than Donald Trump!”

A number of Trump campaign members have problematic histories with women. One 
adviser, former Fox News chief executive Roger Ailes, was this yearforced to 
step down from the network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/roger-ailes-leaves-fox-news-sexual-harassment-claims>
 after reports of sexual harassment allegations spanning decades. Trump’s 
campaign chief, Steve Bannon,faced domestic violence charges  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/steve-bannon-domestic-violence-trump-campaign-ceo>
in 1996.

On Friday websites reported 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/mike-pence-donald-trump-comments-women-229303>
 that when news of the 2005 recording broke, Trump running mate Mike Pence – 
who was eating a chili dog with his daughter at a campaign stop in Toledo, Ohio 
– abruptly dropped the pool of reporters who were following him, thereby 
avoiding any questions on the matter.

Jill Harth, woman who sued Trump over alleged sexual assault, breaks silence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/donald-trump-sexual-assault-allegations-jill-harth-interview>
The Pence campaign team did not respond to a request for comment. 

Ted Cruz, the Texas senator who finished second in the primary and who 
recently, having attacked Trump fiercely over his character,endorsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/ted-cruz-support-donald-trump> 
the businessman,wrote on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/tedcruz/status/784567958525927426> late Friday: “These 
comments are disturbing and inappropriate, there is simply no excuse for them.”

Florida senator Marco Rubio, who also ran for president and subsequently 
endorsed Trump, joined others incriticizing 
<https://twitter.com/marcorubio/status/784566254271094788> the remarks: 
“Donald’s comments were vulgar, egregious & impossible to justify.”

As Democrats escalated pressure to disavow Trump, other prominent Republicans 
issued statements condemning the remarks, in addition to Ryan. . Senate 
majority leader Mitch McConnell said late Friday that Trump’s comments were 
“repugnant, and unacceptable in any circumstance” and that he believed “Trump 
needs to apologize directly to women and girls everywhere”.

Meanwhile, Republican senators facing tough re-election battles – including 
John McCain of Arizona, Rob Portman of Ohio, and Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire 
– issued statements condemning the remarks, but did not withdraw their support.

McCain said in a short statement: “He alone bears the burden of his conduct 
and alone should suffer the consequences.”





But Republican governor Gary Herbert of Utah did 
<https://twitter.com/HerbertForUtah/status/784571669662826496> rescind his 
endorsement. “Donald Trump’s statements are beyond offensive & despicable,” he 
tweeted. While I cannot vote for Hillary Clinton, I will not vote for Trump. 
#utpol”

The Illinois senator Mark Kirk, who has vowed not to support Trump, went 
further,saying on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/SenatorKirk/status/784555457255964672> that Trump “should 
drop out” and the Republican party “should engage rules for emergency 
replacement.”





 