
Technically, the Mirador del Río is a cafe and bar, but the reason people come 
here is to live out their 1960s spy-film fantasies. Created in 1974 by 
visionary architect and artistCésar Manrique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/jun/09/lanzarote-treasured-island>, it 
is a perfect example of his impeccable grooviness, as well as his affinity for 
the otherworldly beauty of his beloved island. Carved into the summit of a 
474-metre-high cliff on Lanzarote’s northern tip, the Mirador is almost 
invisible from the outside. But step inside and a winding corridor leads you up 
through lava rock into two cave-like rooms, with vast panoramic windows 
overlooking the “Rio”, a strait between Lanzarote and the tiny island of La 
Graciosa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fmirador-del-rio-lanzarote-bond-style-bar-cesar-manrique%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f66e5d92ec5caac2469f0f3b22e8dcfb3dadd9f%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Bond-style%20bar%20in%20Lanzarote%3F%20Get%20groovy%20at%20the%20Mirador%20del%20R%C3%ADo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fmirador-del-rio-lanzarote-bond-style-bar-cesar-manrique%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Bond-style%20bar%20in%20Lanzarote%3F%20Get%20groovy%20at%20the%20Mirador%20del%20R%C3%ADo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fmirador-del-rio-lanzarote-bond-style-bar-cesar-manrique%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f66e5d92ec5caac2469f0f3b22e8dcfb3dadd9f%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 I spy … the groovy interior and bar area. Photograph: Alamy 
All of Manrique’s constructions are works of art but the Mirador is the one 
you can imagine as your own apartment

The Mirador is a Ken Adam <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ken_Adam> set come to 
life: the widescreen windows make for a cinematic vibe and the flowing, molten 
interior, with its absence of right angles, adds to the psychedelic, dreamy 
feel. All of Manrique’s constructions are works of art, but the smaller 
Mirador, hidden away in its dramatic clifftop setting, is the one you can 
imagine as your own apartment – swanning around as party host whileFrançoise 
Hardy <http://www.francoise-hardy.com/Biographie> lounges on the curvy sofa and 
Alain Delon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/aug/19/alain-delon-david-thomson> sips a 
brandy by the cavernous fireplace.

Manrique spent his life resisting the spread of “Lanza-grotty” – the rash of 
cheap resorts that swept through the Canary Islands in the 1960s and 70s – 
often physically battling the developers in person. His campaigning paid off – 
Lanzarote remains high-rise and billboard free, and Manrique’s mind-bending 
visions of mid-century architecture and design are a defining feature of the 
island. Come for the cheap winter sun, but pack your best Bond villain outfit 
for the selfie.


• Lois Pryce is co-founder of The Adventure Travel Film Festival 
<http://www.adventuretravelfilmfestival.com/>, which has upcoming events in 
London (12-14 August), Inverewe, and Bright, Australia
 