
Sitting in a downtown Cleveland <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cleveland>
 coffee shop in early December, Julie Goulis is still in shock. “Some of the 
soul-searching I’ve been doing after the election has been about how I can 
understand people outside of my bubble,” she tells me. “I was so ashamed Ohio 
went for Trump.”


Like many US cities, Cleveland is overwhelmingly progressive in its politics 
and traditionally elects Democrats at all levels of government, despite hosting 
the 2016 Republican National Convention. But partisan divisions in the United 
States increasingly correlate with geographic differences, leaving many cities 
like Cleveland as liberal bubbles distinct from the vast conservative American 
hinterland. The looming inauguration of president-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has left many city dwellers 
grappling with just how distant much of their country seems.

I meet Goulis in Tremont, a neighbourhood overlooking the Cuyahoga River as it 
cuts through Cleveland’s revived downtown district. After an influx of European 
immigrants in the late 1800s, Tremont was a thriving and diverse working-class 
community for the first half of the 20th century, before it gradually atrophied 
alongside the local steel business in a familiar post-industrial spiral. 
Goulis, a freelance copywriter who grew up in a town about 40 miles west of 
Cleveland, moved here 12 years ago in search of a more walkable and diverse 
community. “I reject the suburbs,” she says.

In the years since the housing market bottomed out, Tremont and other pockets 
of Cleveland have witnessed a tenuous revitalisation thanks to newcomers 
seeking city lifestyles and new investment in 21st-century industry. Meanwhile, 
other neighbourhoods, particularly communities of colour, continue to suffer 
from the long-term effects of deindustrialisation, disinvestment and systemic 
racism. The dichotomy is familiar in many American cities.

Still, economically and racially diverse metropolitan areas stand as one in 
American politics. InOhio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio>, 
progressive urban centres like Cleveland and Columbus put up fierce opposition 
to Trump, who carried the state by running up huge margins in exurban and rural 
regions. The election only accentuated this divide in political culture, 
bringing a national spotlight to urban-rural tensions that have long simmered 
at the state level.

“I love Cleveland, but I’ve always considered it separate from Ohio,” Goulis 
says. “I just feel different than my friends far out in the suburbs and the 
rural areas. We just have different ideas about what makes a good life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15fa97d7f0045c64c98e2e9dd617bdfb9865f1e5%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20divided%20empire%3A%20what%20the%20urban-rural%20split%20means%20for%20the%20future%20of%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20divided%20empire%3A%20what%20the%20urban-rural%20split%20means%20for%20the%20future%20of%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15fa97d7f0045c64c98e2e9dd617bdfb9865f1e5%2F0_115_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A Trump campaign sign in Pennsylvania’s Rust Belt region. Photograph: Mark 
Makela/Getty 
Such conflicting perspectives stretch back to the foundation of American 
democracy. Urban areas – places of dense social diversity – have long been the 
backbone of the Democratic party, coalescing around a stronger safety net, 
liberal social policies, climate science and more open immigration laws. Outer 
suburbs and rural regions, meanwhile, are a bastion for conservative 
Republicans, with largely white communities rallying around traditional values, 
lower taxes, fewer regulations and a more static notion of American culture.

But the trends driving these divisions have quickened in recent decades, 
particularly during an uneven economic recovery in which many small towns were 
devastated and a few megacities roared back.

These kinds of demographic and economic factors that deepen the political 
divergence largely mirror those in liberal cities and more conservative 
countrysides in Europe, as theUK’s Brexit vote demonstrated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/eu-voting-map-lays-bare-depth-of-division-across-britain>
. In the US, the election of Trump hasushered these urban-rural divides 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/upshot/this-election-highlighted-a-growing-rural-urban-split.html>
 on to the national stage like no other time in modern history.

Nowhere has the reaction been more stark than in New York, Trump’s stomping 
ground and America’s cosmopolitan flagship.Thousands of New Yorkers took to the 
streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/anti-trump-protests-new-york-portland-shooting>
 in the days following his election in November, shutting down main 
thoroughfares as they chanted slogans like “New York hates Trump”. A wall on 
the Union Square subway station was covered until recently with myriad neon 
post-it notes displaying both rants and inspiration: “No human is illegal”, 
“Save Our Country”, “The Future is Female”. Occasional protests continue 
outside of Trump Tower in Midtown Manhattan, where the president-elect has been 
working to form his government.

Following a meeting there with Trump in November, Democrat New York mayor Bill 
de Blasio told reporters that Trump’s harsh proposals on immigration “flew in 
the face of all that was great about New York City, the ultimate city of 
immigrants, the place that has succeeded because it was open for everyone”. De 
Blasio and other urban Democrats have alreadypledged 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-immigration-sanctuarycities-idUSKBN13604P>
 to remain as so-called “sanctuary cities” that provide some protections for 
undocumented immigrants.

The New York progressive has organised a coalition of mayors into a 
pro-immigration reform group calledCities for Action 
<http://www.citiesforaction.us/>, and in December officials urged 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/29/nyregion/bill-de-blasio-donald-trump-mayors.html?smid=tw-share>
 the Obama Administration for action before Inauguration Day. Trump, in 
response, has vowed to curtail federal funding to sanctuary cities, setting up 
another fault line should he pursue his hardline campaign promises.

This dynamic – a liberal metropolis pushing back against more conservative 
governments – has long played out at the state level. Politicians from New York 
City consistently clash with representatives from suburban Long Island or 
upstate New York, a largely rural region peppered with occasional 
post-industrial towns that tends to vote Republican. The result is a centrist 
state government in which de Blasio frequently clashes with state elected 
officials over his avowedly liberal urban agenda.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d788508f61c6d174cd71841c78a5df8746aaaa3%2F0_138_5404_3242%2F5404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20divided%20empire%3A%20what%20the%20urban-rural%20split%20means%20for%20the%20future%20of%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20divided%20empire%3A%20what%20the%20urban-rural%20split%20means%20for%20the%20future%20of%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d788508f61c6d174cd71841c78a5df8746aaaa3%2F0_138_5404_3242%2F5404.jpg>
 Hundreds of New Yorkers marked International Migrants Day by marching to Trump 
Tower, pledging to defend immigrant New Yorkers against the president-elect’s 
policies. Photograph: John Moore/Getty Images 
In Ohio, where a Republican legislature has repeatedly cut taxes, reduced 
municipal revenue sharing, and slashed statewide services, residents in some 
cities have voted in favour of new local levies and additional social 
programmes. “From a policy perspective, we are seeing some real divergence,” 
says Amy Hanauer, executive director of the thinktank Policy Matters Ohio.

The November presidential election saw this state-level dynamic play out on 
the national stage like never before. Hillary Clinton rode a wave of support in 
urban areas – winning88 of the country’s 100 most populous counties 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/11/clinton-trump-city-country-divide/507902/>
 – en route to a popular vote lead of nearly 3 million. Perhaps more striking 
is that the mere 15% of counties she carried nationwide accounted for 64% of 
the country’s aggregate GDP, according to a Brookings Institutionanalysis 
<https://www.brookings.edu/blog/the-avenue/2016/11/29/another-clinton-trump-divide-high-output-america-vs-low-output-america/>
.

Trump portrayed himself as a foil to the urban liberal elite, even if the 
stereotype belies continued stagnation of the urban working class. He spoke of 
cities asdystopian hellscapes 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/donald-trumps-imaginary-inner-cities/> while 
railing against the global-facing industries that fuel their massive economic 
output, including finance, tech and media.

“The political divide sets up a false, zero-sum game between urban areas and 
rural areas, where investment and benefit for one is viewed at the expense of 
the other,” says Alan Berube, a senior fellow at Brookings.

Anti-urban backlash

Americans have had such political disputes stretching back to the nation’s 
founding. Thomas Jefferson, who envisioned the United States as an agrarian 
democracy, warned that, “when [people] get piled upon one another in large 
cities, as in Europe, they will become corrupt as in Europe.” The electoral 
college, which allowed Trump to win the presidency despite a sizeable loss of 
the popular vote, was established partly to prevent populous states from 
gaining too much power.

In the early 20th century, anti-urban backlash targeted crime and unhealthy 
living conditions as cities ballooned into overcrowded manufacturing hubs. That 
sentiment took on an anti-government flavour following the failure of misguided 
urban renewal policies, and then a racist tinge once many white Americans fled 
to the suburbs. Urban political corruption and financial mismanagement have 
only deepened tensions.

“Taken together, anti-urbanism adds up to an unwillingness to acknowledge the 
urban and metropolitan nature of American society and the refusal to embrace 
the essentially collective, rather than individual, nature of urban life,” 
writes historian Steven Conn, author of Americans Against the City: 
Anti-Urbanism in the Twentieth Century.

But Brookings’ Berube sees cause for optimism in bridging the urban-rural 
divide in specific locations. “The states where there is more progress and 
potential,” he says, “are those where the pie is growing and people see that 
their communities are positioned OK, and don’t see themselves in a pitched 
battle for every last employment opportunity and investment dollar.”

One example might be found in the Sun Belt, where Austin’s long record of 
voting Democrat makes it a blue dot within Texas’s sea of red. The state 
capital’s unofficial motto, “Keep Austin Weird”, was coined nearly two decades 
ago as an impromptu ode to local funkiness in the face of breakneck economic 
growth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81a73f2036187b07656b3166436595aa0a03fa0b%2F0_110_3200_1921%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20divided%20empire%3A%20what%20the%20urban-rural%20split%20means%20for%20the%20future%20of%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20divided%20empire%3A%20what%20the%20urban-rural%20split%20means%20for%20the%20future%20of%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81a73f2036187b07656b3166436595aa0a03fa0b%2F0_110_3200_1921%2F3200.jpg>
 Anti-Trump demonstrators gather in Austin, Texas. Photograph: Tamir Kalifa/AP 
Since then, the university town and live music mecca has emerged as one of 
21st-century America’s tech centres. And its liberal social culture, which is 
rare in the overwhelmingly conservative Lone Star State, has remained a selling 
point as multinational giants such as Google set up shop, highly educated 
millennials flood in, and new high-rises spring up. The influx of young 
professionals has added a generational dimension to the differences between 
city and state, though it doesn’t necessarily follow the usual party lines. 

“That push-pull happens every legislative session, and it’s something that 
everybody has come to expect,” says Austin mayor Steve Adler, speaking 
generally of the Republican-controlled state government. “In those instances, 
Austin tries to first reinforce the liberty argument, which is to say the city 
government is the level of government that is closest to the people … Our 
economics and our people are a little bit different – though not necessarily 
better – than other cities.”

But the ascendent Austin, which is home to the seat of state government, may 
have more political clout than some of its urban counterparts across the 
country. In Michigan, ancestral home of the American labour movement, state 
Democrats have lost much of their power to dictate the state policy agenda – 
and it’s unlikely the balance of power will shift any time soon. States draw 
their own federal and state political mapsafter each decennial census 
<http://www.civilrights.org/census/your-community/redistricting.html?referrer=https://www.google.co.uk/>
, many of them putting governing parties in control. It’s no surprise, then, 
that new boundaries in Michigan and other states tilt the odds in the governing 
parties’ favour.

This has come at a pivotal time for Michigan’s largest city, Detroit. In 2013, 
residents watched as the stateinstalled an emergency financial manager 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/15/us/gov-rick-snyder-kevyn-orr-emergency-manager-detroit.html>
 to bring the city back from the brink of financial collapse. The official 
guided Motown through bankruptcy, though his appointment arguably 
disenfranchised local voters from having a say in government.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7768e77a0c8593b2c8624291f7d240b96129804c%2F0_334_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20divided%20empire%3A%20what%20the%20urban-rural%20split%20means%20for%20the%20future%20of%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20divided%20empire%3A%20what%20the%20urban-rural%20split%20means%20for%20the%20future%20of%20America&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fdonald-trump-divided-empire-urban-rural-america-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7768e77a0c8593b2c8624291f7d240b96129804c%2F0_334_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 ‘Largely black residential neighbourhoods still suffer from the long-term 
effects of Detroit’s urban crisis.’ Photograph: Barry Lewis/Corbis via Getty 
Images 
Such moves carry an ugly connotation. In Detroit, as with so many other 
American cities, racism cannot be dissociated from politics and development. 
Black workers were barred from enjoying the full fruits of Detroit’s 
manufacturing heyday, while black prospective homebuyers were prevented from 
pursuing the American dream of single family home-ownership. White flight 
wrought demographic devastation, with the city’s population falling from about
1.9 million in 1950 to 700,000 today 
<http://www.forbes.com/pictures/emeh45jimm/a-declining-population-in-a-widespread-city-13/#ea4a1331177d>
.

Even now, largely black residential neighbourhoods still suffer the long-term 
effects of this urban crisis, despite the nascent resurgence of downtown 
Detroit. And to Jonathan Kinloch, a businessman and activist, the election made 
clear that many Americans haven’t even begun to grapple with that history.

“This was a test here in Michigan, in many black people’s opinions, of how far 
we’ve come,” Kinloch says. “The message that black people heard coming from 
Donald Trump, and what suburban and rural white folks heard, were two different 
messages. This set race relations back a long way.”

The two Detroits: a city both collapsing and gentrifying at the same time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/05/detroit-city-collapsing-gentrifying>
A man riding a wave of implicitly anti-urban populism will now lead an 
increasingly urban country. Hispledge to repeal Obamacare 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/positions/healthcare-reform> would 
disproportionately affect low-income and minority communities. Ben Carson,his 
pick 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/us/politics/ben-carson-housing-urban-development-trump.html>
 to lead the Department of Housing and Urban Development, has no government or 
housing policy experience, oncedescribed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/us/trump-ben-carson-hud-critics.html> 
poverty as a choice, and in 2015compared 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/05/us/trump-ben-carson-hud-critics.html> an 
Obama administration fair housing rule to “mandated social-engineering 
schemes”. And Trump’s hardline stances on trade and immigration stand against 
the philosophical underpinnings of urban economies and culture.

The new president will assume power over diverging urban and rural Americas 
after accentuating the very things that separate them – a blunt departure from 
the once-lofty rhetoric of his predecessor. In a hyper-partisan environment in 
which Republicans control both houses of Congress and a vast majority of state 
governments, the question now is to what extent America’s metropolises will 
wall themselves off – new city-states in a divided empire.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 