
On a typical day, the romantically named Menghua Jie (Dream Flower Street) is 
a hive of activity. Residents hurry around on bicycles and scooters, and food 
vendors do brisk business selling hand-pulled noodles. This is Shanghai’s Old 
Town, the traditional core of the Chinese city dating back to 1554, when walls 
were first erected to ward off Japanese pirates preying in nearby waters.

In the street stands a handsome mansion, built in the 1930s by a capitalist 
called Lin Guisheng, who named it Ximeng Lu, meaning “Hope for an Heir”. An 
elegant mix of European and traditional Chinese designs, the building was 
reminiscent of early 20th century Shanghai when western influences, a result of 
foreign concessions that forced the city open, seeped into local culture, 
design and architecture. Touches of Art Deco motifs line the walls and 
ceilings; mosaic tiles with Buddhist swastikas cover the floors. A pair of 
stone lions, traditional Chinese symbols of wealth, sit under the eaves of a 
balcony.

But Ximeng is emblematic of a darker side of Shanghai history that is often 
forgotten in the wake of rapid urbanisation: during the second Sino-Japanese 
War in 1938 the mansion was turned into a “comfort station”, a military brothel 
where local women were forced into sexual slavery by the Japanese army.

Ximeng is emblematic of a darker side of Shanghai​’s​ history that is often 
forgotten in the wake of rapid urbanisation
 Hundreds of thousands of women from China, Korea and other occupied 
territories were forced into sexual slavery by the Japanese army.Peipei Qiu 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2014/06/24/writing-china-peipei-qiu-chinese-comfort-women/>
 estimates there were 400,000 victims 
When the war reached Shanghai – leaving parts of the city buried in rubble and 
corpses – Lin fled for Hong Kong, and his mansion was abandoned to adark legacy 
of sexual violence and rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/05/japan-comfort-women-abe-apology>.

For low-ranked soldiers using Ximeng, or one of the hundreds of other “comfort 
stations” acrossChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, sex was 
conducted in one of many rooms with beds placed in rows, separated by thin 
curtains. One can imagine the sounds of masculine grunts, creaking beds and 
muffled cries echoing across the wooden stairwell as the women were raped by 
scores of Japanese soldiers.

Strict rules governing soldier behaviour were displayed prominently within the 
mansion:“The entrant must register and pay to obtain an entry voucher and a 
condom”; “The entry voucher holder must enter the designated room and has an 
allotted time of 30 minutes”.
 Strict regulations were displayed in the so-called ‘comfort stations’ 
The women endured routine examinations to prevent the spread of venereal 
diseases and were given contraception.Some Japanese military personnel even 
received accountancy classes 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/15/opinion/comfort-women-and-japans-war-on-truth.html?_r=0>
 on “how to manage comfort stations, including how to determine the actuarial 
‘durability or perishability of the women procured’”.

Following victory in Shanghai, an emboldened Japanese army marched to the 
then-capital Nanjing where it unleashed amassacre, killing up to 300,000 
Chinese civilians and disarmed combatants 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/223038.stm>. An estimated 20,000 
women – including infants and the elderly – were raped, with many subsequently 
mutilated and killed in what became known as the Rape of Nanjing. One reason 
for Japan’s rolling out of comfort stations across Chinawas to regulate the 
sexual aggression of its soldiers 
<http://www.womenundersiegeproject.org/conflicts/profile/nanking>, and Shanghai 
was home to an estimated 158 stations, more than any other city in China.

After the war ended in 1945 and the Communist party takeover four years later, 
the mansion resumed its residential purpose in the form of social housing. More 
than 10 families were assigned rooms in the mansion, a cross-section of 
political and economic classes crammed under one roof. Families labelled as 
capitalists were reduced to small rooms in the back, with workers and party 
members assigned more generous spaces. A descendent of Lin, the original owner, 
is believed to still live quietly in a small room on the top floor of the 
mansion.
 More than 10 families now live in Ximeng mansion, each occupying a room 
assigned by the Communist party in 1949. Photograph: Sue Anne Tay 
Over the decades, rooms were further halved to accommodate growing families. 
This was the reality of communal living across Shanghai, a cheek-by-jowl 
arrangement that remained largely unchangedeven after China opened up post-1979 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2002/mar/10/politics>. Housing reform 
allowed some Shanghainese residents to move out to newer and more spacious 
properties; they then rent their rooms to migrant families, maintaining the 
compressed state of affairs.


All those living in the building know of its history but uncomfortably try to 
ignore the aura left behind by the violated women, some of whom killed 
themselves after the war. Residents endured further trauma during Chairman 
Mao’s Cultural Revolution of the 1960s and 70s, when neighbours turned on each 
other and capitalist families and political opponents were mercilessly 
attacked, and many died. Few of the older generation like to talk about those 
times.


The Writers' Building, Kolkata: a history of cities in 50 buildings, day 13
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/10/writers-building-kolkata-history-cities-50-buildings>
Places like Ximeng mansion are bricks and mortar testaments to Shanghai’s 
tumultuous 20th century history. As the city demolishes vast swaths of old 
neighbourhoods to usher in gleaming new facades, they represent the dark side 
of a forgotten history that helped shape the city. Championing the preservation 
of old houses in Shanghai, whether on the grounds of historical or 
architectural significance, is bureaucratically challenging and rarely 
successful, especially when they occupy prime real estate. Residents of Ximeng 
mansion expect their home will suffer a similar fate in the coming years.


There are few calls for the preservation of former comfort stations, with the 
memorialisation of their victims channelled through official narratives and 
designated sites. Historian Su Zhiliang, who founded theResearch Centre for 
Chinese Comfort Women at Shanghai Normal University 
<http://www.shnu.edu.cn/Default.aspx?tabid=3671&ctl=Details&mid=7980&ItemID=156159&SkinSrc=%5BL%5DSkins/english_2fen/english_2fen>
, collects testimonials to campaign for justice and recognition of past 
atrocities. He has for years called for city authorities to turn Shanghai’s 
first comfort station into a museum. Like Ximeng mansion, the building is 
decaying and crowded with families.It is unclear if Su will be successful.


Ximeng mansion is another story. Once built out of hope, all that is left 
behind is a legacy of despair.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  