
With hearts on her cheeks, kiss curls on her forehead and cupid’s bow lips, 
Claude Cahun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/14/claude-cahun-finding-great> 
stares out at us in a small black and white photograph, taken in 1927. Her gaze 
is steady. Do you dare look at me, she seems to say, meeting the photographer’s 
gaze. The phrase I AM IN TRAINING DON’T KISS ME is emblazoned on her leotard. 
Her outfit makes me think of a circus act.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgillian-wearing-claude-cahun-mask-national-portrait-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F648a213ec2355f77a62df1044d57afeb82ff0fbb%2F0_300_2400_3224%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20ghost%20in%20kiss%20curls%3A%20how%20Gillian%20Wearing%20and%20Claude%20Cahun%20share%20a%20mask&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgillian-wearing-claude-cahun-mask-national-portrait-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20ghost%20in%20kiss%20curls%3A%20how%20Gillian%20Wearing%20and%20Claude%20Cahun%20share%20a%20mask&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgillian-wearing-claude-cahun-mask-national-portrait-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F648a213ec2355f77a62df1044d57afeb82ff0fbb%2F0_300_2400_3224%2F2400.jpg>
 Detail of Self-portrait (as a dandy, head and shoulders) by Claude Cahun, 
1921-22. Photograph: Claude Cahun/Museum of Modern Art, New York/Scala, Florence
Cahun was one of the few women surrealists in André Breton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/may/21/ifyouhappentohear>’s 
circle. Born in Nantes in 1894, partly educated in Surrey, Lucy Schwob became 
Claude Cahun in around 1919, and lived with her life-partner and artistic 
collaboratorMarcel Moore 
<http://www.queerculturalcenter.org/Pages/Tirza/TirzaEssay1.html>, whose given 
name was Suzanne Malherbe, for the rest of her life. In 1937 the couple moved 
to Jersey, working in the resistance during theGerman occupation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/nov/18/guernsey-files-islanders-nazi-occupation>
, and were caught, imprisoned and sentenced to death in 1944. Released when the 
Channel Islands were liberated the following year, Cahun died in 1954.

Here is Cahun again in an almost identical pose. The same kiss curls, the same 
pout. But this time the image – on a far larger scale ­– is byGillian Wearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gillian-wearing>, and dated 2012. The 
likeness and the dislocation are unnerving. In her photographs, Cahun depicted 
herself in multiple guises – middle-aged man, shaven-headed androgyne, cloaked 
and masked, cross-dressed, bleach-haired in a mirror. “Behind this mask another 
mask, there can be no end to these disguises,” Cahun wrote.

Behind a mask, Wearing is being Cahun. Previously she has re-enacted 
photographs of Andy Warhol in drag, the young Diane Arbus with a camera, Robert 
Mapplethorpe with a skull-topped cane, hard-bitten New York crime photographer
Weegee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/mar/31/the-best-of-weegees-new-york-street-photography-in-pictures>
 wreathed in cigar-smoke. Among these doubles, you know Wearing is in the frame 
somewhere, under the silicon mask and the prosthetics, the wigs and makeup and 
the lighting. Going through her own family albums, she has become her own 
mother and her father. It is a surprise she has never got lost in this hall of 
time-slipping mirrors, among her own self-images and the faces she has adopted. 
Wearing has got others to play her game, too – substituting their own adult 
voices with those of a child, putting on disguises while confessing their 
secrets on video.

Cahun was almost forgotten until the late 1980s, and much of her and Moore’s 
work was destroyed by the Nazis, who requisitioned their home. What remains – 
mostly in the collection ofJersey Heritage Trust 
<https://www.jerseyheritage.org/collection-items/claude-cahun> – is an 
astonishing archive. Moore killed herself in 1972, and she and Cahun are buried 
together in a Jersey churchyard. Wearing visited the spot last year, and made a 
further series of new images.


Cahun has been described as a Cindy Sherman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/03/cindy-sherman-interview-retrospective-motivation>
 before her time. Wearing’s art undoubtedly owes something to Sherman – just as 
Sherman herself is indebted to artistSuzy Lake 
<http://hyperallergic.com/185709/the-many-faces-of-suzy-lake/>. Looking back at 
Cahun, Wearing is both tracing artistic influence, and paying filial homage to 
it, teasing out threads in a web of relationships crossing generations.

This March, the National Portrait Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/national-portrait-gallery> in London 
brings the work of Cahun and Wearing together for the first time. Slipping 
between genders and personae in their photographic self-images, Wearing and 
Cahun become others while inventing themselves. “We were born in different 
times, we have different concerns, and we come from different backgrounds. She 
didn’t know me, yet I know her,” Wearing says, paying homage to Cahun and 
acknowledging her presence. The bigger question the exhibition might ask is 
less how we construct identities for ourselves than what is this thing called 
presence?

 * Gillian Wearing and Claude Cahun: Behind the Mask, Another Mask 
<http://www.npg.org.uk/whatson/exhibitions/2016/gillian-wearing-and-claude-cahun-behind-the-mask-another-mask.php>
 is at the National Portrait Gallery, London, 9 March-29 May  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgillian-wearing-claude-cahun-mask-national-portrait-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3610007926418f44f5a32575839717acca3c7365%2F83_86_2239_3374%2F2239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20ghost%20in%20kiss%20curls%3A%20how%20Gillian%20Wearing%20and%20Claude%20Cahun%20share%20a%20mask&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgillian-wearing-claude-cahun-mask-national-portrait-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20ghost%20in%20kiss%20curls%3A%20how%20Gillian%20Wearing%20and%20Claude%20Cahun%20share%20a%20mask&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fgillian-wearing-claude-cahun-mask-national-portrait-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3610007926418f44f5a32575839717acca3c7365%2F83_86_2239_3374%2F2239.jpg>
 Self-portrait as my brother Richard Wearing by Gillian Wearing, 2003. 
Photograph: Gillian Wearing, courtesy Maureen Paley, London  