
John Cage. A wolf in sheep's clothing. Not my aphorism, but the epithet of 
Michael Finnissy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jul/23/michael-finnissy-contemporary-music-guide>
, a composer whoworked with Cage 
<http://www.eno.org/see-whats-on/productions/production-page.php?itemid=2007> 
and who deeply admires him, but who suggests that the Cageian legacy is 
something that needs deconstruction as well as celebration. Behind that
beatifically smiling visage 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-7A_3GIRoiWc/T-LAYq14V4I/AAAAAAAABE4/5xK9ysp-SdY/s1600/john%2Bcage.jpeg>
, the charming prophet of (apparent) freedom, egolessness and openness, there 
could lurk a more conventionally controlling figure, a creative spirit just as 
fiercely rigorous and as conscious of his own significance as any of the other 
titans of the 20th century.

What's worth remembering and genuinely celebrating in Cage's centenary year 
(yes, he – just! – fits in with the inclusionary criteria for this series) is 
that Arnold Schoenberg was out of order when he described Cage not as a 
composer, but "an inventor – of genius". (In one of those dazzling quirky 
chances of musical history, Schoenberg taught Cage in Los Angeles in the 
1930s.) It's a common misconception about Cage - that it's his ideas instead of 
his music that matter.

It's easy to be seduced by that line of thinking. After all, what is his 
(in)famous silent piece,4'33'' <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HypmW4Yd7SY>, if 
not a masterstroke of conceptual fullness and pre-determined sonic emptiness 
rather than a piece of music in any sense that the term had been understood 
before David Tudor sat down at that piano in 1952 and didn't make a sound for 
exactly4 minutes and 33 seconds 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/No-Such-Thing-Silence-America/dp/0300136994/ref=sr_1_sc_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1344843633&sr=8-2-spell>
? You could make similar arguments for his development of hisbeautiful graphic 
scores 
<http://www.e-flux.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/wpid-1256244409image_web_full.jpg>
, abstract images for musical interpretation rather than conventional notes; 
his use of the Chinese Book of Changes, theI Ching 
<http://www.ichingonline.net/index.php>, so that his compositional process was 
governed by chance operations rather than the workings of his ego; even the
prepared piano 
<http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-Wum-REXnGoY/TWflq34GY_I/AAAAAAAAohY/ifbdrxGcrIw/s1600/john+cage+2.jpg>
he created in the late 1930s as an all-in-one percussion and piano section, by 
sticking nails and bits of rubber into the strings of an otherwise normal 
piano: great concepts, all of them, that opened gates of perception to new 
kinds of thinking about music. "Happy new ears", as Cage himself put it.

But that's to forget about something really rather important: Cage's music. 
Concepts are fine, but if you haven't got the chops to back them up with pieces 
of music that performers want to play and audiences want to hear, you're going 
to have a narrow influence as a composer. Cage was a bona fide, proper, real, 
composer. Here's none other thanWoody Guthrie 
<http://www.thestoolpigeon.co.uk/features/letter-woody-guthrie-x-john-cage.html>
's reaction to hearing a record of the prepared piano solos from Cage's Amores 
in 1947. (Thanks to composerLarry Goves <http://larrygoves.com/> for making me 
aware of this.)

'I've been around at several dance gatherings and musical houseparties here in 
New York city where I heard John Cage overhaul the family piano in his own way 
and play some of his choked down off and unusual kinds of things. I've hear him 
work with [a] roomful of tomtommers and drummers on first one stage and then 
the other one, and not only did I feel that this sort of piano music was really 
a keen fresh breeze, but a welcome thing in the way of a healthy change from 
the old ways you hear the average piano played… I think thatJohn Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/john-cage> and Alan Hovaness [sic; 
Hovhaness's music was also on the same disc] have caught and handed over to us 
a whole forest and desert mountain full of these fine things that would be 
looked down on or looked over in bashful weakness by ninety nine out of a 
hundred raters in every window."

Guthrie caught the thrill of the new that Cage's prepared piano music still 
makes you feel, and the new musical terrain it opens up. The structural rigour 
but sonic richness of theSonatas and Interludes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8fPSz-o4zzY> are some of the most immediately 
attractive music of this last century; I'd say the same about Cage's magical, 
austereString Quartet in Four Parts <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e4zW6rgMHqQ>
.

But what about the lupine elements of the Cage legacy? Just before 4'33'', 
Cage completed the four volumes of hisMusic of Changes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qOwcpjr9wFA>, another piece for David Tudor 
<http://davidtudor.org/>. Produced painstakingly through the chance operations 
of theI Ching <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_Ching>, Cage laboured hard to 
find a way to erase his control as much as possible in the compositional 
process: what could be less egotistic, less about the whole composer-as-hero 
idea, than not determining a single sound in a piece you supposedly "write"? 
And yet the result is similar, in its relentless virtuosity, its employment of 
the extremes of the keyboard, its unpredictable changes of speed and dynamic, 
to some of the most systematised music ever conceived. Boulez'sStructures 1A 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FIo15gWMheA>, composed at roughly the same time 
on the other side of the Atlantic, Music of Changes was also, in fact, 
rigorously determined by the questions Cage was asking of the I Ching. Music of 
Changes is heroically difficult to perform, and gives the pianist no leeway in 
its realisation. Nothing, in other words, is really left to chance at all in a 
performance of Music of Changes.

Forward-wind a quarter of a century, and Cage again wrote a sequence of some 
of the most coruscatingly complex music of his career, theEtudes Australes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JohydSPuNkY> for solo piano. Have a listen and 
look at the score here (thanks, again, to the panoply of contemporary music that
John11inch's YouTube channel <http://www.youtube.com/user/John11inch> 
provides): the notes – found through a combination of star charts and the I 
Ching - are fixed, but their rhythm and volume is left to the performer. What 
Cage wanted was that whoever plays the piece creates their own system to 
interpret the notation - this isn't an excuse for improvisational indulgence. 
That's just as true for the works of earlier decades of Cage's career, such as 
theConcert for Piano and Orchestra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NE6n2VBo2cM>
, a masterpiece of gorgeous graphic notation, but again, a template for the 
creation of a strict system of interpretation rather than a licence to play the 
first thing that comes into your head.

In fact, Cage's music is some of the most severe and exacting to play you can 
imagine. The discipline required to perform thesubtly shifting soundworlds 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s8PdWgl2fWs> of the later pieces that are 
titled after the number of performers involved (fromOne to 108 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Number_Pieces>) isn't just about following a 
stopwatch and making sure you're playing your notes at the correct temporal 
point, but submitting yourself to a kind of listening, a sensitivity of musical 
interaction between you and the other performers that requires you to give up 
your sense of individual identity to Cage's music.

In other words: the piece is still paramount in Cage's music. For all the 
existential freedoms he opened up for generations of musicians who came after 
him, that central idea of the work being more important than the composer, the 
performer, or even the audience, is one he never completely turned over. Even 
worse, from his own theoretically ego-less position, the veneration of the 
canon of his pieces is something of a philosophical problem: we still – and 
I've done this too! – talk about 'Cage's 4'33''', when, in reality, the lesson 
of that piece is that it's ours, that simply by turning our aural attention 
completely to any sonic phenomenon, we all create our own continual loop of 
4'33''s. It isn't Cage's, any more than the sounds you're listening to as 
you're reading this are his.

Does that, then, make Cage a big musical wolf? Perhaps: but while you're 
pondering that question, get down with John Cage the great composer – and Cage 
the musical oracle, whose riddles are just as resonant today as they were in 
the 1950s. Happy ever-new ears, you might say.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSSulycqZH-U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSSulycqZH-U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSSulycqZH-U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch here <http://www.youtube.com/embed/SSulycqZH-U>

Five key links 

4'33''
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HypmW4Yd7SY>
Sonatas and Interludes
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8fPSz-o4zzY>
Water Walk: Cage performs on the 1960 TV show, I've Got a Secret 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSulycqZH-U>

Etudes Australes
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JohydSPuNkY>
Two
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cwzduTIy9H0>
 