
Taken literally, Donald Trump’s latest thoughts about the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
, as retailed to the British politician Michael Gove, are terrifying for 
Europe, the EU and Nato. But considered dispassionately, his comments are the 
most recent example of Trump-speak, a loose, untutored language form that 
politicians and diplomats must now quickly learn to decipher.

As has by now been well established 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/09/trump-makes-his-case-in-pittsburgh/501335/>
, Trump-speak should be taken seriously, but not literally. Large pinches of 
salt, interspersed with reality checks and deep breaths, are required. The
hasty, overly defensive reaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/germany-hits-back-at-trump-criticism-of-refugee-policy-and-bmw-tariff-threat>
 on Monday of Germany’s deputy chancellor, Sigmar Gabriel, to Trump’s 
suggestion the EU could disintegrate is not the way to go. Trump could and 
probably will say the exact opposite tomorrow.

Trump-speak is typically off the cuff, unconsidered, contradictory, strongly 
expressed and essentially transitory. It mixes long-held beliefs and prejudices 
with barely grasped facts and dawning realities. It’s like a bloke talking 
loudly in the pub who “just read this stuff in the paper”.

No 10 plays down prospect of UK-US trade deal being ready when Brexit happens 
- Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/16/trump-wants-a-uk-us-trade-deal-signature-ready-for-brexit-in-2019-says-gove-politics-live>
So, for example, Trump revealed to Gove that he has discovered matters were 
not going well in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/the-trump-interviews-what-he-said-about-brexit-putin-israel-syria-and-twitter>
. “I have just looked at something,” he said. “Oh, I should not show you it at 
all, because it’s secret – but I have just taken a look at Afghanistan ... And 
you ask yourself, ‘What’s going on there?’” Well, yes actually, you do.

Trump-speak is a thought-stream, not a logical or rational process. It 
blithely blunders into sensitive issues. It wings it, blurts and stumbles. It 
makes stuff up as it goes along. And it typically lacks solid conclusions, 
leading interlocutors nowhere. The crucial thing about Trump-speak is that it 
is rarely his last word.

Weighing Trump-speak for subtle diplomatic nuances, calculated hints and 
disguised policy shifts is a mug’s game. Thus Gove’s gleeful declaration that 
Trump had bolstered Theresa May by promising a fast-track, post-Brexit trade 
deal with the US looks like delusional over-interpretation.

This is the same Trump who has failed so far to fix a date to meet Britain’s 
prime minister but who found time for Gove, sacked by May, and Ukip’s Nigel 
Farage. Trump says he’s a “big fan” of the UK. But his Scottish golf course 
aside, Britain’s interests barely register on his radar.

Donald Trump's first UK post-election interview: Brexit a 'great thing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
The Chinese have a similar interpretation problem. They find Trump-speak on 
Taiwan to be deeply troubling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/we-will-walk-on-international-stage-taiwanese-president-insists>
. State media are talking angrily about nuclear war. On Monday, Beijing said it 
would “take the gloves off” if Trump persisted with his heretical ideas.

But the Chinese are misreading the subject. To the extent that Trump has 
considered the matter at all, he appears to view Taiwan in the context of 
“unfair” US-China trade. Despite asserting his right to do so, he did not meet 
Taiwan’s president when she transited the US last week. He could be plotting 
recognition of an independent Taiwan. But probably not.

Likewise on Iran, Trump says Barack Obama cut a “terrible” nuclear deal in 
2015. His statements have provoked intense speculation in Tehran about malign 
US intentions and defiant, pre-emptive warnings by Iranian leaders. Their 
mistake is to take him at his Twitter word. What seems to concern Trump most is 
not Israel’s future security. It’s the money the US repaid to Tehran as part of 
the deal.

In Trump-speak, Nato is both “obsolete” and “important” 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-interview-merkel-idUSKBN14Z0XH?il=0][http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-nato-obsolete-idUSKBN14Z0YO>
. US and Russian nuclear arsenals must be “reduced substantially”, although he 
has previously demanded a large US expansion. Angela Merkel, Germany’s 
chancellor, is simultaneously “fantastic” and “catastrophic”.

Trump told Gove he was undecided about who he would support in Germany’s 
September federal election – raising the scandalising possibility that he might 
publicly take sides. And if inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, why not in France? Was Marine Le 
Pen, the Front National’s presidential candidate, simply taking coffee at Trump 
Tower last week? Or was Trump conspiring with her? In the ambiguous world of 
Trump-speak, anything is possible, nothing is certain.

Gove's Trump interview is another headache for Theresa May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/michael-gove-donald-trump-interview-another-headache-theresa-may-revenge>
Trump-speak says, repeatedly, that the US embassy in Israel will definitely 
move to Jerusalem until, suddenly this week, it is not up for discussion. It 
says the prospect of North Korean nuclear missiles threatening the US mainland 
is “not going to happen”. Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s paranoid dictator, thinks 
it will. So what next? Trump-speak is silent.

On Iraq, Trump is consistent but clueless. The 2003 invasion was the worst 
ever decision in history. US policy, he said, was akin to “throwing rocks into 
a beehive”. On Syria, Trump-speak is all over the place. The president-elect 
must have had a briefing, because he now favours “security zones” – presumably, 
the safe havens plan favoured by Hillary Clinton.

It was “terrible” to shoot old ladies in Aleppo, Trump said – on that, all can 
agree. But Trump says he “trusts” the shooter, Vladimir Putin, and looks 
forward to doing “great things” with Russia. What this may mean is anybody’s 
guess, although the Russian president probably has his own ideas. A Nato 
pullback in easternEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> for 
starters.

Trump-speak is whatever Trump believes US policy should be at any given 
moment. This is not necessarily how policy is or how it will be. Trump-speak is 
the exact opposite ofGeorge Orwell’s newspeak 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newspeak>, which was all about thought control 
and limiting alternative ideas and choices. It is thus essentially chaotic.

Trump-speak is more akin to doublespeak. Working out what the next US 
president really thinks, when he often appears not to know himself, is going to 
be a full-time job.
 