
Something strange starts to happen when you listen to American composer Morton 
Feldman's <http://www.newmusicbox.org/assets/16/images/AdamsFeldman.jpg> long, 
long – and I mean long – late chamber pieces. I'm talking about the 80-minute
Piano and String Quartet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0_Q-1u6sNgQ>, the four 
and a half hours ofFor Philip Guston 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=myIvdeQH8hQ> (which you can hear live at the 
Huddersfield Contemporary Music festival <http://hcmf.co.uk/event/show/318> on 
21 November 2012) or the biggest of them all, the five-hourSecond String Quartet
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K95RtulCuOc>. By the end of these works, 
composed a few years before Feldman's death in 1987, I was left wanting more, 
not less. My sense of time had been altered, so intently focused was I on the 
way the music changed from note to note and chord to chord. It created a 
living, breathing network of relationships that extended across its length. You 
don't really listen to these pieces, you live through them and with them. By 
the end of theSecond String Quartet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tUtjodoQUfg>
, I felt it was living inside me too.

Feldman put it thus: "My whole generation was hung up on the 20- to 25-minute 
piece. It was our clock. We all got to know it, and how to handle it. As soon 
as you leave the 20- to 25-minute piece behind, in a one-movement work, 
different problems arise. Up to one hour you think about form, but after an 
hour and a half it's scale. Form is easy: just the division of things into 
parts. But scale is another matter." This might suggest there is something epic 
in Feldman's music, in its rhetoric or ambition. The reality is just the 
opposite. His music is intimate, quiet, small and often slow.For Philip Guston 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=myIvdeQH8hQ> is scored for piano, flute and 
percussion; its gently dissonant chiming never reaches beyond a softly 
reverberant shimmer. It is music written on the same scale as our ears, 
composed to fit our brains and bodies.

Feldman's compositions don't impose themselves on you, and they refuse to 
shout about their meaning or importance – even their length. They also resist 
your attempts to predict what might happen next. His music is full of 
repetition, and yet nothing ever repeats. What I mean is that individual 
chords, textures and rhythmic ideas reoccur, but they are never (or very 
rarely) the same. Patterns don't progress in a predictable way, which makes 
Feldman's aesthetic radically different from minimalists such asSteve Reich 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/oct/22/steve-reich-contemporary-music-guide>
 orPhilip Glass <http://www.philipglass.com/>. You'll search in vain for an 
underlying system or structure to explain what's happening in, say,Crippled 
Symmetry <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OEFictzerXs>, another huge piece for 
flute, percussion and piano. Instead, you should give yourself over to absolute 
concentration. Notice the surface of the music, the way it changes subtly and 
slowly as if reacting to your attention. That's the point about Feldman's long 
pieces: they don't hypnotise or immerse you in a comforting sonic bath, they 
call for your attention and, through that, change you. Again, Feldman's words 
are enlightening; he says that his "patterns are 'complete' in themselves and 
in no need of development – only of extension. My concern is: what is its scale 
when prolonged, and what is the best method to arrive at it? My past experience 
was not to 'meddle' with the material, but use my concentration as a guide to 
what might transpire. I mentioned this to Stockhausen once when he had asked me 
what my secret was. 'I don't push the sounds around.' Stockhausen mulled this 
over and asked: 'Not even a little bit?'"

During his formative years in New York, Feldman's creative pole-stars were 
John Cage <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Cage>, Earle Brown and Christian 
Wolff <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christian_Wolff_(composer)>, and a galaxy 
of painters includingJackson Pollock 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWEhAEKEC0k>, Jasper Johns 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2004/jul/26/art.usa>, Robert 
Rauschenberg and above allhis close friend Philip Guston 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/features/philip-guston-the-hand-that-rocked-the-art-establishment-8061276.html>
 (even though they fell out when Guston's style changed from abstract to 
figurative; a perceived slight by Feldman at an exhibition of Guston's work 
meant they never spoke again). In the 50s and 60s, Feldman developed a kind of 
graphic notation, allowing the performers to choose the pitches and rhythms in 
pieces calledProjections <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pk74GH-_HzM> and 
Intersections <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4EM9TqjwgsA>. But Feldman never 
wanted to release an improvisational creativity from his musicians or to come 
up with scores-as-art as Cage did. Instead, he wanted to fix an idea as 
completely as possible. "The new structure," he wrote, "required a 
concentration more demanding than if the technique were that of still 
photography, which for me is what precise notation has come to imply." That 
concern for precision was one of the reasons Feldman could not go along with 
Cage's dictum that "everything is music", and it was also one of the reasons he 
returned to conventional notation in the 60s.

Luciano Berio 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2003/may/28/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries2> 
once said that the quietness of Feldman's music expressed a kind of existential 
terror of going off the map lest he encounter those regions where there be 
monsters – as if Feldman were frightened of loud music (despite the fact that 
one of his most important influences was the genius noise-artistEdgard Varèse 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AGFLUerbLhk>). It's a mis-hearing of Feldman's 
music. You can only really understand what I mean by living through a piece 
like the 80-minuteFor Bunita Marcus <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t-Kl0eOo1VU>
 for solo piano. What happens is the opposite of quietness, of not much 
happening: it's as if your ears extend outwards to meet the sound. Of course 
it's an illusion, but you feel you're touching the sound with your ears. Far 
from the disengagement with experience that Berio suggests, Feldman's music is 
a more direct encounter with the substance of sound than most composers have 
achieved. (There's a searching compositional reason for Feldman's quietness. As 
he says: "In my music I am … involved with the decay of each sound, and try to 
make its attack sourceless. The attack of a sound is not its character. 
Actually, what we hear is the attack and not the sound. Decay, however, this 
departing landscape, this expresses where the sound exists in our hearing – 
leaving us rather than coming towards us.")

Another side of Feldman's boldness is his polemic against the dominant system 
of composing in 50s and 60s Europe, and musical academia in America. 'If the 
pedant wants to understand me, he must understand my past. I'll take on all 
comers … There will be no embarrassment as to my intellectual abilities. In 
fact, there will be surprises! Pierre [Boulez] …Karlheinz [Stockhausen] 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/karlheinz-stockhausen> … Milton [Babbitt] … 
are you ready?'

And are you? Other things to prepare you for Feldman and his music: the 
massive physicality of the man, his thick glasses and unquenchable appetite for 
life's sensuality; his fascination with the crippled symmetries ofcentral Asian 
rugs 
<http://www.musicweb-international.com/classrev/2002/dec02/Feldman_crippled.jpg>
; the fact that there is loud music in his output, as in parts of the 1979
String Quartet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a83CMl5TYXc>, and the sheer 
blinding dazzle of his last orchestral piece,Coptic Light 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xw17kS7l2sI>, a vision of "what aspects of 
music since Monteverdi might determine its atmosphere if heard 2,000 years from 
now" – and, at about half an hour long, it's a good place to start your Feldman 
journey.

Five key links

1. Coptic Light 
<http://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=coptic+light&oq=coptic+light&gs_l=youtube.3...0.0.0.2099.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0..0.0...0.0...1ac.>

2. Piano and String Quartet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0_Q-1u6sNgQ>

3. For Bunita Marcus
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t-Kl0eOo1VU>

4. Second String Quartet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K95RtulCuOc>

5. For Philip Guston <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=myIvdeQH8hQ>
 