
There's one simple way to approach Harrison Birtwistle's music, one crucial 
maxim I want to give you above all others: Don't Panic! I refer, naturally, to 
the notorious premiere of Birtwistle'sPanic 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dgnq6d-IjUs>, for solo saxophone, drum kit and 
ensemble, which wowed, shocked, and flabbergasted the Last Night of the Proms 
audience in 1995; but what I mean is not that you shouldn't listen to Panic 
(it's one of the most dazzling and dynamic pieces written in the last 20 years) 
but that you should never, ever, approach Birtwistle with the cliched idea that 
he's some kind of scary, noise-making curmudgeon.

No: his music is a vital, essential, life force which you need to hear. Not 
convinced? Listen to the opening of his 1982 ensemble pieceSecret Theatre 
<http://www.nmcrec.co.uk/recording/secret-theatre#8>, and be pinned to your 
seat with the music's unstoppable energy.

Recovered? Right. So here's what you need in your ears and your imagination 
when you listen to pretty well anything Birtwistle has written in about six 
decades of composing, from his earliest works, such as theOockooing Bird 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Oockooing-Bird/dp/B002A4PP0E/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1336927928&sr=8-2>
 for solo piano, to his operaThe Minotaur 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MkyK6UhmX7g> that had its premiere at London's 
Covent Garden in 2008 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/apr/16/classicalmusicandopera1>. It's a 
sense of the animating vital spark that's going on behind the surface of our 
lives, which is teeming under the skin of the natural world. Anelemental 
dynamism <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-g3oGepuKug> drives Birtwistle's 
music: it's sometimes violent yet often lyrical, it's energetic yet also 
melancholic, but it's always striving, always searching, always moving.
 John Tomlinson as The Minotaur and Johan Reuter as Theseus in the Royal 
Opera's 2008 production of The Minotaur. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
His music also has an astonishing way of suggesting things that are 
simultaneously ancient and modern. That's not just because he has always been 
attracted to mythological subjects for his operas or his instrumental works, in 
pieces such as the gargantuan operatic labyrinth ofThe Mask of Orpheus 
<http://www.nmcrec.co.uk/recording/mask-orpheus> or Theseus Game 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Birtwistle-Theseus-Game-Earth-Dances/dp/B0002ANQWW> 
for large ensemble and two conductors. There's something else: if you hear 
music likeEarth Dances <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3-extkCqKU>, his 
monumental orchestral masterwork of the mid-1980s, it makes sounds that you 
feel Birtwistle must have summoned up from the guts of the world, primordial 
churnings and explosions that turn the orchestra into an assemblage of sonic 
elements rather than sophisticated products of cultural evolution. As the title 
says, it's as if the Earth were Dancing.

So where was the crucible of Birtwistle's creative imagination? Manchester in 
the 1950s. Born in Accrington in 1934, and growing up as a clarinetist playing 
in local theatre bands, Birtwistle studied in the north west with what would 
become an (in)famous group of composers and musicians:Alexander Goehr 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/sep/23/alexander-goehr-opera-king-lear>, 
Peter Maxwell Davies, pianist John Ogdon, and trumpeter, conductor, and 
composer Elgar Howarth. The usual story about what this "Manchester school" 
achieved was that they ripped up the rule book, and made British music confront 
contemporary continental modernisms that previous generations and the 
establishment had been frightened of. That's true, to the extent that Harry, 
Max, and Sandy did engage with and devour everything they could get their hands 
on by Schoenberg or Webern or Stravinsky, and one of the pieces that changed 
Birtwistle's life was Boulez's Le marteau sans maître (you can hear himtalking 
about that damascene moment here <http://www.bbc.co.uk/podcasts/series/r3mc/all>
, as part of Radio 3's award-winning Hear and Now 50 series). But just as there 
was a move to the modern, there was an equivalent excavation of the musical and 
mythical past, as Max and Harry delved into medieval music, into plainchant and 
polyphony, to find new-yet-old ways of structuring and thinking about what 
music could be. Some early pieces that resulted prove what Birtwistle learned, 
and how bracingly fresh his idiom still sounds today: listen to the hieratic 
brilliance ofTragoedia <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4KUoKyjy6u8>, one of 
Birtwistle's breakthrough pieces.

But there was theatre, too. One way of experiencing Birtwistle's music (and 
not just his overtly theatrical pieces such as the "improvised music theatre" of
Bow Down <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VoSJQdncOI4>, which tours in a new 
production from The Opera Group <http://www.theoperagroup.co.uk/?p=1476>from the
end of this week <http://brightonfestival.org/>) is as continual, exciting 
drama. Even when writing for small ensembles, or even solo instruments, 
Birtwistle's music has a fundamentally dramatic impetus. He thinks of each 
instrument as a separate character. Listen to the doleful, langorous solo tuba 
inThe Cry of Anubis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Birtwistle-Nights-Black-Shadow-Anubis/dp/B004W7GPLU/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1336928702&sr=8-1>
, or try his Cortege for 14 musicians. And you canlook at the score 
<http://www.universaledition.com/birtwistle-cortege>, too, and listen to an 
excerpt 
<http://www.universaledition.com/Cortege-for-14-musicians-Sir-Harrison-Birtwistle/composers-and-works/composer/64/work/12802>
(which corresponds to pages two-eight of the score). Ten of the 14 players take 
turns to play a solo at the front of the semicircle of the whole ensemble, each 
bearing witness to the other and developing the music's warp and weft of 
interlocking lines. There's an appropriate sense of on-stage ritual for a piece 
that is subtitled "a ceremony for 14 musicians", and was written in memory of
Michael Vyner <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Vyner>, but there's 
Birtwistle's violence and energy here too, as you'll hear.

Birtwistle will be 78 this year, and he has plans for more theatre projects, 
large-scale orchestral pieces, as well as solo and chamber works. He is still
taking his creative line for a walk <http://www.squidoo.com/klee> – to borrow a 
phrase from one of his favourite artists, Paul Klee – and still connecting with 
things ancient and modern, still making the Earth, and our imaginations, dance.

Five key Birtwistle links
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fi3-extkCqKU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fi3-extkCqKU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fi3-extkCqKU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Earth Dances <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i3-extkCqKU>
The title says it all. Brace yourself!

Harrison's Clocks <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6sHPND4kJ10>
Birtwistle on his five pieces of time-bending polyphony for solo piano.

The Minotaur <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MkyK6UhmX7g>
One of Birtwistle's most lyrical, violent, and immediate stage works, 
brilliantly performed at its premiere run at Covent Garden.

Secret Theatre <http://www.nmcrec.co.uk/recording/secret-theatre>
A mysterious but ineluctable musical ritual.

Birtwistle on his aleatoric pebble <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GbtspU4aGx0>
 all of a creative world in a single stone.

Next week: John Zorn
 