
It's where we're all headed, of course, but not all composers make you aware 
of the fact. I'm talking not just about our inevitable demises, and the end of 
things as we know them, but something even bigger: the heat-death of the 
universe. That's how Thomas Adès describes the essential quality that he hears 
inGyörgy Ligeti's <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aI0P1NnUFxc> music, in every 
piece the Hungarian composer wrote, from his earliest works before he fled to 
the west under cover of sackcloth in a train during the Hungarian Uprising of 
1956, to the very last music he wrote in the years before his death in Vienna 
in 2006.

That creative journey encompasses some of the richest music of the 20th 
century, and reveals an imaginative world of dizzying variety and expressive 
power. It's no surprise that of the entire post-war generation who were at the 
forefront of the avant garde in the 1950s and 60s, it's Ligeti who is played 
the most. And here are just three reasons why: listen to theKyrie 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JWqxPp6SvMw> of the Requiem for one of the 
darkest visions of musical terror ever imagined, then revel in the rhythmic 
glitter and complexity of a piece like the firstPiano Etude 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Fi9PHRv8s4&playnext=1&list=PL020D844894B3765F&feature=results_main>
, and relish the warped harmonic world of theHorn Trio 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8fo2qIKsSj8>, like looking at Brahms or 
Schumann through a distorting mirror.

But before we get to the potentially infinite visions of his music and what I 
think Adès means by that "heat-death" idea, Ligeti is the 20th century composer 
with the most cosmic connotations in popular consciousness. That's thanks to 
the way Stanley Kubrick used –Richard Steinitz, in his biography 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Talk%3AGyörgy_Ligeti#Lawsuit_over_Aventures_in_.222001.22.3F>
, relates how Ligeti's music was initially used without permission) – Ligeti's 
music in his movies starting with2001: A Space Odyssey 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36269/2001/review>. In 2001 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GgqI32JX_jY>, and in The Shining 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GN0Vqog6DqI&feature=fvwrel>, too, Ligeti's 
music (along with Penderecki's and Bartók's) is the sound of the other, the 
alien, the supernatural: passages from the Requiem dramatise the images of 
2001's monolith – music of teeming, horrifying vastness and unearthly intensity 
- and Ligeti and the other modernists become the sounds of Jack Nicholson's 
psychological dissemblage in The Shining.

But the real otherness, the real distinctiveness of Ligeti's music is much 
richer than what Kubrick heard in it. From the start of his life in the west, 
Ligeti was a permanently provocative thorn in the side of any of the received 
wisdoms and ideologies of the avant garde. Performances of his orchestral 
pieces from the late 50 and early 60s,Apparitions 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6JUxZcL6k90> and Atmosphères 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aI0P1NnUFxc> (which the Berlin Philharmonic and 
Simon Rattle play at theProms on 30 August 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2012/august-30/14328>) were a revelation 
of a new way of structuring music, of thinking about the possibilities for 
musical language. Instead of accepting at face value the diktats of the 
contemporary serialism, or any other of the –isms of the 50s, Ligeti's idea was 
to make texture as much of a driving force in musical architecture as pitch or 
rhythm, developing what he called a "micro-polyphony" of incredibly dense 
pile-ups of musical lines so that you're more aware of an ever-changing 
amorphous cloud of sound than the movement of individual instruments or voices. 
Sounds complicated? It is to conceive and to compose, but not to listen to: 
these uncanny textures smother, ooze, and slide into your ears in those 
orchestral pieces, or theRequiem <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ApdYpaPamMs>, 
orLux Aeterna <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lgRZnsAgKng> for 16 voices.

Ligeti was not thinking of this music in a vacuum, or pretending that he could 
provide the definitive answer to the challenges of finding a post-war musical 
idiom. He never trod any musical or political party line: not least because he 
had devastating personal experience of where that kind of thinking could lead. 
As Hungarian Jews, his brother and father were killed in concentration camps, 
but his mother survived Auschwitz; after the war, he saw the brutality and 
intolerance of communism at first hand. The last thing he wanted to become as a 
creative artist was a musical ideologue or despot. I met him when he was 
already ill in 2003,and he told me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2003/oct/17/classicalmusicandopera> that he 
was against the idea of "plannification" in music; saying how he could never 
make a pre-planned musical form as Stockhausen did, for example, in his Licht 
cycle. Ligeti also said to me, "I am extremely far away from messianic 
thinking."
 György Ligeti in 2000. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Ligeti's principled resistance of system-for-system's sake – whether Boulez 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jul/16/pierre-boulez-contemporary-music-guide>
's version of serialism,Cage 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/aug/13/john-cage-contemporary-music-guide>
's chance, or Xenakis'sstochasticism 
<http://rateyourmusic.com/genre/Stochastic+Music/> – meant that he had to find 
new forms, new kinds of expression, in virtually every new piece he wrote. His 
searches and his influences spread far beyond the conventional confines of 
western culture: the music of theAka pygmies 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DIJ9A8eV5QE> was one of the catalysts that 
unlocked the last couple of decades of his creativity, above all the rhythmic 
invention of thePiano Concerto <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L5SJDLkE7Tg> and 
thePiano Etudes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h0qoue0JbbU>; he was impressed 
by the sounds and processes of American minimalism in a way that no other avant 
garde composer in Europe was; and his mind was open to the furthest reaches of 
contemporary mathematics. He became fascinated by the new ideas of chaos theory 
thatHeinz-Otto Peitgen <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heinz-Otto_Peitgen> 
developed in the 1980s, and he extrapolated some of those ideas into music such 
as the4th movement <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LiAmhiB2-fs> of the Piano 
Concerto, a chaotic ride to the abyss of continually disrupting, 
self-annihilating rhythmic patterns.

There are, however, constants in Ligeti's musical imagination. One of the most 
important is the idea of the absurd. Ligeti's world of imagination was 
simultaneously an asylum, a place of refuge, and a place to process the horror 
of the 20th century's great geo-political nightmares through which he lived. As 
a child, he invented a self-sufficient world of his creation that he called 
Kylwiria; as an adult, he was a lover of Lewis Carroll (he wanted to write an 
opera based on Alice in Wonderland) and the surreal linguistic games and 
imagery of Hungarian poetSándor Weöres 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sándor_Weöres>. One of his very last pieces was 
Síppal, dobbal, nádihegedüvel <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W9bCApV0Ze4>, 
"With Pipes, Drums, Fiddles", a setting of Weöres's poems for percussion 
quartet and mezzo-soprano. They are, typically for Ligeti, on a tiny scale, and 
they make sounds like nothing else: each of the seven songs is simultaneously 
redolent of folk music and of modernist complexity, of childish immediacy and 
decidedly adult sophistication. Yet this music is absolutely, definitively new, 
and each number conjures its own little-but-large world of absurdist expression 
and resonance. They are also, I think, strangely melancholic. The Sippal songs 
have that quality that all the best absurdist poetry does of making you 
confront big ideas through lightness of touch, humour, and sleight of hand.

Ligeti's pieces are often short, even miniature, but it's as if that smallness 
of scale makes you aware of some gigantic vacuum around them. The first Piano 
Etude writes out a nihilistically destructive game of rhythmic abandon, and it 
does it all in a couple of minutes; there are moments in theViolin Concerto 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oLy26ZZDRbc> in which you don't know whether to 
laugh or cry at the sounds of the swanee whistles and ocarinas you're hearing 
in the orchestra; the whole of his operaLe Grand Macabre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vw8NoTrZBp4> is both a witty satire on death 
and a chilling apocalyptic vision. In other words, you hear a reflection of the 
horrors that Ligeti knew and saw during his lifetime, and you hear also his 
coming to terms with art's essential futility in the face of all that tragedy. 
And yet, in the attempt to reflect on or escape from those experiences, 
Ligeti's music is a clarion-call for the fundamental importance of that 
supposedly futile artistic effort. It's music that gives you a glimpse of the 
heat-death of the universe – and the necessity to keep going, to keep 
composing, to keep living in the face of that nihilistic fate that awaits us, 
even if it all, in the end, amounts to nothing. It doesn't, of course … but 
it's that existential tension that gives Ligeti's music its humanity, and it's 
one reason his work, I think, will only become more and more central to every 
performer's repertoire and every music-lover's ears.

Five key links
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fsa7h7TwJzaM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fsa7h7TwJzaM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fsa7h7TwJzaM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view clip 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/sa7h7TwJzaM>
Musica Ricercata
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nIs3jechQ_E> 

Requiem
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sa7h7TwJzaM> 

Piano Concerto
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L5SJDLkE7Tg> 

Horn Trio
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8fo2qIKsSj8> 

Síppal, dobbal, nádihegedüvel
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W9bCApV0Ze4>
 