
From Syria’s war-scarred citadel of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/24/syria-war-citadel-aleppo-history-cities-buildings>
, perhaps the oldest city in the world, via London’sfirst semi-detached house 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/01/the-grand-london-semi-that-spawned-a-housing-revolution-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-8>
, to the kilometre-high Kingdom Tower in Jeddah (as yet unfinished), ourhistory 
of cities in 50 buildings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/history-cities-50-buildings> series 
has explored how the urbanisation of this planet has been shaped by politics, 
culture, religion, technology – and above all, people.

Over the last 11 weeks, we’ve heard about trailblazing transport systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/26/curitiba-brazil-brt-transport-revolution-history-cities-50-buildings>
, afailed housing experiment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/moscow-narkomfin-soviet-collective-living-history-cities-50-buildings>
 (plusa now-successful one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/13/habitat-67-montreal-expo-moshe-safdie-history-cities-50-buildings-day-35>
), and atransformative doppelganger art gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/30/bilbao-effect-gehry-guggenheim-history-cities-50-buildings>
. But clearly, trying to cram the entire story of urbanisation into a mere 50 
structures is, shall we say, ambitious – so we also asked for your help in 
pointing out other buildings that really ought to have been on our list. Here’s 
a taster of what you came up with ...

Louisville, Kentucky
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1442624> 
Sheppard Square Public Housing Complex in Louisville  
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1442624>

The Sheppard Square Public Housing complex serves as a stand in for all the 
public housing complexes in the US, maligned as 'severely distressed' and torn 
down to hide a long history of constant disinvestment and overt racial and 
class segregation. These complexes are the sites of a far more complex history 
that includes 'greening contests' by residents, spaces for women of color to 
organize around their right to the city, and places that many still call home. 
Public housing is unpopular to everyone except the hundreds of thousands living 
there and the equally astounding number of those waiting to get in.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By drewtucker91079 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/drewtucker91079> 

24 March 2015, 12:28 

New York City, USA

What about the equitable building in manhattan? At the time, its construction 
was so controversial that shortly afterwards, the zoning resolution was created 
to ensure that new, tall buildings in manhattan had to respect envelope 
restrictions (setbacks) to allow light and air to the street level. It’s 
interesting that it is not the equitable building itself which generated a 
particular urban condition, but the city’s desire to avoid more of them. The 
resulting setback skyscraper became a typology which can be seen to define not 
only significant parts of manhattan, but also elsewhere across america and the 
rest of the world.

- puncturedbicycle <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2271895>

London, UK


In the modern era, I’d like to make a case for the former Bryant and May match 
factory in Bow/Poplar, East London. A location that was a landmark of the 
formation of the labour movement in the UK of the 1890’s, in a street that has 
examples of almost every major period of British domestic architecture from 
then to the present day, it is now (and has been since the late 80’s) a leading 
and early example of the re-claimed industrial site, the gated community, of 
how the regeneration of those grand old locations can work as some part of the 
future of cities. It’s also a tremendous example of what the Victorians could 
do with simple brick-laying.

In many ways it covers the entire evolution of the modern city.

- ece301 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12833967> 

Paul Wellman (@PaulWellman_EG) 
.@guardiancities <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> @GuardianWitness 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianWitness> this one on Brick Lane. 
http://t.co/r13LqG8H8e <http://t.co/r13LqG8H8e> pic.twitter.com/Z9UEKYib4F 
<http://t.co/Z9UEKYib4F>
 <https://twitter.com/PaulWellman_EG/status/582190972022456320> March 29, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/PaulWellman_EG/status/582190972022456320> Paul Wellman 
(@PaulWellman_EG) 
.@guardiancities <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> @GuardianWitness 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianWitness> first it was a French Protestant church, 
then a Methodist chapel, then a synagogue, now a mosque.
 <https://twitter.com/PaulWellman_EG/status/582191262700318720> March 29, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/PaulWellman_EG/status/582191262700318720> 
Sao Paulo, Brazil
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1442990> 
MASP The Art Museum of Sao paulo by Lina Bo Bardi 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1442990>

Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> can 
express many things. The "MASP" (acronym for the Art Museum of Sao Paulo) is a 
tour de force by Brazilian architect Lina Bo Bardi. This building has become 
the expression of a city seeking for modernity and innovation. Its enormous 
structure is not supported red columns: the whole structure is hanging from 
them. It gives Sao Paulo and paulistanos identity and pride.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By RobRocco <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/RobRocco> 

24 March 2015, 17:45 

Jakarta, Indonesia
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1547360> 
Istiqlal Mosque, a symbol of religious harmony and tolerance 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1547360>

Istiqlal Mosque is the national mosque of Indonesia and the largest mosque in 
Southeast Asia. Opened to the public in 1978, the mosque was designed as a 
symbol of Indonesia's independence from the Netherlands. Yet, while the new 
republic was the largest Muslim country in the world, the authorities 
deliberately positioned the mosque next to Jakarta Cathedral in a symbol of 
religious harmony and tolerance. There was also an open competition for the 
architectural design. The chosen design was submitted by Frederich Silaban, a 
Christian architect from North Sumatra, with the theme "Ketuhanan" (English: 
"Divinity").

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By ID471748 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/guardianUser4371215> 

30 May 2015, 17:54 

Frankfurt, Germany

Philip Oldfield (@SustainableTall) 
I would nominate #Frankfurt <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Frankfurt?src=hash> 
Commerzbank as#hoc50 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/hoc50?src=hash> -the first 
skyscraper that responds to challenge of#sustainability 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/sustainability?src=hash> http://t.co/Nbzp1MCtZq 
<http://t.co/Nbzp1MCtZq>
 <https://twitter.com/SustainableTall/status/587629962443755521> April 13, 2015
 <https://twitter.com/SustainableTall/status/587629962443755521> 


Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Bas van der Pol (@basvanderpol) 
Rotterdam as a (re)building in its own right? #homeofarchitecturalinnovation 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/homeofarchitecturalinnovation?src=hash> 
@guardiancities <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> @GuardianWitness 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianWitness> #Hoc50 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Hoc50?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/DpuT6p8pTQ 
<http://t.co/DpuT6p8pTQ>
 <https://twitter.com/basvanderpol/status/591862208029659136> April 25, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/basvanderpol/status/591862208029659136> 
Catalhoyuk, Turkey

No longer standing, really, but Catalhoyuk [Turkey] is probably the earliest 
very well known urban development in a sense that we would understand as urban. 
It’s also been exceptionally well excavated (depending on which members of the 
archaeological community you talk to) and has a wonderful organic development 
of overlapping buildings, walls being used as later foundations, layer after 
layer of floors and walls plastered at different times and is generally magical.

- lentoon <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13644044>

Berlin, Germany
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1442819> 
The Berlin Wall 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1442819>

Remains of the Berlin Wall, built in 1961 to stop East Berliners leaving for 
the west. As communist powers decreased, protesters began to demolish the wall 
in 1989. It's estimated that around 5,000 people attempted to escape over the 
wall, with an estimated death toll of up to 200.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By tynegal <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/tynegal> 

24 March 2015, 15:13 

Milton Keynes, UK

Milton Keynes. A successful city designed from scratch using knowledge gained 
from observing cities around the world. Garden Cities of Tomorrow.

– Rosemary Aikman <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10363002>

Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1451666> 
The Vertical Streets of South East Asia 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/550fe804e4b05b980fc9453a/1451666>

This picture, taken in the Chinatown area of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, is a 
classic example of the way buildings are built/designed in many parts of SE 
Asia. Many buildings long a high street will a very narrow fascia but will 
often go back a long way. It's not unusual for every level of a 5 or 6 storey 
building to have it's very own unique use.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Matt Doran <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Matt Doran> 

30 March 2015, 17:22 

Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo

Ben Almeras (@articlequinze) 
Sums up Mobutu's "mismanagement": it was never completed #hoc50 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/hoc50?src=hash> #Kinshasa 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Kinshasa?src=hash> @Guardian 
<https://twitter.com/guardian> @GuardianWitness 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianWitness> (2/...) pic.twitter.com/EP0XsTCH2k 
<http://t.co/EP0XsTCH2k>
 <https://twitter.com/articlequinze/status/580246701895634944> March 24, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/articlequinze/status/580246701895634944> 
Vienna, Austria

Vienna’s Ringstrasse - The 5km long promenade has huge cultural and historical 
significance, as well as being a masterpiece of urban planning and 
architecture. It was built - on the former city walls surrounding the old town 
- to connect the working-class suburbs with the central nobility after the 1848 
Viennese Revolution. As well as the magnificent array of Habsburg palaces, 
theatres, museums and opera houses, a selection of more democratic buildings - 
such as the city hall, parliament and university - also sprang up around the 
Ring. In Europe it was the largest urban planning project of the tumultuous 
19th Century.

- Ajit Niranjan

Other buildings suggested by our readers included: the Blackpool Tower, the 
Museum of Liverpool, Hagia Sophia and the Bayon Temple at Angkor Wat.

 * Read the full History of Cities in 50 Buildings series here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/history-cities-50-buildings>  