
Some nights Peter Dahlin says he tucks a “big-ass knife” under his bed in case 
intruders come for him as he dozes; others he cannot sleep at all.

“They’ve kidnapped people several times here before,” says the 36-year-old 
Swedish human rights activist, chain-smoking Marlboro cigarettes as he 
remembers the 23 days he spent in secret detention inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

It has been a year since Dahlin became one of the first foreign victims of 
President Xi Jinping’s war on dissent 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2016/04/21/crackdown-in-china-worse-and-worse/>
.

On 3 January 2016 Chinese security agents encircled the activist’s Beijing 
home and spirited him and his Chinese girlfriend, Pan Jinling, off to a covert 
interrogation centre he now calls “The Residence”.

Months have now passed but the memories of that spell in custody have proved 
hard to shake. “These facilities are built to break you,” the campaigner says 
during a seven-hour interview at a home in Chiang Mai, a city in northern 
Thailand where he and Pan have lived since he was deported from China amidone 
of the most severe crackdowns in decades 
<http://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-china-crackdown-snap-story.html>.

The story of Peter Dahlin, told here in unprecedented detail, offers a rare 
and troubling snapshot of Xi Jinping’s China, where an unforgiving offensive 
against civil society is now unfolding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37e4836c7399f8888ac228fa4c65bf9d02de1d39%2F0_150_4000_2402%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping's%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping%27s%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37e4836c7399f8888ac228fa4c65bf9d02de1d39%2F0_150_4000_2402%2F4000.jpg>
 Peter Dahlin speaks on camera in a still from video released by China Central 
Television. Photograph: AP 
In the four years since Xi became China’s top leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/15/xi-jinping-communist-party-chinese>
 in November 2012, feminist campaigners, journalists, academics, bloggers, 
publishers, human rights lawyers and even foreign non-governmental organisation 
workers such as Dahlin have all been targeted in what experts suspect is a 
coordinated Communist party push to prevent the development of organised 
opposition to the regime.

The political situation, which some call the most dire since the Tiananmen 
Square massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/chinese-dissidents-urge-obama-press-xi-jinping-human-rights-g20>
 in 1989, has deteriorated so fast under the current leadership that one 
scholar claims Xi has built“the perfect dictatorship” 
<http://blogs.cfr.org/asia/2016/09/14/podcast-the-perfect-dictatorship/> – an 
ever-more repressive system that nevertheless avoids major international 
censure.


During his stint behind bars the Swedish activist says he was given a 
firsthand taste of the harshness with which that battle for control is being 
waged.


For the first time I am not optimistic any more. This is how China will 
operate for the next 20 years
Peter Dahlin 
He claims he was blindfolded and confined to a cell with expressionless guards 
who refused to engage in conversation but noted down his every move; was for 
days deprived of access to his embassy, the right to exercise or even to 
sunlight; was forced to endure exhausting late-night interrogation sessions 
conducted by hectoring inquisitors determined to paint him as a spy; subjected 
to a lie-detection machine intended to extract information about his work; and 
suffered periods of sleep deprivation that he believes were intended to weaken 
his resolve.


Dahlin, who until his detention had run a Beijing-based rights organisation 
called the Chinese Urgent Action Working Group or China Action, said during the 
seven years he lived and worked as an activist in China friends and diplomats 
had always considered him an optimist about the country’s future.

Those illusions have been shattered by the things he witnessed in the lead-up 
to his incarceration at The Residence.


“For the first time I am not optimistic any more,” he says. “This is how China 
will operate for the next 20 years. Now it’s a new hard line.”

The underground activist

Peter Dahlin arrived in China from his native Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> in the summer of 2004, a 23-year-old 
political science graduate keen for a taste of the world outside a lecture 
theatre.


“I was just there to backpack and learn,” recalls Dahlin, whose travels took 
him through Beijing, Shanghai and Xiamen, the south-eastern port where Xi 
served as vice-mayor in the 1980s.


Three years later he returned, throwing himself into human rights work 
alongside Hou Wenzhou, a Chinese activist he had met online.

Dahlin’s first project was a report denouncing the existence of an illegal 
nationwide network of secret detention facilities called “black jails”. It 
identified eight such prisons in Beijing.


About the same time Dahlin met Wang Quanzhang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/china-should-be-proud-of-wang-quanzhang-instead-it-persecutes-him>
, a crusading civil rights lawyer known for his defence of China’s downtrodden 
and outspoken criticism of the government. Together, in 2009, they foundedChina 
Action <http://cuawg.wikidot.com/about-us>, a non-profit advocacy group 
dedicated to supporting human rights defenders in the one-party state.

Increasingly draconian laws 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/29/world/asia/china-foreign-ngo-law.html> make 
it effectively impossible for such non-governmental rights organisations to 
operate legally in mainland China. Instead the pair registered their group as a 
company in Hong Kong and decided they would strive to operate in the shadows so 
as to avoid attracting attention.


“I decided we had a shot at doing something quite special,” Dahlin says of the 
group’s creation. The Swedish activist says he was partly driven by 
“middle-class guilt” but also a conviction that people should be the masters of 
their own destinies.

Even my close friends didn’t know about my work … I always operated with a 
cover

“I’ve never been particularly political,” he says. “I’ve never paid attention 
to Tibet and these issues very much. “I just believe in the idea of 
self-determination.

“Whether it is Scottish people, the Catalan people, the Tibetan people or even 
just a village somewhere in China; that the people there should be the ones 
that have an influence, whether it is by forming an organisation, a labour 
union, their own media, whatever.”

Guided by those beliefs, Dahlin set about building China Action into a small 
but potent force for social change.

With grants from institutions that included the European Union, the National 
Endowment For Democracy and the Norwegian Human Rights Fund it ran training 
sessions for human rights lawyers and investigative journalists and offered 
support to young Chinese campaigners traumatised by run-ins with the security 
services.


Just as China Action was ramping up its operations, however, the human rights 
situation in China took a turn for the worse.

The crackdown begins

Many accuse Xi of initiating the current chill but some trace it back to 
around 2008 whenanti-government protests rocked Tibet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/mar/14/tibet.china1> just as China was 
preparing to host the Summer Olympics.


Deadly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/06/china-riots-uighur-xinjiang> 
riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/06/china-riots-uighur-xinjiang> the 
following year in China’s far west left authorities even more convinced that it 
was time to step up their controls over society.

In Beijing Dahlin sought to fly under the radar, moving into a one-bedroom 
studio hidden in the alleys around the 13th century Drum Tower and disguising 
his true line of work with a series of legends.

He told some he was the son of a wealthy Swedish businessman who was in China 
researching the electric bicycle industry; to others he introduced himself as a 
legal researcher or expat English teacher, “just to see the way the 
conversation dies”.

“Even my close friends didn’t know about my work,” he says. “They knew I did 
something to do with an NGO and human rights but that is about it. I always 
operated with a cover.”

A self-professed history geek, Dahlin adopted the surname Beckenridge – an 
allusion to John C Breckinridge, the vice-president of the Confederate states – 
but he maintained his first name. “Any effective cover story has to have 90% 
truth and then 10% misleading … you always keep your first name to avoid 
mistakes.”

For a while the subterfuge paid off. Dahlin’s visas were renewed by public 
security authorities, despite the fact that his human rights work was 
officially illegal, and he sensed that police were happy monitoring the group 
from afar.


“We’re not a political organisation,” he says by way of explanation for why 
his group was able to keep operating for so long. “We don’t deal with democracy 
issues.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa468bf32f1e698e0ddd90810ccb0beb2943598bb%2F807_682_4001_2401%2F4001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping's%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping%27s%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa468bf32f1e698e0ddd90810ccb0beb2943598bb%2F807_682_4001_2401%2F4001.jpg>
 President Xi Jinping: turned his country into a ‘controlocracy’. Photograph: 
Petr David Josek/AP 
But by 2013, the year Xi became president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/14/xi-jinping-installed-china-president>
, the climate had begun to change. First came a sweeping crackdown on China’s 
already tightly controlled internet; outspoken bloggers were detained and 
publicly humiliated in an attemp to curbthe “wanton defamation” of the 
Communist party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/17/chinese-communist-party-online-crackdown>
.

Next came the obliteration of the New Citizens’ Movement 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/16/world/asia/chinese-activists-test-new-leader-and-are-crushed.html>
, a collective of liberal scholars and activists who had been pushing for 
moderate social and political change. The group’s leader, a respected lawyer 
called Xu Zhiyong, wasjailed for four years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/26/china-jails-activist-xu-zhiyong>
. Another prominent memberfled into exile in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/academics-china-crackdown-forces-intellectuals-abroad>
.


Most dictatorships are very clumsy, raw, inelegant. But this one isn’t. They 
have it sussed
Stein Ringen, political scientist 
 It was the start of what many describe as a concerted clampdown on civil 
society designed to extinguish organised opposition to Beijing at a time when 
China’s fading economic boom threatened to undermine its political legitimacy.


Stein Ringen, a political scientist whose new book, The Perfect Dictatorship 
<http://blogs.cfr.org/asia/2016/09/14/podcast-the-perfect-dictatorship/>, 
examines the dramatic political tightening, said he believed that after a 
period of “steely and foresightful analysis”, China’s top leaders had concluded 
they must tighten their grip over the population now that the era of 
mega-economic growth was over.


“There is an absolute determination that the regime will persist and continue. 
That is number one for everything: the perpetuation of the regime.”

Ringen, an emeritus professor at Oxford University, said that in just a few 
years Xi had turned his country into a “controlocracy” where an ingenious mix 
of hard and soft measures were used to ensure the party’s rule went 
unchallenged.


“It is so smooth that in some respects it doesn’t even look dictatorial,” he 
said. “Most dictatorships are very clumsy, raw, inelegant. But this one isn’t. 
They have it sussed.”


The arrest

As Xi’s crackdown unfolded up and down the country, agents from China’s 
ministry of state security, a mysterious spy agency tasked with snuffing out 
political threats to the party, began to move against Dahlin’s group, trying to 
recruit his assistant as a mole.


“We were well aware that from at least 2013 state security and not just police 
were actively monitoring us,” he says.


Dahlin began taking extra precautions, memorising the night flights out of 
Beijing and filling a brown leather satchel with bundles of cash, hard drives, 
documents, a change of clothes and his passport.


In the summer of 2015 the situation deteriorated further still. A sweeping 
police offensive against Chinese human rights lawyers –the so-called 709 
crackdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/09/reap-what-you-sow-families-of-seized-lawyers-send-public-warning-to-china>
 – began, sucking in “a very large number” of people directly linked to China 
Action, including Dahlin’s friend and partner Wang, who was seized near the 
eastern city of Jinan on 3 August.

At 9.45pm – just hours before he had planned to set off for the airport – 
there was a loud bang on the door

With those detentions Dahlin sensed the noose was tightening. “Maybe there 
will be no more China,” he remembers thinking.

Then on 3 January 2016 the end came. At about 2pm Dahlin realised China Action 
was under intense scrutiny when a Chinese associate reported being summoned to 
meet security officials who had grilled him about a Swedish man named Peter.


Shortly before 4pm the Swede sat down at his computer and began to type an 
email to a group of close colleagues with the subject line: “Situation”.

“There now seems to be an active investigation,” he wrote, adding that he 
planned to flee the country and might not return to China “if things get bad”.

“Clear all papers, USBs, computers, phones, pads etc,” Dahlin instructed his 
workmates. “These things need to be done ASAP.”

Dahlin spent the afternoon tying up loose ends: shredding documents, saying 
goodbye to his girlfriend Pan, and taking care of the couple’s cats, Poopi and 
Dou Gonggong.


He booked a seat on a 3am Cathay Pacific Flight to Hong Kong and from there 
planned to take another flight toThailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand>. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe618c69228c0d531ee1473f9a5cde048b8505bd6%2F0_125_1754_1052%2F1754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping's%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping%27s%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe618c69228c0d531ee1473f9a5cde048b8505bd6%2F0_125_1754_1052%2F1754.jpg>
 The arrest of Peter Dahlin, as described to the Chiang Mai-based 
Mexican-American artist Nicolas Luna Fleck 
But at 9.45pm – just hours before he had planned to set off for the airport – 
there was a loud bang on the door.

“Are you Peter Dahlin?” said one of the uniformed agents packing the alleyway 
outside. “Well, yeah,” the activist replied.

‘The Residence’ 

About 15 miles south of Dahlin’s hutong home, not far from Beijing’s Nanyuan 
military airbase, is a drab, four-storey office block used for the 
interrogation of those deemed enemies of the Chinese state. “Basically, it is a 
secret prison,” says Dahlin.

In the early hours of Monday 4 January a convoy of police vehicles pulled up 
in the ground-floor garage of the U-shaped installation. Blindfolded, the 
activist was led out of one of the cars, into a lift and then along a corridor 
into a second-floor interrogation room.


“You sort of just freeze … It was sort of expected but still you realise that 
this could end badly – or this could end very badly.”

Dahlin’s first interrogation began about 2am that winter morning, as 
temperatures outside The Residence plunged to six degrees below zero.

Two male inquisitors sat opposite the prisoner, who says he was seated in a 
hard wooden“tiger chair” 
<https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/05/13/tiger-chairs-and-cell-bosses/police-torture-criminal-suspects-china>
 with leg shackles that were left splayed out on the floor. Metals bars 
crisscrossed the room’s only window.

The initial questioning was less intimidating than the surroundings might have 
suggested. “It started fairly innocuously. They were just trying to get a sense 
of me. Who am I? What am I doing in China? Very basic questioning.”

Dahlin’s ties to three persons of interest seemed of particular concern: the 
human rights lawyer Wang; Xing Qingxian, an activist from south-west China; and
Su Changlan 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/campaigns/2015/09/su-changlans-story-is-the-story-of-many-chinese-women/>
, a women’s rights campaigner who had been detained months earlier for offering 
online support to Hong Kong’s 2014 pro-democracy protests.

Two guards watched over Dahlin 24 hours a day, recording every move or sound 
he made, but never uttered a word

But it was a gentle introduction to life in The Residence for the 
sleep-deprived activist: three hours later, about 5am, the session was 
terminated and he was led into a rectangular cell across the corridor with 
beige padded walls and two small windows that were also covered by metal bars. 
Thick blackout curtains made it impossible to tell the time of day; three 
fluorescent lamps hung from the ceiling, including one directly above the bed. 
“Even the toilet seat was suicide-padded,” Dahlin recalls.

Also inside were two guards, part of a team that remained there and watched 
over Dahlin 24 hours a day and recorded every move or sound he made in a 
notebook but never uttered a word.

“They would often stand up and go and stand and look when you take a piss, you 
take a shit, you take a shower. It’s a bit odd,” Dahlin says, adding with a 
laugh: “Luckily I’m Swedish and Sweden has a rather relaxed idea of nudity.”

The following days were a blur of interrogations. “They made it clear … that 
they had followed me, surveilled me intently for a while and were well aware, 
they said, of what I had been doing.”

Dahlin claims his captors demanded a “map” of who his group had been working 
with and became “very, very angry” after he refused to talk unless he was 
allowed to see officials from the Swedish embassy.


The activist says his interrogators then refused to let him sleep until he 
offered them detailed information and only relented after he protested to the 
centre’s boss – a woman who gave her name as Mrs Zhang – that his treatment 
violated the UN convention against torture, which China ratified in 1988.

“She was very upset,” Dahlin says of her reaction. “And went on about how 
nicely I’m being treated.”


Eventually he was allowed to sleep.


As the questioning sessions continued, often lasting up to six hours at a 
time, Dahlin, who correctly suspected that Pan and several colleagues were also 
being detained in the facility, decided his best option was to avoid 
incriminating others by painting the officers “a big picture … with nothing in 
it”.

But the interrogators hit back, telling the activist his friends and 
colleagues were turning against him. “This is your only chance,” they said. 
“They are blaming everything on you. If you don’t strike back it is over for 
you.”

I was quite prepared that there was going to be six months of this. That was 
my timeframe
Peter Dahlin 
Dahlin says he held firm, telling his captors China should be proud of its 
human rights lawyers and flatly rejecting repeated demands for him to surrender 
information about them or passwords for email accounts and encrypted hard 
drives that had been seized from his home.


As night fell on the covert prison, unnerving sounds found their way into the 
activist’s cell from other parts of The Residence, which Dahlin estimated had 
been built to house about eight prisoners. “I could hear raised voices. I could 
hear muffled sounds of what I assumed would be someone slammed against the wall 
and floor.

“I was quite prepared that there was going to be six months of this. That was 
my timeframe. I was counting the days in my head.”

As Dahlin floundered in the secret jail the world outside went on. Exactly one 
week after he was seized, on 10 January,David Bowie died in his New York flat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-at-the-age-of-69>
, news the Swedish activist only received after his release.

Two days later, on 12 January, the first reports of Dahlin’s detention 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-sweden-detention-idUSKCN0UQ11820160112>
 began to emerge in the international media. Having initially denied knowledge 
of the activist’s disappearance, the Chinese government now admitted“coercive 
measures” had been taken against him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/china-human-rights-crackdown-arrest-peter-dahlin-swedish-activist>
.

Three days later, on 15 January, a state-run newspaper published an editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/detained-swedish-human-rights-activist-accused-of-making-trouble-in-china>
 accusing the activist of funding “radical political activists” who were 
seeking confrontation with the Communist party.

Friends and relatives called for his release, warning that without access to 
his medicine, Dahlin, who has Addison’s disease –a rare hormonal disorder also 
suffered by John F Kennedy 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2009/sep/05/science/sci-jfk-addisons5> – could die.

Cut off from the world in this hidden jail, Dahlin knew nothing of what was 
going on outside. He used music to help him cope with the boredom and stress, 
attempting to alleviate the tedium by remembering the lyrics of songs by REM, 
Bob Dylan and Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers.

“You think through everything. Not once or twice but 100 times for each thing. 
Every friend you had. Every relationship you had. Every date you had … If you 
sit there for weeks on end with nothing to do you start having weird thoughts 
because there is nothing left to think about.”


About 10 days into his captivity Dahlin’s ordeal took an Orwellian turn when 
interrogators told the activist they wanted to use a “communication 
enhancement” machine – a species of lie detector – to assist with their 
inquiries.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fc1137bef299f5ed84185a239135c2bc90db29b%2F0_0_1630_1483%2F1630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping's%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping%27s%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fc1137bef299f5ed84185a239135c2bc90db29b%2F0_0_1630_1483%2F1630.jpg>
 Peter Dahlin faces his interrogators. Illustration: Nicolas Luna Fleck 
Electrodes were attached to the activist’s fingertips and small cameras 
trained on his pupils while he was asked questions. Dahlin suspects it was “a 
clever psychological play” to make him reveal details of his group’s work and 
sponsors – but the device appeared to fail.


“They seemed to have some problem with the fact that my fingertips would sweat 
so they couldn’t get good readings,” he says. “I don’t think they got much from 
it.”

On about day 13 of Dahlin’s stay at The Residence the omens improved. He was 
granted a visit from two Swedish consular officials who inquired if he had been 
given any fruit – “Only one small bite of an apple,” the prisoner replied – 
then left.


Two nights later came a second positive signal. At about 3am a group of 
officers came into his cell and one, whom he knew as Mr Zhang, perched on the 
edge of his rock-hard mattress. “I realised something was happening,” Dahlin 
says.


The confession

Zhang told the activist he would need to pen “a self-criticism” in which he 
confessed to a series of crimes.


Crucially, Dahlin should admit that the human rights lawyers with whom he had 
worked were “criminals” and taking money from the National Endowment for 
Democracy, a US-funded non-profit which has been demonised in countries such as 
China and Russia as an instigator of colour revolutions.


“Even though they were not among our biggest funders, that was a very core 
point,” says Dahlin, who believes the attempt to link China Action to the 
endowment group was intended to help paint his group as a “hostile foreign 
force” that had been plotting to undermine the Communist party.


I would go from a sense of serene contentment to being exhilarated to being 
incredibly despondent

The following night Dahlin received a second visit. “We need one more thing,” 
the officer told him. “Let’s make a video.”

 Dahlin knew immediately what was being suggested.

Since Xi had taken office apparently forced televised confessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/11/televised-confessions-state-tv-china-social-control>
 had come back into vogue, used to humiliate a range of government foes 
includingGao Yu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/17/gao-yu-and-document-no-9-china-jails-journalist-for-leaking-state-secrets>
, a veteran journalist who was jailed for leaking a politically sensitive 
document, andCharles Xue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/aug/30/charles-xue-prostitution-confession-broadcast-video>
, an internet celebrity known for his online outspokenness on social and 
political issues.

Within hours Dahlin had been ordered to remove his prison uniform, don his 
normal clothes and was seated in a room opposite a glamorous female 
correspondent from the China Central Television, the state broadcaster. He was 
handed a set of seven or eight pre-written answers that had been typed on to a 
sheet of A4 paper.

“Prime time!” the activist says he thought as the camera began to roll. 
“Great!”

Dahlin, who had lost nearly 6kg since his detention began, says he immediately 
agreed to the recording, knowing it would accelerate his release and, more 
importantly, that of his girlfriend.


“I have been given good food, plenty of sleep and I have suffered no 
mistreatments of any kind,”he told his interviewer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/20/swedish-activist-peter-dahlin-paraded-on-china-state-tv-for-scripted-confession>
. “I have no complaints to make. I think my treatment has been fair.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwhbgVz4xKww&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwhbgVz4xKww>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwhbgVz4xKww&media=>
 The ‘confession’ of Peter Dahlin 
Dahlin says he tried to deflect blame from his Chinese associates by 
shouldering responsibility for his group’s activities.


He refused to label the Chinese lawyers he had worked with as “criminals” but 
admitted: “I have violated Chinese law through my activities here. I have 
caused harm to the Chinese government. I have hurt the feelings of the Chinese 
people.

“I apologise sincerely for this and I am very sorry that this ever happened,” 
he concluded before the camera was turned off.


The next day those comments were splashed across China’s party-controlled media
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/absolute-loyalty-how-xi-jinping-is-bringing-chinas-media-to-heel>
 with Xinhua, the country’s official news agency, using the “interview” to 
prove police had“smashed an illegal organisation 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-01/19/c_135025122.htm> that sponsored 
activities jeopardising China’s national security”.


Dahlin, Xinhua claimed, had been planted in the country by “western anti-China 
forces” bent on stirring opposition to the regime.


As a reward for his video confession Dahlin says he was given a cup of Nescafé 
instant coffee and a couple of cigarettes. Less than a week later he and Pan 
would be free.


Dahlin says the final stages of his three-week stint in a secret jail were 
among the hardest, even though he sensed his release was imminent. “I would go 
from a sense of serene contentment to being exhilarated to being incredibly 
despondent and thinking, ‘Fuck, this is it. I’m dead.’”

Goodbye to China

On the morning of 21 January he was told he had been granted medical parole 
and would soon be deported. Four days later, after being allowed a fleeting 
meeting with Pan, he was blindfolded and escorted back downstairs into The 
Residence’s garage.


Flanked by four burly guards in martial arts clothing, Dahlin was driven north 
towards Beijing’s international airport where he was told he was being expelled 
under the espionage act.

“Stay out of trouble now,” he recalls being told by one of the security 
agents, who escorted him on to Scandinavian Airlines Flight 996 to Copenhagen.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36f9d48919c13fecd7597a2579caeaa67832ed9%2F0_63_1429_1785%2F1429.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping's%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping%27s%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff36f9d48919c13fecd7597a2579caeaa67832ed9%2F0_63_1429_1785%2F1429.jpg>
 Peter Dahlin’s last view of China and his security minders 
Onboard the passenger jet Dahlin turned on his phone and snapped one final 
photograph of China: a surreptitious shot of the security officers who had 
placed him on his last flight out of the country.

The flight attendant in first class – police officials had used cash 
confiscated from Dahlin’s home to buy his ticket – handed him a glass of 
champagne.


“I killed it,” Dahlin says. “And then I had another glass. I had wine. I had a 
whisky. I had a beer and I had a coffee. All of the things I hadn’t had.”

I get weird-ass dreams that I never had before; anxiety; never being able to 
relax properly

Since touching down in Thailand in May, Dahlin says he has been gradually 
trying to rebuild his life.


After the trauma of 23 days in secret custody and seven years living with the 
daily stress of concealing his work, he says he is struggling to adapt to a 
more mundane routine and fears he may be suffering from post-traumatic stress 
disorder.

“I’ve gotten so used … to living a lie. It takes time to break that habit down.

“I get weird-ass dreams that I never had before; anxiety; never being able to 
relax properly. I can deal with it – but it takes time,” he says. “Your mind 
plays tricks on you. You hear things by the gate at night.”


One afternoon Dahlin remembers suffering a panic attack when he lost sight of 
Pan, who moved with him to Chiang Mai, in a supermarket and concluded she had 
been snatched by Chinese agents – as appears to have happened toa wave of 
Thailand-based dissidents and Communist party foes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/activist-li-xin-vanished-in-thailand--held-in-china-says-wife>
.


On another occasion Dahlin’s heart leapt when a group of Chinese men 
surrounded the couple at a local hotel. “I thought, ‘Fuck, is this it? Are they 
here to do something?’”


The here and now

Back in China, the situation is even gloomier. Recent weeks have seen a fresh 
round of detentions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/family-of-chinese-human-rights-lawyer-fear-he-may-have-been-secretly-detained>
 that suggest the crackdown on human rights lawyers has yet to run its course.

Dahlin’s former partner Wang remains in police custody awaiting trial. “It is 
not a happy story,” Dahlin says of his friend. “I think he would rather die 
than admit defeat in this case [by confessing to crimes he didn’t commit]. He 
is ready to be a martyr.”

Stein Ringen said he believed the world had failed to grasp the scale of the 
repression now playing out in China, still viewing the country as a “benevolent 
autocracy” when in fact it had mutated into “a very, very hard dictatorship 
which manages to look better than it is”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F478b011bba247178189d42ccc38ea332d58c2693%2F0_65_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping's%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20human%20rights%20activist%2C%20a%20secret%20prison%20and%20a%20tale%20from%20Xi%20Jinping%27s%20new%20China&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fhuman-rights-activist-peter-dahlin-secret-black-prison-xi-jinpings-new-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F478b011bba247178189d42ccc38ea332d58c2693%2F0_65_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Peter Dahlin near his home in Thailand. Photograph: Tom Phillips for the 
Guardian 
The academic said he envisioned no change of direction while Xi, who will 
reach the halfway point of his anticipated decade-long term in late 2017, was 
in power.

“Regrettably, I think the best we can hope for is that it doesn’t get worse … 
My money during Xi Jinping’s tenure would be that what we have now is pretty 
much what we are going to get – that is a hard dictatorship that is 
nevertheless tempered by some pragmatism … I’m completely bleak.”

“The alternatives I think are chaos – that the control breaks and that China 
falls again back into chaos which it has done again and again over the last 
couple of centuries – or that Xi Jinping’s tightening of controls continues and 
pulls the system into one of fully fledged totalitarianism.”

I see no reason why they would ever give me a visa to go back. Why would they?

On the veranda of his new home, surrounded by wind chimes, hanging planters, 
and the soothing sound of bird song, Dahlin reminisces about happier times.


He speaks of his admiration for the Chinese campaigners still willing to 
sacrifice their freedom to promote change and fondly recalls nights spent at 
his favourite Mongolian whisky bar in Beijing.


“You miss a few things because my exit consisted of going from solitary 
confinement into an airplane,” he says. “I left Beijing with a small bag, three 
books, two changes of clothes, some hard drives and a laptop.

“You do seven years of something … and now it is all gone: your work, whatever 
you have accomplished, your clothing, your furniture, my cats, my friends.”

But with no political thaw in sight the activist said he doubted he would ever 
be able to return to the country he once dreamed of transforming.

“I see no reason why they would ever give me a visa to go back. Why would 
they?”

“I think the only reason I go back is after the government falls. And I’m not 
sure that is going to happen in my lifetime.”

 