
Was the UK supreme court’s judgment last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/26/supreme-court-clears-way-release-secret-prince-charles-letters-black-spider-memos>
 allowing the Guardian to publish letters written to ministers by the Prince of 
Wales a “problematic” case?

It certainly caused problems for the judges who heard it over a 10-year 
period. They disagreed over whether to uphold the attorney general’s veto on a 
freedom of information request made by the reporter Rob Evans. As Inoted at the 
time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/26/prince-charles-letters-case-reinforces-profound-constitutional-principles>
, Lord Wilson even accused his fellow supreme court justices of undermining 
parliamentary sovereignty.

Ignore David Cameron's corruption claims, judge tells jury in bribery case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/11/ignore-david-camerons-corruption-claims-judge-tells-jury-in-bribery-case>
I don’t regard this ruling as problematic in the sense of transgressing the 
proper limits of the judicial role. And yet that’s exactly how the judgment in 
Evans v Attorney General is seen by theJudicial Power Project 
<http://judicialpowerproject.org.uk>, a small team of lawyers supported by the 
Policy Exchange thinktank. Evans is one of50 such cases 
<http://judicialpowerproject.org.uk/50-problematic-cases/> included this week 
in a list compiled by the project from suggestions it had solicited.

The thinking behind the project is that the judges have gone too far. Or, as 
its website puts it, “our concern is that the judicial role is expanding in 
ways that threaten constitutional self-government and the rule of law”. This 
can be seen from the tendentious way it has summarised the Evans case:
 “The supreme court ignores the limits of the judicial role by rewriting the 
Freedom of Information Act to effectively remove the power to prevent the 
publication of information that the UK parliament had conferred on the attorney 
general.”

But Mark Elliott <https://publiclawforeveryone.com/about-the-author/>, 
professor of public law at the University of Cambridge, prefers analternative 
reading 
<https://publiclawforeveryone.com/2016/05/09/anisminic-axa-evans-and-nicklinson-judicial-powers-50-problematic-cases-and-the-contestability-of-the-proper-judicial-review/>
 of the judgment:
 “The supreme court interpreted the ‘ministerial veto’ power in the Freedom of 
Information Act in the light of the constitutional principles of the rule of 
law and the separation of powers. The court concluded that the legislation, 
properly interpreted, sanctioned executive override of the judgment of a 
superior court of record only in very limited circumstances.” 
Elliott has written 
<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2621451> a lengthy but 
rewarding analysis of the Guardian’s “constitutional blockbuster” case for the 
journal Public Law. He makes the fundamental point that if parliament doesn’t 
like this, or any other judgment, it can always overturn it – so long as 
parliament makes its intentions entirely clear.

But – and Elliott makes this point too – a case can also be listed by the 
project as problematic because it does not go far enough.Liversidge v Anderson 
<http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1941/1.html> was the famous ruling by the 
law lords in 1941, during the darkest days of the war, on the home secretary’s 
powers to detain without trial anyone he reasonably believed to have been “of 
hostile origin or associations”.

The judgment is remembered for Lord Atkin’s powerful dissent: “I protest, even 
if I do it alone, against a strained construction put on words with the effect 
of giving an uncontrolled power of imprisonment to the minister.” But, as the 
project says, “the actual decision of the majority of the law lords showed 
excessive deference to the executive’s wide discretionary powers in wartime”.

The 50 cases complied by the project include some that appear to be too 
European for its liking. There’sHirst 
<http://www.bailii.org/eu/cases/ECHR/2005/681.html>: “The Strasbourg court 
stretches the ‘living instrument’ approach to interpretation to breaking point 
by holding that the UK’s blanket ban on prisoner voting is contrary to the 
ECHR.”

But also Benkharbouche <http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2015/33.html>: 
“In a case involving claims of mistreatment brought by foreign workers in 
embassies in London, the court of appeal determined that article 47 of the EU 
Charter (right to effective remedies) … resulted in the disapplication of 
primary UK legislation”. It did indeed; but that was surely what parliament had 
intended.

These 50 cases are also problematic in the sense that we may argue over 
whether the judges reached the right result. Take the well-known example of
Rookes v Barnard <http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKHL/1964/1.html>, decided by 
the law lords in 1964. The project summarises it thus:
 “With no regard for the political sensitivities surrounding the regulation of 
strike action, the law lords developed the economic tort of intimidation, the 
effect of which was to bypass the statutory immunity for organisers of strike 
action. Parliament enacted the Trade Disputes Act 1965 to reverse the decision.”
Fine. But compare that with Marina Litvinenko’s successful challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/11/alexander-litvinenko-widow-court-victory-inquiry>
 two years ago to the home secretary’s refusal to grant the public inquiry that 
wouldestablish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/alexander-litvinenko-was-probably-murdered-on-personal-orders-of-putin>
 how her husband had been murdered by Russian agents in London.

With the benefit of hindsight, we can see that the high court got it exactly 
right. But the project’s summary says dismissively that the judges “departed 
from the traditional reach of judicial review for no reason other than that 
they disagreed with the minister’s decision”.

Michael Ratner, attorney for WikiLeaks and Julian Assange, dies at 72
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/11/michael-ratner-wikileaks-julian-assange-attorney-dies>
Nobody wants to go back to the days of Lord Denning’s “palm tree justice” 
<http://ubplj.org/index.php/dlj/article/viewFile/283/311>, when the law applied 
by his court turned out to be pretty much whatever he wanted the law to be. But 
nobody wants to go back to the time when the law turned out to be pretty much 
what the government wanted it to be, either.

The law, as applied by the courts, needs to be certain and predictable. But we 
don’t need the sort of judges who are too frightened to do anything for the 
first time. It seems from the project’s summaries that many of the cases have 
been included because the judges who decided them tried not only to follow the 
law but also to deliver justice. In my book that’s qualifies you for the hall 
of fame, not shame.
 