
Since in 2016 turning on the news invariably resulted in a rush of negativity, 
it’s fair to say that by 31 December we were all fed up with the prevailing 
sense of doom. This perhaps explains why a story – the authenticity of which 
has been questioned – about a Japanese husband who didn’t speak to his wife for 
20 years was reported as a bizarre-yet-comical, and ultimately cheery, item. 
Better that than to see it as an example ofcoercive control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/28/domestic-violence-law-coercive-control-abuse-partners-courts>
, something violence against women’s charities have been highlighting for 
decades.

Last December, ironically rather close to the dawn of the year just gone, some 
types of controlling domestic abusebecame a crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/29/domestic-abuse-law-controlling-coercive-behaviour>
 in the UK, punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment. For many though, 
their understanding of “domestic violence” remains limited to its physical 
manifestations.

Are you in a coercive relationship like Helen’s in The Archers? Here’s how to 
tell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/coercive-reationship-helen-tichener-archers-domestic-abuse>
Thus, the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4078242/Sulking-husband-went-20-YEARS-without-speaking-wife.html>
 andthe Sun 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2509206/father-of-three-refused-to-speak-to-his-wife-for-20-years-because-he-was-sulking/>
 are happy to report on what they are saying is a true story of a 
father-of-three from Nara in southern Japan, who has continued to live with his 
wife despite only ever responding to her attempts at conversation with a nod or 
grunt. That this might be less a comedy and more a peep into how coercive 
control operates isn’t dwelled upon in these articles.

The drive to cover it at all is based on this being viewed as a strange but 
harmless story of the ups and downs inherent in marriage. Nowhere is time given 
to ponder what, if this story is genuine, would be the grim reality for a woman 
who was treated like this. Neither is there consideration of what levels of 
emotional resilience had been worn away to make her remain with a man who 
grunted responses to her despite them raising an 18-, 21- and 25-year-old. Or 
to consider the emotional impact of the children seeing their father demean 
their mother in such a way. The story is instead presented under the jokey 
headlineThe Incredible Sulk 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4078242/Sulking-husband-went-20-YEARS-without-speaking-wife.html>
, without understanding the irony of this pun, with its allusions to explosive 
rage and violence, and relying on tired gendered stereotypes of the miserable 
husband and long-suffering wife.

The Mail’s take on the story (a version one commentator believes is an example 
of fake news and poor fact checking), has been shared 17,000 times. If anyone 
cares to they can watch the couple meeting and talking at the place where it’s 
said that they had their first date. Footage comes courtesy of the TV show 
their 18-year-old son had written into, telling of how he had never heard his 
parents in conversation together.

As is typical, the wife is blamed for the abuse she has suffered, while her 
husband admits that he was “jealous” that she was “very involved and busy in 
raising the kids”. Laughter can be heard when the husband says he intends to 
speak to his wife after their filmed reconciliation, to which she says she is 
“grateful”. Again – the urge to see the funny side of things. Reporting like 
this, which fails to acknowledge the humiliation this woman may have suffered, 
or to accept that the jealousy that fuelled the sulk is not a sign of love but 
an example of coercive control, shows how far we have yet to go in publicising 
the complexities of domestic violence.

Shocking domestic abuse statistics don’t show the real picture: it’s even 
worse | Kate Moss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/domestic-abuse-statistics-ons-worse-education>
Psychological coercion is central to how an abuser maintains their power and 
yet there persists the focus on physical violence. Trying to turn a story that 
should make us question the intricacies and impact of such behaviour into a 
light news item merely perpetuates the problem. It means that the impact on a 
person who is in a relationship that is emotionally and physically threatening 
is minimised. And under such conditions it is far easier to believe survivors 
are catastrophising their perception of reality. These are the types of 
arguments perpetrators make to those who they are abusing in order to justify 
their abuse. It is an effective tool for silencing victims.

Coercive control is, thankfully, now on the radar. Last year’s domestic 
violence storyline onThe Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/04/the-guardian-view-on-domestic-abuse-truth-fiction-and-the-archers>
 made listeners aware that it is more complicated than looking out for bruises, 
and a wider understanding of the issue can only be a good thing. Yet simplistic 
assessments of domestic violence situations which see the only problem as the 
woman’s unwillingness to “just leave” continue to fail victims. Instead what is 
needed is greater appreciation of how coercive control works. That, I’m afraid, 
is not cheery news but it will go some way towards helping those suffering to 
be seen and heard.
 