
A shadow is cast long upon New York by the ghost of Robert Moses, the titan 
“master builder” of 20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/23/the-power-broker-robert-moses-and-the-fall-of-new-york-robert-caro-review>
th century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/23/the-power-broker-robert-moses-and-the-fall-of-new-york-robert-caro-review>
 whose almost unrivalled power to chart his vision of urban renewal fostered 
the car-dominant and public transport-starved metropolis that is, for better or 
worse, one of Gotham’s most enduring legacies.


 But pedestrianism among advocates and urban planners in the new, young 
century has been on the ascent in global cities far and wide, with many pushing 
for more restrictions on cars in the interests of bipeds and cyclists.

That was part of thinking behind the Shared Streets initiative, a five-hour 
long event over the weekend. It saw the city demarcate some 60 blocks of 
Manhattan’s oldest neighbourhood as part of an urban geographical experiment 
meant to alter the often-fractious dynamic between motorists and pedestrians 
that is the unwritten law of the concrete jungle.

Police officers stood with signs announcing Shared Streets 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/dot/summerstreets/html/sharedstreets/shared-streets.shtml>
 at various checkpoints along the border of the Financial District, east to 
west from Broadway to Water Street, and north to south from the Brooklyn Bridge 
to the Battery.

Within that area, pedestrians were encouraged to treat the roads like 
pavements, and cars were told to keep their speeds at 5mph or below. Mixed in 
along the way were city-sponsored garden games, outdoor vendor booths at 
various locations, and recommended city tours.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fnew-york-manhattan-car-free-shared-streets-financial-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29098895a417468bcd890a037ff1107329e0dd15%2F0_4_668_812%2F668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20New%20York%3F%20Manhattan's%20oldest%20neighbourhood%20goes%20car-free%2C%20kind%20of%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fnew-york-manhattan-car-free-shared-streets-financial-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20New%20York%3F%20Manhattan%27s%20oldest%20neighbourhood%20goes%20car-free%2C%20kind%20of%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fnew-york-manhattan-car-free-shared-streets-financial-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29098895a417468bcd890a037ff1107329e0dd15%2F0_4_668_812%2F668.jpg>
 The 60 Shared Streets blocks 
Officials with the New York City Department of Transportation based the event 
in part on recentcar-free days held in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/27/all-blue-skies-in-paris-as-city-centre-goes-car-free-for-first-time>
 and Bogotá, as well as the most recent Earth Day when New York restricted car 
use in three Manhattan neighbourhoods and encouraged citizens to ditch driving.

The initiative played heavily on the Financial District’s history and urban 
geography. In front of small crowd of assembled onlookers in front of the 
historic Fraunces Tavern and accompanied by a fife-and-drum quartet decked out 
in full colonial regalia, city officials ushered in the event with a brief set 
of remarks.

“This is the first time that we think something of this scale and size 
certainly has been done in New York or any other American city,” saidNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City Department of 
Transportation commissioner, Polly Trottenberg, announcing the event.

“Our streets are for everyone,” said public advocate Letitia James. “And 
before there were cars we were all cyclists and pedestrians, commuters and 
explorers, in this infinitely marvellous city. And today we try to return to 
that period.”

Hamburg, Helsinki, Madrid and Oslo have also recently pushed for sizeable 
car-free zones in their city centres.

Advocates argue that restricting car usage in cities is not only important in 
the broader fight to curb carbon emissions and greenhouses gases, but as an 
important mechanism to take the load off overstretched public transport systems.

New York is particularly at risk on that front, with its subway systems 
adversely impacted by record usage rates, desperately needed infrastructure 
updates, and the looming close of the L Train from Brooklyn to Manhattan, which 
will impact the commutes of thousands of New Yorkers.

Judging by the results of Saturday’s event, it’s an idea that is likely to 
find many supporters, but whose specific scheme is likely to be an evolving 
process of in terms of how the city tries embrace car-free solutions.

For those expecting a replay of Times Square, which has been blocked off for 
cars since 2009, there was little similarity to thatbastion of 
tourist-inundated cacophony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/01/new-york-taskforce-topless-times-square-performers>
, which has been praised by advocates for its embrace of pedestrianism, but 
criticised by others, including mayor Bill de Blasio, for its carnival 
atmosphere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fnew-york-manhattan-car-free-shared-streets-financial-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb0e9987a32854aa3a8296ee235d3e522bee34d%2F0_34_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20New%20York%3F%20Manhattan's%20oldest%20neighbourhood%20goes%20car-free%2C%20kind%20of%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fnew-york-manhattan-car-free-shared-streets-financial-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20New%20York%3F%20Manhattan%27s%20oldest%20neighbourhood%20goes%20car-free%2C%20kind%20of%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fnew-york-manhattan-car-free-shared-streets-financial-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb0e9987a32854aa3a8296ee235d3e522bee34d%2F0_34_5315_3189%2F5315.jpg>
 Times Square has been blocked to cars since 2009. Photograph: Siegfried 
Layda/Getty Images 
For one, there were fewer people at Shared Streets, a fact the might be 
partially explained by the weather, as the heat index exceeded 100 degrees.

But the streets were far from empty.

“I think it’s really cool to have time where you can just be on a bike and not 
worry about cars,” said Eve Wool, a city resident who works for a mental health 
initiative. “Even if it’s just for the whole idea that a lot of folks who bike 
in New York City I feel like are always so cramped.”

But she also said the she didn’t know if the new initiative would be totally 
utilised.

“I don’t know how many people know about Shared Streets, it’s newer so it’s 
still gaining popularity,” she added, after saying she was more aware of the 
related Citi Summer Streets initiative.

Citi Summer Streets 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/dot/summerstreets/html/home/home.shtml>, which is 
happening on three consecutive Saturdays in August, is the hugely popular event 
that the city first began nine years ago. The event, which coincided on 
Saturday with Shared Streets, closed car traffic from Park Avenue near Central 
Park down along more than 60 blocks for five hours, allowing cyclists and 
casual strollers unimpeded, avenue-wide access.
 Cars were limted to 5mph during the Shared Streets event. Photograph: Tom 
Kutsch 
To the many people who ventured out into lower Manhattan during Shared Streets 
on Saturday, several expressed mild befuddlement about the programme, despite 
being largely supportive of the overarching goal of car reduction.

“I didn’t know about that,” said Casey Levy, a resident of Manhattan, about 
Shared Streets. “What’s going on down here?” he asked, more than two hours 
after Shared Streets had officially begun. “I wouldn’t want to share a street 
with a vehicle, even if he’s supposed to be going slower,” he said, after the 
idea of the initiative was explained to him.

“It’s confusing,” said Bill Barlow, who lives in New Jersey and was biking 
downtown, about the programme’s concept. He said restricting car usage for 
bikers was a worthy goal, but suggested it made more sense to go “all or 
nothing” in terms of whether cars should be allowed or restricted.

Several police officers suggested that the area was to be mostly car-free, 
except people who lived or worked in the area, yet cars regularly drove in the 
area without much pushback and, though sparse, car traffic routinely violated 
the suggested 5mph speed limit. Several motorists expressed misgivings over the 
occasional pedestrian who tried to share the streets.

Still, taking motorists off the streets is a welcome development for the 
throngs of bikers in a city that now boasts more than 750,000 bicyclists.

All-blue skies in Paris as city centre goes car-free for first time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/27/all-blue-skies-in-paris-as-city-centre-goes-car-free-for-first-time>
“If you have wide open spaces and are able spend time outside, that’s a good 
direction to go,” said John Ryan, a Financial District resident who works as a 
consultant, about the effort to restrict cars and encourage walking. “I think 
it would be cool though if it was more obvious, it would be cool if it was more 
centralised as well,” he said, before hopping on his Citi bike.

The city has not said if it will repeat the Shared Streets. For now, officials 
say they are going to assess surveys from businesses and participants in the 
area, as well as monitor traffic and pedestrian data from the day to see 
whether it should be repeated or expanded in the future.

“It’s a significant step in the right direction,” said Paul Steeley White, 
executive director of Transportation Alternatives, a nonprofit organisation 
that advocates for pedestrians and cyclists.

But he questioned whether the initiative was bold enough.

“Without question a car-free regulation is preferable and would absolutely 
work better and would reduce some of the ambiguity,” he said. “It’s still 
worthwhile and we’re glad the city is doing it.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 