
Cybercriminals do stuff online, so punish them by taking away their internet 
access. It’s as simple as taking a crowbar from a burglar. Or is it? Some 
outside-the-box thinking by a top cop this week has triggered a debate among 
cybersecurity types about young offending and punishment.

Ch Supt Gavin Thomas, the president of the Police Superintendents’ Association 
of England and Wales, suggested in an interview that wifi jammers – devices 
worn on the ankle or wrist to block the internet – could serve as a smarter 
punishment for cybercrimes than prison. “We have got to stop using 19th-century 
punishments to deal with 21st-century crimes,”he said 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2017/01/07/teenage-criminals-should-fitted-wifi-jammers-rather-going-prison/>
.

Few would dispute that, but there are some issues with jammers. First, they are
illegal under the Wireless Telegraphy Act 2006 
<https://www.ofcom.org.uk/spectrum/radio-spectrum-and-the-law/jammers>, so we’d 
need to work on that. Second, they wouldn’t work.

“Although we desperately need alternatives to prison, using wifi jammers is 
both technically infeasible and unreliable,” says Cal Leeming, who went to 
prison for hacking as a teenager and is now a security consultant. “Even if you 
did manage to implement it without breaking nearby connectivity, which in 
itself would be very difficult because of how radio works, it could be easily 
circumvented by using a cable.”

Darren Martyn, an Irish convicted hacker turned security researcher (he was 
part of the LulzSec group), adds: “This would cause huge disruption to anyone 
within jamming range of the ‘tagged’ person.”

Legal and technical hurdles notwithstanding, would an enforced screen break – 
a digital grounding of the sort increasingly issued by parents 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsround/22354743> – help solve the broader problem? 
Prof Mary Aiken <http://www.maryaiken.com/>, a cyber-psychologist at University 
College Dublin, is sceptical. If the criminal justice system is struggling to 
keep pace with tech, the lag in education is the graver threat, she says. “It 
is going to be very difficult if not impossible to prosecute our way out of 
problems such as youth hacking,” she explains. “What is required is a 
fundamental re-evaluation of the impact of technology on developing youth.”

In Youth Pathways into Cybercrime (pdf) 
<http://www.mdx.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0025/245554/Pathways-White-Paper.pdf>
, a report published in October by Middlesex University, Aiken and her 
colleagues recommend not thwarting the digital skills of these young people, 
but giving them safer outlets.

Jessica Barker, a cybersecurity consultant who runs the cyber.uk 
<http://cyber.uk/> website, agrees. She cites research by Sonia Livingstone, 
who leads theParenting for a Digital Future 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/parenting4digitalfuture/2016/07/06/what-and-how-should-parents-be-advised-about-screen-time/>
 research project at the London School of Economics. It suggests that denying 
screen time or web access can be counterproductive, whether we’re talking about 
naughty kids or young criminals. “Children who are blocked access are more 
likely to engage in risky behaviour because they will find another way to 
access the internet that is unsupervised,” Barker says.
 