
England is a land of jokesters and rhymesters, where nothing is ever quite as 
it seems, even the weather managing to pull off a daily fast one, with double 
bluffs making for foggy conditions where none had been forecast, and low fronts 
wrecking mariners in a sudden squall.

Some of this uncertainty, indeed, is retailed by the Ancient Mariner himself; 
and the vagaries of the weather occupy much of the mood of the Romantic 
movement in poetry: it is Peter Ackroyd's achievement that he has shown that 
pseudonymous medieval monk, Thomas Rowley (who was in fact the young Thomas 
Chatterton in disguise) as the precursor of all those curses of the English 
modern age - climate, scenery and heritage.

The structure of the book is as complex and doubling-back as the subject 
demands, with Charles Wychwood, the bewitched poet of our times, haunted by 
henna-haired Chatterton (himself best known, since the demise of interest in 
his middle-ages forgeries, as a beautiful suicide, painted by Henry Wallis in 
1856, with George Meredith as the model for 'the marvellous boy').

Many of the characters in Wychwood's quest for the truth about Chatterton, 
after the almost accidental acquiring of a portrait of what purports to be the 
poet in his own middle age, have an other-worldly air, as if to show that 16th 
century London, nearly all obscured though it may be, lives on in fact; the 
effect, strangely, as with the grotesque booksellers Mr and Mrs Leno, who 
supply Wychwood with the picture; and the Bristol 'friend' of Mr Joynson, 
printer and bookseller, is as if Angus Wilson's characters had come startlingly 
to life.

The most successful grotesque in this gallery of dolls is Harriet Scrope, a 
novelist who is herself discovered to be a plagiarist, and her relationship 
with Miss Sarah Tilt, a blocked scribbler of a book on the art of Death, Tilt 
bringing in another angle of fakery in the art gallery where Wychwood's wife, a 
colourless and oppressed character works. Scrope, indeed, with her outrageous 
gin-supping, swearing and Cockney imitations, seems more of a man than Wychwood 
himself; and it's tempting to wonder whether every single element in the book 
isn't really its reverse, so that Chatterton stays alive and poems said to be 
Blake are written by the brilliant forger; and all this to prove that the 
portrayal of the real takes more invention than any make-believe.

Chatterton suffers, if anything, from the somewhat deadly voices of the 
living. Scenes between the artist Wallis and the about-to-abscond Ellen 
Meredith, have the greatest power and imagination in the book. But then, to the 
English, the past does always sound more real.
 