
James Joyce’s first novel, A Portrait of the Artist As a Young Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/24/james-joyce-portrait-of-the-artist-john-crace-digested-classics>
, was published in the United States on 29 December 1916. Although Joyce did 
not conceive his novel as a commentary on the events of that turbulent year, 
the centenary of its publication seems to me a curiously apt way to bring 2016 
to a close, given the manner in which the issues of national identity Joyce 
raises have come back into vogue in thisyear of Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/brexit-disaster-decades-in-the-making>
.

Is James Joyce's Ulysses the hardest novel to finish?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jan/13/is-james-joyce-ulysses-the-hardest-novel-to-finish>
A Portrait tracks the life of budding writer Stephen Dedalus (aka Joyce) prior 
to his departure fromIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> for 
the continent in 1904. The book’s first four chapters deal with Joyce’s 
childhood, his agonised wrestle with religion and the emergence of his proudly 
independent artistic personality. Its concluding chapter, set during Joyce’s 
student years, recreates some of the arguments about Irish identity that formed 
a backdrop to the Easter Rising of 1916.

Growing up in late 19th-century Ireland, Joyce perceived that “nets” of 
“nationality, language and religion” were flung at his soul, “to hold it back 
from flight”. He was determined to free himself from such restraints and “to 
forge in the smithy of my soul” Ireland’s “uncreated conscience”. The very 
things Joyce saw as restrictive nets spurred contemporaries of his, such as 
Patrick Pearse, into action atEaster 1916 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/01/easter-rising-century-ireland-1916>
.

Joyce was coming into his own at a time of burgeoning political interest in 
Ireland’s cultural identity, something that had not been a feature of the 
pragmatic, parliamentary nationalism of Daniel O’Connell and his successors who 
represented Irish interests at Westminster throughout the 19th century. Joyce’s 
father’s political hero,Charles Stewart Parnell 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/parnell_charles.shtml>, had 
fallen from grace in 1890, a political earthquake memorably dramatised in A 
Portrait’s Christmas dinner scene, where Ireland’s moralistic Catholic bishops 
are blamed for Parnell’s demise. New cultural/political movements were on the 
rise at the turn of the century – the Gaelic League dedicated to the revival of 
the Irish language and the Gaelic Athletic Association with its mission to 
promoteGaelic football and hurling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/apr/15/gaelic-football-selling-games-soul-to-sky>
. Many of those who took part in the Easter Rising were nursed into public life 
through cultural activity.

The young Joyce sniffed a narrowness of vision among his contemporaries and 
was having none of it

In the concluding chapter of A Portrait, the author is urged to conform to an 
emerging Irish zeitgeist. “Try to be one of us,” he is told. “In your heart you 
are an Irishman but your pride is too powerful.” While many of his 
contemporaries “worshipped the sorrowful legend of Ireland”, as he put it, he 
was forward-looking, wanting to embrace “the loveliness which has not yet come 
into the world”.

The young Joyce sniffed a narrowness of vision among his contemporaries and 
was having none of it, as a sarcastic diary entry at the end of A Portrait 
illustrates: “John Francis Mulrennan has just returned from the west of 
Ireland. European and Asiatic papers please copy.”

Joyce, self-consciously cosmopolitan and European, had his misgivings about 
the direction in which Yeats had taken Irish literature, with his focus on 
Celtic mythology and rural life. Joyce made more of an effort at learning 
Ibsen’s Norwegian than Ireland’s native language. Years later in Ulysses, he 
devoted much of the Cyclops episode to lampooning the supposedly one-eyed 
excesses of “the Citizen”, his caricatured epitome of early 20th-century 
nationalism.

James Joyce spent the last 37 years of his life in Trieste, Rome, Paris and 
Zurich, where he died in 1941, but it was the Dublin he left behind and not 
those continental cities that fired his imagination. Viewing it from exile gave 
him a distinctive take on the land of his birth. The three main characters in 
his novels were all set apart by their foreign associations – Stephen Dedalus 
(Greek name), Leopold Bloom (Hungarian, Jewish background) and his wife, Molly 
(born in Gibraltar). The character in A Portrait who connects it with the 
events of 1916 in Ireland is, ironically, the ebullient internationalist 
McCann. He was based on one of Joyce’s contemporaries at university, the 
radical pacifist and suffragistFrancis Sheehy-Skeffington 
<http://www.easter1916.ie/index.php/people/a-z/francis-sheehy-skeffington/>, 
who was summarily executed by a British officer during Easter week, even though 
he had taken no part in the rising. In the novel, McCann rebukes the 
protagonist and budding writer Dedalus for being “an anti-social being” whereas 
he is for “liberty and equality among all classes and sexes in the United 
States of Europe of the future”. Now where have I heard those words before?

In A Portrait, Joyce presents his youthful self as torn between various 
identities, devoutly Catholic and free-thinking, Irish and European. Although 
Joyce spent most of his life outside of Ireland, it would be wrong to conclude 
that he was uninterested in Irish affairs. In a series of essays he wrote for a 
local newspaper in Trieste, his analysis of Irish history comes across as being 
within the nationalist mainstream.

Among the political figures of his time, the one he had most regard for was 
Arthur Griffith 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/easterrising/profiles/po07.shtml>, 
founder of the originalSinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> movement, who advocated 
abstention from Westminster and a dual monarchy. From his years in Trieste, a 
city then in Austria-Hungary, Joyce knew a lot about the multinational empire 
he gently admired, and in Ulysses he jokingly maintains that his fictional 
character Leopold Bloom had given Griffith the idea of Ireland seeking to 
emulate Hungary’s success in securing a form of independence in 1867.

Why, 100 years after the Easter Rising, are Irish women still fighting? | 
Olivia O’Leary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/25/100-years-after-easter-rising-irish-women-still-fighting-gender-equality>
At the end of a year shaped for me by Ireland’s commemoration of the Easter 
Rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/27/easter-rising-centenary-to-be-marked-in-dublin-gpo-amid-heavy-security>
 and the British debate about Europe, I find in Joyce, the European Irishman, 
an accommodating reference point. Our 1916 centenary commemoration was 
scrupulously inclusive as we acknowledged the complexities of that year of war 
and insurrection.

Although his restless imagination would surely find fault with aspects of 
today’s world, I like to think that Joyce would approve of the fact that his 
homeland is now at ease with a pluralist Irish identity comfortably anchored in
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. It seems right at the 
close of a troubled 2016 to celebrate Joyce’s literary achievement and the 
broadmindedness with which he imbued his principal characters, Stephen Dedalus 
and Leopold Bloom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Feurope-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man-ireland-brexit-easter-rising-1916%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F096545d332136fc6550d600ca89524612f25077e%2F46_197_2743_1646%2F2743.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20portrait%20of%20Europe%20as%20an%20old%20friend%2C%20by%20James%20Joyce%20%7C%20Daniel%20Mulhall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Feurope-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man-ireland-brexit-easter-rising-1916%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20portrait%20of%20Europe%20as%20an%20old%20friend%2C%20by%20James%20Joyce%20%7C%20Daniel%20Mulhall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Feurope-james-joyce-a-portrait-of-the-artist-as-a-young-man-ireland-brexit-easter-rising-1916%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F096545d332136fc6550d600ca89524612f25077e%2F46_197_2743_1646%2F2743.jpg>
 ‘Joyce devoted much of the Cyclops episode of Ulysses to lampooning early 
20th-century nationalism.’ Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer  