
It is the best of times for reissues of Dickens classics as this year marks 
the 200th anniversary of his birth. With one of the most famous opening 
sentences in history,A Tale of Two Cities ranks among the novelist's finest, 
anatomising the conflict between democratic and aristocratic principles during 
the French revolution.

An "intensely cold mist" covers the land "like an evil spirit". After 18 years 
as a political prisoner, Doctor Manette is released and reunited with his 
daughter, the beguiling Lucie, who captivates the affections of two suitors, an 
aristocratic Frenchman named Darnay and the English lawyer Carton. This tale of 
two cities (London and Paris) is also a tale of three lovers, with a plot-twist 
of self-sacrifice inspired by Wilkie Collins's playThe Frozen Deep, in which 
Dickens acted.

Epic in historical scale, it is also an intimate book, showing how the 
personal and political intermingle and what the causes and effects of violence 
are, including the struggle to retain one's sanity under systemic abuse. 
Dickens focuses throughout on two sets of relationships: between father and 
daughter, and between subject and state. Those facing the guillotine do not 
hope to gain the "pity of the people", but it is a measure of Dickens's skill 
that he makes us feel sympathy towards them.

This taut, atmospheric novel initially appeared as weekly instalments in 1859. 
Its insights remain relevant: "Crush humanity out of shape once more, under 
similar hammers, and it will twist itself into the same tortured forms. Sow the 
same seed of rapacious licence and oppression ever again, and it will surely 
yield the same fruit according to its kind".
 