
Deep beneath the 14 islands which make up Stockholm, channelling the Baltic 
Sea into a collection of waterways, lies the world’s longest art exhibition. 
Starting at T-Centralen in the city centre before weaving out for 70 miles 
around the outer reaches of the commuter belt, the Stockholm metro acts as a 
continuous journey through the annals of five decades of European art history.


Through paintings, carvings, sculptures and mosaics, as the metro expanded 
outwards, it captured everything from political upheaval to post-modernism, 
while simultaneously reflecting Stockholm’s long-held fascination with the 
subterranean. This is, after all, a city which built the world’s deepest hotel, 
500 feet below ground, in the murky tunnels ofan old silver mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2013/feb/22/worlds-most-unusual-hotels-in-pictures?picture=404491765>
.

The idea of creating art in the metro stemmed from a debate which had raged 
since the end of the 19th century. Many felt art needed to be more accessible 
to the wider community instead of being a culture enjoyed solely in the 
boutique salons of Sweden’s elite.

It became reality in the late 1950s as part of a new political ideology known 
asFolkhemmet or “The People’s Home,” led by the Swedish Social Democratic 
party. While most ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> was 
still recovering economically from the second world war, Sweden’s neutrality 
and high income-tax rates meant the Social Democrats had an abundance of money 
to fulfil their visions.Folkhemmet introduced a nationalised health service and 
a welfare state to Sweden for the first time, and instigated something of a 
cultural boom.

“The Social Democrats felt that art should not be isolated, but it should be 
part of Stockholm,” says Birgitta Muhr, a sculptor commissioned to work on the 
Högdalen station in 2002. “Stockholm was expanding at the time, with many 
people moving to the suburbs for work. A subway system needed to be created to 
connect the city, and they wanted art to come to every man and woman. There 
were lotteries in which you could win a collection of prints from a famous 
painter for a cheap price, and then they launched a competition to find artists 
to paint and create sculptures for T-Centralen.”

I hoped [the tulips] would plant a smile in the minds of the people waiting 
alongside them, even if just for a moment
Brigitta Muhr  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fstockholm-metro-tour-world-longest-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444732859823%2Fa0cabb7d-e0be-4f94-99b5-3907841bf06d-2060x1330.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tour%20of%20the%20Stockholm%20metro%20%E2%80%93%20the%20world's%20longest%20art%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fstockholm-metro-tour-world-longest-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20tour%20of%20the%20Stockholm%20metro%20%E2%80%93%20the%20world%27s%20longest%20art%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fstockholm-metro-tour-world-longest-art-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F13%2F1444732859823%2Fa0cabb7d-e0be-4f94-99b5-3907841bf06d-2060x1330.jpeg>
 Brigitta Muhr’s 2.5m tall bronze tulips at Högdalen station. Photograph: Luis 
Rodriguez 
A similar project had been launched on the Moscow metro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/may/14/moscow-metro-80-anniversary-city-history-in-pictures>
 20 years earlier but, rather than pay homage to the imperial, primarily 
decorative art of Stalinist Russia, the original artists selected to work on 
Stockholm’s central cluster of subway stations found themselves inspired by the 
minimalist and abstract creations found increasingly in Paris and New York.

Among them was a painter and sculptor called Siri Derkert, a former leader of 
theSvenska Kvinnors Vänsterförbund, the Swedish Women’s Left-Wing Association. 
Derkert was commissioned to work on Östermalmstorg in the early 1960s, a 
station designed to serve as a shelter in case of nuclear attack. With cold war 
tensions reaching a peak surrounding the Cuban missile crisis of 1962, it 
seemed a realistic possibility.

An active campaigner and advocate for peace, women’s rights and the green 
movement, Derkert chose to insert her own messages into her creation. The walls 
of Östermalmstorg are filled with charcoal coloured drawings, drilled into the 
cement using a special sand-blasting technique to highlight them in an almost 
luminescent glow, 100 feet below ground. They show key female figures from 
history such as British writer Virginia Woolf and the mathematician Hypatia, 
who taught philosophy and astronomy in Ancient Greece, interspersed by repeated 
musical transcriptions from the French revolutionary song La Marseillaise.

As the 1970s dawned, a new wave of the metro was created to be filled with a 
far angrier, more radical artwork. At Solna Centrum, the blood-red night sky 
daubed across the roof of this cave-like station contrasts sharply with a 
spruce forest running for almost 1km along the walls. Painted by Anders Åberg 
and Karl-Olav Bjork in 1975, this almost demonic landscape has become of one 
the most iconic images of the Stockholm metro, a social statement against the 
rural depopulation and deforestation taking place inSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> at the time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fstockholm-metro-tour-world-longest-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8abbd08cb0ab3d7ebdfc862ab2801e947c4e69b6%2F0_313_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tour%20of%20the%20Stockholm%20metro%20%E2%80%93%20the%20world's%20longest%20art%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fstockholm-metro-tour-world-longest-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20tour%20of%20the%20Stockholm%20metro%20%E2%80%93%20the%20world%27s%20longest%20art%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fstockholm-metro-tour-world-longest-art-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8abbd08cb0ab3d7ebdfc862ab2801e947c4e69b6%2F0_313_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Per Olof Ultvedt honoured the workers who built T-Centralen station in the 
1970s by painting their silhouettes (and his own) on the walls and ceilings. 
Photograph: Luis Rodriguez 
“Art was very political in Sweden in the 1970s,” says Fredrik Landegren, who 
painted the Fruängen station about a decade ago. “If there was not a strong 
message behind your work, there was little chance you’d be offered a job on the 
subway. But I think that was the case with art throughout Europe. It changed in 
the 1980s when things became much more about individualism and later 
post-modernism.”

By the 1990s, the focus had shifted to improving forgotten stations at the 
ends of the lines where artwork had yet to be installed. When Muhr entered a 
competition to create a sculpture for Högdalen, she was struck by its isolation.

“Högdalen is an outdoor station with a big park on one side and a main road on 
the other,” she explains. “It’s quite windy and lonely there, apart from at 
rush hour. Subway stations can be rough areas at night so I wanted to put some 
company on the platform. I decided to make these tulips in bronze. They’re 
designed so it appears they’re also waiting for the next train. I hoped that 
would plant a little smile in the minds of the people waiting alongside them, 
even if just for a fleeting moment.”

Landegren was likewise captured by the idea of creating a warmer environment 
for the waiting passengers. His initial inspiration for Fruängen came from 
sitting in his kitchen at home. “Before I started, this station was such a 
terrible place to be, entirely grey. And so I was looking at the textiles on my 
kitchen table and I realised that they really encapsulated the feeling of being 
home and being safe. And so I began with these bright patterns.”

Art was very political in Sweden in the 1970s
Fredrik Landegren  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fstockholm-metro-tour-world-longest-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb379019de5fc8b49a354eeb3076979e917b40199%2F0_264_5155_3093%2F5155.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tour%20of%20the%20Stockholm%20metro%20%E2%80%93%20the%20world's%20longest%20art%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fstockholm-metro-tour-world-longest-art-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20tour%20of%20the%20Stockholm%20metro%20%E2%80%93%20the%20world%27s%20longest%20art%20gallery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fstockholm-metro-tour-world-longest-art-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb379019de5fc8b49a354eeb3076979e917b40199%2F0_264_5155_3093%2F5155.jpg>
 Solna Centrum’s murals by Anders Åberg and Karl-Olav Bjork feature a blood-red 
sky and spruce forest running for 1km along the walls. Photograph: Luis 
Rodriguez 
But while many of the works across the metro have become perhaps somewhat 
dated, a time capsule of the era in which they were created, Landegren wanted 
to create something more enduring, which any passenger could relate to.

“It took me three years but I created these eight mosaics throughout the 
station, each representing a different phase of life,” he says. “It’s called 
Our Life Faces. I wanted people to live through this, so when they were young 
they would perhaps relate to the small boy, and then as they grew old they 
would recognise themselves once more. None of the mosaics have names. I wanted 
the faces to speak for themselves.”

Landegren’s life faces were inspired by his own family and scenes from films 
such as Madame Bovary. They include a baby, a small child, a young couple in 
love, a 30-year-old man, a couple divorcing and, finally, an old lady. “Her 
face seems to be both humble and full of wisdom, but also perhaps a little sad.”

The art of the Stockholm metro – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2015/oct/20/art-stockholm-metro-in-pictures>
Over the past half century, many artists have become iconic names throughout 
Sweden for their work on the Stockholm metro. But with fewer new stations being 
constructed, this vast exhibition of culture is slowly evolving. Older works 
are gradually being replaced and newer ones added.

The sculptor Christian Partos’ work on Hasselby Strand harked towards 
futuristic modes of transport in centuries to come. “It’s a bit science 
fiction,” he laughs. “I was dreaming of a transport system where you arrive at 
a station and get instantly teleported. And I created this storyline through 
mosaics where the initial trials, using lizards and other animals, go wrong and 
they’re left trapped in time on the walls.”

Landegren says that the continuous influx of new ideas that comes with every 
generation is part of what makes the metro so unique.

“I’m 57 and my work in Fruängen is 10 years old now,” he says. “As the decades 
unfold, you get these new layers of thought and expression. New and younger 
artists are emerging and what they’re doing is very different to my generation. 
The beauty of the subway is that you can start at T-Centralen, the beginning, 
which reminds us of where we have been, and then you journey outwards and 
experience how it evolves into different things. It’s time travel through 
Swedish art, almost like getting to know a fine wine.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 