
We’ve seen the road-straddling bus that glides over lanes of traffic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/22/china-straddling-bus-bizarre-transport-schemes>
, thehigh-speed transport pods of the Hyperloop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/12/hyperloop-or-over-hyped-latest-demo-does-little-to-ease-doubts>
, andbike paths in abandoned tube tunnels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/05/bike-paths-abandoned-tube-tunnels-london-underline>
. Now here’s the latest radical transport idea to transform our cities: putting 
cars in tunnels – but with a twist.

Dreamt up by Lars Hesselgren and his research team at London-based 
architecture practice PLP, and announced today at the Institution of Mechanical 
Engineers, the CarTube proposal reflects the company’s motto: “Streets are for 
people, not cars.” The solution to achieve this? Move a city’s cars underground 
on to a network of constantly moving tracks in small-bore tunnels, creating 
more safe space at ground level for bicycles and pedestrians.

Sounds rosy, but there are a few technical issues to surmount before this 
vision can be realised, especially in London, its case study city. First, as a 
fully automated system, it would rely on only electric, internet-enabled 
vehicles using it. As it stands, fully electric cars only make up a tiny 
proportion of the cars on the road – although at last year’sUN climate change 
meeting in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
, the UK – along with Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and others – agreed to 
ensure thatall new cars will be zero-emissions by 2050 
<http://www.theweek.co.uk/67605/paris-conference-all-new-uk-cars-to-be-zero-emissions-by-2050>
. Which, admittedly, is 34 years from now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fcartube-tube-underground-cars-proposal-bury-traffic-next-best-thing-to-teleportation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6151ed95b5e9626f0c20039b964eb54baaabaa%2F875_597_4005_2182%2F4005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tube%20for%20cars%3F%20Proposal%20to%20bury%20London's%20traffic%20says%20it's%20'next%20best%20thing%20to%20teleportation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fcartube-tube-underground-cars-proposal-bury-traffic-next-best-thing-to-teleportation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20tube%20for%20cars%3F%20Proposal%20to%20bury%20London%27s%20traffic%20says%20it%27s%20%27next%20best%20thing%20to%20teleportation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fcartube-tube-underground-cars-proposal-bury-traffic-next-best-thing-to-teleportation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6151ed95b5e9626f0c20039b964eb54baaabaa%2F875_597_4005_2182%2F4005.jpg>
 Artist’s impression of the system’s ‘car stack’. Illustration: PLP 
Second, building an entire network of new underground tunnels takes time, 
space and money. Weknow from London’s Crossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/04/london-crossrail-train-tunnels-finished-three-years-non-stop-digging>
 just how expensive creating even a relatively simple underground tunnel route 
can be – though PLP insists the CarTube tunnels are far cheaper because they’re 
smaller, don’t require large stations, and have no need for ventilation because 
there will be no vehicular emissions. Still, in a city like London, with tube 
tunnels, train tunnels and sewerage systems, it’s anyone’s guess where the 
subterranean space for the CarTube network would even be found.

The specifics of how the system works remain a little hazy, but here’s the 
general idea: the CarTube grid of subterranean tunnels would link to a city’s 
existing road infrastructure, with entrances feeding in from periphery 
motorways as well as simple ramps throughout the city. The tracks in the 
tunnels would move at a steady, continuous rate, resembling massive conveyor 
belts.

Users decide exactly where they want to start and end their journey, book a 
time slot, and the system does the rest – whether you’re using your own car or 
a taxi. Vehicles are spaced at two-metre gaps and locked into position on 
constantly moving tracks, so accidents and delays are also prevented.

Furthermore, if you arrive at your destination by private car, you could take 
a pedestrian lift to the surface while your car is kept in a “car stack” – like 
an underground car park with an automated valet service. Later, your car would 
be returned to you on demand.

In the London case study, PLP claims travel times on the CarTube would be 
roughly a quarter of what is achieved on existing roads, with a typical journey 
from Heathrow to the City ofLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
taking only 14 minutes (the same journey on Crossrail is due to take 34 
minutes).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fcartube-tube-underground-cars-proposal-bury-traffic-next-best-thing-to-teleportation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F950d22b2141e734e145385ac887a17056e697f28%2F0_511_7000_4201%2F7000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tube%20for%20cars%3F%20Proposal%20to%20bury%20London's%20traffic%20says%20it's%20'next%20best%20thing%20to%20teleportation'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fcartube-tube-underground-cars-proposal-bury-traffic-next-best-thing-to-teleportation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20tube%20for%20cars%3F%20Proposal%20to%20bury%20London%27s%20traffic%20says%20it%27s%20%27next%20best%20thing%20to%20teleportation%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fcartube-tube-underground-cars-proposal-bury-traffic-next-best-thing-to-teleportation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F950d22b2141e734e145385ac887a17056e697f28%2F0_511_7000_4201%2F7000.jpg>
 New York, new underground system? Illustration: PLP 
As with all elements of the “smart city”, the objective here is to eliminate 
disruptions and inefficiencies from urban life. The CarTube envisages replacing 
the current “stop-start model” of urban transport – be that traffic lights or 
train stops – with a “fluid, integrated network”. It’s this idea of an 
interruption-free journey that leads to PLP calling the CarTube “the next best 
thing to teleportation”. They claim it will reduce urban travel time by 75%.

“The real issue is control,” Hesselgren explains. “Trains and tubes have 
controls; cars don’t. Autonomous cars do, but they don’t work well with 
pedestrians, cyclists and other unexpected elements. The only way you can have 
a high-capacity car network in a city is to have a dedicated track.” He insists 
the idea is not repeating the “awful” underground motorways of the latter part 
of the 20th century.

But shouldn’t we be thinking about moving away from car-based city transport 
altogether, rather than simply building expensive alternative infrastructure 
for it? What about promoting cycling and public transport? “Thisis public 
transport,” insists Hesselgren, adding that because cars on the CarTube can be 
continuous and closely spaced, moving at a speed of 50 miles per hour (80kmh), 
capacity for transporting people is higher than packed trains that come every 
five minutes.

If the project’s goal is to reduce street-level congestion, then is a city 
like London (which already has an extensive public transport system and 
congestion charge) its prime target? “London is our case study, but chances are 
it will get built somewhere else where people are desperate for a solution,” 
Hesselgren says, listing Mexico City, Delhi, Jakarta and Mumbai as the sorts of
gridlock-heavy cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/23/world-worst-traffic-jakarta-alternative>
 that could benefit from the CarTube. “This kind of approach in those places 
could really make a difference,” he adds. That difference, however, would rest 
on the replacement of all cars in those cities with fully automated, 
emission-free vehicles – which seems a long, long way off.

End of the car age: how cities are outgrowing the automobile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
It is easy to come to the conclusion that this would never work, let alone 
happen, so why dedicate attention to it? Putting aside the key lesson from this 
year that you shouldnever underestimate the potential of something that seems 
so wholeheartedly preposterous 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/the-real-reason-why-donald-trump-will-never-be-president-813>
, proposals like the CarTube reveal how we are responding to the mounting 
crisis of urban transport and what we want out of the future city. Now might be 
the time to mention that the CarTube team is meeting with potential 
collaborators, including Google, in the new year to move the idea forward.

As we reported earlier this week, some cities are tackling street-level car 
congestion with approaches far simpler, and cheaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/30/cycling-revolution-bikes-outnumber-cars-first-time-copenhagen-denmark>
, than an entirely new automated underground transport system: building safe 
segregated bike lanes, controlling car access to urban cores, and increasing 
the capacity on public transport. Taking cars off the road is a noble idea 
indeed, but putting them underground may not solve the transport challenges our 
cities currently face.

What do you think about the CarTube? Share your thoughts in the comments below 
and follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 