
Birmingham, Saturday night.
At today’s sitting of the Garden City Conference, George Cadbury 
<http://www.quakersintheworld.org/quakers-in-action/270> gave some account of 
theBournville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/oct/03/lets-move-to-bournville-birmingham>
 Village Trust.


He has taught for more than forty years a Sunday morning men’s Bible class in 
Birmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham>. Through this class he 
has learned to know the life histories and struggles of hundreds of men, and in 
the effort to help them to a better life he again and again encountered the 
barrier caused by their surroundings. Setting himself resolutely to face the 
problem, he decided that the most hopeful solution of it was to give an 
opportunity for the people to relieve from the squalor and temptations of the 
city and settle amidst the wholesome, helpful sights and sounds of country life.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgeorge-cadbury-model-village-bournville-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa127a4e078e811463422ad924c7fb900a39b216c%2F93_365_4586_2753%2F4586.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20visit%20to%20George%20Cadbury's%20model%20village%20of%20Bournville%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%201901&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgeorge-cadbury-model-village-bournville-birmingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20visit%20to%20George%20Cadbury%27s%20model%20village%20of%20Bournville%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%201901&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fgeorge-cadbury-model-village-bournville-birmingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa127a4e078e811463422ad924c7fb900a39b216c%2F93_365_4586_2753%2F4586.jpg>
 Workers in the streets of Bournville, 1909. Photograph: Topical Press 
Agency/Hulton/Getty Images 
He set apart a large portion of his Bournville estate in order to give this 
conclusion practical effect, and took initial precautions to avoid repeating 
the overcrowding which he sought to remedy. He decided that each house must 
have a good-sized garden, that no building should occupy more than about 
one-fourth of the site on which it was erected or be more than two storeys 
high, and that one-tenth of the land, in addition to roads and cottage gardens, 
should be reserved for parks and recreation grounds. A number of cottages were 
built upon these lines.


A first intention was to sell them outright and so create a class of 
freeholders. But who was to ensure that the new-comers would administer their 
property in harmony with Mr. Cadbury’s motives and wishes? Then leases were 
thought of. Cottages to the number of 143 were actually sold at cost price on 
the leasehold system. But an unearned increment began to pass into the pockets 
of individuals. People who paid £250 sold their cottages for £325.


Mr. Cadbury <https://www.theguardian.com/business/cadburyschweppes> considered 
that the natural increment of value ought to be applied to the building of more 
houses. And so he abandoned the leasehold system, and other cottages have been 
built and let to weekly tenants. Of these there are 227. The village has 
altogether 370 houses, with a population of 2,000. Every house is occupied. 
Tenants do not leave unless they remove from the district, and the present list 
of applicants for vacant houses is long enough to people a village half as 
large again as Bournville.


The village will continue to grow until the entire area of the estate - 330 
acres - is occupied. It is not reserved exclusively for those employed by the 
firm of Cadbury Brothers, and as a matter of fact a large number live there who 
go to Birmingham for their work. Birmingham is five miles distant, and 
Bournville uses Birmingham’s drainage system, Birmingham water, and Birmingham 
gas.

You can read this article in full here 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/09/14/cadbury1.jpg>.

 