
The president-elect might hate Hollywood but he just pulled a classic old 
Hollywood move: like a glowering, cigar-chewing studio head, Donald Trump has 
hired his son-in-law. Jared Kushner, married to Ivanka Trump,has been appointed 
his senior adviser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jared-kushner-senior-adviser-donald-trump>
, and transition officials have solemnly announced that they have received 
“legal counsel” to ensure that this does not violate US anti-nepotism law.

Europe loved Obama. Trump’s excesses remind us precisely why | Anne Perkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/europe-loved-obama-trump-us-president-democracy>
Perhaps the counsel amounted to a careful, syllable-by-syllable scrutiny of 
Richard Nixon’sclassic maxim <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HiHN3IJ_j8A>: 
“When the president does it, that means that it is not illegal.” In 1933 the 
MGM studio chiefLouis B Mayer 
<http://www.hollywoodsgoldenage.com/moguls/mayer.html> hired his son-in-law 
David O Selznick 
<http://www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/0510.html> to run a 
production unit. Selznick was of course very talented, but his elevation 
inspired the eternal Hollywood gag: The Son-in-Law Also Rises.

The favoured relative inspires suspicion and resentment in the hearts of 
colleagues – and finally, mysteriously, in the heart of the aged patron 
himself. Perhaps Kushner pondered the career ofCount Galeazzo Ciano 
<http://ww2today.com/23rd-december-1943-galeazzo-cianos-last-reflections-before-execution>
, who marriedMussolini’s daughter Edda 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1995/04/10/obituaries/edda-ciano-84-daughter-disavowed-mussolini-for-count.html>
, became foreign minister, but was eventually imprisoned by his father-in-law 
and sentenced to death by firing squad. It is said that when Mayer’s business 
partner Samuel Goldwyn met Albert Einstein, he told him: “I got a theory about 
relatives, too. Don’t hire them.”

The attitude of gratitude

I have in the past reflected on the phenomenon of the “thankbrag”, a cousin to 
the humblebrag, generally deployed on social media in a spirit of effusive 
humility. (“Thanks so much to everyone for all your lovely comments about my 
recent article”; “Thanks so much to the fans whose support inspires me and have 
put my new album/film/TV show/dating app straight in at number one”.) It was 
while gobbling down fiction over Christmas and New Year that I realised that 
acknowledgments sections are the source of some world-class thankbrags.

After powering through Robert Harris’s addictive and gripping thriller, 
Conclave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/24/conclave-by-robert-harris-review>
, about the election of a new pope, I chanced upon the following: “At the 
outset of my research I asked the Vatican for permission to visit the locations 
used during a conclave that are permanently closed to the public. I am grateful 
to Monsignor Guillermo Karcher of the Office for the Liturgical Celebrations of 
the Supreme Pontiff for arranging my visit.” Does that mean permission was 
granted? And that the author saw things denied to “the public”? I guess so. In 
which case: what’s the point of hiding your light under a bushel and thanking 
Monsignor Karcher for general unspecified help? If anyone has earned 
thankbragging rights, it’s Harris.

Sausages and shame

In his annual London Review of Books diary 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v39/n01/alan-bennett/diary>, Alan Bennett has put his 
finger on a contemporary nightmare: stuffing yourself at the hotel breakfast 
buffet. If you’ve got bed-and-breakfast inclusive rates, the temptation to go 
mad is sometimes overwhelming: “Some of the well-to-do guests can’t wait to get 
the food back from the breakfast bar to their table, one young man downing a 
tumbler of orange juice en route and a boy stuffing himself with sausages 
before he even sits down.”

Comedian Michael McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/08/michael-mcintyre-big-show-saturday-night-tv>
 has also commented on middle-class behaviour at the breakfast buffet: how 
guests feel the urge to sit down at their tables pointlessly for a microsecond, 
before jumping up and galloping over to the eggs and bacon. At many a film 
festival I have disgraced myself by trying to curate, secretly, two separate 
picnic meals for lunch and dinner from the breakfast buffet – casually draping 
magazines and papers over my table so the disorder supposedly disguises the 
activity of wrapping bananas and slices of Parma ham in various paper napkins. 
Oh, the shame of it.
 