
Welcome to the Guardian’s weekly Brexit briefing, a summary of developments as 
Britain moves towards the EU exit. If you’d like to receive it as a weekly 
email, please sign uphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
 (and check your spam folder if you don’t see it in your inbox).


A heads-up, also, that the Guardian has launched a Brexit podcast: Brexit 
Means… The first episode offers a brief history of Brexit andyou can listen to 
it here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2016/dec/06/brexit-means-podcast-the-story-so-far>
. Episode two looks at article 50 and the various legal challenges to it. It 
will be out next week.

Producing the Guardian’s independent, in-depth journalism takes a lot of time 
and money. But we do it because we believe our perspective matters – and it 
might well be your perspective too. If you value our Brexit coverage,become a 
Guardian Supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_Brexitbriefing_copy>
 and help make our future more secure. Thank you.

The big picture

Win, loss or score draw? The jury is still out on whether Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> suffered a grievous defeat at 
the hands of parliament last week or pulled off a resounding victory. Or 
whether it was perhaps a bit of both.

What happened, first, was that Labour joined forces with a bunch of 
Conservative rebels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/tory-backbenchers-demand-brexit-plans-theresa-may-government-article-50-anna-soubry>
 to demand that the prime minister publish the government’s plan for Brexit 
before article 50 is triggered and the UK starts the two-year divorce process.

This she promised to do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/may-says-she-will-reveal-brexit-plan-before-triggering-article-50>
 – whereupon MPs led by the astute shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, 
insisted the plan must actually be a plan, as opposed to some vague hope (as in 
the now-familiar “get the best possible deal for Britain”).

Starmer insisted that to qualify as a plan, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/keir-starmer-calls-for-detailed-brexit-plan-after-mps-vote-to-trigger-article-50>
 it must answer key questions. such as would the UK seek to stay in the customs 
union and the single market, but also provide enough detail for MPs to 
scrutinise it and economists to assess its impact.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fed-miliband-owen-jones-tories-brexit-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Miliband%20tells%20Owen%20Jones%3A%20'The%20Tories%20don't%20know%20what%20they%20want%20from%20Brexit'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fed-miliband-owen-jones-tories-brexit-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Miliband%20tells%20Owen%20Jones%3A%20%27The%20Tories%20don%27t%20know%20what%20they%20want%20from%20Brexit%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fed-miliband-owen-jones-tories-brexit-video-interview&media=>
Ed Miliband tells Owen Jones: ‘The Tories don’t know what they want from Brexit’
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/09/ed-miliband-owen-jones-tories-brexit-video-interview>
Remainers saw it as a big win in the battle for more clarity on the 
government’s somewhat opaque Brexit strategy.

Leavers, however, insisted ministers had won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/mps-brexit-vote-blank-cheque-government-iain-duncan-smith>
, because it was never said how much detail the “plan” would actually contain – 
and because in the same non-binding vote, MPs also promised to let the 
government trigger Brexit by the end of March.

By approving Labour’s motion – demanding a Brexit plan – and the government 
amendment – setting an article 50 deadline – parliament had in effect given the 
government “a blank Brexit cheque”, leavers argued.

Only England and Wales voted to leave the EU. So the UK should let them go | 
Steve McCauley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/england-wales-eu-brexit-article-50>
Remainers, of course, denied this, mainly because the supreme court – which 
spentfour enthralling days hearing submissions on the question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/government-accused-treating-eu-legislation-contempt-supreme-court-article-50>
 – may decide ministers cannot trigger article 50 without passing a whole new 
bill anyway.

That, obviously, would demand another parliamentary vote. As they showed last 
week, MPs are highly unlikely to vote against any proposed article 50 
legislation (that would be “defying the will of the people”).

But they could significantly amend it, forcing May, for example, to put a lot 
more meat on the bones of the government’s plan than she would like to. The 11 
judges announce their decision in January; it will be a big moment.

On Monday, the chancellor, Philip Hammond, told MPs – in slightly convoluted 
fashion – that the government would be likely to seek a transitional deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
 to help smooth the Brexit process, confirming that in his view it may well 
take longer than two years to complete negotiations:

There is an emerging view ... that having a longer period to manage the 
adjustment between where we are now and where we get to in the future as a 
result of negotiations would be generally helpful.

Whether the UK will be offered such a deal is not clear; EU officials have not 
shown themselves particularly keen thus far.

The view from Europe

The EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, Michel Barnier, put the cat among the 
pigeons somewhat, saying – to London’s apparent surprise – thatBritain would 
have less than 18 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/uk-will-have-under-18-months-to-negotiate-deal-says-eus-brexit-broker>
 to secure its article 50 divorce.

The Frenchman said the EU would need a few weeks to sort out its negotiating 
stance at the beginning of the article 50 process and a few months to ratify 
the agreement at the end. He also laid out the key principles of the bloc’s 
approach.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-week-brexit-labour-motion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc4fc297dac400ad3581977f69ca342e1d46558e%2F0_183_5340_3204%2F5340.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20win%2C%20loss%20or%20draw%20for%20her%20Brexit%20plan%3F%20Jury%20out%20on%20Theresa%20May's%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-week-brexit-labour-motion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20win%2C%20loss%20or%20draw%20for%20her%20Brexit%20plan%3F%20Jury%20out%20on%20Theresa%20May%27s%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-week-brexit-labour-motion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc4fc297dac400ad3581977f69ca342e1d46558e%2F0_183_5340_3204%2F5340.jpg>
 Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator. Photograph: Thierry 
Monasse/AP 
The EU would seek first and foremost to preserve the unity and interests of 
its 27 remaining members, he said, and would continue to refuse all negotiation 
before notification. Brexit must be a worse deal for Britain than EU 
membership, and curbs on free movement were not compatible with full access to 
the single market:

Being in the EU comes with rights and benefits – third countries can never 
have the same rights and benefits. The single market and its four freedoms are 
indivisible. Cherry picking is not an option.

Barnier also said it was “difficult to imagine” an interim deal at present, 
without knowing exactly what kind of final deal the UK might want.

Elsewhere, Matteo Renzi’s defeat in a referendum on constitutional reform was 
greeted by Eurosceptics everywhere as another nail in the coffin of the EU. It 
was hardly a welcome development, but there waslittle to suggest the result had 
much to do with Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/italian-referendum-result-eu-eurosceptics-far-right-austria-matteo-renzi>
: this was not Italy’s Brexit moment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fvan-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Van%20der%20Bellen%3A%20Austria%20vote%20a%20signal%20of%20hope%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fvan-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Van%20der%20Bellen%3A%20Austria%20vote%20a%20signal%20of%20hope%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fvan-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video&media=>
Van der Bellen: Austria vote a signal of hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/van-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video>
And just a few hours earlier, Alexander Van der Bellen, the overtly 
pro-European leftist candidate in Austria’s presidential elections,defeated 
Norbert Hofer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/van-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video>
, whose party was founded by a former SS officer, prompting heady talk of a 
post-Brexit bounce in support for the ailing European project.

With elections in the Netherlands, France and Germany, 2017 will tell us more. 

Meanwhile back in Westminster

Westminster’s focus this week was again partly directed elsewhere, on a 
byelection. But whilelast week’s upset in Richmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/lib-dems-unseat-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
 pointed to a remainers’ rebellion, Thursday’svote in Lincolnshire’s Sleaford 
and Hykeham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/sleaford-byelection-caroline-johnson-holds-seat-for-conservatives>
 brought another message.

Yes, the Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> 
were expected to keep the strongly pro-leave seat, with Ukip maybe to finish 
second. The message, perhaps, came in the relegation of Labour from a strongish 
second to a miserable fourth, behind the Lib Dems.

As one alarmed Labour MP theorised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/labour-mps-blame-brexit-lack-clarity-sleaford-north-hykeham-byelection-result>
, in trying to balance its Brexit strategy between the will of the 52% of leave 
voters and 48% of remainers, the party may have ended up annoying both and 
becoming “the party of the 0%”.

The warning did not seemingly focus minds in the party, where two senior MPs, 
Diane Abbott 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/diane-abbott-escalates-labours-immigration-9435335>
 andAndy Burnham 
<http://news.sky.com/story/burnham-sounds-like-paler-version-of-farage-says-clarke-10692379>
, spent the weekend saying precisely opposite things on post-Brexit freedom of 
movement.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fno-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20Bregrets%3A%20Sunderland%20after%20the%20vote%20to%20leave%20the%20European%20Union%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fno-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20Bregrets%3A%20Sunderland%20after%20the%20vote%20to%20leave%20the%20European%20Union%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fno-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video&media=>
No Bregrets: Sunderland after the vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/08/no-bregrets-sunderland-brexit-vote-nissan-european-union-video>
The former party leader Ed Miliband also entered the fray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/10/miliband-soft-brexit-labour-conflict-grows-migration>
, formally coming out for a softer Brexit, and saying limited curbs to 
immigration were a necessary price to pay for single market membership.

Elsewhere, some conspiracy-minded types have wondered whether the fuss over 
Theresa May’s leather trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/dec/07/theresa-mays-leather-trousers-you-need-a-tough-hide-to-wear-them>
 is an example of thedead cat strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/20/lynton-crosby-and-dead-cat-won-election-conservatives-labour-intellectually-lazy>
. More likely, it’s just an indicator of how poisonous relations have become 
between the PM and some of her more rebellious backbenchers.

The former education secretary Nicky Morgan was barred from a Downing Street 
Brexit meeting with Mayfor talking disparagingly about the £995 trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/morgan-cut-from-meeting-with-may-after-criticising-pms-leather-trousers>
, a snub that escalated with the leak of furious texts between Morgan and May’s 
chief of staff. (More fashion-minded types thought the real scandal lay 
elsewhere: who wearsbaggy leather trousers?)
Hadley Freeman (@HadleyFreeman) 
@JonathanHaynes <https://twitter.com/JonathanHaynes> Even more specifically, 
*loose* brown leather trousers. Tight leather trousers: OK. Loose leather 
trousers: madness.
 <https://twitter.com/HadleyFreeman/status/808247322790531072> December 12, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/HadleyFreeman/status/808247322790531072> 
You should also know that:

 * QC Jolyon Maugham is asking the Irish courts to decide whether article 50 
is reversible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/09/irish-courts-to-be-asked-to-intervene-in-brexit-legal-process-article-50>
, in a case aimed at reaching the European court of justice. 
 * Another legal challenge wants the courts to rule on whether the government 
needsparliamentary approval to withdraw from the single market 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-12-12/may-faces-new-legal-case-over-post-brexit-single-market-plan>
. 
 * The home secretary, Amber Rudd, said EU nationals in post-Brexit Britain 
will will need “some form of ID” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/05/amber-rudd-says-eu-nationals-in-post-brexit-uk-will-need-form-of-id>
. 
 * Advocacy group the3million has urged Theresa May to unilaterally guarantee 
therights of EU nationals who settled in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/the3million-campaign-group-letter-theresa-may-eu-citizens-in-uk-right-to-remain>
 before the referendum. 
 * A report by the thinktank British Future made the same recommendation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/end-brexit-uncertainty-for-eu-citizens-in-the-uk-report-urges>
. 
 * The Open Britain campaign group said UK businesses will have to deal with 
60m more pieces of paperwork each year ifBritain leaves the customs union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/uk-firms-face-more-not-less-red-tape-if-britain-exits-customs-union>
. 
 * Guy Verhofstadt, the EU parliament’s point man on Brexit, said EU associate 
citizenship would be “on the table” for Britons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/brexit-talks-plan-for-uk-nationals-to-keep-eu-citizenship-verhofstadt>
 in the exit talks. 
 * A hard Brexit would do lasting damage to the UK economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/07/major-cut-eu-migrants-risks-long-term-damage-uk-economy-niesr-report>
, reducing GDP per head while having little effect on low-paid workers’ wages, 
new research said. 
 * Kezia Dugdale, the Scottish Labour leader, called for a new political 
settlement and a federal state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/scottish-labour-new-federal-state-unite-uk-after-brexit-kezia-dugdale-nicola-sturgeon>
 to unite the UK after Brexit. 
 * The estate agents Savills said half of planned office developments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/uk-office-construction-forecast-to-plunge-after-brexit-vote>
 in central London were likely to be postponed as a result of the Brexit vote. 
 * In much-mocked remarks, May once more declined to elaborate on her plans, 
saying this time she wanted a “red, white and blue Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/red-white-blue-brexit-explaining-theresa-mays-bunting-draped-vision>
”. 
Read these:

Matthew d’Ancona reckons Theresa May was pretty clever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/theresa-may-remainers-brexit-concession>
 with her amendment in the Commons last week, and her article 50 ruse has 
caught the remainers off-guard:

This edges the PM closer to the moral high ground, and strengthens her claim 
to be the authentic champion of democracy. She signals that she respects both 
the referendum and representative democracy, and challenges MPs to follow suit. 
As a holding position, it is a cunning plan.

Theresa May’s clever holding position has caught remainers off guard | Matthew 
d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/theresa-may-remainers-brexit-concession>
In the FT (paywall), Jana Ganesh argues beautifully 
<https://www.ft.com/content/37b5933c-b884-11e6-ba85-95d1533d9a62> that 
Britain’s refusal to accept that continentals actually mean what they say is a 
cultural difference that is doing the UK no favours at all:

The EU will do more to set the terms of Britain’s extrication than Britain 
itself. It is also characteristically candid about what those terms will be, if 
only we could switch off our Wildean irony radar and accept words at face value 
... When Angela Merkel, German chancellor, talks up the indivisibility of the 
four freedoms, a good time-saving exercise is to believe her. When EU leaders 
rejected informal talks in advance of article 50, ministers in London smiled at 
the charade and waited for the European line to waver. They still wait.

And back in the Guardian, Rafael Behr says May risks becoming an “accidental 
Europe-wrecker” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/theresa-may-risks-becoming-accidental-europe-wrecker>
 by feeding a Ukip-inspired image of the EU:

A spokeswoman has accused MPs of “frustrating the will of the people” and 
failing to “back the UK team”. Downing Street is creeping into that Ukip zone 
where any residue of interest in European integration is unpatriotic, verging 
on treasonous ... The prime minister cannot play with this combative tone at 
home without being heard abroad. Meanwhile, hardliners give the impression 
Brexit contains aggressive intent towards the whole European project. If May is 
in the business of reconciliation, she is running out of time to prove it.

 Tweet of the week

If you missed it, Rupert Myers from GQ live-tweeted what really happened in 
the supreme court last week. It was quite a party.

Do read the full thread, you won’t regret it ...
Rupert Myers (@RupertMyers) 
If you're not watching the #SupremeCourt 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SupremeCourt?src=hash> livestream right now, the 
judges are all talking about how they prefer croissants to a full english
 <https://twitter.com/RupertMyers/status/805749367269392384> December 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/RupertMyers/status/805749367269392384>  