
There was a good deal of sympathy for the writer Julian Barnes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/julianbarnes> last month, when he described 
as “straightforwardly daft” the opening up to US competition of the Booker 
prize, historically limited to British, Irish and Commonwealth countries.The 
Americans, Barnes said, “have enough prizes of their own” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/28/julian-barnes-letting-us-authors-compete-for-booker-prize-is-daft>
.

Then again – though this is not to doubt the justice of his complaint – at 
least Booker eligibility has yet to extend to the dead. Without wishing to 
start a daftness competition, the Booker isn’t available to cartoon writers of 
fiction, to fictional novelists, to people who are living, but unpublished, 
with a view to encouraging non-novelists who are opposed, on principle, to 
prizes for fiction. But something not dissimilar, in 2016, has been the fate of 
various awards devised to celebrate or promote female achievement at a time 
when, the UN says, “gender inequalities remain deeply entrenched in every 
society”.

At the BBC, the contribution from the judges on the latest Woman’s Hour’s 
“Power List” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/dec/14/womans-hour-power-list-bridget-jones-margaret-thatcher-germaine-greer>
 – in the week that the anti-feminist obsessivePhilip Davies MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/anti-feminist-tory-mp-philip-davies-elected-to-equalities-committee>
, was promoted to the Commons women and equalities committee – was the 
inclusion of two dead women,Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> and Barbara Castle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/may/04/guardianobituaries.obituaries>, 
and of the fictional airhead,Bridget Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/bridget-jones-baby-diary-film-better-age-todays-punitve-politics>
. Admittedly, the Nobel judges have demonstrated the advantages, for a prize, 
of an occasional shake-up. The inclusion of the deceased, never real and wholly 
unconnected, represented by, say, Eric Liddell, Velvet Brown and Bob Dylan, 
could be just the thing to transform the BBC’sSports Personality of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year> into an 
almost endurable event. In future, London could sendPatti Smith  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/patti-smith-hyde-park-london-gig-july-interview>
to accept the Best Kept Village award. Journalism’s George Orwell prize could 
be awarded, at long last, toGeorge Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/georgeorwell>.

And in fairness to Helen Fielding’s excellent creation, Jones is not, like one 
of Glamour magazine’s Women of the Year, male. Some may find her more lifelike 
than theUN’s latest women’s ambassador, Wonder Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/21/wonder-woman-un-ambassador-staff-protest>
, just retired after an in-house petition and protest. Moreover, given the 
striking absence of awards for fictional characters, it could not be argued, as 
Barnes did of US novelists, that there were plenty of other places where Jones, 
a genial imbecile, could be hailed as “a catalyst for change over the past 70 
years”.

Anyway, following the past week’s publicity, congratulations are absolutely in 
order for theWoman’s Hour judges. They have overjoyed BBC publicists with an 
instantly controversial list that, left to the more literal or sentimental, 
might well have included names such as Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-obituary>, Victoria 
Wood or <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/20/victoria-wood-obituary>
Caroline Aherne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/02/caroline-aherne>. Or, 
indeed, a living woman up for crushing Philip Davies. If there were a 2016 
prize for most ridiculous women’s award, such as to convey their obsolescence, 
the Power List judges would definitely, with Bridget Jones, beat Glamour’s Bono.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/bono-woman-of-the-year-women>
 But they lose, narrowly, to the UN’s peerless insult to the living, its 
honorary ambassadorship for Wonder Woman. The UN director of outreach, a Mr 
Maher Nasser, reasoned: “There is a Wonder Woman in every woman.”

Maybe the Top Cat in every UN executive explains why a semi-naked, 
gigantically bosomed, wartime-era sexual fantasy should have struck that 
organisation as the ideal ambassadress for female empowerment, excepting, 
naturally, within the UN, where male leaders are strongly preferred. Now that 
the WW scheme has been aborted, the lads in outreach must be wondering, 
desperately, what other photogenic heroine – sod’s law: Jones is taken – would 
be big enough to signal its fathomless respect for women, following the 
appointment of another male secretary general. Minnie Mouse?Moana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/sep/26/moana-polynesia-disney-cultural-blunders>
?That eagle taming girl – or is she real 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/the-eagle-huntress-review-otto-bell-kazakh-falconry-mongolia>
?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fwonder-woman-at-un-how-about-a-real-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec94e2d387eb2280b9f39e7cb3e41dbb11b8d134%2F0_192_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Wonder%20Woman%20at%20the%20UN%3F%20How%20about%20a%20real%20one%3F%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fwonder-woman-at-un-how-about-a-real-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Wonder%20Woman%20at%20the%20UN%3F%20How%20about%20a%20real%20one%3F%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fwonder-woman-at-un-how-about-a-real-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec94e2d387eb2280b9f39e7cb3e41dbb11b8d134%2F0_192_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 Bridget Jones, played by Renee Zellweger in the film ‘Bridget Jones’s Baby’, 
is hailed as a ‘catalyst for change’ despite being a ‘genial imbecile’. 
Photograph: Allstar/UNIVERSAL PICTURES 
It’s hardly an excuse that the men appear to have been enthralled by feminist 
assurances from Diane Nelson, DC Entertainment’s very own belle dame sans merci
, whose superpowers include transforming UN functionaries into her besotted 
PRs. The UN-DC “creative partnership” coincided with a Warner Bros remake of
Wonder Woman. Nelson seized the chance, at a celebrity launch attended by Ban 
Ki-Moon, <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon> to reintroduce a 
character nowadays best known as a stripogram choice, as an emblem of hope for 
the female downtrodden.

“Her ability to operate alone,” Nelson told the BBC (maybe not completely 
getting the whole “united” part about the UN), “and to be her own independent 
person but also to work right alongside with the same strength and same 
abilities as some of the strongest male superheroes, I think is a testament to 
her character and kind of ties back to the UN designation and this idea of 
gender equality.”

While some of us prefer to stick, thank you, to the inspiration afforded by 
Noggin the Nog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/28/noggin-the-nog-peter-firmin-edinburgh-festival>
, team-building in his winged airboat, there is no disputing Nelson’s 
faithfulness to the vision of WW’s creator, the early psychologist and creepy 
huckster,William Moulton Marston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/05/wonder-woman-the-feminist>. WW 
existed, Marston wrote, “to combat the idea that women are inferior to men, and 
to inspire girls to self-confidence and achievement”. At home, he was the 
ill-tempered master of a mini harem.

If her feminist career never entirely took off, it may be because Marston also 
conceived Wonder Woman – and approved every aspect of her pin-up inspired 
clothing – as a vehicle for his dearest erotic imaginings. Thanks toJill Lepore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/21/secret-history-wonder-woman-jill-lepore-review-man-behind-superhero>
’s fascinating biography, the UN outreach personnel could have discovered what 
Nelson must know: that Marston’s obsessions came to alarm his publishers almost 
as much as they thrilled bondage fetishists. “Do some careful chaining here,” 
he would instruct the illustrator. “Put a metal collar on WW. Have her hands 
clasped together at her breast with double bands at her wrists... Between these 
runs a short chain. Then put another, heavier, larger chain between her 
wristbands which hangs in a long loop to just above her knees...” His editor 
noted that “Marston’s idea of feminine supremacy was the ability to submit to 
male domination”.

Even without that, an online search could have filled in UN’s outreach 
officials on growing opposition to sexist depictions of women in comics, to a 
point that might contraindicate a comic-book ambassadress for women. Failing 
that, any marginal awareness of female UN co-workers should have indicated the 
likely response if line managers preferred, to any of the world’s 3.5 billion 
or so living women, a cartoon, dressed in pants.

True, the WW team was reportedly aware of sensitivities. Working with 
illustrators around key words “regal” and “appropriate”, Mr Nasser ensured that 
Madam would be shown only from her tiny waist up, with a slogan semi-obscuring 
her breasts: “Think of all the wonders we can do”.

If that sounds trite, it was, indeed, no time at all before real women workers 
at the UN demonstrated, by returningWonder Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/wonder-woman> to political oblivion, the 
power of direct protest. Closer to home, the real UK MP Eilidh Whiteford just 
overcame, no less wonderfully, an attempt by that supposedly invincible 
nuisance, Philip Davies, to talk out her bill protecting women and children. 
And to think none of it might have happened without that catalyst for change, 
Bridget Jones.
 