
Aaron Lee Tasjan is an unlikely contender for Americana’s next new hope. 
Despite acclaim from the country crowd for his new album Silver Tears, the 
30-year-old insists that’s really not what he’s about. “I love that sound, but 
I’m not a country singer,” he says.


That would be news to people in Nashville, a city where Tasjan landed in 2013 
and almost immediately became an easily identifiable figure of the new vanguard 
of singer-songwriters who are collectively offering an alternative to the sleek 
commercialism of Music Row.

Margo Price: ‘Country music is about divorce, drinking and jail’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/12/margo-price-country-music-is-about-divorce-drinking-and-jail>
“Fans were trying to grab me, they probably didn’t know who I was. It was like 
a real rock’n’roll dream come to life for a 23-year-old kid,” he says. By the 
time Tasjan arrived in Nashville he’d already completed his musical 
apprenticeship in a very different setting. A native of New Albany, Ohio, he 
spent seven years in New York City where he played guitar in Semi Precious 
Weapons, the electro-rock band that worked with Tony Visconti on their first 
record and ended up touring withLady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lady-gaga>. When that ended he spent six 
months in 2009 in a revived incarnation of the New York Dolls, a job that 
required him to learn 35 songs to play in stadiums across South America where 
they were treated like royalty. Turning up in Nashville was a bit of a shock to 
the system.

“I had to learn a completely different performance dynamic that I never 
experienced before. And then to come back from that I was playing by myself for 
100 bucks a night in New York. It showed me the power of what making great 
rock’n’roll can do for people.”

Yet as a teenager Tasjan discovered veteran country songwriter John Prine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/08/john-prine-interview-country-music>
 and, when in New York, spent many nights at the Living Room studying different 
songwriters rotating through town. The move to Nashville in 2013 reinforced his 
personal inclinations towards storytelling songs and fed his desire to meet 
musicians he shared more in common with than the ones he left behind in New 
York. He quickly got a Wednesday residency at the 5 Spot, a hangout for 
burgeoning songwriters, and soon enough he met upcoming singer-songwriters 
Margo Price, Robert Ellis and others, and discovered a community of like-minded 
musicians who felt connected to the past but were not burdened by it either.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Faaron-lee-tasjan-americana-country-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1c0a9c55525763ce407ce863e4374b3a5294646%2F141_0_4219_2532%2F4219.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Lee%20Tasjan%3A%20the%20anti-establishment%20candidate%20leading%20Americana's%20new%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Faaron-lee-tasjan-americana-country-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Lee%20Tasjan%3A%20the%20anti-establishment%20candidate%20leading%20Americana%27s%20new%20breed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Faaron-lee-tasjan-americana-country-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1c0a9c55525763ce407ce863e4374b3a5294646%2F141_0_4219_2532%2F4219.jpg>
 Aaron Lee Tasjan: ‘It was like a real rock‘n’roll dream come to life for a 
23-year-old kid.’ Photograph: Curtis Wayne Millard 
Their collective output pushes back against the committee-driven process that 
dominates the major labels where star vocalists pick and choose songs written 
by a stable of songwriters who understand their personality – at least the ones 
they want showcased on the radio, which remains vital. Despite the popularity 
of streaming and the cafeteria-style of listening it created, country radio 
still matters when it comes to blockbuster exposure.

Tasjan says the widening circle of independent songwriters in Nashville is 
primarily connected by a deep respect for the past, more than commercial 
ambition.

“There’s this real effort to be genuinely very authentic and present and 
interested in those luminary songwriters we all love down here – Guy Clark, Tom 
Petty and the Stones. It’s like there’s some sort of effort being made to get 
inside of what makes that stuff so everlasting and of such quality that it goes 
on forever,” he says.

Sturgill Simpson: 'People think I pour LSD on my Cheerios'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/31/sturgill-simpson-country-music-reluctant-saviour-metamodern-sounds-interview>
Tasjan’s album, released late in 2016, is a record with the hallmarks of 
Nashville’s most literary side – John Prine to Todd Snider – as well as 
embracing a love of country-rock and 1960s pop.


Tasjan’s eclecticism is his greatest strength as the album flows through songs 
that tell stories of people with modest dreams, while poking fun at their 
foibles too. Instead of making a record that stands as a definite alternative 
to whatever else is going on in Nashville, Tasjan has made a record that, in 
its own way, is a genre unto itself.

He doesn’t sound as angry as Sturgill Simpson, who he is regularly compared 
to, or even as determined to make a statement about what music coming out of 
Nashville should or should not sound like. He says the tension between Music 
Row and East Nashville, the ground zero neighborhood for the singer-songwriter 
movement, is a false dichotomy.

“For me, I don’t feel much in competition with anybody that’s doing the modern 
country thing and I’m not even that much in touch with a lot of the people in 
theAmericana <https://www.theguardian.com/music/americana> scene who tend to be 
more traditionalist,” he says. “I’m looking to see what I can do that’s maybe a 
little different.”

 