
Cliff Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/08/acdc-bassist-cliff-williams-retiring>
 has said it is “time to step out” of AC/DC. In a video posted on the rock 
group’s YouTube channel, the bassist confirmed that he will be leaving the band.


Williams, 66, first signalled his departure in July this year, explaining that 
after the group’s current tour he would be “backing off of touring and 
recording”, and citing the ongoing issues within the band: in the last two 
years alone the lineup has been reshuffled as a result of guitaristMalcolm 
Young leaving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/01/acdc-guitarist-malcolm-young-has-dementia>
 through ill health, singerBrian Johnson’s hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/19/acdc-brian-johnson-hearing-loss-diagnosis-statement>
 condition and drummerPhil Rudd’s convictions for drug possession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/21/acdc-drummer-phil-rudd-pleads-guilty-threatening-to-kill-drug-charges>
 and making threats to kill.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOKjCTgLGCe4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOKjCTgLGCe4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOKjCTgLGCe4&media=>
Watch Cliff Williams’s video message to fans 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OKjCTgLGCe4> 
In his new statement, Williams says his reasons for leaving extend beyond 
recent incidents: “It’s time for me to step out, that’s all. Not because we’ve 
lost Mal, Phil or Brian, everything changes when something happens like that. 
WhenBon [Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/11/acdc-fans-raise-45000-bon-scott-statue-hometown>
, AC/DC’s former singer] died it changed then, everything changes, so it’s not 
that,” he said.

“It’s just I’m just ready to get off the road really and do what I do in 
between tours. We take a few years off, so I know how to do that, I know what 
I’m going to do and, again, it’s just my time.

“I’m happy I just need family time now, just chill out and not do this,” the 
British musician added.


Angus Young admits he doesn't know whether AC/DC will continue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/03/angus-young-admits-he-doesnt-know-whether-acdc-will-continue>
The future of AC/DC has seemed tumultuous to fans, with Australian guitarist 
Angus Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/03/angus-young-admits-he-doesnt-know-whether-acdc-will-continue>
 the last original member performing with the group. As well as Malcolm Young’s 
dementia diagnosis, which forced him to leave the group, Johnson was also 
unable to play with the band for fear he would lose his hearing. The band have 
continued touring, with Young replaced by his nephew Stevie Young and Rudd by 
Chris Slade. Its most notable addition has beenGuns N’ Roses singer Axl Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/acdc-review-axl-rose-lisbon-first-gig>
, who has replaced Johnson for dates on the critically acclaimed Rock or Bust 
tour.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Facdcs-first-concert-with-new-frontman-axl-rose-lisbon-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=AC%2FDC%20perform%20Shoot%20to%20Thrill%20with%20new%20frontman%20Axl%20Rose%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Facdcs-first-concert-with-new-frontman-axl-rose-lisbon-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=AC%2FDC%20perform%20Shoot%20to%20Thrill%20with%20new%20frontman%20Axl%20Rose%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F08%2Facdcs-first-concert-with-new-frontman-axl-rose-lisbon-video&media=>
AC/DC perform Shoot to Thrill with new frontman Axl Rose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/may/08/acdcs-first-concert-with-new-frontman-axl-rose-lisbon-video> 