
It wouldn’t normally be that much of a story: bloke who plays rhythm guitar, 
stands at the back of the stage, never says anything, almost never gives 
interviews and when he does never says interesting, leaves band. In the 
hierarchy of rock’n’roll, the rhythm guitarist is hardly ever the hero: the 
singer or the lead guitarist swap top position, the bassist is usually last, 
and the drummer and the rhythm player swap places (if the drummer’s 
particularly flashy, he or she might be perceived as the bigger star). The 
rhythm guitarist takes the role identified by Eric Cantona for Didier Deschamps 
in the French football team of the 1990s: the water carrier. The rhythm 
guitarist is the one who does the boring, unshowy stuff that enables the lead 
player to unleash those flashy solos.

But that so wholly undersells the role Malcolm Young played in 41 years with 
AC/DC, one of the greatest rock’n’roll bands ever, as to be meaningless. Young, 
who has now left the group he founded in November 1973 with his younger brother 
Angus, was the heartbeat ofAC/DC <https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc>, the 
very core of the band’s unyielding, unrelenting, implacable throb.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4dsq2lH20k4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4dsq2lH20k4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4dsq2lH20k4&media=>
The public face of AC/DC has always been the combination of singer and lead 
guitarist: Bon Scott or Brian Johnson with Angus Young. And many people, asked 
about AC/DC, would respond with talk of school uniforms, endless solos, and 
singers with screeching voices pouring out innuendo. But what made AC/DC great 
– and this may sound odd, describing a band whose onstage props include a giant 
inflatable woman, firing cannons and the “hell’s bell” – has always been 
restraint. Malcolm Young was the master of making as little as necessary do as 
much as possible. The band’s music was low input, high impact, so to speak.

Malcolm Young understood that a great riff does not need 427 components to 
make it great, that what it really needs is clarity. That meant stripping riffs 
down rather than building them up, and it also meant understanding volume. 
Given how loud AC/DC can be in concert – ear-ringingly, sternum-shakingly loud 
– it might be surprising to learn that, in the studio at least, Malcolm Young 
favoured quietness: he played with his amps turned down, but with the mics 
extremely close. That’s why, on the great AC/DC albums, you hear not just the 
chords of the riffs, but their very texture, their burnished, rounded sound. 
It’s why AC/DC are immediately recognisable, whether or not you know the song.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Facdc%2Fgirls-got-rhythm-video%2F2285643%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Facdc%2Fgirls-got-rhythm-video%2F2285643%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.muzu.tv%2Facdc%2Fgirls-got-rhythm-video%2F2285643%2F&media=>
Crucial to that is space. The best AC/DC records are the ones where the 
guitars have room to breath, where the riffs chop rather than roar, and where 
the production and recording allow them to stand alone rather than drowning 
them in too many overdubs or aggressive mastering (it’s why for many purists – 
me among them – the best AC/DC records are those produced by Harry Vanda and 
George Young, rather than the smash hits overseen Robert John “Mutt” Lange). 
These songs –She’s Got Balls <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oJZRqPiGkTg>, Gone 
Shootin’ <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=85Nsyib4bv8>, Live Wire 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jc5yNJ5ELc8> – are not the dumb heavy rock 
detractors claim. They’re like perfect equations, beautiful in their 
formulation and resolution. Maybe AC/DC are the true “math rock” group, for 
understanding that maths is about answers, as well as puzzles.

The utter discipline of the riffs – the only showing off allowed is when it’s 
time for Angus’s solo, and on record some of those solos are surprisingly 
to-the-point – is an achievement in itself. For all his love of the blues and 
rock’n’roll records of the 1950s and 60s, and conviction that they were the 
bedrock of everything good about rock music, there must have been times when 
Malcolm fancied cutting loose. Maybe some arpeggios, or an acoustic guitar 
intro, a time signature change … surely he must have toyed sometimes with the 
idea of showing The Many Moods of Malcolm Young. But he never did, because 
AC/DC is a monolith, an edifice, and once its unity is compromised, it must 
start to crumble (which may explain why there’s never been so much as a hint of 
a solo album from him or Angus).

Oh, Malcolm Young, you will be missed.
 