
Six months ago, I wrote that AC/DC should call it quits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/mar/10/ac-dc-brian-johnson-hearing-tour-dates-fans-acdc-call-quits>
. After the announcement thatBrian Johnson was stepping down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/08/acdc-singer-brian-johnson-to-stop-touring-to-save-his-hearing>
 as singer, I argued – tetchily – that a group in which only Angus Young and 
Cliff Williams remained of the “core” AC/DC lineup should pack it in, and put 
dignity ahead of business. It turned out I was wrong, as I discovered whenI saw 
Axl Rose’s first show fronting the band 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/08/acdc-review-axl-rose-lisbon-first-gig>
, in Lisbon.

If anything, Axl/DC seemed like a band revived, the singer ceding centre stage 
to Young, now the undisputed leader of the group. The setlist, so long set in 
stone, was revived by the inclusion of Bon Scott-era songs left untouched for 
years. If You Want Blood (You’ve Got It), Rock’n’Roll Damnation and Riff Raff 
became mainstays once again; Touch Too Much made occasional appearances; on the 
Rock or Bust tour’s final night, in Philadelphia on Tuesday, Problem Child was 
brought out for the first time since 2001.

Philadelphia was notable for something else, too: it was Cliff Williams’ final 
show as AC/DC’s bassist. That means that in the past couple of years, the group 
has lost Malcolm Young, its rhythm guitarist and driving force, to dementia; 
Phil Rudd, its drummer, to legal problems; Brian Johnson, its singer, to 
hearing problems; and now Williams, because he simply feels the time has come.

Angus Young, for so long the face of AC/DC, is now all that remains of AC/DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/acdc>.

Whatever I said back in March, I think that this incredible band have handled 
their tribulations with great dignity. No replacement for Malcolm would be 
perfect, but his nephew Stevie kept things in the family. And while there was 
plenty of grumbling from fans about Chris Slade stepping in for Rudd, he had at 
least served with the group before: he represented continuity.

The album Rock or Bust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/30/ac-dc-rock-or-bust-review-kitty-empire>
, made with Rudd but without Malcolm, was a perfectly reasonable effort at 
keeping the juggernaut going. Yes, one might wish it had been better, but it 
could have been a whole lot worse. And the ensuing tour – both with Johnson and 
then with Rose – proved AC/DC could still be one of rock’s most compelling 
experiences.

AC/DC: 'If there's a bad-parenting issue, they blame rock'n'roll'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/27/acdcs-brian-johnson-if-theres-a-bad-parenting-issue-the-us-moral-majority-blames-rocknroll-you-cant-fix-stupid>
But now, with dignity intact and millions of fans satisfied, it really is time 
for the show to end. It’s not that Cliff Williams’s basslines are impossible to 
replicate – in fact, you’d find it hard to locate a professional bassist who 
couldn’t play those repetitive, unyielding, four-to-the-floor lines. It’s that, 
Angus aside, he was the last remaining link to the Bon Scott years. I suppose 
they could go back to Williams’ predecessor, Mark Evans, if he wanted to 
return. But why? There’s now no tour to finish, no album to promote, just – if 
Angus does intend to carry on – the ritual five-year wait for something new to 
happen.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DErXbMB9R5-0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DErXbMB9R5-0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DErXbMB9R5-0&media=>
By that time, who would be the singer? Rose was only ever billed as a 
short-term replacement, and while he spoke enthusiastically about the role, 
it’s hard to see him becoming a studio singer for a new AC/DC album. Who would 
be the bassist or drummer? We can assume Stevie would be the rhythm guitarist, 
but that’s only two members. And one original member, one respected stand-in, 
three hired hands – it’s not a band.

Here’s a solution. Let Williams remain retired. Let Johnson tend to his 
hearing. Let Rudd work through his issues. But when or if either of the first 
two get the itch to take to the stage again, and if the latter can be forgiven 
by Angus, then let AC/DC reconvene on an occasional basis, but no longer as a 
formal working band, tied to a schedule. The odd festival show, the occasional 
one-off. No more two-year world tours with accompanying albums to justify them. 
No more custom-built stage spectaculars. No more keeping on with the show, 
whatever the cost. Just a band, playing rock’n’roll if and when they get the 
urge, making no commitments and demanding no favours. Maybe that means one 
festival in five years’ time; maybe it means a handful of club shows hardly 
anyone can get into. But it would preserve AC/DC’s legacy as one of rock’s 
purest spectacles.

Maybe Angus might remember the words of one of AC/DC’s earliest anthems, Ride 
On: “I ain’t too young to realise / That I ain’t too old to try / Try to get 
back to the start.” At the start, musicians make music because they love it. If 
Angus loves it, let him make music. But, please, leave us with the happy 
memories of one of the greatest bands ever, unless you can find a way to ensure 
any future AC/DC is still a real AC/DC.
 