
A court in Edinburgh has ruled that an environmental activist can sue Donald 
Trump’s golf resort near Aberdeen for breach of privacy and compensation after 
she was apparently filmed without her consent on the course.

A lawyer acting for Rohan Beyts, a long-time critic of resort’s impact on the 
environment and community, accused Trump’s staff of breaching the Data 
Protection Act by taking mobile-phone footage of her in April as she allegedly 
urinated behind a dune on the course.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Factivist-can-sue-trump-golf-resort-for-breach-of-privacy-court-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F464b4fce9783342df2e223590f1173df2766816a%2F3972_0_1350_1350%2F1350.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Activist%20can%20sue%20Trump%20golf%20resort%20for%20breach%20of%20privacy%2C%20court%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Factivist-can-sue-trump-golf-resort-for-breach-of-privacy-court-rules%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Activist%20can%20sue%20Trump%20golf%20resort%20for%20breach%20of%20privacy%2C%20court%20rules&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Factivist-can-sue-trump-golf-resort-for-breach-of-privacy-court-rules%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F464b4fce9783342df2e223590f1173df2766816a%2F3972_0_1350_1350%2F1350.jpg>
 Rohan Beyts. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
The ruling raises the prospect of Trump facing a battle in the Scottish small 
claims court a few months into his first term as US president.


The Guardian revealed in August that Trump International Golf Course Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, which is wholly owned by Trump, had 
breached the UK’s strict laws on data protection and privacy after it failed to 
register with the Information Commissioner’s Office, despite operating an 
extensive CCTV system and handling data on thousands of golfers, guests, staff 
and suppliers. The resort insisted this was due to a clerical error.

Beyts’s lawyer, Mike Dailly, said the result was fantastic. “Although the 
defendant sought to have the case dismissed as incompetent, or transferred to 
the ordinary courts with unlimited expenses, or transferred to Aberdeen, all 
attempts to stop the case progressing were rejected by the sheriff,” he said. 
“So now there is a case to answer, and witnesses will have to give evidence on 
behalf of TIGC”.

Beyts, 62, told the Guardian she was delighted with the result and looked 
forward to making her case.

The case arose from an incident last April when Beyts and a friend used a 
public footpath across the Trump course to reach the sand dunes and beach that 
border the golf links. Returning from their walk, the pair say there were 
challenged by resort staff and then photographed by a local newspaper 
photographer.

Three days Beyts was visited at home by two Police Scotland officers who 
formally charged her with public annoyance. A third officer in charge of the 
complaint told her that two members of Trump’s staff and a guest on the course 
had filmed her on their mobile phones as she ducked out of sight.

Her prosecution raised fresh accusations from Trump’s critics that his staff 
were deliberately persecuting opponents and closely monitoring their movements 
on the resort.

The claim was heard before Sheriff Gordon Liddle on Thursday morning, who 
swiftly dispatched the arguments made by Paul Motion, the solicitor advocate 
acting for the resort.

Dailly argued that the case was a straightforward claim for invasion of 
privacy, on the basis that the resort had admitted it was not registered with 
the ICO, and that being filmed without her consent had caused distress to 
Beyts, for which she was seeking £3,000.

Motion questioned whether a small claims court was competent to deal with such 
a case.

 Liddle concluded, however, that while he was aware that he was “dealing with 
ifs and buts, not black and white”, nothing had persuaded him that the case was 
incompetent as a small claim.

When Motion argued that the case should be held in Aberdeen, closer to the 
golf course and relevant witnesses, Liddle quipped: “Should I transfer it to 
Manhattan?” before noting that there was no reason why Beyts could not sue a 
company in the place where it had a registered office, in this case, Edinburgh.

Liddle was staunch in his defence of the principle of the small claims court 
when Motion argued that the case should be transferred to the ordinary courts. 
The sheriff said: “The effect of sending it to ordinary proceedings may well be 
[that Beyts] is discouraged from pursuing it because of the expense 
implications.” The limit on expenses was an “essential component” of the small 
claims system, he said.

TIGCS said: “Our position on Rohan Beyt’s claim remains unchanged and the 
matter is now in the hands of our lawyers.”

The next hearing is set to begin on 3 April and last for three days.
 