
Two campaigners are to appeal against their convictions, alleging that an 
undercover police officer took part in their protest and set fire to a branch 
of Debenhams, causing damage totalling more than Â£300,000.

The officer, a leading member of the covert unit at the heart of the 
undercover controversy, was revealed this week to have also been a key figure 
in thesecret operation to spy on the family of Stephen Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/06/stephen-lawrence-theresa-may-inquiry-police>
.

The announcement of the appeal comes as scores of convictions involving 
undercover officers over the past decades are to be re-examined to see if 
campaigners in a range of political groups have been wrongly convicted.

Mark Ellison, the QC who produced Thursday's report into the undercover 
infiltration of the Lawrence campaign, also found that the unit, the special 
demonstration squad (SDS), had concealed crucial evidence from courts.

Now he has been asked by the home secretary, Theresa May, to identify specific 
cases in which unjust convictions have been caused by the SDS, which 
infiltrated political groups between 1968 and 2008. Peter Francis, the former 
undercover spy who has blown the whistle on the SDS since 2010, is offering to 
help Ellison pinpoint the cases where he is aware that his ex-colleagues 
withheld evidence.

Lawyers for the two campaigners announced on Friday that they were seeking to 
overturn their convictions, alleging that the role of the undercover spy Bob 
Lambert was hidden from their original trial.

The pair, Andrew Clarke and Geoff Sheppard, were convicted of setting fire to 
three Debenhams stores in the 1980s to protest against the sale of fur and 
jailed for three and four years respectively.

They only discovered more than two decades later that the long-haired 
protester they knew as "Bob Robinson" was actually Lambert, an SDS spy.

After he was exposed in 2011, Lambert admitted he had worked undercover in the 
1980s to "identify and prosecute members of the Animal Liberation Front who 
were then engaged in widespread incendiary and explosive device campaigns 
against vivisectors, the meat and fur trades." He said he succeeded in getting 
Clarke and Sheppard arrested and imprisoned.

In 2012, the Green MP Caroline Lucas alleged in parliament that Lambert had 
been part of the pair's protest and had planted an incendiary device that set 
fire to a branch of Debenhams in Harrow, north-westLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

In parliament, Lucas quoted testimony from Sheppard saying: "There's 
absolutely no doubt in my mind whatsoever that Bob Lambert placed the 
incendiary device at the Debenhams store in Harrow. I specifically remember him 
giving an explanation to me about how he had been able to place one of the 
devices in that store, but how he had not been able to place the second 
device". She added: "So it would seem that planting the third incendiary device 
was perhaps a move designed to bolster Lambert's credibility and reinforce the 
impression of a genuine and dedicated activist."

Lambert has strenuously denied planting the incendiary device, adding: "It was 
necessary to create the false impression that I was a committed animal rights 
extremist to gain intelligence so as to disrupt serious criminal conspiracies. 
However, I did not commit serious crime such as 'planting an incendiary device 
at the [Debenhams] Harrow store'."

Mike Schwarz, the lawyer representing Sheppard and Clarke, said that for the 
past 18 months they had repeatedly raised their alleged miscarriage of justice 
with the former and current directors of public prosecutions, Keir Starmer and 
Alison Saunders, but both had "ignored or dismissed our representations". He 
added that, following Ellison's report, they were going to launch an appeal.

Lambert fathered a child with an activist before abandoning the pair, 
returning to work at Scotland Yard, where in the 1990s he directed the 
operations of the SDS.

On Thursday, Ellison reported that Lambert supervised an undercover officer, 
known only as N81, who gathered personal information about Doreen and Neville 
Lawrence as they tried to bring the killers of their son to justice.

Lambert arranged a clandestine meeting between the operative, described by 
Ellison as "the spy in the Lawrence family camp", and a senior officer who was 
helping to draw up the Met's defence of their failed investigation into their 
son's murder.

Lambert said he organised the "fascinating and valuable exchange" as his 
superiors wanted to brief Paul Condon, the then Met commissioner, about the 
Lawrence issue as it "continued to dominate the commissioner's agenda on a 
daily basis".

In his report, Ellison also found that the SDS had "operated as if exempt from 
the proper rules of disclosure in criminal cases" and on occasions failed to 
"correct evidence given in court which they knew was wrong".

In the past three years, it has been revealed that 56 protesters have been 
wrongly convicted or prosecuted as a result of undercover police operations.
 