
Our son, Adam Smith, who has died aged 32 of cancer, was an artist and 
sculptural fabricator who leaves a pictorial testimony; not only in his own 
paintings, but also in works by artists such asMat Collishaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/apr/26/mat-collishaw-still-sensational>
 andCath Campbell 
<http://www.workplacegallery.co.uk/artists/7-cath-campbell/works/>, which were 
made possible by his capacity for translating a basic concept into an 
engineering triumph.

Born in Aldershot, Hampshire, but brought up on the edge of the New Forest, 
Adam was the son of Adrian, a history professor, and Mary (nee Broad), a 
teacher. He attended Orchard junior school, Dibden Purlieu, and Priestlands 
school, Lymington, before heading to Brockenhurst sixth-form college, and then 
in 2003 to Bournemouth Arts Institute (now Arts University Bournemouth), for a 
fine art foundation course. There, and at London College of Communication, 
where he took a BA in Graphic and Media Design, Adam impressed tutors with his 
draughtsmanship and his vivid imagination. Not only could he draw with finesse, 
but when faced with a technologically demanding challenge he could call on a 
wide range of practical skills.

These attributes were confirmed with his MA in illustration at Central Saint 
Martins, and then, following graduation in 2010, in his work as a sculptural 
fabricator. Adam was an impressive artist in his own right, but relished his 
role as an artisan and a craftsman, whether for a short spell designing 
patterns at Alexander McQueen, painting backstage murals at Glastonbury 
festival, or, above all, realising the ideas of contemporary artists through 
his work in London at AB3 Workshop and thenThe White Wall fabrication company 
<http://thewhitewall.co.uk/>, which he joined in 2013.

One of Adam’s most testing assignments came four years ago, when he took the 
lead in erectingStudio Weave’s giant Paleys upon Pilers 
<https://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/daily-news/studio-weave-completes-timber-aldgate-installation/8633762.article?blocktitle=Latest-News&contentID=3>
, a timber palace on the site of Chaucer’s house in Aldgate, east London. He 
also took pride in the installation of Collishaw’s giant zoetrope in the clock 
tower of theVictoria & Albert Museum 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/m/mat-collishaw-magic-lantern/>, London.

This autumn, at Trinity Hall in Cambridge, White Wall put in place a huge 
trellis sculpture of steamed oak and stainless steel by Campbell, which was 
largely built by Adam. His determination to see this last project through to 
completion, despite serious illness, speaks volumes about his courage, grit and 
single-mindedness.

Always his own man, Adam’s principal source of advice and instruction was his 
wife, Georgia McDonald, a medical biochemist, whom he married in Upper Clapton, 
east London, in 2015.

He was talented, handsome, and invariably the best of company. More 
importantly, he was a fair-minded and compassionate human being, and for this 
reason alone he will be sorely missed by all who knew him.

He is survived by Georgia and us.
 