
The “perfect afternoon”, according to Ronald Koeman, although that depends on 
the shade of blue.For Tom Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/everton-tom-davies-ensures-pep-guardiola-knows-name-manchester-city>
, Ademola Lookman and those of a royal hue, it was undoubtedly true as Everton 
produced the finest display and result of the Koeman era. For Pep Guardiola, by 
contrast, this was a harrowing, humbling experience. Manchester Citywere 
dismantled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/everton-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 and their revered manager left searching for answers to the heaviest league 
defeat of his glittering career.

Everton teenager Tom Davies ensures Pep Guardiola knows his name | Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/everton-tom-davies-ensures-pep-guardiola-knows-name-manchester-city>
Guardiola conceded the Premier League title is beyond his expensively 
assembled side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-rules-out-title-race>
 after enduring the club’s biggest defeat against Everton for 31 years. “You’re 
getting sacked in the morning,” reverberated around a jubilant Goodison Park as 
the home crowd revelled in an uncomfortable return for John Stones and the 
emerging talents of Mason Holgate, the new signing Lookman and the outstanding 
Davies in particular. The Evertonians were pushing it, of course, but the City 
manager has bigger problems than the rarity of ending a league campaign without 
the championship on the evidence of another feeble defensive performance.

Romelu Lukaku opened the scoring with Everton’s first shot on target, a 
familiar story for City and one Guardiola admitted affected his players 
mentally, having started brightly. Kevin Mirallas struck a decisive blow 
moments after the restart and from that moment onwards the fortunes of Koeman 
and Guardiola, friends from their Barcelona days, veered in wildly different 
directions.

Everton’s day rose to a crescendo as the 18-year-old Davies opened his account 
for the club with an exquisite finish that his uncle, the former title-winning 
striker Alan Whittle, would have been proud to call his own. Lookman, signed in 
an £11m deal from League One Charlton Athletic, then became the second teenager 
to score his first Everton goal – within four minutes of hisPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> debut.

“Maybe that was the best in terms of it being a total team performance,” the 
Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> manager, Koeman, said. 
“How we played in the second half was really outstanding, really perfect. It 
might have been impossible to play at a higher level in every aspect of 
football.”

The worry for City was not only their limited reaction to falling two goals 
behind early in the second half but their manager’s admission that he “has to 
look for the best solution” to issues that have plagued his team for several 
months. Ten points adrift of the leaders Chelsea and languishing outside the 
Champions League places, City are toiling defensively while their manager 
insists a more clinical approach will alleviate inconsistencies and torment at 
the back. This was a defeat that also raised questions of theircharacter.

Guardiola described City’s first-half display as “exceptional” and they did 
impress until Lukaku scored his 13th of the season in the 34th minute. Raheem 
Sterling screamed in vain for a penalty after colliding with Joel Robles’s 
trailing leg as he attempted to round the Everton goalkeeper and the covering 
Leighton Baines. The referee, Mark Clattenburg, was unmoved. That came from 
City’s first foray down their left and the first of several quality deliveries 
from Kevin De Bruyne, who created another clear opening for the former 
Liverpool winger and David Silva. Both were wasted, so, too, a two‑on-one 
counterattack involving Sterling and Pablo Zabaleta – deployed as a roving 
central midfielder in the absence of Fernandinho, Fernando and Ilkay Gündoğan. 
Their generosity was punished ruthlessly.

The breakthrough arrived when Gaël Clichy gifted possession to Davies. The 
teenager pierced City’s defence with a superb pass into Mirallas, who cut the 
ball back invitingly for Lukaku. His compatriot side-footed a precise, powerful 
shot inside Claudio Bravo’s left-hand post.

Remarkably, it was the fourth time in the past seven league games that City 
had conceded the first shot on their goal. Guardiola had switched Stones, given 
a harsh reception, to the left of City’s central defence to combat Lukaku’s 
tendency to cut inside onto his favoured left foot. There was no City defender 
near the Belgium international when he converted and the tone for a feeble 
display at the back had been set.

Lukaku, who had carried Bradley Lowery – the five-year-old Sunderland fan 
diagnosed with neuroblastoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/everton-sunderland-fan-cancer-battle-bradley-lowery>
 – on to the pitch before kick-off was involved in Everton’s second. His 
attempted through-ball was intercepted by Stones but the impressive Ross 
Barkley slipped the rebound into the path of Mirallas, who found Bravo’s far 
corner with an excellent finish – in keeping with the Belgian’s overall 
contribution.

Guardiola introduced Kelechi Iheanacho for Zabaleta in an attempt to cajole a 
fightback but City’s response barely flickered into life. Everton’s day simply 
got better and better.

Pep Guardiola rules Manchester City out of title race after Everton thrashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-rules-out-title-race>
Davies, who had cleared a Clichy header off his own goal-line in the first 
half, put the contest beyond the visitors with a goal that encapsulated the 
many qualities he has shown since joining the senior ranks. First, he 
outmanoeuvred Yaya Touré and Clichy with a determined run down the right before 
playing the ball inside to Lukaku. Barkley took over, spotted that Davies had 
continued his run and released the teenager on the right of the penalty area. 
Davies clipped a delightful finish over the advancing Bravo and beyond Lukaku’s 
attempt to apply the final touch on the line.

Koeman brought on the £20m signing Morgan Schneiderlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/morgan-schneiderlin-joins-everton-manchester-united>
 and, so comfortable were Everton, January’s other recruit, the 19-year-old 
Lookman. The forward had been on the pitch less than four minutes when Séamus 
Coleman’s raid broke to him inside the area and, ignoring the right-back’s call 
for a return pass, he fired a low finish through the legs of the City 
goalkeeper. Guardiola’s men were routed, well and truly.
 