
The apparent African exodus from the international criminal court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/27/african-revolt-international-criminal-court-gambia>
 must be stopped or the most heinous crimes will be allowed to go unpunished, 
Kofi Annan, the former UN secretary general and one of the ICC’s chief 
architects, has warned.

Burundi, Gambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/gambia-becomes-latest-african-nation-to-quit-international-criminal-court>
 andSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/south-africa-to-quit-international-criminal-court-document-shows>
 said this year they would no longer recognise the court’s jurisdiction and 
announced their intention to quit. They claim the ICC disproportionately 
targets African leaders. Nine of the 10 cases taken by the court have involved 
former African rulers.

State impunity is back in fashion – we need the international court more than 
ever | Kofi Annan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/state-impunity-international-criminal-court-african>
Annan’s intervention is designed to influence the annual meeting of the 
Assembly of States Parties, whose members are signatories to the ICC. He warned 
the actions of the three African countries risked giving the false impression 
the entire continent was hostile to the court.

Annan was pivotal to the court’s creation when he was UN secretary general, 
hosting the inaugural conference in Rome in 1998.

Writing in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/state-impunity-international-criminal-court-african>
, he says: “Most of the continent’s democratic governments stand by the ICC. I 
stand by the ICC, because the most heinous crimes must not go unpunished.”


He says Africa “was [the court’s] most enthusiastic supporter” at the ICC’s 
inception. “Memories of the horrors of the Rwandan genocide were still fresh in 
our minds. In fact, the first signatory of the treaty was an African country, 
Senegal.Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> remains the single 
largest regional bloc, with 34 states party to the Rome statute out of 124,” he 
writes.

Annan said the focus of the ICC’s work in Africa did not indicate any bias but 
rather Africa’s willingness to refer cases to it. “Of the nine investigations 
on the African continent, eight were requested by African states. Six African 
states referred their own situation to the ICC, and African states voted in 
support of the UN security council referrals on Darfur and Libya,” he writes.

“Kenya was the only case in Africa opened independently by the court, but it 
enjoyed the enthusiastic support of a majority of Kenyans. They wanted justice 
for the 1,300 people killed and hundreds of thousands displaced in 
election-related violence.”

Annan said Africa was not the sole subject of international justice, pointing 
out that criminal tribunals were first set up after the second world war, at 
Nuremberg and Tokyo. After the cold war, more international or mixed tribunals 
were launched for crimes in Lebanon, Cambodia and Yugoslavia. The ICC has 
opened investigations in Georgia and is conducting preliminary examinations in 
Afghanistan, Columbia, Ukraine, Iraq and Palestine.


He said the “ICC remains the continent’s most credible court of last resort 
for the most serious crimes … [It] does not supplant national jurisdictions; it 
only intervenes in cases where the country concerned is either unable or 
unwilling to try its own citizens.”
 