
When South Africa’s government started giving laptops 
<http://www.southafrica.info/services/education/elearning-160813.htm#.V-UYDjYrL1J>
 to off-grid schools, James van der Walt spotted an opportunity for a solar 
business. But his market research revealed a problem: of 12 schools he visited, 
11 had previously lost solar panels to thieves. So he decided to pack his 
system into a reinforced shipping container, creating a secure, mobile power 
station that could be shut away at the end of each day.

The prototype Solar Turtle has survived its first year powering a school in 
the Eastern Cape, despite civil unrest that forced the school to close for 
three months. Save for some scratches where someone tried to break in, the unit 
came through intact. “Nothing got broken, nothing got damaged,” says van der 
Walt. “It was like, ‘Yes, it’s actually working’.”

Solar Turtle is just one example from a clutch of startups trying to navigate 
the challenges of Africa’s off-grid electricity sector with mobile, flexible 
solar technology. It’s part of a mosaic of businesses, social enterprises and 
philanthropic schemes fuelling talk of an African “solar revolution”. Other 
startups include Juabar and ARED, which supply portable solar kiosks for 
phone-charging businesses in Tanzania and Rwanda respectively, creating jobs 
while boosting access to clean, cheap energy.

New ideas and declining costs are already leading to a dramatic uptake of 
solar technology across Africa, according to areport published this week 
<http://www.irena.org/menu/index.aspx?mnu=Subcat&PriMenuID=36&CatID=141&SubcatID=2744>
 by the International Renewable Energy Agency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrica-solar-mobile-revolution-stolen-mali-kenya-ghana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff47bfaa8bb4a7f5117fb70d6b1984fdff531d4bf%2F0_190_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa's%20portable%20solar%20revolution%20is%20thwarting%20thieves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrica-solar-mobile-revolution-stolen-mali-kenya-ghana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%27s%20portable%20solar%20revolution%20is%20thwarting%20thieves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrica-solar-mobile-revolution-stolen-mali-kenya-ghana%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff47bfaa8bb4a7f5117fb70d6b1984fdff531d4bf%2F0_190_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Solar power is being used to give remote villages access to reliable sources 
of electricity for refrigeration and irrigation. Photograph: Solar Turtle 
Investors' neglect of small-scale renewables threatens universal energy access
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/20/energy-renewables-climate-change-finance-investment-east-africa-india-off-grid-development>
Van der Walt is not alone in using shipping containers. German firm Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> GreenTec created a similar 
grid-in-a-box for villages in Mali to attract investors nervous about the 
vulnerability of conventional technology in unstable regions. “This way we can 
recover the whole thing if there is any crisis,” says founder Torsten 
Schreiber. “We only need a few hours to put it on a truck and leave.”


It’s unsurprising that entrepreneurs are seeking routes into Africa’s off-grid 
solar sector. More than 630 million people lack electricity in sub-Saharan 
Africa, according to theInternational Energy Agency 
<http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2015/WEO2015Electricityaccessdatabase.xlsx>
. The majority of additional investment required to achieve the UN target of 
universal energy access by 2030 needs to go intooff-grid and mini-grid systems 
<http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/WEO2011_WEB.pdf>, 
it has said.

One hope is that electrification won’t just bring light, TV and phone 
charging, but spawn new industries too. Africa GreenTec’s prototype, launched 
in south-west Mali’s Mourdiah village in 2015, offers a glimpse of what’s 
possible. Locals used to throw away 80% of their goats’ milk, says Schreiber, 
but thanks to energy for cooling from the solar container, they now use it to 
make cheese. Mango juice is also newly on sale.

Despite the buzz around such ventures, most are very small and in need of 
funds. Commercial investors have shown some appetite for backing bigger players 
such as solar systems business M-Kopa Solar, which raised $19m in one 
investment round last November. But young, innovative startups still rely on 
money from donors and so-called impact investors, who look for social benefits 
as well as a financial return, says theGlobal Off-Grid Lighting Association 
<http://global-off-grid-lighting-association.org/>’s executive director, Koen 
Peters.

Schreiber’s experience at Africa GreenTec bears this out. Having crowdfunded 
the money for four containers (at around €150,000 a go) he is now looking to 
mainstream investors to back 50 more. This plan would make him the biggest 
decentralised energy provider inMali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali>, 
he says, but is too small for venture capitalists approached to date: “They 
told me ‘If you need $100m, come again’,” he says.

Africa, food and business: tell us what stories we should cover
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/live/2016/sep/07/africa-food-business-stories-debate>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrica-solar-mobile-revolution-stolen-mali-kenya-ghana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ceeb9dcc2efcb30d1e9de874e9530ead9eacf10%2F113_0_2812_1688%2F2812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa's%20portable%20solar%20revolution%20is%20thwarting%20thieves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrica-solar-mobile-revolution-stolen-mali-kenya-ghana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%27s%20portable%20solar%20revolution%20is%20thwarting%20thieves&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrica-solar-mobile-revolution-stolen-mali-kenya-ghana%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ceeb9dcc2efcb30d1e9de874e9530ead9eacf10%2F113_0_2812_1688%2F2812.jpg>
 More than 630 million people lack electricity in sub-Saharan Africa, according 
to the International Energy Agency. Photograph: Africa GreenTec 
Solar startups are also vulnerable to competition when they have proved their 
model and are ready to grow, says Itamar Orlandi, senior analyst at Bloomberg 
NewEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Finance. “Pioneers 
often work really hard to create consumer awareness just to see their margins 
and market share disappear once their success attracts competitors,” he adds.

Research on a Zambian mini-grid by the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI) 
reveals another, potentially knottier, challenge for electrification startups 
with big dreams. The 60 kilowatt pilot in Mpanta, a fishing village, lost 
customers when a six-month fishing ban kicked in, says Oliver Johnson, senior 
research fellow at SEI’s Africa Centre. Designing the right system, or payment 
plan, requires deep understanding of local conditions, he says. “The big 
question is how do you scale up things that need to be context-specific?”

Answering that may get easier as domestic expertise and supply chains grow – 
something Gillian Davies, a renewable energy expert at UK-based international 
development consultancy IOD PARC, has been monitoring. She points to emergent 
solar panel manufacturers in Kenya andGhana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana>, and the fact you can now take a 
renewable energy degree in Malawi’s Mzuzu University. This shift to domestic 
capacity and expertise will ultimately help with finding solutions that better 
match local, or at least regional, conditions, says Davies.

Products that directly boost income generation may also have an advantage over 
generic electrification when it comes to creating sustainable, scalable 
ventures, says Toby Hammond, whose Kenya-based company Futurepump sells 
solar-powered irrigation pumps to small-scale farmers. “Being able to irrigate 
a crop in dry season when you wouldn’t otherwise be able to grow anything 
translates directly into income for the farm,” he says. “It’s more bankable.”
 