
Liberia’s president has said Hillary Clinton’s defeat  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concedes-election-donald-trump-speech>
was a missed opportunity for women around the world, as fears grew that Donald 
Trump’s victory in the US election would damage women’s lives and political 
hopes far beyond America’s borders.


The shock result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/the-guardian-view-on-president-elect-donald-trump-a-dark-day-for-the-world>
 dashed hopes that a first female president could serve as a powerful feminist 
global figurehead, amid growing concerns that a Trump administration could cut 
aid funds for some of the most vulnerable women in the world.

12 steps to achieve gender equality in our lifetimes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/14/gender-equality-women-girls-rights-education-empowerment-politics>
“We are extremely saddened by this missed opportunity on the part of the 
people of the United States to join smaller democracies in ending the 
marginalisation of women,”Ellen Johnson Sirleaf 
<http://news.trust.org/item/20161109165348-4zo83>, the first woman to be 
elected as head of state in Africa, told BBC television.

Multiple allegations of sexual misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/list-of-donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations>
 against Trump, and hislewd comments boasting of assault on leaked footage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
, are particularly disturbing for campaigners against gender violence.

“Trump’s victory is a clear message to women around the world that we don’t 
count, that our safety and demands for justice for sexual violence are not 
important,” saidMona Eltahawy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mona-eltahawy>, a Cairo-based writer and 
feminist.

“When a sexual predator can become president of any country – most of all the 
most important country in the world – it’s a green light that women’s bodies 
are fair game.”

In India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, activists fighting the 
country’s endemic violence against women said Trump’s victory was devastating 
because of America’s global leadership role.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fliberia-president-ellen-johnson-sirleaf-hillary-clinton-defeat-donald-trump-women-rights-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef98a611c8937c8d4d0e4a2d20c35819f4f4b462%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa%20leads%20outcry%20over%20setback%20for%20feminism%20after%20Trump%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fliberia-president-ellen-johnson-sirleaf-hillary-clinton-defeat-donald-trump-women-rights-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%20leads%20outcry%20over%20setback%20for%20feminism%20after%20Trump%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fliberia-president-ellen-johnson-sirleaf-hillary-clinton-defeat-donald-trump-women-rights-equality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef98a611c8937c8d4d0e4a2d20c35819f4f4b462%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Journalist Mona Eltahawy, who says Trump’s victory sends a message that 
women’s bodies are fair game. Photograph: Brian Ach/Getty Images 
“It reinforces the belief, which is also there in India, that men can get away 
with violating women with impunity,” said Sonali Khan, country director of the 
women’s rights organisation Breakthrough, adding that it sent a dispiriting 
political message as well.

Hawaii dubbed the 'best state for women's equality' in new study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/hawaii-womens-equality-work-education-politics-study>
“It is still difficult for a woman to hold a position of political power. 
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> is more 
qualified; she has experience. Despite that, this decision. I mean it makes you 
think: ‘was it because she’s a woman?’” said Khan.

Chinese feminists had been rooting for Clinton, who has occupied a special 
place in their hearts since giving a famous 1995 speech in Beijing, in which 
she declared: “Human rights are women’s rights and women’s rights are human 
rights.”

“I cannot accept the result. I cannot believe my eyes,” said Li Maizi, one of 
the leading members of China’s nascent feminist movement.

When Li and four other Chinese campaigners were arrested in Beijing as part of 
a government crackdown last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/12/five-chinese-feminists-held-international-womens-day>
, Clinton came to her defence, accusing President Xi Jinping of being 
“shameless” for claiming to speak up for gender equality while “persecuting” 
feminist activists.

She fears Trump is unlikely to fight for feminists in a similar way. “I have 
been in a bad mood for the entire day,” Li said. “I will carry on using toilet 
paper with Trump’s face on it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fliberia-president-ellen-johnson-sirleaf-hillary-clinton-defeat-donald-trump-women-rights-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f7d68d8b756c10e9de40f975390961856e8c6c0%2F0_0_3728_2237%2F3728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Africa%20leads%20outcry%20over%20setback%20for%20feminism%20after%20Trump%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fliberia-president-ellen-johnson-sirleaf-hillary-clinton-defeat-donald-trump-women-rights-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Africa%20leads%20outcry%20over%20setback%20for%20feminism%20after%20Trump%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fliberia-president-ellen-johnson-sirleaf-hillary-clinton-defeat-donald-trump-women-rights-equality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f7d68d8b756c10e9de40f975390961856e8c6c0%2F0_0_3728_2237%2F3728.jpg>
 Japanese politician Yuriko Koike. Photograph: Kiyoshi Ota/EPA 
In Japan, women had hoped a Clinton victory would boost their efforts to raise 
the profile of women in politics, still extremely low despite the recent 
elections of Yuriko Koike asgovernor of Tokyo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/31/tokyo-elects-first-female-governor>
 and Renhō Murata asleader of the country’s main opposition party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/japanese-opposition-party-elects-first-female-leader>
.

Murata, the first woman to lead the Democratic party, congratulated Trump on 
his victory, but added that she hoped he would distance himself from comments 
made during the campaign and prove that he respected the rights of women and 
minorities.

Mari Miura, a political science professor at Sophia University and a gender 
equality expert, said she feared Trump’s victory could be used as 
“justification for a misogynistic backlash” on the other side of the Pacific.

“If even Clinton, a prominent politician with lots of experience, can’t win, 
then it will send out the message toJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> that it will never have a female 
prime minister,” Miura said.

Japan must embrace ‘womenomics’ to modernise economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/women-leadership-blog/2014/oct/16/shinzo-abe-japan-women-economy-cherie-blair>
Women make up fewer than one in 10 MPs in the lower house of Japan’s parliament
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2014/dec/15/female-representation-parliament-rwanda>
 and one in five in the upper house. There are just three women in the 
20-member cabinet and prime minister Shinzō Abe has got off to a slow start 
with his pledge to fill 30% of public and private sector leadership positions 
with women by the end of the decade.

There are also concerns that a Trump administration might cut aid to some of 
the most vulnerable women in the world, including those with HIV/Aids and 
victims of sexual violence.

“There is increasing recognition that sexual violence in conflict is major 
issue, and a major part of responding to that is reproductive healthcare 
including access to abortion,” said Heather Barr, senior researcher on women’s 
rights at Human Rights Watch.

“The US has been a major donor for services for women around the world and, in 
the wake of a campaign that has focused on restricting reproductive freedom, we 
are concerned about both quantities of aid and restrictions that might be 
placed on it.”

Vidhi Doshi <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/vidhi-doshi> in Mumbai, Tom 
Phillips <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tomphillips> in Beijing and 
Justin McCurry <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/justinmccurry> in Tokyo 
contributed to reporting.
 