
Aftershocks have rattled the survivors of a devastating earthquake in Indonesia
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> that killed nearly 100 people as 
officials urgently appealed for medicine and doctors to treat the hundreds 
injured.


The fresh tremors hampered rescue efforts in Aceh province on Sumatra where a 
shallow 6.5-magnitude quakelevelled hundreds of homes, mosques and businesses 
on Wednesday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/aceh-earthquake-children-among-dead-and-dozens-more-trapped-on-sumatra>

Search and rescue crews using advanced life-detecting devices have been 
combing the rubble for any sign of movement, as hopes fade of finding any more 
survivors more than a day after the quake.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Frescuers-hunt-for-survivors-after-earthquake-in-indonesia-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rescuers%20hunt%20for%20survivors%20after%20earthquake%20in%20Indonesia%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Frescuers-hunt-for-survivors-after-earthquake-in-indonesia-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rescuers%20hunt%20for%20survivors%20after%20earthquake%20in%20Indonesia%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Frescuers-hunt-for-survivors-after-earthquake-in-indonesia-video-report&media=>
Rescuers hunt for survivors after earthquake in Indonesia – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/07/rescuers-hunt-for-survivors-after-earthquake-in-indonesia-video-report>
“These scan through the rubble to see if anyone’s alive or dead,” said 
national disaster agency spokesman Sutopo Purwo Nugroho.

The death toll stands at 99, he added. The figure has fluctuated as 
authorities identify the dead across the region which one of the areas 
worst-affected by thedevastating 2004 tsunami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/dec/27/tsunami2004.indonesia>.

Thousands of soldiers and emergency personnel have been using excavators to 
clear rubble in the worst-hit areas, with volunteers – equipped with little 
more than hoes and their bare hands – also chipping in.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Faftershocks-rattle-survivors-amid-appeal-for-supplies-after-indonesia-quake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7914d1fd048f9baf38815b5d8ee1efd57a49ed80%2F0_182_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aftershocks%20rattle%20survivors%20amid%20appeal%20for%20supplies%20after%20Indonesia%20quake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Faftershocks-rattle-survivors-amid-appeal-for-supplies-after-indonesia-quake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aftershocks%20rattle%20survivors%20amid%20appeal%20for%20supplies%20after%20Indonesia%20quake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Faftershocks-rattle-survivors-amid-appeal-for-supplies-after-indonesia-quake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7914d1fd048f9baf38815b5d8ee1efd57a49ed80%2F0_182_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A man holds his son in front of a collapsed building in Aceh. Photograph: 
Anadolu Agency/Getty Images 
President Joko Widodo asked people to pray for their fellow Indonesians in the 
disaster-stricken province.

“Aceh is not alone,” he posted on his official Twitter account.

But attention is shifting to caring for those injured and homeless.

The army has established kitchens, shelters and a field hospital in the 
hard-hit town of Meureudu, Aceh military chief Tatang Sulaiman told Agence 
France-Presse.

“Our priority today is to re-check all the buildings to ensure no more victims 
are trapped, and to help the refugees,” he said.

But medical supplies and other essentials in short supply, officials said, 
with the region’s ill-equipped hospitals overwhelmed.


More than 700 people were injured in the quake, many seriously, according to 
the disaster agency.

Said Mulyadi, the deputy chief of the worst-hit Pidie Jaya district, said they 
were in desperate need of medicine, supplies and extra hands to treat the 
injured.

“We need surgeons and orthopaedics, because many victims have fractures,” he 
told AFP.

Most victims spent the night outdoors, either unable to return to their homes 
or terrified of the aftershocks rattling the region, he added.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Faftershocks-rattle-survivors-amid-appeal-for-supplies-after-indonesia-quake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5d146fc781447c9c1d6496317650e899e94432a%2F0_69_2111_1267%2F2111.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aftershocks%20rattle%20survivors%20amid%20appeal%20for%20supplies%20after%20Indonesia%20quake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Faftershocks-rattle-survivors-amid-appeal-for-supplies-after-indonesia-quake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aftershocks%20rattle%20survivors%20amid%20appeal%20for%20supplies%20after%20Indonesia%20quake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Faftershocks-rattle-survivors-amid-appeal-for-supplies-after-indonesia-quake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5d146fc781447c9c1d6496317650e899e94432a%2F0_69_2111_1267%2F2111.jpg>
 Survivors in makeshift accommodation in Pidie, Indonesia after Wednesday’s 
quake. Photograph: Lana Priatna / Barcroft Images 
Aid has begun trickling into the region, with emergency shelters erected to 
house those left with nowhere to go.

But more was needed for the 4,000 people evacuated to shelters, said local 
disaster agency chief Puteh Manaf.

“They really need food, clean water, medication and blankets,” he told AFP.

Many fled for higher ground when the quake struck, fearing a tsunami, though 
no alert was issued.

A huge undersea earthquake in 2004 triggered a tsunami that engulfed several 
countries around the Indian ocean, killing more than 170,000 people in 
Indonesia alone, the vast majority in Aceh.

Indonesia experiences frequent seismic and volcanic activity due to its 
position on the Pacific “Ring of Fire”, where tectonic plates collide.

Aceh lies on the northern tip of Sumatra island, which is particularly prone 
to quakes. In June a 6.5-magnitude quake struck off the west of Sumatra, 
damaging scores of buildings and injuring eight people.
 