
First Paris introduced the Vélib’ bicycle; then the Autolib’ electric car. 
Now, in a further move to reduce noise and pollution, amoped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/03/paris-to-launch-electric-moped-hire-scheme>
-sharing scheme has rolled into the French capital.

Called Cityscoot <https://www.cityscoot.eu>, a fleet of 150 electric scooters 
similar to the old-fashioned 50ccmobylette, 
<https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobylette> made their appearance on Paris’s 
streets on Tuesday.

The project’s organisers say they are cheap, emit no noise or fumes, and are 
safe and hygienic, with a helmet and plastic hair cap stowed under the seat.

Their maximum speed of 28mph (45kmh) is unlikely to impress Top Gear, but 
Philippe Doucet of Le Figaro 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/automobile/2016/06/20/30002-20160620ARTFIG00314-j-ai-teste-le-cityscoot-le-scooter-en-libre-usage.php>
 described the scooters – made in Poland by a German manufacturer – as “nippy 
enough to slip into traffic with no problem”.

“It makes no noise, not when it starts or when it’s going, so be careful not 
to surprise pedestrians. Even with a rider weighing more than 100kg the 
Cityscoot accelerates well and achieves its maximum speed in a few seconds,” 
Doucet wrote.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fafter-velib-bikes-and-autolib-cars-paris-adds-cityscoot-mopeds-to-capitals-hire-fleet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6134c736ef05334451ac34da388560e9a7e53c7c%2F0_253_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20V%C3%A9lib%E2%80%99%20bikes%20and%20Autolib%E2%80%99%20cars%2C%20Paris%20adds%20mopeds%20to%20hire%20fleet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fafter-velib-bikes-and-autolib-cars-paris-adds-cityscoot-mopeds-to-capitals-hire-fleet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20V%C3%A9lib%E2%80%99%20bikes%20and%20Autolib%E2%80%99%20cars%2C%20Paris%20adds%20mopeds%20to%20hire%20fleet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fafter-velib-bikes-and-autolib-cars-paris-adds-cityscoot-mopeds-to-capitals-hire-fleet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6134c736ef05334451ac34da388560e9a7e53c7c%2F0_253_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 A man rides a Vélib’ bicycle near the Eiffel Tower. Photograph: Francois 
Guillot/AFP/Getty Images 
Riders do not have to worry about where they leave their Cityscoot 
<https://www.facebook.com/cityscootparis> as the mopeds can be dropped almost 
anywhere, as long as they are not blocking the road or pavement or causing a 
nuisance, and do not need to be charged by users.

Frenchman Bertrand Fleurose, a former City trader in London who founded 
Cityscoot 
<http://www.challenges.fr/challenges-soir/20160621.CHA0890/cityscoot-pourquoi-paris-se-dote-de-scooters-electriques.html>
, said it would work on a “free-floating” model; there were no rental parks, 
keys or magnetic cards, and geo-location meant the nearest moped could be found 
using the related smartphone app.

Once a scooter was found and booked via the app, the rider had 10 minutes to 
pick it up using a start code.

Riders must be over 18 and register using the app, which requires a 
photograph. Face recognition software will check their identity. Insurance is 
included and only drivers born after 1 January 1988 need a licence.

It costs from 20 cents a minute if prepaid, up to a maximum of 28c a minute. A 
journey acrossParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> from the Champs 
Elysées to Bastille will cost about €2.40, a little more than a metro ticket.

Fleurose said he has been working on the scooter scheme, which is supported by 
Paris City Hall 
<http://www.paris.fr/actualites/cityscoot-le-1er-service-de-location-de-scooters-electriques-en-libre-acces-c-est-parti-3822>
, for 10 years. About 1,500 testers participated in a six-month pilot scheme 
and made 20,000 journeys, the average length of which was 2.3 miles. Cityscoot 
aims to have 1,000 mopeds in the French capital by the end of March next year.

Scooter schemes already exist in Spain (Cooltra) and Germany (eMio).
 