
Musicians: when they’re not trying to indoctrinate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/shortcuts/2015/mar/31/tidal-jay-z-madonna-and-kanye-make-waves-in-the-streaming-business>
 us with their weird streaming cult, they’re inciting violence among our 
children or provoking the premature sexualisation of teens. Or are they? Teen 
siteRookiemag <http://www.rookiemag.com/> has been challenging the assumption 
that rap and rock stars are a bad influence on future generations by enlisting 
some of the biggest and best names in music to dole out advice for its Ask an 
Adult video series. This week,Beastie Boys’ Ad-Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/12/adam-ad-rock-horovitz-beastie-boys-interview-while-were-young>
 made his debut and imparted wise advice about intimacy and how to overcome 
insecurity. The videos offer a great opportunity for finding out how to become 
a better person and, as a bonus, are sneaky excavations of otherwise enigmatic 
artists’ minds and vulnerabilities. Below are some of the best.

Karen O  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/29/karen-o-soundtrack-of-my-life-yeah-yeah-yeahs>

As with many famous extroverts or eccentrics, there is a shy and insecure 
being who’s perfected the art of being vivacious as the public persona. Here, 
theYeah Yeah Yeahs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/21/yeah-yeah-yeahs-islington-academy>
’ frontwoman offers some sage advice on stage fright, which could be relevant 
for anyone suffering from a crisis of confidence (she suggests getting angry, 
drunk and faking a sense of self-certainty). Most precious are her 
philosophical thoughts on heartache, and the artistic “gift” of being 
heartbroken. “Heartbreak is pretty much one of the most romantic things that 
could happen to you,” she says. “It’s way more romantic than just staying with 
your boyfriend for another three or four years and breaking up and falling 
apart ... you get the opportunity to feel one of the most intense, soul 
shaking, to-your-core and most alive feelings that there is as a human being.” 
So there you have it: hurting is how you grow, create and love people better. 
And how you end up writinga song like Maps 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oIIxlgcuQRU>. 

Ad Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/12/adam-ad-rock-horovitz-beastie-boys-interview-while-were-young>

From first kisses (“go ahead and do it!”) to the best method for breaking up 
with a partner (“blame your parents – that’s a good out”), Adam Horowitz is an 
expert in matters of the heart. He’s also quick to point out the crucial 
differences between women and men – “boys are for the most part not very 
observant or altogether smart for that matter” – and is particularly effective 
when reassuring one viewer about their regular bouts of insecurity: “Everybody 
feels that way weekly. You’re not alone. When I get down or feel alone or 
depressed I make music. It makes me happy. Think about the thing that makes you 
happiest and do that.”

Run the Jewels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/26/run-the-jewels-on-hip-hops-golden-age-playing-ferguson-and-americas-civil-rights-problem>

Perhaps it’s something to do with the hip-hop crowd, but Run the Jewels have a 
similar stance to Ad-Rock regarding the gender divide: According toEL-P and 
Killer Mike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2014/oct/31/run-the-jewels-2-elp-killer-mike-video-review>
 “guys are dumb” and “mature slower than girls, so that means we’re confused 
about our bodies for a lot longer.” The rappers are also experts on first dates 
(“don’t go to a movie, go for some food”), age gaps (don’t date someone in 
their 20s when you are 14), and how to get over an ex: “The easiest way to get 
over a hurt heart or broken promise or love lost is to find another love.” 
Which, I presume, is the PG-version of telling someone to get over a guy by 
getting under another one.

Stephen Malkmus  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/24/stephen-malkmus-pavement-soundtrack-my-life>

If you thought slacker rock was all about wearing caps and acting aloof, then 
here’s the genre’s holy leaderStephen Malkmus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/stephen-malkmus> discussing all matters of 
emotions, such as intra-band crushes – “I think that crushes are virtually 
impossible to crash so I think you should just act on it because an unrequited 
crush is also going to put a lot of stress on the band” – and how to navigate 
the tricky emotional logistics of casual sex. While wearing a cap.

Thom Yorke and Nigel Godrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jul/15/thom-yorke-spotify-twitter>

Perhaps the most revealing of all is producer Nigel Godrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/22/nigel-godrich-really-thinks-about-spotify>
 and Radiohead’sThom Yorke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/11/thom-yorke-asks-who-does-our-government-work-for>
’s sweetly effacing video. I like how Godrich is wise, considered and thorough 
while Yorke is a little more prone to misbehaviour and unpredictability. It 
feels like a dynamic possibly indicative of their time in the studio together. 
The Ask a Grown Man series also allows two notoriously private men to talk 
candidly about topics other thanAbleton <https://www.ableton.com/> or Spotify. 
Instead, you get musings on the initial sparks of attraction (“those little 
electrical impulses – they’re the best bit ... one of the nicest things about 
being alive”), advice on how to overcome shyness in the face of love ...

Thom Yorke: If you have a crush on him, if you’re really, really, really, 
really shy, which is what I was at that age — also, I was at a boys’ school so 
it was impossible to meet girls anyway – how about just write him a note? Or if 
you can’t bear it, just throw him against a wall sometime.

... And the beauty of psychical imperfections [Yorke was born with one eye 
fixed shut]: “When I was your age I was convinced that girls would think it was 
not very nice at all. I worked in this pub and this old woman used to come in 
all the time, she was the first person to say: ‘It’s the nicest thing about 
you.’ She was pissed at the time, but you know, I went with it.”

Also in the series: Tegan and Sara 
<http://www.rookiemag.com/2012/11/sunday-video-tegan-and-sara/>, Beth Ditto 
<http://www.rookiemag.com/2013/05/ask-a-grown-woman-beth-ditto/>, Girl Talk 
<http://www.rookiemag.com/2014/04/ask-a-grown-man-girl-talk/>, Tunde Adebimpe 
<http://www.rookiemag.com/2013/10/aagm-tunde-adebimpe/>.
 