

Outdoor air pollution has grown 8% globally in the past five years, with 
billions of people around the world now exposed to dangerous air,according to 
new data <http://www.who.int/phe> from more than 3,000 cities compiled by the 
World Health Organisation (WHO).
3,000 cities on WHO report 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/archive-zip/giv-12515CF0UBm6t9gvr/>
While all regions are affected, fast-growing cities in the Middle East, 
south-east Asia and the western Pacific are the most impacted with many showing 
pollution levels at five to 10 times above WHO recommended levels.

Bar chart of cities by region 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/archive-zip/giv-125158X7Uhkk84D9S/all-bars.html>
According to the new WHO database 
<http://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/databases/cities/en/>, levels 
of ultra-fine particles of less than 2.5 microns (PM2.5s) are highest in India, 
which has 16 of the world’s 30 most polluted cities.

China, which has been plagued by air pollution, has improved its air quality 
since 2011 and now has only five cities in the top 30. Nine other countries, 
including Pakistan and Iran, have one city each in the worst 30.
China and India PM 2.5 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/china-india/giv-12515HgvRpWhSr6Mt/>
For the larger, but slightly less dangerous PM10 particles, India has eight 
cities in the world’s top 30. Nigeria,Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> and Pakistan each have two 
cities in the top 10. The true figure for the growth in global air pollution is 
likely to be worse because only a handful of African cities monitor their 
levels.

The most polluted city in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/which-are-the-worlds-two-most-polluted-cities-and-why>
, according to the WHO data, is Onitsha, a fast-growing port and transit city 
in south-eastern Nigeria that recorded levels of nearly 600 micrograms per 
cubic metre of PM10s - around 30 times the WHO recommended level of 20 
micrograms per cubic metre.
Africa and Asia PM 10 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/who-africa-pm10/giv-12515KojFjAfF5ldZ/>
Air pollution levels were generally much lower for cities in developed 
countries with Sydney, New York and London registering 17, 16 and 22 micrograms 
per cubic metre for PM10s respectively. However, the data only includes 
measurements for particulates and does not include forms of air pollution such 
as NO2 and ozone.

“We have a public health emergency in many countries. Urban air pollution 
continues to rise at an alarming rate, wreaking havoc on human health. It’s 
dramatic, one of the biggest problems we are facing globally, with terrible 
future costs to society,” said Dr Maria Neira, director of public health at the 
WHO in Geneva.

“The cost for countries is enormous. Air pollution affects economies and 
people’s quality of life. It leads to major chronic diseases and to people 
ultimately dying,” she said.



Which are the world's two most polluted cities – and why?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/which-are-the-worlds-two-most-polluted-cities-and-why>
The new data, drawn from city and academic records, shows a rapid 
deterioration in air quality as low-income cities grow unchecked and 
populations become unable to escape clouds of smog and soot from transport, 
industry, construction sites, farming and wood-burning in homes.

Outdoor air pollution causes more than 3m deaths a year 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v525/n7569/full/nature15371.html> - more 
than malaria and HIV/Aids - and is now the biggest single killer in the world. 
The toll is expected to double as urban populations increase and car numbers 
approach 2bn by 2050.

Air pollutants such as sulphates, nitrates and black carbon penetrate deep 
into the lungs and into the cardiovascular system, posing the greatest risks to 
human health, says the UN.

“As urban air quality declines, the risk of stroke, heart disease, lung 
cancer, and chronic and acute respiratory diseases, including asthma, increases 
for the people who live in them. When dirty air blankets our cities the most 
vulnerable urban populations - the youngest, oldest and poorest - are the most 
impacted,” said Flavia Bustreo, WHO assistant director general.

Encouragingly, there is evidence from the WHO data that many cities are 
addressing air pollution. More than half of the monitored cities in high-income 
countries and more than one-third of those in low- and middle-income countries 
reduced their air pollution levels by more than 5% in five years. Delhi, one of 
the most polluted cities in the world, has banned large diesel cars from going 
into the city centre.

Air pollution: how does it affect you?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/air-pollution-how-does-it-affect-you>
Measures taken by cities include reducing industrial smokestack emissions, 
increasing the use of renewable power sources like solar and wind, and 
prioritising rapid transit, walking and cycling networks in cities. Many cities 
are also committed to reducing reducing car traffic and diesel vehicles in 
particular.

The UN’s third outdoor air pollution database suggests the cleanest cities in 
the world are generally small, wealthy and situated far from industrial 
centres. Muonio in Finland, a town above the Arctic circle, has the world’s 
purest recorded urban air, recording just 2 micrograms per cubic metre of PM2.5 
pollution and 4 micrograms per cubic metre of PM10s. It is closely followed by 
Norman Wells in Canada, Campisábalos in Spain and Converse County, Wyoming in 
the US.
Search database 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/who-pollution/embed/embed.html> 
Of 52 UK towns and cities included in the UN database, Port Talbot in south 
Wales, a hub for the UK steel industry, is the most polluted, ahead of London, 
Glasgow, Southampton and Leeds. The cleanest UK city in the WHO list is 
Inverness, followed by Bournemouth, Newcastle and Sunderland.

The most polluted city in Australia, according to the data, is Geraldton, a 
major seaport on the west coast, north of Perth. The most polluted city in the 
United States is the inland city of Visalia-Porterville in California.

Eastbourne a surprise name among UK's most polluted towns and cities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/eastbourne-a-surprise-name-among-uks-most-polluted-towns-and-cities>
“More than 80% of people living in urban areas that monitor air pollution are 
exposed to air quality levels that exceed theWorld Health Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/world-health-organisation> limits. While all 
regions of the world are affected, populations in low-income cities are the 
most impacted; 98% of cities in low- and middle income countries with more than 
100,000 inhabitants do not meet WHO air quality guidelines. However, in high 
income countries, that percentage decreases to 56%,” said the WHO.


“It is crucial for city and national governments to make urban air quality a 
health and development priority,” said Dr Carlos Dora, co-ordinator of the 
WHO’s Interventions for Healthy Environment programme. “When air quality 
improves, health costs from air pollution related diseases shrink, worker 
productivity expands and life expectancy grows. Reducing air pollution also 
brings an added climate bonus, which can become a part of countries’ 
commitments to the climate treaty.”
 