
India’s national airline will designate two rows on every flight as 
female-only.


Air India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> made the announcement 
after two incidents in the past month of men allegedly groping cabin staff or 
other passengers.

A general manager at the airline, Meenakshi Malik, said officials had made the 
decision 
<http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/Air-India-to-reserve-six-front-seats-for-women/article17023907.ece>
 because “we feel … it is our responsibility to enhance comfort level to female 
passengers”.


The service, which will come at no extra charge, will start this week on 
internal flights, and be rolled out across the network throughout the year.

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> in India can already 
ride in segregated train carriages and buses, and pink women-only 
auto-rickshaws in two cities near Delhi.

Air India is trying to rebuild its reputation as a safe airline for female 
passengers afteran incident in December 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/business-class-flyer-gropes-woman-on-flight-to-us/articleshow/56384289.cms>
, when a business class passenger flying from Mumbai to Newark moved to an 
empty seat next to a woman in economy and allegedly groped her as she slept.

Another Air India passenger was also reportedly arrested in January 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/airhostess-alleges-sexual-harassment-by-passenger/articleshow/56321206.cms>
 after a flight attendant complained he had touched her inappropriately and 
made lewd remarks.

This month, the airline announced its crew would begin carrying restraints 
<http://www.indiatimes.com/news/india/if-you-act-unruly-aboard-air-india-flight-staff-will-now-put-handcuffs-on-you-269062.html>
 on domestic and international flights to be used on unruly passengers as a 
last resort.

A former Air India executive, Jitendra Bhargava, told the Hindu 
<http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/Air-India-to-reserve-six-front-seats-for-women/article17023907.ece>
 the move was a “misplaced priority”.

“To my knowledge, this happens nowhere in the world. Planes are not unsafe for 
women passengers,” he said. “In case of unruly behaviour, the airline crew are 
authorised to take action as per the law.”

Domestic air traffic jumped by more than 20% in India in 2015, making it the 
world’s fastest growing aviation market. Butsafety fears are also increasing 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/aviation/flying-getting-riskier-in-india-as-safety-incidents-increase-20160815-gqt8ng.html>
, including near-misses by planes on the tarmac andpilots getting drunk 
<https://qz.com/677267/more-than-40-pilots-were-drunk-on-duty-in-india-last-year-most-work-for-jet-airways-and-indigo/>
 on the job.
 