
Hibernian’s failure to win the Scottish Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup> since success over Celtic in 
1902 is a constant source of ridicule. The serious aspect is simple – the 
record is ludicrous for a club of Hibs’ standing. Even terrific Hibs teams have 
fallen short, which makes the prominence of the class of 2016 somewhat strange 
when placed in context.

Saturday’s cup final against Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> arrives only days after Hibs’ 
latest failure to win promotion to the top flight. They will therefore spend a 
third season in succession playing lower league football. Financially, and in 
terms of reputation, this is seriously damaging. Whether the pain would be 
offset by the claiming of the one trophy to elude them for so long is open to 
debate. The winners at Hampden will earn a place in the Europa League’s 
qualifying stage.

Uncertainty relating to the future of Alan Stubbs has been apparent for 
months. The Hibs manager has been linked with the vacant position at Bolton 
Wanderers, one of his former clubs. Given unsatisfactory climaxes to promotion 
bids, it is debatable whether Stubbs has earned the right to continue at Easter 
Road in any case.

Rangers secure promotion to Scottish Premiership with win over Dumbarton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/05/rangers-promotion-scottish-premiership-dumbarton>
“The big negative is we didn’t achieve our main goal and we’re disappointed 
from that,” Stubbs said. “But after this final, we’re already focusing on next 
season. We are planning towards making the team even stronger. I don’t think 
you need a carrot dangling in terms of what’s at stake. They may never have 
another opportunity to play in a Scottish Cup final. I certainly would love 
them to play in two, three, four cup finals but the likelihood is that they may 
not.”

Rangers lie between Hibs and the Scottish Cup in what represents the first 
time this final has featured two teams from outside Scotland’s top division.
Rangers’ canter to the Championship title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/23/hearts-rangers-motherwell-scottish-premiership>
 means they will play Premiership football next season. The key danger lies in 
the three weeks that have passed since their last competitive outing.

“It’s always a risk having a break, you can look at it both ways,” Mark 
Warburton said. “You can say it’s hard on Rangers having a break or tough on 
Hibs having four games in a fortnight. They can run the risk of fatigue or 
injury. We have done the best we can and we know we’ll need to replicate this 
again in January when there is a winter break.”

The Rangers manager added: “From where Rangers have been, the prize is now 
European football if we beat a very good opponent. And it’s also for the 
Rangers fans with the history and experiences of European football. They will 
be desperate to get those nights back again at Ibrox and if we can beat Hibs 
and give them that, fantastic.”

Warburton remains hopeful of coaxing Joey Barton from Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/burnley-leicester-promotion-sean-dyche-premier-league>
 but there is a fear the midfielder may opt to remain in England, with Burnley 
having been promoted to the Premier League. European football, surely, would 
help Rangers’ cause.

Rangers welcome back their most prolific striker, Martyn Waghorn, for the 
final. Warburton, however, is without the suspended Tottenham loanee Dominic 
Ball.
 