
The former Leeds and Manchester United striker Alan Smith has been placed in 
temporary charge ofNotts County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottscounty> while the club looks for a 
new permanent manager.

Another Notts County era begins with cautious optimism after £3.5m takeover
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/notts-county-takeover-alan-hardy-ray-trew>
Smith, 36, a County player since the summer of 2014, has been asked to oversee 
first-team duties following the sacking of John Sheridan. Mark Crossley will 
continue in his role as assistant manager.

Sheridan departed Meadow Lane on Monday, hours after a 4-0 defeat at Cambridge 
– a ninth successiveLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> loss which left Notts 
just one place and one point above the relegation zone. The 52-year-old was 
appointed in the summer but won only six of his 24 league games.

Smith’s first game in charge will be away at Morecambe on Saturday while the 
club looks for its 11th full-time manager since winning the League Two title in 
May 2010.

“The most important thing right now is for everyone – players, staff and fans 
– to stick together,” Smith told the club’s official website. “There’s no 
getting away from it, it’s been a very, very disappointing season so far. But 
there are lots of points still to play for and we are determined and confident 
of putting things right.

“The fans are doing their bit. Our following at Cambridge, given our recent 
form, was phenomenal. As players and staff we have to repay that loyalty.

“We have some huge games coming up, starting at Morecambe on Saturday and, 
until a new manager arrives, I will be working closely with Mark and the rest 
of the staff to hopefully lead an upturn in our fortunes.”

Notts County are set to be taken over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/notts-county-takeover-alan-hardy-ray-trew>
 by the local businessman Alan Hardy after the current owner, Ray Trew, agreed 
to sell the club in December but it is understood the former will not appoint 
Smith on a permanent basis, instead wanting a manager with proven lower-league 
experience.

Smith came through the academy at Leeds in the late 1990s and he was part of 
the side that reached the Champions League semi-finals under David O’Leary in 
2001.

He made a controversial move to Manchester United following Leeds’ relegation 
from the Premier League in 2004 and made a good start at Old Trafford before a 
broken leg curtailed his career.

The striker-turned-midfielder, who won 19 England caps, then moved to 
Newcastle before dropping down to League One with MK Dons and then Notts County.
 