
On a cold spring morning earlier this year, I met Alan Yentob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-yentob> in the Eurostar departure 
lounge at St Pancras International station in London. It was about 6am and we 
were on our way to the “Jungle” refugee camp, just outside Calais. Yentob, who 
is 69 and has the physiognomy of a small mature bear, was perched on a bar 
stool, wearing a long coat, what looked like a pair of red checked pyjama 
bottoms and two scarves. The weather had been bitter and the camp was said to 
be muddy. Yentob had texted me the night before to remind me to wear sensible 
boots, but he had forgotten to bring any himself.

Yentob was going to Calais to oversee a film that he was making there. In its 
way, the project was a perfectly Yentobian enterprise. Since he was forced to
resign as the BBC’s creative director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/03/alan-yentob-steps-down-bbc-kids-company>
 in December 2015, on account of thecollapse of Kids Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/05/the-guardian-view-on-the-fall-of-kids-company-a-social-policy-morality-tale>
, a charity that he chaired, Yentob has focused again on making programmes. And 
during last winter – before Brexit, before the camp closed – this particular 
camp became a hot thing among the cultural elite in London. The refugee crisis 
was here, or at least very close (55 minutes on a fast train). Thousands of 
bereft Afghans, Iraqis, Syrians and Eritreans were living in shacks, risking 
their lives to get smuggled across the English Channel. Politicians were 
proving useless at resolving the problem, intolerance was on the rise, and 
there was an opportunity for artists and film-makers to go into the camp, meet 
the refugees and articulate their experiences. Damon had been over – he was 
working with the Syrian national orchestra. Rufus, from the National Theatre, 
was involved. (Yentob’s is a first name world.) The Stephens (Daldry and 
Frears) were on the case. And so, as water flows downhill, was Yentob.

Yentob had dispatched a director named Jack Cocker, whom he uses for Imagine, 
the arts series he has presented since 2003, to make a film inside the camp. 
Tentatively entitled How To Survive Inside the Jungle, the idea was for it to 
be beautiful and human and stocked with archival footage of the wrecked places 
the refugees were from. Yentob has an unquestioning belief in the power of 
public television to change society and improve the human condition. He often 
talks about the role of TV in the fall of communism. He wanted the Calais film 
to be the centrepiece of a night devoted to refugees on theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> that would be broadcast after the EU 
referendum. “Surely this is one of the challenges that faces all of us in terms 
of integration and immigration and refugees,” he told me. “How can we share 
things and still be individuals ourselves?” Damon would perform with the 
Syrians. Jude, Law that is, might do something with masks.

Alan Yentob: the last impresario – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2017/jan/16/alan-yentob-the-last-impresario-podcast>
Everything that Yentob said about the project was sincere – and yet the whole 
thing felt unseemly as well. For more than 20 years, Yentob has fulfilled the 
tabloid fantasy of what a ridiculous arts person does. And there was something 
obviously jarring about London drama types jumping on the Eurostar for a day, 
in order to slum it with the real-life survivors of war and other traumas.

When we got off the train, Yentob looked at all the concrete and the telephone 
wires and said: “There’s something about Calais, isn’t there?” He often seems 
to say the first thing that comes into his head. I once asked Sir Salman 
Rushdie (about whom Yentob has made two films, and for whom he is sometimes 
mistaken) whether he was, despite everything, somehow guileless and Rushdie 
said no. “I think what he manages to do is to recreate an innocence,” he said. 
“You have to get into a frame of mind in which you don’t think about what the 
Daily Mail is saying.”

Bunched in a car with Cocker and a security man, Yentob wanted to know about 
the filming. He was particularly excited about an African teenager named 
Everest, whom he hoped might become a central character. “There is this boy,” 
he had said on the train, “called Everest.” Yentob allowed a beat for the name 
sink in. (He is always, in some manner or another, pitching you, even though 
you are not sure why or what he wants). In the car, Cocker said that both 
Everest and another Sudanese boy, a rapper known as Hotspot, had disappeared. 
Yentob asked if Cocker could get hold of them on the phone and record their 
voices in the camp. “This is not a news story,” he said. “We are making a 
creative intervention.”

Yentob stood opposite one burnt-out shell and said it reminded him of the work 
of the British sculptor Cornelia Parker

We walked under a motorway bridge and into the camp. Yentob couldn’t resist 
comparing it all – the mud, the tents, the ethnic food – to Glastonbury. He is 
almost, but not quite, beyond parody. There was a thin smell of burning. In the 
previous days, French police had destroyed several sections of the camp, and 
dozens of refugees had set fire to their shelters in protest. Yentob stood 
opposite one burnt-out shell and said that it reminded him of the work of the 
British sculptor Cornelia Parker, whom he was also making a film about. He took 
a picture and texted it to her.

We drifted towards a soup kitchen that marked the current front line with the 
bulldozers. On the way, Yentob fell into conversation with an Afghan boy named 
Hadib who had recently fallen from a truck on its way to the UK. “I forgot my 
brain for one night,” said the boy. French riot police stood watching us, with 
plastic bags on their feet. A crowd of British photojournalists spotted Yentob 
approaching in his scarves. The array of characters facing one another – 
refugees, police, journalists and celebrity – began to resemble a low-quality 
art performance. “My good friends,” Yentob muttered under his breath. The 
photographers raised their cameras.

The figure of Yentob at that moment, the luvvie in the “Jungle”, was 
completely consistent with the figure of Yentob in British culture in general. 
He was there, doing his job, making a film – it will probably be quite good, 
memorable even – and yet there was something absurd and even transgressive 
about the situation. Yentob has been Britain’s most influential TV executive of 
the last half-century. No one in the history of BBC, the world’s most 
successful public-service broadcaster, has ever held such a sequence of 
powerful jobs: controller of BBC2; controller of BBC1; BBC television director 
of programmes; director of drama, entertainment and children’s programming; and 
creative director of the broadcaster from 2004 until 2015.

Even then the titles don’t capture it. It makes more sense to think about 
Yentob in terms of the programmes you have watched. If you have enjoyed any of 
the following in the last 48 years:Cracked Actor 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p0177ydp>, Yentob’s 1974 documentary about 
David Bowie; Omnibus; Arena; films such as Chelsea Hotel and The Orson Welles 
Story; The Late Show; Have I Got News for You?; Absolutely Fabulous; Noel’s 
House Party; Holby City; Wallace and Gromit; Pride and Prejudice; 
Ballykissangel; the cancellation of Eldorado; the expansion of EastEnders to 
three nights a week; the films of Adam Curtis; CBeebies; Life on Mars; The 
Office; The Thick of It; QI; Sherlock; Strictly Come Dancing; on and on and on 
and on – then you, along with the loyal readers of Britain’s rightwing press, 
have been enjoying the work and creative decisions of Alan Yentob.

People who admire Yentob see him as a giant figure in contemporary British 
culture, responsible for creating a new, more emotional and accessible form of 
television – one driven primarily by art and culture, rather than by money or 
politics. In their eyes, he has transformed his own field as much as Sir 
Nicholas Serota has changed the arts or Anna Wintour has shaped fashion. In BBC 
terms, Yentob ranks comfortably alongside Sir David Attenborough (briefly a 
BBC2 controller in the 1960s) and Sir Huw Wheldon (who made the pioneering art 
series, Monitor, and then ran BBC1) as one of the great 
programme-maker-turned-executives. “He was far more influential than just 
someone important,” Adam Curtis, the documentary-maker, told me. “He was 
essential.”

Outsized figures, such as Yentob, paid for by the nation to make culture for 
the nation, may not be welcome any more

But Yentob apologists hold their heads in their hands at the same time. 
Despite working ostensibly for the public good, Yentob has become, over the 
years, an extraordinary object of fascination and loathing.The Sunday Mirror 
used to hack his phone frequently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/05/alan-yentobs-phone-hacked-court-hears-bbc-mirror-journalists>
 (reporters sang The Ying Tong Song from The Goons, “Ying tong ying tong ying 
tong yiddle I poh”, as they did so) while the Mail, the Standard, the 
Spectator, and the Murdoch press have published – no exaggeration – many 
hundreds of articles about his latest supposed indulgences and hypocrisies. “He 
is ludicrously vain, lives ridiculously, is unbelievably snobbish, and lives a 
life which is completely inappropriate and silly,” said Dame Liz Forgan, a 
former chair of the Scott Trust, which owns the Guardian, who worked alongside 
Yentob at the BBC in the 1990s. “You ask yourself, does he deliver value 
sufficiently to justify all those nonsenses? And yes he does, you know, by 
miles.”

One explanation of Yentob – and of showmen in general – is that you have to 
take the rough with the smooth. “Isn’t it so often the case with a person or a 
syndrome, you can’t have one without the other?” asked Anthony Wall, the editor 
of Arena, who has known Yentob since the late 1970s. No one expects Harvey 
Weinstein to be a sweet person really. But there has been, over the years, 
something borderline obsessive – and therefore something sociologically 
revealing – about the pursuit, and eventual toppling of Yentob. No one I spoke 
to for this article wanted to be the first to mention antisemitism, but pretty 
much everyone did in the end. “A posh Jew poncing around at the public 
expense,” said his friend Hanif Kureishi, the writer. “What is not to hate?”

Beyond that, however, there is also a sense that outsized figures such as 
Yentob, paid for by the nation to make culture for the nation, may simply not 
be welcome in British society any more. The stitching that once held them in 
place has gone. Political and social faith in public broadcasting is in 
decline. Subsidy of the arts and education is much weaker than it was a 
generation ago. People who work in those sectors find themselves assailed by 
market forces, low-grade ministers and a sceptical rightwing media all at the 
same time.

Seen from the end of 2016, the reason for Yentob’s resignation and disgrace – 
the closure ofKids Company <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/kids-company>, 
a charity he chaired for 12 years – appears oddly contrived, hysterical even. 
Watching him interrogated by MPs and paraded before the media, colleagues at 
the BBC, outside the news division anyway, smelled an air of retribution for 
crimes that were understood but never quite spelled out. “It was like watching 
the creation of a fictional character that was a necessary antithesis,” Wall 
said. “A Dr Yentob and Mr Hyde to the character that was so lauded and endorsed 
and approved of in the 80s and 90s.” Like Tony Blair, perhaps, it is impossible 
to remember why we loved him.

Back in Calais, Yentob edged away from the paparazzi. A few minutes later, 
over tea in another makeshift cafe, he and Cocker discussed another possible 
character for the film: Ishmael, a musician who had brought a dambora, a 
two-string lute, all the way from Afghanistan. “Can we have something like 
that?” asked Yentob, and then, in the way it does when he is talking, the 
conversation strayed to Cuba and the Rolling Stones and Goldeneye, Ian 
Fleming’s house in Jamaica, where Yentob once stayed. A text message arrived on 
his phone. “Are you coming to my dinner? I hope so.” Yentob didn’t know who it 
was from.

The morning brightened up after that. Outside, under a weak sun, Yentob walked 
among the unhappy fabric of the camp. He encouraged Cocker to shoot the 
shelters as a series of stills. As it turned out, Britain voted for Brexit 
three months later, and the BBC’s refugees night never happened. But for an 
hour or so, Yentob sensed something alive and worth capturing, and was excited. 
He is the kind of guy who nods his head as soon as music starts to play. The 
next day, a headline appeared on the Mail Online: “As if life in the jungle 
isn’t hard enough, what have migrants done to deserve a visit from Alan Yentob 
in his jim-jams?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde8156fda4281a85ca1c1e79ef9347479e26d3a%2F0_260_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde8156fda4281a85ca1c1e79ef9347479e26d3a%2F0_260_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
 Alan Yentob at home in north London. Photograph: Felix Clay for the Guardian 
The manner of Yentob’s slide from power a year ago – it was messy; he was not 
cast out altogether – means there has not been a natural moment to consider his 
career, and what its decline signifies. There has also been the obstacle of his 
overwhelming public persona, an almost Swiftian figure of expenses, multiple 
salaries, cars and drivers. Yentob is no hero, but he is, without question, the 
embodiment of a particular time and place in British culture. He is a creature 
of the postwar liberal settlement, a consensus that used to exist for public 
investment in the arts, education and television that is now almost completely 
eroded.

Yentob is not a nostalgist. He arrived at a BBC where people were paid their 
Christmas overtime in wads of cash kept in desk drawers, but he thrived under 
the pro-market reforms ofJohn Birt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/sep/03/edinburghtvfestival2005.politicsandthemedia>
, the broadcaster’s controversial director general in the 1990s. “He has been a 
sort of shapeshifter, really,” one colleague told me. Over the years, Yentob’s 
openness to money and celebrity, reality TV formats, and mumbling, social 
realist comedies have tracked and informed our own. During all this, however, 
some old-fashioned tenets have remained constant. Although he is associated 
with greed and extravagance, Yentob has spent his entire career in public 
broadcasting. His much-criticised salary, of around £330,000 until a year ago, 
was an eighth of the £2.3m received by ITV’s group finance director, Ian 
Griffiths, in 2015.

He also retains a touching faith in what used to be called the national 
culture. Tony Hall, the BBC’s director general, described Yentob to me as the 
conscience of the broadcaster, and people who don’t know him well are taken 
aback by how upset and emotional Yentob can become when talking about the place 
of the BBC in the world of Sky, Amazon and Netflix. In 2014, Yentob made an 
Imagine film about the writer, Colm Tóibín, at Tóibín’s house in County 
Wexford, in rural Ireland. Tóibín was struck by how someone so senior, so 
storied, could still maintain such a childlike belief in the ability of a 
public institution to bind us. “He has idealism, pure simple idealism,” Tóibín 
said. “We all feel like this,” he said. “But how does somebody like him not get 
crushed by it?”

Yentob’s greatest crime was probably to go on for so long. He is frequently 
criticised for not having replaced himself, or disappeared altogether. “How is 
Alan Yentob still allowed in the building?”asked Jennifer Saunders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/08/jennifer-saunders-bbc-idiots> in 
an interview in 2013. But by sticking around, Yentob has unconsciously 
illustrated how much the world has changed around him, and how the BBC itself 
has become diminished and doubtful – unable to produce another impresario like 
him. Michael Jackson, who succeeded Yentob as the controller of BBC2 and then 
BBC1, was supposed to be his heir, but he left for Channel 4 in 1997. Jackson 
has worked in the US since 2001, and he noted how much of Britain’s belief in 
subsidised creativity has deteriorated in recent years. “During Alan’s career 
the world has sort of moved from a faith and a trust in public servants, as it 
were, to this huge scepticism,” Jackson told me. “The rules have all changed.”

Another Yentob protege, the former director general, and current chief 
executive of the New York Times, Mark Thompson, observed that the postwar BBC 
was born out of “the idea that public intervention in the arts can make the 
country great, and that Britain can punch above its weight culturally as well 
as diplomatically”. He continued: “I think Brexit marks a sort of point at 
which that vision is, I don’t know, too big an ambition. It feels like, ‘No, 
no, no. That costs too much money and it is going to lead to abuse and people 
will go to parties in London and enjoy themselves.’ Does Alan now look a bit 
anachronistic? Well if the answer is yes, then I think it says more about the 
limitations of this age than it does about him.”

Yentob joined the BBC out of Leeds University in 1968. He was the only trainee 
that year not to have graduated from Oxford or Cambridge. His parents gave it a 
month or two. Yentob’s father, known as Kay, was a drinks salesman in Baghdad 
before he arrived in the East End of London in 1946. The Yentobs were Iraqi 
Jews. They moved north when Alan and his twin brother, Robert, were a few 
months old, and became prosperous in the Manchester textile trade. Yentob, who 
also has a younger brother, Nigel, grew up in a household of Middle Eastern 
exiles in Didsbury. His early memories were of walking factory floors in 
Bolton. Robert used to go with the boys’ uncle, Nadji, to the bank, to help him 
be understood. Yentob’s first contact with the BBC was in the form of a family 
friend, Naim Basri, who was in charge of Arabic music at the broadcaster. Basri 
played the oud – a kind of Middle Eastern lute – at parties, alongside Yentob’s 
father on percussion, while everybody else sang along.

His first posting was with the World Service, in Bush House, but a few years 
later he fetched up at Kensington House, a large, tatty office block in 
Shepherd’s Bush – now a hotel – that housed the broadcaster’s sport and arts 
departments. At the time, the BBC’s arts programming was undergoing a 
transformation. An older guard of suave, elegant types, who doubled as 
novelists and phoned Marlene Dietrich from their offices, were being challenged 
by a crowd of young directors with long hair who wanted to make experimental 
documentaries that looked like Antonioni films. “We were all into thenouvelle 
vague,” said Leslie Megahey, a director who later worked alongside Yentob on 
the Omnibus and Arena arts series. The idea was to be oblique and cinematic, 
rather than show an Oxford don dissecting a painting.

One of Yentob’s first films was Profile of a Monster, an avant-garde portrait 
of David Prowse, a bodybuilder and actor who would go on to play Darth Vader in 
the Star Wars films (James Earl Jones supplied the voice). Yentob intercut 
footage of Prowse at home with his family and children with scenes from 
Frankenstein, in which Prowse had recently played the monster. David Bowie saw 
the film and asked Yentob to make a documentary about him too. “If I am honest, 
I had hardly heard of him up to at that point,” Yentob told me.

Cracked Actor, with Bowie ethereal, fragile as glass, appeared on Omnibus in 
1974. It was the first time the BBC had ever dedicated a major arts programme 
to a pop star and it established Yentob, at the age of 27, as a film-maker. But 
he was never quite settled in the role. He took too long over things. He 
agonised. He lived a few doors down from Megahey in Notting Hill, and every 
night after work Megahey would listen out for the sound of Yentob’s feet on the 
steps. “He would just immediately launch into, ‘You know that scene …?’ ‘Do you 
think the next shot …?’” Megahey recalled. “They never measured up to what he 
wanted to do with them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf01cd70559f27009529f9fe49bf58474ecc1972%2F0_52_1181_709%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf01cd70559f27009529f9fe49bf58474ecc1972%2F0_52_1181_709%2F1181.jpg>
 An Arena programme about The Third Man, starring Orson Welles – a big Yentob 
favourite. Photograph: BBC/Studiocanal/BBC 
Yentob worked on his films for so long that he worried about the sack. He 
never completed a study of the German postwar novelist, Heinrich Böll. “It was 
an amazing film,” he reminisced. “It had everyone in it.” But it turned out he 
had a knack for helping on several films at the same time. “I was good at not 
being given too long,” said Yentob. “Sorting things out.” When Arena launched 
as an arts show in 1975, with various subjects in each episode, Yentob looked 
after the theatre coverage. In 1978, he took over as editor and threw out the 
magazine idea. Each Arena became a single film. There was no fixed schedule on 
BBC2 at the time, so Arena ran at any length and, more or less, about anything. 
Yentob described the editorial freedom as “the scope we were given to be 
ourselves”.

Stanley Kubrick’s 17-year-old daughter, Vivian, followed her father around 
with a camera during the making of The Shining (1980). William Burroughs and 
Andy Warhol ate lunch together at the Chelsea Hotel (1981). Megahey’s The Orson 
Welles Story (1982) was three hours long. “If you look back at Arena, it is as 
much about the mood as it is about the subject,” said Curtis, who was himself 
discovered by Yentob in the late 1980s. The films were experimental, but they 
were also intimate, and had the feel of real life and conversation. “Yentob got 
that,” said Curtis. “He changed the way that television thought, way beyond his 
own thing.”

Yentob also proved to be an operator within the planned economy of the BBC. 
Rivals called him the “wily Levantine”. He commissioned an architect, Will 
Alsop, who later designed the Peckham Library in south London, to rip out half 
a floor of offices in Kensington House to create a beautiful new space for 
Arena, decked out with Japanese hardwoods.

People on the wrong side of Yentob told me that he is a bully and arrogant, an 
entitled figure who sucks the air out of any room. He makes hagiographic films 
about overrated men – “Al’s pals” – and swans about without a care in the 
world. In 1996, Georgina Born, an anthropologist, carried out a year of 
interviews and fieldwork, observing how the BBC functioned as an organisation. 
In one commissioning meeting, she watched Yentob arrive late, flanked by 
assistants from the corporation’s strategy and planning unit. “One of the 
women,” Born noted, “is bearing a large gilt dish on which are arranged 
luscious fruits.”

As a BBC executive, Yentob was more of an artist than the artists
Clive James 
Yentob describes what he does as creative leadership. “Children have to play 
and artists have to play, as Picasso said,” he told me once. He would often 
sleep in Kensington House after editing all night. On meeting Yentob for the 
first time in the late 1970s, Will Wyatt, a former managing director of BBC 
television, described him in his diary as “grubby, obsessed and interesting”. 
Clive James, the critic, has described the elevation of Yentob to executive 
power at the BBC in the mid-1980s as a turning point in the broadcaster’s 
history. “As an executive,” he wrote, “he was more of an artist than the 
artists.”

On his first day in charge of BBC2 in 1988, Yentob sought to change the 
schedule, even though it was already printed in the newspapers. His mission was 
to rebrand a sleepy channel, full of programmes about gardening, into a 
response to the recently launched, insurgent Channel 4. Yentob’s spell at BBC2 
was defined by the Late Show, an expensive, mainly live, four-nights-a-week 
discussion show that merged news and culture. The Late Show debated Aids and 
architecture, Rushdie’s fatwa and the fall of the Berlin Wall. It was Yentob’s 
creation and obsession. “He watched it minute-by-minute on air every night,” 
Roly Keating, a former editor of the programme, told me. Yentob would call the 
production gallery while the show was on to disagree with what was being said 
and, even, on occasion, to demand that guests were taken off while they spoke. 
“We were all terrified of him,” said Janet Lee, who now edits the Culture Show. 
“You just didn’t want to get that phone call.”

In practice, much of what Yentob actually does all day is talk to people on 
the phone. Arranging to meet him for this article nearly always involved a 
10-minute prologue about whatever was on his mind: Jeremy Corbyn, Netflix, 
Donald Trump, the financial health of the Guardian, George Osborne, the films 
that he was making over the summer. He talks in a roundabout way, airing plans, 
seeking information, refining it, and passing it on. Probably the best 
description of him at work is in 2½ Men In A Boat, an account of a journey up 
the Thames with Yentob by his former colleague, Nigel Williams, in 1993:

“Pure heaven, for Alan, is to be watching a television programme for which he 
is responsible in mixed company, while on the telephone to other people, all of 
whom are watching the same programme. In ideal conditions, the people with whom 
he is watching the programme will also be on the telephone as well. He is 
working towards the day when the people to whom he and his friends are talking 
on the telephone are watching the same programme, are themselves on other 
telephones talking to yet more people, who are watching the same programme 
while on the telephone to yet more people.”

There is something compulsive about this search for the ultimate conversation. 
“If there is somebody more important at the party he will talk to them,” said 
Wyatt. “He can’t stop himself.” Megahey told me about an occasion when he and 
Yentob were having a conversation about eggs. “We were talking about the brown 
frilly bits on a fried egg, so he rang Nigella.” (When I asked Yentob about 
this, he shrugged as if this was what anyone would do.) At the BBC, Mark 
Thompson would put down the phone after finishing a call with Yentob only to 
pick it up again, and find that Yentob was still talking away. “He likes to 
rehearse his thinking,” said Michael Jackson. “He will say things out loud to 
anyone he meets.”

This mania for contact – non-stop communication – is one of the reasons Yentob 
survived for so long at the BBC, through the Birtian revolution of the 1990s, 
the Greg Dyke and Thompson eras, and even, for a while, the post-2010 era of 
austerity, commercialism and political hostility that ultimately devoured him. 
“He knows exactly what is happening,” said Tony Hall, to whom Yentob still 
speaks several times a week, in something like wonder. Lord Patten, who chaired 
the BBC Trust from 2011 to 2014, found that Yentob had a habit of arriving for 
important meetings that he wasn’t invited to. “If it was going to be 
interesting,” he said, “he would turn up.”On the night when George Entwistle 
resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/10/bbc-crisis-george-entwistle-resigns>
 after just 54 days as director general of the BBC in November 2012 – brought 
down by the reporting missteps surrounding theJimmy Savile scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/25/jimmy-savile-scandal-bbc-timeline>
 – the executive offices on the fourth floor of new broadcasting house were 
deserted. “There were just a couple of people around trying to look after 
George,” said Patten. “And one of them was Alan Yentob.”

What can the origins of the BBC tell us about its future? | Charlotte Higgins
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/15/bbc-origins-future> 
He could have gone to Hollywood, but he never did. Instead he agitated from 
within. He packed the schedules with short films and themed nights and video 
diaries. “I wanted to earn the right that people thought this was a different 
place, a special place,” he said. In 1993, Yentob abruptly cleared a Saturday 
night on BBC2 for a live broadcast of Stiffelio, a Verdi opera he had seen a 
few days earlier in Covent Garden.

The creative tension worked as long as the BBC was trusted enough, was funded 
enough, to let top commissioners go with their gut and not worry unduly about 
the consequences. “He is the maverick, right? But mavericks exist in the 
context of an establishment,” said Jackson. He and Yentob remain close, and 
Jackson observed that, in a way, Yentob has been sheltered by a sensible, 
protective presence his entire life, in the form of his twin, Robert, who is 
the straight man, diligent and quiet, the guardian of the family’s textile 
business. “Alan is the maverick even the context of his own family,” Jackson 
told me. “When the big, broad BBC family really existed, it worked really well 
for him. But in the modern world, what is it to be a maverick? I’m not sure.”

Yentob after the fall is a bruised animal – a little humiliated, little 
defensive, a little angry. He is wary of traps that his younger self did not 
care about. (In 1993, he happily discussed the aesthetics of the birth of his 
son, Jacob, with the Independent. “The colours were so lurid, especially the 
reds and greens,” he said. “It was a caesarean, so it was top-lit.”) Sometimes, 
now, if he feels himself sliding into an anecdote about Orson Welles or Stanley 
Kubrick or Mel Brooks – men whom he befriended and loved – Yentob will check 
himself. “I hope we’re not going to go into this,” he says.

He introduces the controversies before you get a chance: his “one-and-a-half 
salaries”, not two. (From 2003 until last year, Yentob was paid for both his 
management and programme-making work.) Theexpenses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/oct/25/bbc.broadcasting>: cleared of 
wrongdoing after an internal investigation in 2004, eventually found to be 
£14,000 out of pocket in 2006. The taxis: £1,500 in three months last year, 
working out at one £17 taxi per day. He trots all this out, knowing that the 
facts don’t alter the Yentob caricature, which stalks him. “I always looked 
like I was having too much fun,” he told me. “It is very good I said that 
because it is true. But they have certainly done their fucking best to make it 
feel as bad as possible.”

Last month we went for lunch at an Italian restaurant around the corner from 
the BBC. I wanted to double-check which programmes Yentob had helped create. It 
is another sensitive subject. For years, because of his high profile, Yentob 
often received accolades for things that he had not done. “He didn’t do much to 
disabuse people,” as one colleague told me. Late Yentob is more circumspect. He 
ordered sea bass, which he ate absentmindedly with his hands. For much of the 
conversation, he was vague and self-effacing.Television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> is never the work of one 
person, he said. Absolutely Fabulous? “This talent was there, and it was there 
to be looked after.” The Office? “Somehow a risk was taken.” On casting of 
Colin Firth in Pride and Prejudice? “I said, ‘Who is he? Remind me?’”

What was more telling were the shows and decisions that Yentob was eager to 
discuss. He came alive describing the launch of CBeebies in 2002; the rescue of 
the panel show, QI, which had been rejected elsewhere in the BBC; and the 
fortuitous reinvention of Come Dancing, the stale ballroom dancing show that 
Yentob cancelled in 1998, into Strictly Come Dancing six years later. “How did 
Strictly come about? Almost by chance,” Yentob said. There was a gap in the 
summer schedule. “There was a format. Let’s try it. It worked,” he said. “And 
yet it feels like something that people care about.”

Yentob’s excitement about programmes such as Strictly has always made him an 
object of suspicion for the real purists of public-service broadcasting. Has he 
been an embattled, high-minded producer all these years, or part of the 
problem? In 1993, Yentob described Noel’s House Party as the “most important 
show on the BBC”, a remark that some of his old comrades have never quite 
forgiven him for.

The free-market critique of the BBC, of course, contends that it has no 
business making hugely popular entertainment shows that any commercial 
broadcaster would be desperate to own. Over lunch, Yentob argued that there is 
still something qualitatively different about BBC programmes such as Strictly, 
or The Great British Bake Off, or Top Gear compared with the versions made by 
rivals such as ITV, or Netflix, or Amazon – something fragile and British and 
made without money in mind, which enables them to become occasions of national 
communion and pleasure. “The BBC was clever enough and bold enough and actually 
sweet-natured enough to commission a programme about cakes, and then it grew 
into a phenomenon,” said Yentob. “You have got all these other commercial 
devices. Can you not have one place which is allowed to be like this?

Looking back, the lights began to go out on the Yentob era with the election 
of the Conservative-led coalition in 2010

Some of his happiest years at the BBC were running “DEC” – drama, 
entertainment and children’s television – between 2000 and 2004. Dragon’s Den, 
The Office, The Thick of It, and a re-energised drama department, making Doctor 
Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> and Life on Mars, 
emerged from that period. Yentob had 2,000 people reporting to him and an 
annual budget of around £500m. It was like having a studio of his own.

It is the time that now feels furthest away. Looking back, the lights began to 
go out on the Yentob era with the election of the Conservative-led coalition in 
2010. That October, the BBC was forced to deny that Yentob was about to be made 
redundant – a high-profile sacrifice to the new age of austerity. He hung on, 
but the last two licence fee settlements, that year and in 2015, have each 
resulted in effective reductions of 20% of the BBC budget. According to a 
forecast by the Office for Budget Responsibility, the BBC’s annual income will 
decrease by £745m by 2020. At around £5bn, it is now half the size of Sky’s.

The first thing to go is instinct. “When you are working with a pinched budget 
one of the casualties tends to be creativity,” said Patten. “People don’t take 
risks any more.” The last time Leslie Megahey pitched to a BBC commissioner, 
the executive wouldn’t even pass on the idea. “He emailed back saying he was 
sorry, he couldn’t give a definite no,” Megahey recounted. “These people there 
are just petrified … They simply don’t have the sheer brass nerve to do what we 
did because we weren’t afraid for our jobs.”

The next thing to go are the big shows. In the background of my conversations 
with Yentob this year there was a steady drumbeat of dispiriting news: from the
loss of Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/12/bbc-loses-great-british-bake-off>
 during the summer to the premieres of Amazon’s The Grand Tour, andThe Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/03/the-crown-windsor-claire-foy-elizabeth-blockbuster>
, Netflix’s no-jewel-spared, £100m drama about the reign of Elizabeth II, 
directed by Yentob’s friend, Stephen Daldry. Yentob was in charge of BBC Films 
when it green-lit Billy Elliot, Daldry’s first feature film. He has known about 
The Crown for years. “That was going to come to the BBC,” Yentob told me. “They 
wanted to go to the BBC and they knew the BBC couldn’t afford it all.” An idea 
to co-produce with Netflix didn’t get off the ground. “Netflix said, ‘We don’t 
need to share it. We will just do it,” said Yentob. “Now that is a world that 
is difficult.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a6fc9fb420277f8537692836636689ce86163e5%2F0_194_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a6fc9fb420277f8537692836636689ce86163e5%2F0_194_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 The Crown. “Netflix said, ‘We don’t need to share it [with the BBC]. We will 
just do it,” said Yentob. “Now that is a world that is difficult.” Photograph: 
Alex Bailey/Netflix/Netflix 
Sometimes it feels as if the edifice is under threat from all sides. That day, 
over lunch, Yentob pulled out his phone to look over a daily update of stories 
about the BBC. Ted Sarandos, the chief content officer of Netflix, had 
suggested that the BBC’s invention of the iPlayer may have unwittingly brought 
about the end of the licence fee, by helping to create a new generation of 
people who only watch TV over the internet. There was an article about the new 
ceiling of £150,000, above which BBC salaries will now be made public. And the 
day before, the new culture secretary, Karen Bradley, had observed to MPs that 
in its time on the BBC, the Great British Bake Off had been a missed 
opportunity to sell advertising.

Yentob slammed his phone down on the table. “She is the culture secretary,” he 
said. “She calls herself the culture secretary. How can she say that?” He sat 
there in fury. There are times when Yentob seems physically overcome with 
concern for the BBC’s survival. “It can’t continue,” he said, “to fight against 
all this stuff for ever and ever.”

As with any national institution, no one knows when the critical moment will 
come – the reform, or the cut – after which the body has irredeemably changed. 
That week, another 300 jobs were going, as the BBC prepared to spin off its 
in-house production department to become BBC Studios by the end of the year. 
The reforms will mean that, by 2020, all BBC programmes will be put out to 
tender, with the broadcaster competing against the private sector to make shows 
such as Songs of Praise and even Yentob’s Imagine. He didn’t want to talk about 
BBC Studios that day. “Everybody is upset,” he said. “The whole place is upset. 
I am upset. And then when I read this shit …” He glanced at his phone. I asked 
Yentob once if he could see himself joining the BBC now, at the age of 21. “I 
have to say,” he said, picking his words, “it could be tricky.”

In the end, his downfall had nothing to do with television, or public culture, 
and everything to do with the Yentob persona – a figure of indulgence in a land 
of scarcity. He walked in through the door of Kids Company in the spring of 
1997. Jackson had just taken the job at Channel 4. The two men were on a tour 
of British charities funded by Comic Relief. They met prostitutes at a shelter 
in King’s Cross. Then they went to a set of railway arches in Camberwell, south 
London, to a drop-in centre for traumatised children run by Camila 
Batmanghelidjh, a charismatic psychotherapist. Batmanghelidjh, who was in her 
mid-30s, had turned the back of a lorry into an art studio in which children 
depicted horrifying scenes from their daily lives. Drug dens and abandonment. 
“It was a revelation,” Yentob told me. Yentob’s children, Jacob and Bella, were 
six and four at the time. (His wife, Philippa Walker, is a documentary maker.) 
He volunteered to help.

For several years, the arrangement was informal. At least part of Yentob’s 
interest, Batmanghelidjh sensed, was aesthetic. It was about finding the next 
thing. “He has got an intuitive nose for what’s real, artistically,” she told 
me. “And these kids were real.” The early years of the charity were a litany of 
police raids, shootings and emergencies. “I would call him in the middle of the 
night,” Batmanghelidjh said. “He would always pick up.” In 2002, Yentob became 
chair of the trustees, and the charity boomed. Over the next 10 years, Kids 
Company’s annual income rose from £2m to £23m. Coldplay, Richard Branson, JK 
Rowling and John Lewis made donations. Batmanghelidjh – a woman from Iran, in 
her kaleidoscopic outfits – caught the moment. “Funnily enough, when it was 
going well, I didn’t get any attention at all,” Yentob said. “She was the 
saint. They loved her at the Mail. They loved her at the Sun. They loved her 
everywhere.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b0d5f8cced5046902be8a642eb45fd07a835b19%2F0_48_2768_2767%2F2768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b0d5f8cced5046902be8a642eb45fd07a835b19%2F0_48_2768_2767%2F2768.jpg>
 Alan Yentob with Camila Batmanghelidjh, the founder of Kids Company in 2015. 
Photograph: Simon James/Getty Images 
It was, and remains, a point of pride to Yentob and Batmanghelidjh that the 
finances of Kids Company never quite stacked up. Batmanghelidjh’s methods were 
expensive and unorthodox. The charity prided itself on never turning a child 
away. “Kids Company was not box tickable,” Yentob said. “It was not being run 
like other places, so you had to believe in it.” The first major funding crisis 
– over a £590,000 tax bill – occurred shortly before Yentob took the chair. The 
next ones happened in 2005, 2007, 2010, 2012, 2014.

At the height of its operations, Kids Company claimed to reach 36,000 children 
across London and Bristol and employed a staff of 400. The wheels came off in 
the spring of 2015. For years, the charity had relied on special grants from 
central government in order to survive. In May, the money ran out again. This 
time, however, there were press reports about anxious donors, misbehaving staff 
and Batmanghelidjh’s irresponsible spending. In June, against the advice of 
civil servants, the Cabinet Office ministers Oliver Letwin and Matthew Hancock 
approved a £3m emergency grant to bail out Kids Company, citing its 
“inspirational work”. But a month later, on the day the money arrived, the 
Metropolitan Police announced an inquiry into sexual abuse at the charity. The 
investigation was dropped, but it was the final blow.Kids Company closed 
shortly after, on 5 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/05/childrens-charity-kids-company-close-financial-concerns>
. A parliamentary investigation concluded that the charity had been run by 
Yentob and Batmanghelidjh according to “wishful thinking”.

I once asked Yentob if he treated Batmanghelidjh as if she was TV talent. A 
handful, to be sure, but worth the trouble. He didn’t like the analogy, but 
colleagues and friends saw a parallel. “He tried to protect her and nurture her 
to a fault,” said one. “He treated her like she was Stanley Kubrick or 
someone.” For many Yentob-watchers, the idea of Kids Company as well-meaning, 
stuffed with celebrity support and somewhat out of control – a big-budget 
production, running out of road – was all too easy to believe. Between 2002 and 
2010, Yentob was also the chair of the Institute of Contemporary Arts. That 
organisation also experienced a severe funding crisis, which led to Yentob 
stepping down.

Forgan, his former colleague, was chair of Arts Council England during the ICA 
crisis and told me that both jobs were “just ridiculous roles” for Yentob. 
“That is why the BBC is so good for him, it surrounds him with a safe shell and 
grown-up people saying, ‘No Alan. No further.’ He was supposed to be the person 
saying, ‘No, Camila. No further.’ That is not his role.” Yentob’s twin Robert, 
who helped during the final, doomed restructuring of Kids Company told me: 
“Look, I am in business, that is the way I operate. It is not his talent. He is 
doing something that he believes is good for the country, good for those 
children.” (Other trustees of the charity declined to speak with me because of 
an ongoing Charity Commission inquiry.)

At first, when people asked Yentob if he would resign from the BBC because of 
Kids Company’s failure, he thought the suggestion was absurd. But there was a 
sense of worlds colliding. From March onwards, Yentob was involved in talks 
with the Cabinet Office to keep the charity alive, while, elsewhere in 
Whitehall, the BBC was negotiating a new licence fee settlement with a hostile 
culture secretary, John Whittingdale, and the Treasury. Newsnight broke the 
news that Kids Company might close on 2 July, four days before the new licence 
fee deal was announced. Yentob was in the papers every day. In August, he was 
accused of putting pressure on BBC journalists three times in their coverage of 
the story. A member of the public complained to the broadcaster.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff14290a460d95bdb5cdd9c08ef3fcf63de0da0e2%2F0_158_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Yentob%3A%20the%20last%20impresario%20%7C%20Sam%20Knight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Falan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff14290a460d95bdb5cdd9c08ef3fcf63de0da0e2%2F0_158_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Alan Yentob resigns in October 2015. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
As winter came, with the BBC preparing for another round of government talks, 
this time about charter renewal, Yentob and Kids Company were still in the 
news. When the BBC Trust decided it would investigate the complaint against 
Yentob, he resigned as creative director, though he retained his role as the 
presenter of Imagine. “I just decided, I couldn’t do this any more,” he said. 
Yentob struggled to accept that it was time to step down. He described the 
decision to me in almost out-of-body terms. “I didn’t expect to do it,” he 
said. “A lot of people thought, ‘Why are you doing this Alan?’ ‘Is it an 
admission?’ And I said, ‘No. In a dignified way, the BBC can do without this.’ 
And if you are asking me, could I do without this? I think it is time for 
another generation of people to start emerging.”

Both allies and foes of Yentob sensed larger implications in the Kids Company 
scandal and his eventual undoing. For the Daily Telegraph and the Daily Mail, 
the story was about a recklessness towards public money, endemic at the BBC, 
and made flesh in the form of Yentob. The parliamentary inquiry into Kids 
Company noted that with concern that even after his resignation, Yentob “still 
retains substantial responsibilities … and oversees substantial budgets” at the 
corporation. The Spectator, which broke some of the initial stories about Kids 
Company, complained that Yentob would be even less accountable after resigning 
his executive post. Colleagues within the BBC sensed an attack on the 
organisation itself. “Was the public really interested? Was that really such a 
big story?” said Anthony Wall, the Arena editor. “I am not saying Alan hasn’t 
pissed people off over the years, but there was something else going on as 
well. There are people who are going to profit hugely from the destruction of 
the BBC.”

There has been no replacement. Tony Hall told me that was always the plan, and 
Yentob would have stepped down in the next year or two anyway. “We were 
slimming down the organisation,” said Hall. Not that losing his title seems to 
have changed Yentob’s behaviour much. “Alan being Alan, he comes in,” said 
Hall. “He pops in, to offer advice, and come and talk.” But I never got the 
sense, talking to dozens of BBC staff for this article, that there was another 
impresario like him on the rise, someone who would stay so long, and rip up so 
many schedules for the benefit of the British public. Yentob was too anomalous 
and, in many ways, too annoying to ever earn our gratitude as a tastemaker. He 
was a showman who mistook himself for a servant. But that doesn’t mean we will 
be better off without him. You only miss some things when they are gone. I 
asked Hall if he thought the BBC would see his like again. “I don’t know,” he 
said. “You just never know in the world we live in where someone is going to 
pop up and, as it were, do a Yentob.”

The last time we talked was at New Broadcasting House. Yentob had lost his 
pass so he had to sign in at the front desk. In the entrance lobby, he bumped 
into John Simpson, the veteran foreign correspondent, and the two men talked 
for a minute. Since he resigned as creative director, colleagues still come to 
him. “People are still asking me questions,” he said. “They are not necessarily 
listening.” We went up to the sixth floor. For a while, Yentob had a security 
pass that would take him everywhere in the building. The Daily Mail found out 
and accused him of having his own lift. Yentob’s own office was rather narrow. 
An assistant, sitting at one end of the desk, was working on a laptop. Yentob’s 
end was more or less buried in books and DVDs.

We sat next door, in a radio rehearsal room. I asked Yentob about Wheldon and 
Attenborough, the other great postwar controllers and programme-makers. “I 
suppose all three of us were really committed to public service but also 
entrepreneurial,” he said. The world used to be simpler and the BBC was part of 
who we were. Yentob fears that in a sceptical, fragmented time, where the BBC 
is allowed to wither, there won’t be the means or the freedom to take the risks 
that he did, at least not in the name of the public. He adopts the voices of 
his antagonists sometimes when he talks. “We need to know how much everyone is 
earning. You are no better than a civil servant, than a local authority. That’s 
what you are,” he said. “But why aren’t you producing shows like Netflix? Why 
aren’t you? Really the noise level makes it very, very difficult.” He paused. 
“I think it is really important that this doesn’t end here.”

Yentob looked out of the window across the roofs. He does not stay down for 
long. He started talking about the next run of Imagine, and a plan he has for a 
festival of Europe, in London, to contest the mood of Brexit. He will keep 
looking for the next thing. “I don’t need a title. I don’t need a department,” 
he said. But the day of the panjandrum is done. “I fear it may be true. I hope 
it is not true,” said Yentob. It was almost dark. “I hope there is a way for 
somebody like me.” He showed me to the lifts, and then he padded off to talk to 
someone else.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 