
Alan Warhurst, who has died aged 89, was one of a handful of new directors 
engaged from the 1960s onwards in transforming museums into the popular and 
socially engaged institutions they are today. The years immediately following 
the second world war were not kind to museums. Several had been blitzed; most 
suffered staff reductions and funding shortages through the late 1940s and 50s 
as local authorities struggled to rebuild services. But Alan, with colleagues 
largely from outside London, saw a way forward that was geared to family 
education.

An innnovator, he maintained that museums should stretch their boundaries and 
engage local communities in wider activities such as fossil hunting and the 
exploration of ruins and archaeological excavation, as well as broaden their 
responsibilities to encompass “living history” in rural areas of historic 
importance. He believed in the importance of design to engage an inquisitive 
public of all ages and abilities, and campaigned against entry charges.

During his decade as director of Bristol City Museum 
<https://www.bristolmuseums.org.uk/bristol-museum-and-art-gallery/> from 1960, 
he accumulated much experience in the cause of a building that was not 
ultimately realised. He worked withthe architect Sir Hugh Casson 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituaries-sir-hugh-casson-1113219.html>
 on researching a design that had the bombed-out shell of St Peter’s Church in 
its central courtyard, visiting the best museums in continental Europe and 
north America in the process. To work with him on this he built up a team of 
colleagues, including Mike Belcher, Neil Cossons and Max Hebditch, who went on 
to become significant museum figures themselves.

In 1970 he was appointed director of the Ulster Museum <http://nmni.com/um/>, 
in Belfast. Arriving just after the start of the Troubles, he saw it as a vital 
tool to bring diverse communities together through shared cultural activities. 
He oversaw the completion of a big extension, in brutalist style, which opened 
in 1972, but experienced the impact of violence both professionally and 
personally.

His family home suffered a car bomb explosion in 1974, and two years later a 
museum store on the city’s outskirts was bombed, leading to the destruction of 
its entire collection of costume and textiles. Undeterred, Alan rebuilt his 
house, and continued to transform the museum, whose exhibitions included one of 
Renaissance gold jewellery recovered fromthe galleass La Girona 
<http://www.my-secret-northern-ireland.com/the-girona.html> – a warship that 
used both oars and sails – which sank off the north Antrim coast in the storms 
of 1588, on its way back round Britain after the defeat of the Armada.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Falan-warhurst-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F995360c5591bfab084ae5f018f09ab6cf1b5cf27%2F0_129_2480_1488%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Warhurst%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Falan-warhurst-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Warhurst%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Falan-warhurst-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F995360c5591bfab084ae5f018f09ab6cf1b5cf27%2F0_129_2480_1488%2F2480.jpg>
 Manchester Museum, where Alan Warhurst led a programme of gallery 
redevelopment that brought it a Museum of the Year in award in 1987. 
Photograph: University of Manchester 
His final post came as director of Manchester Museum (1977-93). Part of the 
University of Manchester, it was again an institution in need of modernisation. 
Alan trained staff and ensured that advanced forensic research was undertaken 
to understand the causes of death of mummified ancient Egyptians and of Lindow 
Man – the preserved body of a man discovered in a peat bog at Lindow Moss, near 
Wilmslow in Cheshire. He led a programme of gallery redevelopment, winning 
Museum of the Year in 1987 for the redisplay of the Egyptology and botany 
collections, and for expanding its size and scope. An article he wrote in 1985 
about funding threats to university museums led to the formation the following 
year of the UniversityMuseums <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/museums> 
Group, with Alan as its first secretary.

Born and brought up in Bolton, Lancashire, Alan was the son of William 
Warhurst, an accountant at British Rail, and Margaret (nee Holden), who came 
from a farming family. He was head boy ofBolton Church Institute (later Canon 
Slade school) 
<http://www.theboltonnews.co.uk/features/11646749.School_with_a_long_history/>, 
and in 1947 was commissioned into the Lancashire Fusiliers from the officers 
training school in Bangalore, serving in India and Egypt, an experience that 
confirmed him in his pacifist tendencies. Graduating in history as a Hulme Hall 
scholar from the University of Manchester in 1950, and passionate about 
archaeology, he was appointed assistant curator at the Grosvenor Museum in 
Chester. Following posts at Maidstone Museum & Art Gallery andNorthampton Museum
 <http://www.cosgrovehistory.co.uk/doc/villa/villa.html>, Alan went to Bristol 
at the age of 33.

He preferred a consensual approach to management, although a colleague 
remembers at least one occasion after he and another colleague had failed to 
reach agreement over the plans for an exhibition, when Alan got up rather 
reluctantly from his desk and said: “I suppose we should now have a 
confrontation meeting.”

He served as president of the Museums Association (1975-76), chairman of the 
North West Area Museum Council (1992-97), on the Museums and Galleries 
Commission (1994-99), and as external examiner of the museum studies course at 
the University of Leicester. In 1990 he was appointed CBE.

He married Sheila Bradbury, a teacher and psychotherapist, in 1953. She 
survives him, along with their children, Alyson, Frances and Nicholas.

• Alan Warhurst, museum director, born 6 February 1927; died 4 December 2016
 