
Albion Rovers of Scottish League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-league-two> are offering fans 
the chance to "pay what they can" in an attempt to increase the attendance for 
their league match against Montrose on Saturday.

Supporters will be able to watch for a minimum £1, although the club have 
asked that people dip into their pockets and pay what they believe the football 
is worth.

Rovers, based 10 miles from Glasgow, usually pull in gates of 400 but, 
inspired bya similar scheme at Brentford earlier in the season 
<http://www.brentfordfc.co.uk/news/article/pay-what-you-can-update-18.09.13-1062412.aspx>
, their chairman John Devlin believes greater numbers will be attracted to 
Cliftonhill this weekend. "We're trying to appeal to new fans and stimulate a 
dormant support in our home town of Coatbridge. It's hopefully the perfect time 
to do this for people who are cash-strapped after Christmas and new year," said 
Devlin.

"We're in a catchment area of 50,000-60,000 people so I do think there is a 
larger support there for us. The guys give their best on a Saturday, it's 
grassroots football, very honest and I'm sure that still appeals to an element 
of supporters – we've had a lot of interest."

Rovers, who currently sit fifth in the table, usually charge £10 for a full 
adult ticket but Devlin expects the majority of spectators to choose £1 for the 
Montrose match. "I'm expecting quite a lot of people will pay just the £1, 
we're kind of budgeting on that basis. We hope a lot of people who haven't seen
Albion Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albion-rovers> before will 
come along just out of interest. That was the objective," he said.

"We're a bottom-tier club in Scottish football. We usually get home gates of 
400 or so which is a million miles away from Premier League clubs. It's a whole 
different ball park."
 