
Kanye West has been called many things, but you could never accuse him of 
being a man of mystery. Ever since the phrase"I'mma let you finish ..." 
<http://kanyegate.tumblr.com/> went viral, the rapper has been ubiquitous in 
many ludicrous ways: talking up collaborations with Justin Bieber, claiming to 
have overcome suicidal thoughts because he's a "soldier of culture" 
<http://tv.gawker.com/5668114/soldier-of-culture-kanye-west-gets-choked-up-on-ellen>
, offeringa a Coventry man 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/aug/02/kanye-west-twitter> Twitter fame. 
Even when West wasn't the one doing the talking, presidentsold 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/nov/04/george-w-bush-kanye-west> and new 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/blog/2009/sep/16/listen-obama-kanye-jackass-audio>
 were offering their opinions on him.

The natural inclination would be to assume the rapper has spread himself too 
thin; the career evolution of most celebrities who spend this much time filling 
column inches tends to involve a sex tape, misuse of collagen or leaked photos 
involving a bong. Instead, West made one of the best albums of 2010.
My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy is both impressively grand and intensely 
personal, thriving on the rapper's restless creative mania. Sampling the likes 
of Aphex Twin, King Crimson and Mike Oldfield, West also gathers rap veterans 
and newcomers – notably Rick Ross, Jay-Z and Nicki Minaj. It's the latter who 
introduces the album, her cod-English accent telling the children – in one of 
the album's many weird moments – to "zip it, listen!"

Of course, we'd heard many of the album's finest songs already – the explosive 
Monster, the mournful Runaway, the sinister So Appalled – as part of West's 
G.O.O.D. Friday giveaways or on the lavish 30-minute Runaway film. But the 
album shines brightest when The Ego is left to one side and Kanye allows 
himself to be fraught and, at times, a bit pathetic.

More than once, West returns to the role of beleaguered lover; the one floored 
by the coldness of an ex-girlfriend inHeartless 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Co0tTeuUVhU>, the one who leant a sympathetic 
ear to the self-conscious beauty inAll Falls Down 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8kyWDhB_QeI>. Sharing vocals with John Legend 
on the exceptional Blame Game, West bitches about an unhealthy relationship, at 
turns histrionic and cavalier, and equally convincing in both guises.

When he does tackle that most loathsome of topics – fame – in Lost in the 
World, West does so in his own individual style. Absent is the talk of unnamed 
haters that has proved the staple of hip-hop for far too long; instead, Bon 
Iver (the album's unlikely wingman) provides isolated vocals – "I'm lost in the 
world, I'm down on my life" – that warp into cacophonous, tribal drumming, 
while reworked refrains from the album's previous tracks ebb and flow. When the 
track segues into Gil Scott-Heron talking of a "rapist known as freedom" in 
final song, Who Will Survive in America, it sounds completely natural, despite 
the contrast in West's depiction of psychological isolation and the fate of the 
American continent.

And that is one of his greatest attributes as an artist. Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest> remains a gifted producer, 
evident in his subtle production touches, but he also understands that truly 
brilliant pop music must make the personal universal. For all the time he 
spends acting like a spoilt child in real life, he remains, on record, one of 
the most compelling artists of our time.
Free music - My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy (Explicit Version) 
<http://www.we7.com/album/My-Beautiful-Dark-Twisted-Fantasy-Explicit-Version?albumId=620936> 