
The prospects of an extended humanitarian ceasefire in eastern Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> have diminished after Russian 
diplomats stressed the Syrian government was entitled to eliminate all rebels 
in the city, and not just the 1,000 jihadi fighters linked to al-Qaida.


Russia has implemented a unilateral four-day ceasefire to allow humanitarian 
access, evacuation for the wounded and the safe passage of 1,000 Jabhat Fateh 
al-Sham fighters, therebel group formerly known as al-Nusra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/al-qaida-syria-nusra-split-terror-network>
, out of the besieged city.

The proposal is partly in line with a plan laid out by the UN special envoy, 
Staffan de Mistura, but neitherRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>
 or Syria will agree to the second half of the plan – allowing the existing 
eastern Aleppo council to remain in power and halting attacks on non-jihadi 
fighters.

Russia tells UN it will pause bombing of eastern Aleppo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/merkel-hollande-threaten-sanctions-russia-aleppo-airstrikes-putin>
Russia believes there are as many as 6,000 rebels in eastern Aleppo, and only 
1,000 are from Jabhat Fateh al-Sham, the organisation that has been labelled a 
terrorist group by Russia and the US. Russia insisted on Friday that all the 
fighters in eastern Aleppo should be classified as terrorists and must be 
eradicated.

On Thursday, De Mistura had urged Jabhat Fateh al-Sham to leave, but added 
that there had been no Syrian acceptance of the other element of his package – 
that the east Aleppo council would remain in political power and other armed 
opposition forces could stay in the city. The jihadi group has refused to leave.

Russia said that civilians were not leaving the city despite the humanitarian 
corridor, blaming sniper fire and threats by the opposition. It claimed members 
of the Ahrar al-Sham group, which is not proscribed by the US, had on Thursday 
publicly executed 14 local self-government officials who had called on people 
to leave the city’s eastern districts.

Moscow also announced it was extending its humanitarian ceasefire for a 
further 24 hours by allowing a further pause in the bombing from 8am to 7pm on 
Saturday.

So far the UN has said it has not been able to go into east Aleppo with 
supplies due to the lack of security assurances.

The Syrian government has been sending text messages to east Aleppo citizens 
claiming the rebels will use chemical weapons to defend themselves and calling 
the fighters cowards because they are hiding behind civilians.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faleppo-ceasefire-at-risk-russia-all-rebels-can-be-eliminated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F508ed7f21d039bcae1344b3134607a02f245cb6e%2F0_43_4962_2977%2F4962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aleppo%20ceasefire%20at%20risk%20after%20Russia%20says%20all%20rebels%20can%20be%20eliminated&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faleppo-ceasefire-at-risk-russia-all-rebels-can-be-eliminated%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aleppo%20ceasefire%20at%20risk%20after%20Russia%20says%20all%20rebels%20can%20be%20eliminated&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Faleppo-ceasefire-at-risk-russia-all-rebels-can-be-eliminated%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F508ed7f21d039bcae1344b3134607a02f245cb6e%2F0_43_4962_2977%2F4962.jpg>
 Staffan de Mistura, the UN special envoy for Syria, at a news conference at 
the UN in Geneva. Photograph: Martial Trezzini/AP 
Russia claimed a group of more than 1,200 rebels, including 30 suicide 
bombers, has been massed for an attack on Aleppo from the south-west.


The militants have tanks, armoured vehicles and 20 pick-up trucks carrying 
large-calibre machineguns, Russian officials said.

On the diplomatic track, a UN human rights council meeting in special session 
in Geneva passed a resolution backing an independent investigation into the 
bombing of a UN convoy on 19 September and calling for a wider inquiry into 
human rights abuses in Aleppo.

The UK Foreign Office minister Tobias Ellwood, speaking at the council, said: 
“The actions of Assad and of Russia are driving radicalisation and fuelling 
terrorism, not tackling it. Russia: you are making the situation worse, not 
solving it.”


He told reporters that the Russian pause was “being used simply for them to 
regroup and further their own stranglehold over Aleppo”.

Referring to the airstrikes, he said: “This is shameful and it is not the 
action or leadership that we expect from a P5 [permanent member of the UN 
security council] nation.”

The United Nations’ top human rights official, Zeid Ra’ad al-Hussein, also 
described the siege and bombing of eastern Aleppo as “crimes of historic 
proportions” that had caused heavy civilian casualties that amounted to war 
crimes.


 