
The Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny> has demanded a recount in 
Moscow's mayoral election after the incumbent, Sergei Sobyanin, narrowly 
avoided a second-round runoff.

Opposition candidates won a handful of regional elections in a surprisingly 
strong showing on Sunday, leading many pundits and officials to suggest the 
elections marked a turn towards more competitive and transparent politics in
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

However, Navalny's claims of vote falsifications in the capital called into 
question just how much competition pro-Kremlin forces were willing to allow. 
His supporters gathered for a protest on Monday night.

One of the most notable results of Sunday's elections was the anti-drugs 
activist and off-road racing champion Yevgeny Roizman's narrow victory over his 
opponent from the ruling United Russia party in the race for mayor of Russia's 
fourth largest city, Yekaterinburg.

The opposition candidate Galina Shirshina won the mayoral race in 
Petrozavodsk, capital of the northern Karelia region, against another United 
Russia candidate.

The opposition RPR-Parnas, which put forward Navalny in Moscow, won seats in 
the Yaroslavl regional legislature, and the billionaire Mikhail Prokhorov's 
Civic Platform party, which put forward Roizman, also won city council seats in 
Yekaterinburg and Krasnoyarsk.

Pro-Kremlin officials including the prime minister, Dmitry Medvedev, who is 
also the chairman of United Russia, praised the elections for their 
competitiveness and transparency.

In 2011 thousands of Russians took to the streets after state Duma elections 
were marred by irregularities in the vote count. The following year the protest 
movement continued to grow after Vladimir Putin returned to the presidency in a 
vote that many saw as fraudulent.

The general consensus of pundits and observers was that there were far fewer 
violations in Sunday's elections. "There was a pretty high level of 
competition, and this was allowed by the Kremlin," said the conservative 
political analyst Yevgeny Minchenko. He predicted that the level of 
transparency would continue to improve.

Sobyanin and the Moscow region's acting governor, Andrei Vorobyov, both of 
whom are closely aligned with the Kremlin, helped opposition challengers make 
it on to the ballot.

Prokhorov, who ran for president in 2012 without ever criticising Putin by 
name, said Sunday's results showed that the Kremlin would allow opposition 
candidates to compete in and even win mayoral races, but not regional ones. 
"The most important points of control are governors and regional legislatures â€¦ 
The money is all at the level of governor," he told Ren-TV.

Nonetheless, Navalny's campaign refused to recognise the results in Moscow, 
arguing that vote falsifications and violations, especially with ballots cast 
by elderly voters at home, had allowed Sobyanin to avoid falling beneath the 
50% threshold for a runoff.

Navalny supporters working as observers at a polling station in south-central 
Moscow told the Guardian on Sunday that they had found no violations in votes 
cast from home or at the polling place. But a reporter for the New Times 
magazine followed an electoral worker and observer as they collected ballots 
from elderly women in their homes, noting minor infractions that should have 
nullified some votes.

The official count gave Sobyanin 51.37% and Navalny 27.24%, a result that far 
exceeded expectations for the opposition leader. A compilation of observers' 
results from different organisations found that Sobyanin received 49.5%, but 
the margin of error made it difficult to determine whether a runoff was in 
order.

Sobyanin refused offers to negotiate with Navalny after previously offering to 
meet with his challenger, and Navalny said he was prepared to challenge the 
results in court. The anti-corruption campaigner called his supporters to a 
protest on Bolotnaya Square.

Navalny was freed pending appeal of his politicised conviction for 
embezzlement and allowed to run in what many saw as a move by Sobyanin to lend 
his victory legitimacy and gain political status. The manoeuvre appears to have 
backfired, however, now that the election came so close to a second round.
 