
Tech entrepreneur Alexandre Mars is known in his native France as the French 
Bill Gates. Having made his fortune creating and selling tech startups, Mars, 
41, foundedEpic Foundation <https://epic.foundation/en> two years ago. It aims 
to encourage tech-savvy investors to donate to children’s and young people’s 
charities it has selected.

“We change the act of giving … Either I can go out and build schools myself. 
Or I can invest my money … leverage my skills, my network,” he explains. He is 
putting $2m into Epic, which uses technology to allow wealthy donors to fund 
and track a charity’s impact. Donors swipe an app to follow beneficiaries’ 
progress.

Mars says he aims to “change mindsets”, and describes himself as a “disruptive 
philanthropist” <https://twitter.com/alexandremars>. It is the reason he funds 
Epic, rather than directly funding projects himself. The foundation, which has 
staff in London, New York, Paris and Bangkok, has exceeded its 2016 target to 
raise $1m. As a result, each of the 20 charities it has selected will receive 
at least $50,000. Charities apply online from all over the world and a 
selection team headed by aformer United Nations head of policy 
<https://epic.foundation/en/nicola-crosta> analyses their impact, leadership 
and finances. In the UK, it supports education charity – and one of last year’s 
Guardian charity awards winners –The Brilliant Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/video/2015/dec/01/the-brilliant-club-guardian-charity-awards-winner-2015-video>
.

40 charities account for nearly 20% of total income for voluntary sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/apr/11/40-charities-account-for-nearly-20-of-total-income-for-voluntary-sector>
Next year, a further 10 charities have been selected for support (from 2,000 
applications), including two more UK charities, sport-based not-for-profit
Street League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/16/street-league-football-unemployment-clarence-seedorf>
 and east London employment projectThinkForward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/dec/13/coaches-help-young-people-back-on-track>
.

Mars is also launching a series of virtual reality films enabling donors to 
“experience” the charities, and a new online donation function encouraging 
gifts of $25 upwards from anyone.

The UK was recently ranked eighth in an annual global league table for 
individual giving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/oct/25/uk-global-giving-index-lags-myanmar>
. Figures from the National Council for Voluntary Organisations suggest we 
donated£19.4bn to the UK voluntary sector in 2013-14 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/apr/11/40-charities-account-for-nearly-20-of-total-income-for-voluntary-sector>
. This is44% of the voluntary sectors’ income 
<https://data.ncvo.org.uk/a/almanac16/fast-facts-5/>.

Mars believes a debate is needed “to explore opportunities and strategies for 
increasing giving”. At at time whentrust in charities is at an all-time low 
<https://www.civilsociety.co.uk/news/public-trust-in-charities-at-an-all-time-low-reveals-commission-research.html>
 following criticism of some traditional fundraising practices, new ways of 
engaging donors through technology is surely needed. Such challenges are 
expected to feature in next year’sHouse of Lords select committee report on 
charities 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/charities-committee/news-parliament-2015/committee-appointed/>
, with its focus on digital innovation and financial sustainability.

Mars says he always planned to “do good” with money: “I wasn’t clear that the 
end would be Epic or to change the act of giving … but I knew the day would 
come when I’d switch, and just do good.” . He decided to develop Epic after 
fellow wealthy entrepreneurs told him of the problems they have with charitable 
giving. They said: “We don’t trust [how to give], we don’t have the time, we 
don’t have the knowledge [of what to fund] … let’s say you want to do something 
for cancer, which one to pick if you have 25 different charities? The biggest? 
The newest?”

So he set up a philanthropy middleman. “When you’re an entrepreneur, it’s 
about finding a place where people are, and a place where people want to be ... 
If the gap is wide, you can build a business,” he explains.

Born in Paris and based in New York, Mars says his combination of enterprise 
and philanthropy comes from the dual influence of his businessman father and 
“humanitarian” mother. He recalls a recent visit to Paris, where he found his 
mother volunteering to teach French to a Chinese immigrant. The specific 
interest in youth inequality stems from visiting a Delhi orphanage in his 20s 
where his girlfriend, now wife, was volunteering.

He spends 90% of his time on Epic, with the remainder split between his tech 
investment company Blisce and chairing thesport and society committee of the 
Paris 2024 Olympic and Paralympic bid 
<http://www.paris2024.org/medias/presse/paris_2024_unveils_sport_and_society_committee.pdf>
. He laughs off the French media’s comparison with Gates, but is clearly proud 
– and he has sought advice from the Gates Foundation.

In the US, no one is ashamed of success. In the UK it’s ‘don’t be too loud 
about it’

What about criticisms that tech entrepreneurs’ charitable aspirations are 
over-ambitious, such as Facebook founderMark Zuckerberg’s $3bn initiative to 
cure all disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/sep/22/mark-zuckerberg-and-priscilla-chan-pledge-3bn-to-end-all-disease-video>
? Mars blames perception of ambition: “It is something different in UK than in 
the US. In the US, being successful is something good, something that no one 
has to be shy or ashamed of. In the UK it’s ‘don’t be too loud about it’ … It’s 
ambitious, I agree, to believe that we can change systems, but the good thing 
is, [this ambition] it’s needed,” he says.

Silicon Valley philanthropists are also reproached for being unsympathetic to 
social problems on their doorstep and failing to help community-based 
organisations. Surely Epic’s philanthropic radar fails to pick up smaller, 
community-based groups that, for example, lack capacity for its rigorous 
selection process? He replies saying Epic cannot “fix everything”, but that 
charities might indirectly benefit from its pro-giving mantra: “We have two 
impacts, one is very tangible [donations] the other is the mindset … so if you 
give through us or do whatever you do [volunteering or donating elsewhere], I’m 
happy.” He believes philanthropy is increasingly crucial as public finances 
shrink (“states and cities – they’re under huge debt”). So, how does he define 
the role of philanthropists versus the state? “We need policymakers, we need 
strong leaders … [but] they don’t have enough money, so where is it [the 
money]? It’s with the corporate world most of the time, so how can we 
[business] just step up?”

Then, sensing his wealthy peers might need a snappier rallying cry, he adds: 
“Switch on the television, watch the news – it’s our role to do something.”

Curriculum vitae

Age 41

Lives Brooklyn, New York

Family Married, three children

Education Florent Schmitt high school, HEC Paris [European business school – 
Hautes Etudes Commerciales de Paris] and Paris Dauphine University

Career 2014-present: chief executive and founder, Epic Foundation; 
2013-present: chief executive and founder, Blisce; 2007-13: head of mobile, 
Publicis Group; 2006-13: chief executive and founder, Scoon; 2001-07, chief 
executive and founder, Phonevalley; 1998-2002: chief executive and founder, 
Mars Capital (venture fund); 1997-99: co-founder and chief executive, A2X web 
agency.

Public life chair of the sport and society committee, part of the Paris 2024 
Olympic and Paralympic Games bid

Interests practitioner of mixed martial arts; fan of the Brooklyn Nets, New 
Orleans Saints and New York Yankees; marathon runner; listening to jazz
 