
From the period of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s militant opposition to the 
Shah’s regime in Iran in the 1970s, until his death, at the age of 82, Ali 
Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani was one of Iran’s major political players. Considered 
a pragmatic liberal, he had at times been ruthless. His charm and immense 
wealth gave him a cachet that few other Iranians enjoyed. He grew close to 
Khomeini during the latter’s exile in the 60s and became rich as a property 
speculator in the following decade. He suffered imprisonment under the Shah in 
1963, 1964, 1967, 1970, 1972 and 1975on and off throughout the 60s and 70s, 
but, after the Islamic revolution in 1979, he held various positions of state, 
including, from 1989 until 1997, that of president. He was credited with Iran’s 
reconstruction after the1980-88 war with Iraq 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/4260420.stm>.

Born in the village of Bahraman, near Rafsanjan, into a wealthy family of 
pistachio farmers, Rafsanjani attended a traditional Qur’anic school and in 
1948 went to a seminary in the holy city of Qom, where he lived near Khomeini. 
By 1956, he had completed his basic theological studies. In 1963, the Shah 
ordered seminarians, technically exempt, to serve in the army. Rafsanjani fled 
and was arrested.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakbar-hashemi-rafsanjani-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3a4c23f2e81c49e3ef7631af617c5bb3d575106%2F0_225_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ali%20Akbar%20Hashemi%20Rafsanjani%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakbar-hashemi-rafsanjani-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ali%20Akbar%20Hashemi%20Rafsanjani%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakbar-hashemi-rafsanjani-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3a4c23f2e81c49e3ef7631af617c5bb3d575106%2F0_225_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Ayatollah Khamenei, left, with Rafsanjani at the tomb of Ayatollah Khomeini in 
Tehran in 2006. Photograph: Reuters 
He was rumoured to have provided the gun used to assassinate the prime 
minister Hassan Ali Mansur in 1965. During this period Rafsanjani co-operated 
closely with future Islamic leaders such as the present supreme leaderAyatollah 
Ali Khamenei <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>. In 
1978, Khomeini appointed Rafsanjani a member of the Council of the Islamic 
Revolution, and he was a co-founder of the Islamic Republic party in February 
1979. In May that year, he escaped an assassination attempt. In 1980, he was 
elected speaker of the Iranian parliament and served until 1989. From then 
until his death he was chairman of the expediency council. In 2007, he became 
chairman of the crucial assembly of experts, serving until 2011.

He often sailed close to the wind. As speaker he had confirmed in 1985 
Khomeini’s appointment of AyatollahHossein Ali Montazeri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/dec/20/grand-ayatollah-hossein-ali-montazeri-obituary>
 to succeed as supreme leader. The conservatives strongly opposed this choice 
but Khomeini depended on Rafsanjani for political advice. Khomeini’s biographer
Baqer Moin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/baqer-moin> described 
Rafsanjani as “a witty and soft-spoken politician” who saw himself as a 
“patriot and a reformer who tried to advance a pragmatic interpretation of 
Islam, the revolution and Khomeini’s thinking”.

Brilliant at networking and wheeler-dealing, Rafsanjani was always a powerful 
figure. When he visited China and Japan in 1985 he was received as a head of 
state. It was during this visit that the US presidentRonald Reagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/jun/07/guardianobituaries.past> thanked 
him for bringing a peaceful end to thehijacking 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/twa-flight-847-is-hijacked-by-terrorists>
 of a TWA jet by Lebanon’s Hezbollah. This was one of many instances when he 
enraged the then prime minister,Mir Hossein Mousavi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mir-hossein-mousavi>, by dominating foreign 
policy.

Rafsanjani was clever at appealing to liberals and, where necessary, 
hardliners alike. The hardliners were pitted against him and fellow liberals 
when the US arms-for-hostages scandal in 1986 was revealed in the Lebanese 
press. Montazeri and his relative Mehdi Hashemi were alarmed by this 
rapprochement with the US. The radicals drew them into a power base from which 
the conservatives might grasp the leadership when Khomeini died. Hashemi was 
arrested for trying to sabotage the negotiations with the US while Rafsanjani 
was forced to disclose the story of what became known asIrangate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/feb/27/irangate-ronald-reagan-us-politics>
.

Rafsanjani survived where others might have fallen. He had Hashemi put on 
trial. Hashemi’s execution in 1987 sent a signal to the hardliners that 
Rafsanjani would not tolerate their interference. He then presented himself as 
a defender of the radicals. As Khomeini’s representative on the supreme defence 
council, he ran the war with Iraq and controlled the supply of weapons to the 
radical Revolutionary Guards. As president, he promoted a free-market economy, 
encouraging a World Bank-inspired structural adjustment policy. In 2005, he ran 
for a further term, but lost toMahmoud Ahmadinejad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahmoud-ahmadinejad> in the run-off.

In 1988, he had been influential in persuading Khomeini to “swallow poison” by 
unconditionally accepting UN Security Council resolution 598, ending the war 
with Iraq. This followed Iraq’s use of chemical weapons against Iran. 
Rafsanjani persuaded Khomeini that using such weapons in retaliation would 
provoke new missile attacks against Iran, further demoralising the people and 
undermining the revolution. When aUS warship shot down an Iranian passenger 
plane in July 1988 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/july/3/newsid_4678000/4678707.stm>
, killing nearly 300 passengers, Rafsanjani helped keep tempers under control.

Nevertheless, he was ruthless when it was necessary. The newspaper Ettela’at 
quoted him in October 1981 as saying of the militantMujahedin-e Khalq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/sep/21/qanda-mek-us-terrorist-organisation>
 movement that “God’s law prescribes four punishments for them: one – kill 
them; two – hang them; three – cut off their hands and feet; and four – banish 
them. If we had killed 200 of them after the revolution, their numbers would 
not have mounted in this way.”

During his presidency, dissidents, drug offenders, communists, Kurds and 
Bahais were executed. In 1982, the former prime ministerMehdi Bazargan 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituaries-mehdi-bazargan-1568973.html>
 addressed an open letter to him accusing his government of creating an 
“atmosphere of terror, fear, revenge and national disintegration …”

Although after the Iran-Iraq war he sought closer ties with the west, he 
refused to lift Khomeini’s fatwa against the writerSalman Rushdie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/salmanrushdie>. He was a supporter of Iran’s 
nuclear programme, although he insisted that Iran did not seek weapons of mass 
destruction. After the end of his presidency he delivered a sermon at Tehran 
University in 1999 praising the government’s use of force to suppress student 
demonstrations.

With the passing of the years, his attitudes became softer. In a speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/17/rafsanjani-speaks-out-at-friday-prayers>
 on 17 July 2009, he criticised restrictions on the media and the suppression 
of activists and stressed the importance of the popular vote. Some two million 
people attended this speech, which some regarded as one of the most important 
in modern Iranian history.

During that year’s presidential elections, the radical Ahmadinejad won a 
landslide victory over his reformist challenger, Mousavi. Many believed that 
the election was rigged. Both Khamenei and Ahmadinejad, as well as the 
opposition Green Movement, recognised the value of securing Rafsanjani’s 
support. He registered as a candidate in the 2013 presidential elections, but 
after he was disqualified from standing backed the moderate clericHassan Rouhani
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/15/iran-presidential-election-hassan-rouhani-wins>
, the current president.

Rafsanjani is survived by his wife, Effat Marashi, whom he married in 1958, 
and their three sons, Mohsen, Mehdi and Yasser, and two daughters, Fatemeh and 
Faezeh.

• Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, politician, born 25 August 1934; died 8 
January 2017
 