
Alicia Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/music/aliciakeys> has taken over 
Times Square, bringing five blocks of one of the busiest areas of the western 
world to its knees. Her “secret” gig tonight is not so secret. She’ll 
commandeer the epic digital billboards and her face – lightly freckled and 
without makeup, as is her way these days – will flash all over American Eagle 
Outfitters.

Times Square is Keys’s back yard. She was born in Hell’s Kitchen in 1981 and 
grew up in a one-bedroom apartment on 43rd Street between 9th and 10th Avenue. 
Her teenage years coincided with the tenure of Mayor Rudy Giuliani: the street 
is now quietly gentrified, and features the Manhattan Plaza Health Club.

She has booked the entire 57th floor of the W hotel to dress for the gig, 
rest, and do this interview in promotion ofHere 
<http://www.aliciakeys.com/alicia-announces-new-album-and-debuts-new-single/>, 
her first album in four years. Her complicated management system functions like 
an onion. There is an outer layer of nervy young people glued to Samsungs, a 
middle layer of big characters in bomber jackets who emerge before show time 
and hand out laminates, and an inner layer – Key’s confidants and partners in 
her company, AK Worldwide: longtime manager and co-writer Erika Rose (headscarf 
and curly haired child in sling), and DJ Walton – who is, among many things, a 
vocal coach and boxing coach with two full sleeves of tattoos.

The machinery around the star exists as a shock absorber, and Alicia’s suite 
is almost temple-like in its serenity. Four shadowy figures sit on high-backed 
chairs, like guests at a strange, gloomy dinner party. Two cameramen swoop 
around the room, filming the proceedings – everyone from Beyoncé to Janelle 
Monáe has their own personal film team these days, capturing your interview for 
their “personal archive”, or their legal department.

In the corner is a girl in a headscarf and jeans who looks so unassuming I 
think it’s another assistant. Alicia Keys moves to the sofa in her socks, pulls 
her knees up, and begins talking in her soft, low, boyish voice.

New York wasn’t like a beauty pageant, it was a hard, grimy place, and you had 
to dress accordingly

“Times Square was dark – gee, it was dismal,” she says. “In the 80s, when I 
was a little girl, this whole Midtown area was a different world. These are the 
streets that I walked, and learned my lessons on, and heard the music, and 
witnessed disenfranchised people, and people who just had dreams and hopes. 
Every pimp, every prostitute, every drug dealer, every Broadway dreamer wishing 
they could be a writer, or a musician, or an actor.”

Her white, Italian-Irish mother, Terria Augello (now Joseph), raised her 
alone, working as a legal assistant at the Chadbourne and Parke law firm at the 
Rockefeller Center from the year before she was born until 2001, when her 
daughter’s debut album,Songs in A Minor, was released (it went on to sell 12m 
copies). Mum had attended NYU’s School of the Arts and worked on and off as an 
actor. She started her daughter young: at four, Alicia got a part inThe Cosby 
Show, as one of Rudy Huxtable’s sleepover guests, and can be seen, small and 
giggling, riding Bill’s leg like a bucking bronco.

At 12, in 1993, she attended the newly created, publicly funded Professional 
Performing Arts School, 10 minutes walk from home and just off Broadway. Claire 
Danes and Britney Spears were pupils at one time. She was tutored by “Miss 
Aziza…” she says wistfully.Aziza Miller <http://www.azizamiller.com/> – “One of 
the most phenomenal women jazz instructors ever to be born. She was a pianist, 
an arranger, a producer, a composer, and she had so much vocal prowess. She was 
badass. And I know for a fact that she influenced a large part of what I 
became.”

The school kept her off the streets. “You walked out the door, you had to be 
ready to protect yourself,” she says. “Be covered up, just get to where you 
were going. I couldn’t wear skirts, I couldn’t wear heels. On the other hand, 
it was kind of the area where whoever didn’t belong anywhere else could come, 
and belong.”

From mean streets to stage school to the big time, all by the age of 20, it 
was the American dream. When Keys released her first single,Fallin’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Urdlvw0SSEc>, in 2001 she already had a 
certain kind of pedigree. She’d been taken on by Clive Davis, who’d signed 
Janis Joplin and mentored Whitney Houston. Her songs, filled with jazz chords 
and tinkling Moonlight Sonata-style intros, appealed to a mature audience as 
well as a young one; another big hit,If I Ain’t Got You 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ju8Hr50Ckwk>, sounds like a thumping Motown 
classic now. She wasbeloved of Stevie Wonder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z8RrY_HZH9c>, and Bob Dylan got all soppy 
about her, writing inThunder on the Mountain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0RPkJeziNyI>, “I was thinking about Alicia 
Keys, couldn’t keep from crying/ When she was born in Hell’s Kitchen, I was 
living down the line…”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDWACsH1f2So&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDWACsH1f2So>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDWACsH1f2So&media=>
Listen to Alicia Keys’s Blended Family (What You Do for Love). 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DWACsH1f2So> 
Today, at 35 but looking 25, she is – strangely – an elder stateswoman of the 
sound that has dominated pop in the 21st century. She judgesThe Voice alongside 
Miley Cyrus but her own lacks the melismatic warble of modern R&B. Even her new 
albumHere – full of ice-cool songs celebrating life’s confusions and 
compromises – bears a closer relationship to neo-soul than the songwriting 
teams of Beyoncé or Rihanna.

She’s already had one comeback – 2010’s Empire State of Mind 
<https://open.spotify.com/track/3xkxcbnc7G3XYuZt6eUnI5>, with her friend Jay Z, 
is the biggest New York song since Sinatra’s. And she has remained, quietly, 
part of the hip-hop elite: she’s known Beyoncé since they were 16, and was one 
of the first artists to sign to Tidal; she’s struck up sponsorship deals with 
everyone from BlackBerry to American Express, and has a formidable philanthropy 
career. Then there’s the politics: she performed between Bill and Hillary 
Clinton atPhiladelphia’s Democratic National Convention in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jul/26/democratic-convention-day-two-clinton-nominee-sanders>
. Which was a difficult day all round, apparently.

“Really, it was pretty emotional,” she says. “Bernie was coming up to support 
Hillary at that time, and there was this real disappointed energy – because 
Bernie is so beloved, and he has such powerful thoughts and ideas that really 
resonate with people. There was this energy to make sure that there wasn’t a 
huge divide within the party, because that would have been devastating. I 
remember just wanting to relay that.”

She says she sees in Clinton the possibility for “how powerful women can be”, 
then adds, “It’s emotional for me as a black woman, wanting to make sure that 
all the issues are addressed in America when it comes to race, when it comes to 
black people – wanting to make sure that message isn’t lost. And that it is 
continuously on all our agendas – particularly Hillary’s.”

Is she confident (we are talking four weeks ahead of the election) about the 
outcome?

There’s no end to what the family dynamic can look like, as long as it is 
filled with love

“I just refuse to believe that anything else is going to happen,” she says. 
“But I also know it’s only going to happen if we’re getting out and registering 
to vote. We have hope, we have potential; that I do believe in.”

In 2008, Keys told Blender magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/apr/15/aliciakeys.urban> she thought 
the Black Panther movement would have gone global if they’d had the platform 
musicians have today. She might have to start something herself, she mused at 
the time – then Black Lives Matter came along and she didn’t have to. Tidal 
donated $1.5m this year, on what would have been Trayvon Martin’s 21st 
birthday. In July, Keys’s charitable foundation,We Are Here, 
<http://weareheremovement.com/> put together a protest film – “23 Ways You 
Could Be Killed If You Are Black in America” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U_VaNhI4CLo> – which featured Rihanna and 
Pharrell Williams. I ask what she thought when her old landlord, Giuliani, said 
– in response to Beyoncé’stribute to the Panthers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/beyonce-black-panthers-homage-black-lives-matter-super-bowl-50>
 at the Superbowl 50 halftime show – that he’d “saved more black lives than 
anyone on that stage”.

“I don’t pay attention to things that don’t need to be paid attention to,” she 
says.

“Musicians have a really big part to play in spreading messages because 
they’re able to reach a large portion of people on an emotional level. Artists 
reach people at their heart; it’s the only time we meet in one place and put 
our differences aside. When you’re in a forum listening to music, all you feel 
in that moment is love and the understanding.”

Keys has known her husband, the producer Swizz Beatz 
<http://www.swizzworld.com/> (Kasseem Dean), since she was about 16, though 
they took years to get together. Kanye West once called Dean, 38, the best rap 
producer of all time. His more unusual accolades include global ambassador for 
New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation, and a place at Harvard Business 
School. Dean already had three children when he married Keys in 2010. His first 
son, Prince Nasir, with Nicole Levy, is 16. There’s another, Kasseem, with 
Harlem songwriter Mashonda Tifrere, singer of the songNo Panties 
<https://vimeo.com/30612707>. And a girl, Nicole, by Jahna Sebastian, whose 
website claims she helped bring grime to Russia.

Keys faced her share of scandal with the relationship, and covers it in the 
new single Blended Family (What You Do for Love) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DWACsH1f2So>, which includes a direct address 
to her stepchildren: “I know it started with a little drama/ I hate you had to 
read it in the paper/ But everything’s alright with me and your momma…”

“It’s about my personal journey with my family, and creating a family that’s 
built on compassion and understanding,” she says, in her broad, new age-y way. 
“That’s not an easy road. A lot of the modern family is children from different 
relationships. That’s what family is today, and there’s never been a song about 
how beautiful it is. There’s no end to what the family dynamic can look like, 
as long as it is filled with love for the kids. ”

Her stepchildren, she says, call her Umi, which is Arabic for mother. Kasseem 
Dean is Muslim: “4 years of greatness and cheers to 100 plus more inshallah” he 
Instagrammed, on their anniversary. I ask her if she has converted to Islam. 
There is a pause, then she says:

“I love learning about different religions, and discovering the different ways 
to worship, and to love the greatness and the higher being that surrounds us 
all. I definitely believe in a bigger presence, and I really respect all 
religions; at their core they all teach the same message – community and 
kindness and looking out for each other.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4HazJhPnrB8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4HazJhPnrB8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4HazJhPnrB8&media=>
Watch the video for Alicia Keys’s In Common. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4HazJhPnrB8> 
Growing up, she rarely saw her own father, Craig Cook – an air steward of 
Jamaican background, who became a masseur – but she maintained a close 
relationship with his parents (though her father’s absence was not, she points 
out, “exactly a topic for the dinner table”).

“I did have a deeper relationship with my nana than I did with my father, and 
again, that’s how life goes. There’s no rulebook. My grandmother was a very 
loving woman. The table would be filled with Christmas cards. She could cook 
really well too – and then one day, she just decided to stop. My grandfather 
had passed. Something just changes, you know?”

When her grandmother became terminally ill in 2006, Keys took off for Egypt 
for three weeks by herself. That a single holiday had such a formative impact 
on her reminds you how young she was when fame hit. She named the first of her 
two sons Egypt, five years later. Like his namesake with its “impossible 
structures”, Egypt Dean loves to build. “I mean, he’s obsessed. He’s like an 
architect.”

At five years old, the tot already has a co-credit producing a song for 
Kendrick Lamar – untitled 07, on Lamar’suntitled unmastered album (sample 
lyric: “shut your fucking mouth and get some cash you bitch!”). He wasposted on 
Instagram by his father 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/hip-hop/6898221/swizz-beatz-son-egypt-dean-kendrick-lamar-untitled-unmastered-project>
, playing a piano intro. “He really did it,” she assures me. “He came up with 
it, heard the melody, picked it out on his piano, and brought it to the studio. 
Played it, programmed it. It’s pretty cool.” Egypt watched Superbowl 50 sitting 
next to Kendrick, Jay Z and Usher.

I don’t listen to anything Donald Trump says. Does anybody care what he thinks 
about women?

Keys has said that having children has made her feel more womanly. “As I grow 
and I get older I’m realising more and more that there’s such a beautiful, 
sensual power that we have as women,” she says. “It’s really unbelievable and 
that’s why everybody falls to our feet.”

In a piece for Lena Dunham’s Lenny newsletter 
<http://www.lennyletter.com/style/a410/alicia-keys-time-to-uncover/>, she 
explained the decision to go without makeup which has gripped the world – from 
the TV hosts on NBC’sToday morning news show, who wiped their own off in 
solidarity 
<http://www.today.com/style/tamron-hall-take-anchors-shed-makeup-after-alicia-keys-performance-t102506>
, to the messageboards of Muslim girls debating the difference between 
liberation and empowerment. The stuff made her feel like a “chameleon”, she 
says. Going without it is a terrific marketing trick: she even wrote a lyric 
that goes, “Maybe all this Maybelline is covering my esteem”. And her makeup 
artist recently revealed that the no-makeup lookactually requires quite a bit 
of makeup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2016/oct/10/alicia-keys-no-makeup-look-not-quite-real>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Falicia-keys-i-want-to-make-sure-all-issues-race-hillary-clinton-here-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce1f12c57424c740f2ecb41bd645da78ba974fc8%2F0_0_6208_6934%2F6208.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alicia%20Keys%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20want%20to%20make%20sure%20all%20the%20issues%20about%20race%20are%20addressed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Falicia-keys-i-want-to-make-sure-all-issues-race-hillary-clinton-here-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alicia%20Keys%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20want%20to%20make%20sure%20all%20the%20issues%20about%20race%20are%20addressed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Falicia-keys-i-want-to-make-sure-all-issues-race-hillary-clinton-here-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce1f12c57424c740f2ecb41bd645da78ba974fc8%2F0_0_6208_6934%2F6208.jpg>
 Alicia Keys: ‘Mary J Blige really resonated with me because she was from New 
York.’ Photograph: Paola Kudacki 
But the campaign certainly suits Keys’s muted, delicately retro R&B persona. 
Like an American Neneh Cherry, what she was doing 15 years ago feels 
significant now. Compared with the modern-day vogue for ironic sluttiness, and 
the subsequent nail-biting over what it means to be feminist in pop, Keys and 
many of her contemporaries around the millennium offered something 
comparatively nuanced. Like TLC, her style was boyish – trousers, boots and 
braids – but her lyrics examined love and its vulnerability. One of her 
signature songs, You Don’t Know My Name, feels almost quaint now, as she poses 
as a waitress and rings the guy in the “fly blue suit” to ask him out: “I know 
girls don’t usually do this…”

It was a relaxed kind of self-possession, girl power without a soapbox. When I 
ask her what was going on, she lights up.

“It was good, it was so good,” she says. “In the 1990s, with Mariah Carey, 
Whitney Houston, those really big female artists were very glamorous, it was 
all about the glamour at that time. And so there was a big switch, the desire 
to be more who you were, not so beholden to this whole standard of beauty. It 
was a liberation. You see Mary J Blige – she did the same, wearing the combat 
boots.”

So it was an attitude, as much as a fashion?

“Yeah, definitely. Mary really resonated with me because she was from New 
York, and that’s what New York looked like: it wasn’t like a beauty pageant, it 
was a hard, grimy place, and you had to dress accordingly. That represented the 
type of girl that I was, so that worked for me.”

Does she think there’s been a change, in the way female R&B looks now?

Alicia Keys review – soul singer opens door to blistering basement bash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/21/alicia-keys-review-roundhouse-london>
“Yes. To me, it just seems like there’s a lot less variety,” she says. “When 
you talk about the TLCs, or the Marys, you had a chance to see women in 
different orbits. [TLC’s] Chilli was one way, T-Boz had a whole other style. 
Now, I think we see almost only one thing when it comes to female performers. 
Obviously they’re beautiful, so you want to emulate that. But I think there’s 
some confusion as to what beauty looks like – it can only be oversexualised. 
What’s refreshing is when you see people who know how to express themselves in 
a multitude of ways.

“We think – or maybe we’re shown – that the only way to express ourselves is 
through that very sexy energy. I think there’s more than that which shows our 
power. For me, I sometimes feel the most sexy when I’m totally covered head to 
toe.”

We meet in the week that it was revealed that Donald Trump acknowledged that 
his daughter is a piece of ass – and that 35 is the age he tends to check out 
on a woman 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/donald-trump-howard-stern-tapes-women-35_uk_57fa46e1e4b01fa2b904368b>
.

She cracks her knuckles unnervingly loudly. “I don’t listen to anything that 
he says. Does anybody care what he thinks about women? That’s the only 
question. I just was wondering?”

Does she think the comments might have ruined Trump?

“To me, he’s never been in.”

Can she see another black president?

“Yes. Just as I can see a woman president.”

One of the shadowy dinner party guests moves forward, and calls time.

“I guess come with me to the little soundcheck thing,” says Keys.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Falicia-keys-i-want-to-make-sure-all-issues-race-hillary-clinton-here-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34be26b5f53e68be3b4dc3a8ff5d9717d05b5f66%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alicia%20Keys%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20want%20to%20make%20sure%20all%20the%20issues%20about%20race%20are%20addressed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Falicia-keys-i-want-to-make-sure-all-issues-race-hillary-clinton-here-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alicia%20Keys%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20want%20to%20make%20sure%20all%20the%20issues%20about%20race%20are%20addressed%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Falicia-keys-i-want-to-make-sure-all-issues-race-hillary-clinton-here-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34be26b5f53e68be3b4dc3a8ff5d9717d05b5f66%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
 Keys performing Empire State of Mind with Jay Z as part of her album launch in 
Times Square last month. Photograph: Gary Gershoff/Getty Images for Alicia Keys 
She enters Times Square on the arm of a young male assistant, a Starbucks in 
one hand and a big hooded blanket over her headscarf, with mirrored sunglasses, 
looking like Erykah Badu.

The video for Blended Family – her sober song of inclusion – flashes up and 
down the length of the buildings like a Benetton ad. At the back of the VIP 
section, Kasseem Dean, in a posh camel coat, holds two small boys wearing New 
York baseball caps.

Keys smashes out delicious, Gershwinesque chords on an upright piano. She 
sounds like a female Stevie Wonder. And throwing her arms up, she becomes an 
ambassador. For Black Lives Matter: “Don’t let these people make you think we 
are different from each other. I feel like we have devolved!” For women: 
“Without women there would be no humans!” And for mums everywhere: “There’s 
nothing worse than being cold at a concert.”

And finally, the bit the crowd have been waiting for: “This ignorant racist 
jackass whose name rhymes with scum has the nerve to talk about grabbing pussy? 
If you care about your life then vote for it. Please.”

When Jay Z joins her on stage for Empire State of Mind, the taxis of Times 
Square appear to be drifting silently in the slipstream of the song. Tourists 
emerging from Broadway theatres get an experience they couldn’t have paid for – 
and which the teenage Keys, making her way to some vocal class round the corner 
years ago, almost certainly never imagined.

Here is out now on RCA Records
 