
The lack of sound on the Champs Elysées was striking. 

With the eight lanes of France’s most famous avenue cleared of all traffic on 
Paris’s firstcar-free day 
<http://www.paris.fr/actualites/le-27-septembre-journee-sans-voitures-2817>, 
the usual cacophony of car-revving and thundering motorbike engines had given 
way to the squeak of bicycle wheels, the clatter of skateboards, the laughter 
of children on rollerblades and even the gentle rustling of wind in the trees. 
It was, as one Parisian pensioner observed as she ambled up the centre of the 
road taking big gulps of air, “like a headache lifting”.

There were other weird and pleasant effects of this tiny glimpse of carless 
utopia. “Everyone seems to be smiling, and not as stressed,” marvelled 
Elisabeth Pagnac, a civil servant in her 50s, who had been emboldened to cycle 
in from the eastern edge of the city without a helmet. But strangest of all was 
the sky.

“I live high in a tower block in the east of the city and looking out of my 
window today I saw the difference straight away: the sky has never been this 
blue, it really is different without a hazy layer of pollution hanging in the 
air,” she said.

Others agreed that looking up towards the Arc de Triomphe and to La Défense 
beyond, a view that was so often hazy and distorted by the city’s famous smog 
was suddenly crystal clear.

“What a joy to go down the middle of the road taking in the sights,” said 
Claude Noirault, a wheelchair-basketball coach, who had done 10km in his sports 
wheelchair and was planning 30km more.

When Anne Hidalgo, the mayor of Paris, launched the idea of the French 
capital’s first car-free day at the suggestion of the collectiveParis Without 
Cars <http://parissansvoiture.fr/fr/>, pollution was top of the agenda. 

In March this year, a rise in air pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/23/paris-smog-pollution-emergency-measures-traffic>
 briefly made Paris the most polluted city in the world, with smog so bad it 
almost completely obscured the city’s landmarks, including the Eiffel Tower. As 
Paris prepares to host this year’s massive climate change conference, the city 
was under pressure to make a gesture.
Paris goes car free. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/paris_car_free-zip/giv-31114EqYvNYETs04R/>
France has the highest percentage of diesel cars on the road in Europe, as 
successive governments have subsidised the fuel, making it cheaper than petrol. 
TheVolkswagen scandal over emissions-rigging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/25/volkswagen-appoints-matthias-muller-chief-executive-porsche-vw>
 has increased pressure on the French government to act on car pollution.

As Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> mayor, Hidalgo has set out 
to push the city towards less car use and cleaner vehicles. She has vowed to 
eradicate diesel use in the city by 2020 and plans to extend car-free areas 
along the Seine.

But Paris’s car-free day was not without controversy, not least because it 
wasn’t a totally carless day and was limited to only around one-third of the 
city. After a standoff with police, authorities were only able to make car-free 
certain parts of the city centre, stretching between Bastille and the Champs 
Elysées, and the outer Bois de Boulogne and Bois de Vincennes, and only between 
11am and 6pm. In the rest of the city, cars were allowed but at 20km an hour.

Early in the morning, some of the smaller streets near Republique were 
deserted, and on the empty Champs Elysées people picnicked on the curb. But by 
noon, as taxis and buses were allowed to move freely, even in the “car-free” 
zones, certain streets like the busy Rue de Rivoli filled up with taxis and 
public transport, nudging children on bikes to the side.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fall-blue-skies-in-paris-as-city-centre-goes-car-free-for-first-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1ecfbc498aa57ebb2861b6fb731ebc5be06fea5%2F0_184_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All-blue%20skies%20in%20Paris%20as%20city%20centre%20goes%20car-free%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fall-blue-skies-in-paris-as-city-centre-goes-car-free-for-first-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All-blue%20skies%20in%20Paris%20as%20city%20centre%20goes%20car-free%20for%20first%20time&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fall-blue-skies-in-paris-as-city-centre-goes-car-free-for-first-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1ecfbc498aa57ebb2861b6fb731ebc5be06fea5%2F0_184_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 An alternative mode of transport that is not a large part of the mayor’s 
vision for how to get around in a car-free Paris. Photograph: Tom 
Craig/Demotix/Corbis 
Hidalgo, launching the event with other mayors who have already pioneered 
car-free days, including the mayor of Brussels, said the initiative showed 
people “are not obliged to move around in a personal car, there are other ways 
to approach mobility in a city”.

Cylists from a bike collective, Vélorution, gathered at the Place de la 
République and cycled together, not through the car-free zone but through the 
streets where cars were allowed, to make their point.

Camille Carnoz of the collective, said: “Today is symbolic, it’s about giving 
people a dream, showing us what a city could look like without cars, a type of 
utopia. But we need to go further, with more and larger cycle routes, better 
parking spots for bicycles, slower speed limits. There’s a lot to be done.”

Boris Najman, a university economics professor who was taking part in the 
Vélorution cycle with his four- and seven-year-old children, said: “We notice 
the pollution in terms of our children’s health, which is so much better when 
we’re away by the sea. Today should be about really thinking about changing 
habits. Going car-free is possible in Paris: it’s a small city, it’s very 
dense, it has a lot of good public transport. It can happen.”

Alex Copin, dressed as Spider-Man, was leading 1,000 longboard skateboarders 
on a tour of the car-free streets. “It’s just so nice to not have to practise 
this sport with exhaust pipes pumping out at us. It’s nice to have the road to 
ourselves in such a beautiful city.”

At the Place de Châtelet, a four-lane roundabout which is normally one of 
central Paris’s grimiest traffic points, Cathie Ventalon, a yoga teacher, was 
laying out yoga mats in the middle of the deserted street and preparing to 
teach a class in the sunshine. “It’s about reappropriating the public space and 
breathing better. We can even hear the fountain, which is normally drowned out 
by traffic noise,” she said.

Nicolas Maille, who works in communications for a TV station, was stretching 
out on his mat. “I’ve noticed people in the city centre just seem so happy 
without the cars. It’s like aJacques Tati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/french-film-first/gallery/jacques-tati-the-french-comedy-genius-who-led-the-way-for-mr-bean-in-pictures>
 film of the 1950s, everyone’s on a bike and smiling. It’s incredible to see.”


Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 