
It is the day she expected to make history as America’s first female president.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/05/hillary-clinton-campaign-first-woman-president-2016-election-voters>
 Instead Hillary Clinton will undergo a special kind of torture on Friday when 
she stands just yards from the spot where Donald Trump takes the oath of office.

Women's March on Washington set to be one of America's biggest protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/womens-march-on-washington-protest-size-donald-trump>
Clinton, 69, who lost to Trump in the most bitterly divisive election in 
modern times,will be present 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2017/01/hillary-clinton-bill-attend-trump-inauguration-233141>
 at his inauguration in Washington alongside her husband, former president Bill 
Clinton.


In a Shakespearean twist, she will watch silently with cameras trained on her 
as the man she denounced as unfit for office, andwho threatened to jail her, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/trump-jail-hillary-clinton-private-email-server-us-election>
 claims the crown for which she strived for so long.

“It has to be an emotionally difficult day, but she won’t give any outward 
sign,” saidRobert Shrum, 
<https://twitter.com/BobShrum?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 a Democratic party consultant. “She will have a stiff upper lip.”


She will not be the first losing candidate to be so close yet so far on the 
riser at the US Capitol. Outgoing vice-presidents Richard Nixon in 1961 and Al 
Gore in 2001 watched close up as the men who beat them byagonisingly narrow 
margins <http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1988/11/10/did-nixon-beat-kennedy/> 
were sworn in.

Shrum, who worked for Gore, who won the popular vote but lost the electoral 
college aftera dispute settled at the supreme court, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/dec/22/worlddispatch.martinkettle> 
said: “He behaved extraordinarily well because he thought it was important for 
the country. I think Hillary Clinton will behave perfectly.”

Clinton and her campaign knew the stakes in the election against celebrity 
billionaire Trump were unusually high. “I’m the last thing standing between you 
and the apocalypse,”she told the New York Times 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/16/magazine/hillary-clinton-campaign-final-weeks.html?_r=0>
 in October. Her surprise defeat on 8 November was therefore shattering, and 
she has only made a handful of public appearances since her emotional 
concession speech the following day.

A night of shattered dreams: inside election day with Hillary Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-us-election-night-reaction>
Her efforts to recover have included walking her dog in the woods 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/woman-goes-for-hike-in-chappaqua-runs-into-hillary-clinton/>
 near her home in Chappaqua, north of New York City, where several supporters 
have chanced upon her and taken photos with her. She told a gathering of donors 
that FBI director James Comey’s late intervention was crucial to the outcome.


Last month Clinton resumed political duties, speaking at an unveiling ceremony 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/nation/2016/12/08/clinton-this-not-exactly-speech-capitol-hoped-give/qVKLrzqKAmNWi5UT5FlRaO/story.html>
 for a portrait of the retiring Senate minority leader, Harry Reid.

“This is not exactly the speech at the Capitol I hoped to be giving after the 
election,” she said. A group of tearful young women thanked her.

The Clintons and their daughter, Chelsea, attended the final performance of 
The Color Purple on Broadway, to standing ovations. Then Clinton joined other 
former secretaries of state for the opening of a diplomacy centre at the state 
department. There has even beenmedia speculation 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2017/01/hillary-clinton-new-york-mayor-233384> 
over a potential run for mayor of New York.

Clinton knows well the theatre of inaugurations. She attended those for her 
husband in 1993 and 1997 and looked on as Barack Obama, who defeated her in the 
Democratic primary, took office in 2009. But she and many others believed 2017 
would bring her turn to be centre stage.

Grace Bennett, editor and publisher of Inside Chappaqua, 
<http://theinsidepress.com/> who met the former fist lady recently, said she 
was “proud” of Clinton’s decision to attend Trump’s big day.

“I think it was probably a tough call. It’s a classy move. It tells you a lot 
about what she’s made of. She can rise above her own disappointment and loss 
and be a witness to history with a different set of eyes from Trump supporters.”

 