
Nearly half of Americans believe it acceptable to torture enemy combatants, 
according to a new survey which suggests that 15 years of warfare have 
significantly recast American attitudes on torture.

The poll <https://www.icrc.org/en/document/people-on-war>, conducted by the 
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), found that 46% of Americans 
believe it acceptable to torture enemy combatants, with just 30% opposed to the 
practice and another 24% unsure or unwilling to answer.

Only Nigeria and Israel record higher rates of support for torturing captured 
enemy fighters, with 70% and 50% endorsements, respectively.


Tunisian men detail CIA black site torture involving electric chair and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/03/cia-torture-electric-chair-black-site>
By contrast, in 1999 – the last time the ICRC conducted its “People on War” 
poll – 65% of Americans said the US could not torture captured enemy fighters, 
and 57% favored permitting an independent monitor to observe detention 
conditions.

The survey found a coarsening of attitudes towards obligations to civilians in 
wartime among people in the US, UK, Russia, China and France – the permanent 
members of the United Nations security council, which possess disproportionate 
power to set the global governance agenda.

As Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, who has 
endorsed torture enthusiastically, prepares to take the White House, some 33% 
of Americans consider torture “a part of war”, with another 13% unsure or 
unwilling to answer.

The poll <https://www.icrc.org/en/document/people-on-war> found that 54% of 
Americans consider torture “wrong”, a lower proportion than in any other 
population save for those of Israel and Palestine. Only 44% of Israelis and 
only 35% of Palestinians considered torture to be wrong.

The poll comes as rising tides of illiberalism have washed over the world’s 
great powers. In addition to Trump’s election, the UK has voted to leave the 
European Union and in France, the leader of the far-right Front National has 
led in a number of polls ahead of next year’s presidential elections. Russia 
and China have become more expansionist than they have been in decades, with 
Russia destabilizing Ukraine and China pressing maximalist territorial claims 
in the South China Sea.

Absolute opposition to torture was recorded by 100% of Yemeni respondents, 73% 
of Syrians, 68% of Iraqis, 80% of Ukrainians, and 58% of South Sudanese.

Across the so-called Permanent Five countries on the security council, 46% of 
respondents advocated additional assistance to migrants and refugees fleeing 
conflicts, an urgent question seized upon by rightwing politicians in Europe 
and the US in response to an influx of Middle Eastern refugees. But 79% of 
respondents from conflict-wracked nations urged greater help.

“There is a higher degree of acceptance amongst people living in the 
[Permanent Five Security Council] countries and Switzerland that the death of 
civilians in conflict zones is an inevitable part of war,” found the ICRC, 
which polled 17,000 people in 16 countries.

Fiji's police and military using torture with 'near impunity', Amnesty says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/fijis-police-and-military-using-torture-against-suspected-criminals-amnesty-says>
Across those countries, 48% of people believe that a captured enemy combatant 
cannot “be tortured to obtain important military information”, a figure sharply 
lower than the 66% opposition recorded in 1999.

Areas in active conflict record greater urgency over questions of civilian 
protection in wartime than do the great powers that often conduct or 
participate in those conflicts. In Ukraine, 83% believe everyone wounded and 
sick during a conflict has a right to health care, compared with 62% of 
Russians. A full 100% of Yemenis endorse the proposition, as do 81% of Afghans, 
66% of Syrians and 42% of Iraqis – compared with 49% of Americans, 53% of 
Britons, 37% of the Chinese and 67% of the French.

Only 59% oppose attacking a target with the knowledge that civilians will be 
killed, down from 68% in 1999, the ICRC found. While the 2016 study did not 
break the finding down by country, in 1999, its predecessor poll found that 52% 
of Americans believed the US ought only attack enemy combatants, while 42% 
believed the US should leave civilians alone “as much as possible”.
 