
Alun Wyn Jones has mellowed, so much so that when he is asked about his 
prospects of leading the Lions in New Zealand in the summer he says after a 
moment’s reflection: “Going back a few years, I would probably have ignored you.

“I would like to think I am well aware of what the Lions are about and what 
they represent, but out of respect for your body and the players who are 
putting up their hands to be selected, you keep it at arm’s length. The second 
row is a hotly contested position, probably more than any other. If you do not 
measure up there, you do not join the queue; the buck stops with me. It is a 
simple answer,” said Jones in an interview conducted before 
Tuesday’sannouncement that the 105-cap second-row will lead Wales in the Six 
Nations instead of Sam Warburton.

Related: Alun Wyn Jones replaces Sam Warburton as Wales captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/17/alun-wyn-jones-sam-warburton-wales-captain>

Jones has captained Wales five times before, on one-off occasions. He led the 
Lions inthe final Test in Australia in 2013  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/06/australia-lions-third-test-match-report>
when victory sealed a first series win in 16 years, but a player who has always 
stood up for what he believes and never worried about bruising egos has on the 
international field led by example, the first out of the trenches and always 
fully armed for battle.

The Lions coach, Warren Gatland, is on sabbatical from Wales but was privy to 
the decision to give Jones the captaincy. When Gatland decided on Warburton, 
then a raw 22-year old, six years ago, there was surprise Jones was overlooked. 
“I have challenged Gats over the years, probably to my own detriment,” he said. 
“It was never for anything other than clarity. I do not know if it was why he 
did not make me captain, but he does not mind honesty: he has called me out a 
few times about not working and stuff.

“I have a good working relationship with him and he is a top man-manager. When 
the pressure is on, he has done pretty well, the Midas touch they call it. I 
have worked with Gats a long time and if I do get selected by the Lions, there 
will always be an element of did I get there because I knew him so well and 
people will say it is because I am Welsh, but he is not a sentimental guy. It 
is easy to overthink things and I am good at that.”

Jones prefers to talk about the past rather than the future, not so much for 
fear of tempting fate but because it is certainty compared to the unknown. At 
the age of 31, and with more than 350 senior appearances behind him, he is 
getting used to questions about how long he intends to play for and what 
ambitions he has left. GettingOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> back into the European Champions 
Cup after their first season out of the competition is one and they are well 
placed at the top of the Pro 12, playing an invigorating brand of rugby Wales 
are aspiring to.

“You cannot look too far ahead because of form and fitness,” he said. “It is 
all about being healthy and available and for someone who has played a lot of 
rugby that is a big box to tick. I have been fortunate in that I have largely 
been available to feature throughout my career: I would like to say it was 
because I stayed in Wales, but I am not sure that was the case in my early to 
mid-years. Things are more joined up now with the national dual contracts and 
Ospreys look after me.

“I relax more now, you have no choice with a young daughter (19-month old 
Mali), and I make an effort. Before, I would go down the gym and have an 
average session because I was trying to do too much. I will take a day off now 
and spend time with the family. I have become more mellow and I have become 
more self-aware: I want to enjoy it. As a player you are in a privileged 
position, but we spend a lot of time travelling and away from home. Mali is 
good fun, but she will only be little for so long. When you are young and not 
tied down, it is easy enough, but now you miss stuff more, especially that 
which you cannot get back. Thirty seems to be the magic number for the question 
of how long you have left. There will come a day when you cannot play much 
more. I do not know when that will be or what I will do then, but I hope to go 
on for a bit longer.”

Jones will be a more demonstrative and more vocal captain than Warburton as 
Wales seek a catalyst to bring their evolving playing style to fruition. “I am 
pleased with the way things have gone at Ospreys so far,” he said. “The 
foundation was laid by the non-international players putting in extra days 
during pre-season, but there is a way to go. We have been known as a defensive 
side and while we have played in patches in the past, we are now putting our 
rugby philosophy on the park rather than paying lip service to it, although I 
wish, in terms of spectators, that more in the region had an emotional 
attachment to us through their clubs; we have to mean more to them.

“It would be nice to think we can step up another level with Wales and develop 
a style of play for the national team. The four regions play their own type of 
rugby: I like to think we are doing something different at Ospreys which can 
only benefit Wales. There is definitely an effort from the coaching staff to 
look forward and improve. We will take the positives out of the results in the 
autumn, but probably not out of how we got there. We are getting to the point 
now where we have to process the way we play: it is not about being robotic, 
but if you go through your strategy, opportunities are created which makes it 
look like you are doing it off the cuff. Mostly you can go back two or three 
phases and see that it happened because someone hit a ruck or made space 
elsewhere. There is a method to the flair.

I was just another fat kid chasing an egg. It has gone pretty well

“It is about getting the process right and there were frustrations, but it is 
easy to inflict the perception of others on you. Certain sources know they can 
get a lot of clicks for saying something or making a headline. That is the 
disappointing thing. We did not have a decent tournament in last year’s Six 
Nations: if that is prolonged, it is not a good sign but if, like Ospreys, not 
finishing in the top six but creating the right mindset means you can push your 
limits and ask questions, you move on.

“It is exciting where Wales are now. It is not about becoming the side of old 
again because the game has moved on. It worked and you cannot look back and say 
it was boring, even if it was. We are trying to expand, as are others, and it 
is set up to be an exciting Six Nations.

“We are not fancied to win it and we have to show character and do something 
about that. We are an experienced team but not an old one. Anyone can empty the 
tank, but it is about doing our training patterns on the park and being in the 
mix.”

While Jones, who is a qualified lawyer, does not relish looking forward, 
glancing backwards he cites the third Lions Test in 2013 as one of his career 
highlights. “I do not know if I was able to enjoy it on the day because it was 
one of the most, not intense, but so much pressure in the buildup meant there 
was so much relief in victory. It was like being in purgatory afterwards 
because we had to stay an extra day waiting for the insurance to clear before 
finally going home. I do not know if I will stay in the game when I do retire: 
I have got humanity so I do not know if I will go into law. Playing is 
time-consuming and I will probably decide too late. I never counted on playing 
rugby: I was just another fat kid chasing an egg. It has gone pretty well.”
 