
When Alyssa Haughwout heard the news that Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> had become the 
president-elect of the United States, her first thought was about the 
century-old mosque she cares for.

“I’m not really worried, knock on wood,” said the 31-year-old native of 
Brooklyn and third-generation American of Lipka Tatar descent. “But when Trump 
got elected, my first thought was: ‘We should get a security camera. We don’t 
have a video in the front. Let’s just do that.’” The community has since 
started the process of upgrading its security system.

Amid a reported spike in hate incidents in recent years and since the election 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/10/us/post-election-hate-crimes-and-fears-trnd/>, 
centenarian Muslim communities across the country – whose families have been in 
the country as long as Trump’s, if not longer – are wondering what will come 
next. Generations before the president-elect irrationally claimed “Islam hates 
us” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C-Zj0tfZY6o> on national television, their 
parents and grandparents were writing the story of what it means to be an 
American Muslim, from the streets of Brooklyn to the plains of North Dakota.

Now, Americas’ oldest Muslim families are holding on to optimism: “This too 
shall pass,” said Marion Sedorowitz, Haughwout’s aunt, who also sits on the 
board of the mosque, which is a spiritual home to Brooklyn’s 110-year-old Lipka 
Tatar community.

Lipka Tatars are a predominantly Muslim ethnic group with roots in what are 
now the lands split between Poland, Lithuania, and Belarus. Hundreds immigrated 
to the US at the turn of the last century – around the same time that Donald 
Trump’s paternal grandfatherleft Germany for the US 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/22/politics/trump-grandfather-germany-friedrich/> 
in 1885.

‘All this anti-Muslim-ism – I want to say it will be short-lived’
 Brooklyn’s historic Lipka Tatar mosque. Photograph: Ryan Schussler for The 
Guardian 
“I think a lot of that garbage is going to be swept under the rug,” Joe 
Aossey, an 80-year-old lifelong resident of Cedar Rapids, Iowa, said about the 
anti-Muslim fervor emboldened by the Trump campaign. “There are simply too many 
Muslims, and they have too many friends.”

Hassan Igram, 61, also of Cedar Rapids, said: “I have a lot of faith in the 
American people, I really do. I think if they were to be approached by Muslims, 
they would change. We’re people with the same aspirations as any other 
American.”

Aossey’s maternal grandparents immigrated to Iowa in the late 1880s from what 
is now Lebanon – a few years before Trump’s grandfatherbecame a US citizen in 
Seattle <http://genealogy.about.com/od/famous_family_trees/p/trump.htm>, going 
on toseed the family’s wealth 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/features/2016-trump-family-fortune/> in a 
gold-rush-era bar and brothel in Canada, biographers have found.

Igram’s family immigrated to the US around that same time. Cedar Rapids’ 
Muslim community is more than a century old, and the city is home to one of the 
first purpose-built mosques in North America.

“The way I see it – all this anti-Muslim-ism – I want to say it will be 
short-lived,” Aossey said. “It comes from the ignorance of people who don’t 
know anything except their own [lives], or it comes from the top to divide and 
rule.”

Describing the reported spike in hate incidents against Muslims since the 
election, Igram said: “Even if [Trump] doesn’t condone it, he’s already set the 
groundwork for this stuff to happen.” Igram said he had family members, 
particularly women who wear hijab, who have been harassed in public. “It’s not 
a coincidence.”
 Mother Mosque of America in Cedar Rapids, Iowa – among the first 
purpose-built mosques in the United States. Photograph: Ryan Shuessler for the 
Guardian 
Ken Zvizdich, who is a third-generation member of Chicago’s deep-rooted 
Bosnian Muslim community, is also concerned about what might be in store for 
American Muslims under a Trump administration.

“The majority of the Muslims have adjusted well in this country, and I think 
the implications that have been made are not correct,” Zvizdich, 50, said. “I 
think the Muslims in this country are going through the same things that the 
Jews went through, the Irish went through, the Italians went through – the 
difference is that today you have TV, iPhones, cameras, the internet. I think 
in 50 years or 100 years, Muslims are going to be an accepted part of this 
culture and society. It’s a difficult time, and American Muslims need to 
realize that, but they also need to step up and say we’re proud Americans and 
we want to do what’s right by this country, too.”

Zvizdich’s grandfather immigrated from Bosnia in 1906 and was a founding 
member of a benevolent society – Chicago’s Dzemijetul Hajrije – that is thought 
to be the oldest Muslim organization in the US. It once had chapters in cities 
such as Gary, Indiana, and Boise, Idaho. The Zvizdich family counts several US 
military veterans in its ranks.

“My grandfather’s favorite holiday was Thanksgiving, because it was the one 
holiday that they could identify as a true American,” Zvizdich said. “I’m a 
proud American. I have no conflict of interest [with my religion].”

‘They should be evaluated before they come into the country’
 A military tombstone in a Muslim cemetery in Ross, North Dakota. Photograph: 
Ryan Schussler for The Guardian 
Richard Omar, a 66-year-old son of Lebanese immigrants and a native of 
Mountrail County, North Dakota, falls more into the camp that is skeptical of 
Muslim immigrants.

“You say that Muslims are portrayed as evil people,” Omar said in a phone 
interview from his home in Stanley, North Dakota. “Well, some of them are 
[evil]. I won’t argue with that. It’s no different than any other group of 
people.”

Of Syrian and Iraqi refugees, he added: “They should be evaluated before they 
come into the country.”

Those applying for refugee status in the US go through a rigorous vetting 
process that crosses multiple government agencies and can take more than two 
years to complete.

Omar is a descendant of a small community of Muslim homesteaders in North 
Dakota who are credited with building the first US mosque, in the town of Ross 
in 1929 – the year before Trump’s Scottish mother immigrated to the United 
States. Omar believes his parents may have prayed at that mosque, but it was 
falling apart by the time he was old enough to remember. He and his siblings 
attended a Christian church growing up.

“They were just common people to me,” he said of his parents and the other 
Muslim immigrants who came to north-west North Dakota at the beginning of the 
20th century. “And I think to everybody else in this area.”

Betty Abdallah, whose father was a member of Ross’s Muslim community, told the 
Guardian in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/north-dakota-mosque-islam-history-united-states>
: “From my upbringing, the Muslim faith isn’t unkind. It makes me sad, for the 
stupidity. It’s not Muslims that are unsafe. It’s ‘radical’. And you can be a 
radical Christian. You can be a radical Jehovah’s Witness. It’s just the word 
‘radical’.”

Back in Brooklyn, the Sedorowitzes and their niece contemplated the rise of 
Islamophobia over coffee and Italian pastries.


“A lot of non-Muslim folks do not have enough information about Islam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>,” Marion Sedorowitz said. “And they 
have the wrong information. It’s like our religion has been hijacked. And it’s 
really difficult to try to get people to understand.”

For Alyssa Haughwout, who became the mosque’s caretaker a year ago, Trump’s 
victory comes at a time when she has been pushing for her community to further 
open its spiritual home to the neighborhood and world – in part to tell its 
story and show how Islam has long been a part of American society.

“[Opening the mosque up] was important before and now even more so,” she said, 
referring to Trump’s victory. “This can’t be the thing that deters us. This is 
just more reason to do it.”
 