
Give credit to the American Music Awards for being honest. The show, which ran 
its 44th edition on Sunday night, eschews “best” accolades, instead honoring 
“favorite” artists and songs; nominees are culled from sales, not artistic 
pretensions, and the winners are determined by online polling. Its aim? To be a 
blithe celebration of the root word of “pop,” giving awards to artists who show 
up.

But 2016 isn’t a typical year, and Green Day – the Bay Area punks turned 
alt-rock elder statesmen – lit up the night with a protest of United States 
president-elect Donald Trump. During a speedy run-through oftheir rumbling 
single Bang Bang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/15/pop-punk-green-day-blink-182-descendents>
, from their recent album Revolution Radio, the band inserted a bit of Born To 
Die, a 1982 single by the Texas hardcore outfit MDC that wasupdated a few weeks 
ago <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EiC9ofpzVZw>; that song’s original opening 
chant, “No war, no KKK, no fascist USA,” was amended so that it called out 
Trump.

References to the current political situation peppered the night: Supermodel 
Chrissy Teigen made a bleeped-out reference to the “really interesting, 
fucked-up, fucking election” while she introduced her husband John Legend’s 
performance of the anthem-in-waiting Love Me Now, mogul-slash-reality star Mark 
Cuban and brassy-voiced Tony winner Idina Menzel cracked jokes about not being 
invited to the inauguration,Sting <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sting> 
accepted his Merit Award with a speech calling himself a “musical migrant” and 
co-host Jay Pharoah offered up a few wince-worthy Trump impersonations. But for 
the most part, the night stayed fairly on message, showcasing a clutch of the 
songs that have been dominating radio playlists and streaming-music charts for 
much of 2016 amidst awkward acceptance speeches and cheesy laugh lines 
delivered by Pharoah and co-host Gigi Hadid.

Bruno Mars kicked off the show with 24K Magic, the lead single from his 
just-released album of the same name. That tribute to 80s robo-funk might be in 
the model of his mega-collaboration with producerMark Ronson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mark-ronson>, Uptown Funk, but its being one 
of the few big singles this year to have something resembling a pulse and 
Mars’s infectious energy and performance chops served as a high bar for the 
rest of the show.

A couple of moments reached the opener’s energy. Prince’s sister, Tyka Nelson, 
gave a fiery, teary speech accepting the Top Soundtrack award for Purple Rain, 
which got a sales jolt when the storied pop genius passed away in April.Selena 
Gomez <https://www.theguardian.com/film/selena-gomez> accepted favorite 
pop/rock female artist with an emotional speech talking about her return from 
the success-borne brink. Fifth Harmony powered through the girl-power anthem 
That’s My Girl amid post-apocalyptic rubble.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fgreen-day-protest-at-amas-no-trump-no-kkk-no-fascist-usa-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Green%20Day%20protest%20at%20AMAs%3A%20'No%20Trump%2C%20no%20KKK%2C%20no%20fascist%20USA'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fgreen-day-protest-at-amas-no-trump-no-kkk-no-fascist-usa-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Green%20Day%20protest%20at%20AMAs%3A%20%27No%20Trump%2C%20no%20KKK%2C%20no%20fascist%20USA%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fgreen-day-protest-at-amas-no-trump-no-kkk-no-fascist-usa-video&media=>
Green Day protest at AMAs: ‘No Trump, no KKK, no fascist USA’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/nov/21/green-day-protest-at-amas-no-trump-no-kkk-no-fascist-usa-video>
The dreary cloud that has settled over much of pop, however, made the show 
drag at times. Bro-EDM duo The Chainsmokers, who took home favorite artist, 
performed their acidly laconic Closer, which spent all of the fall in the 
Billboard Hot 100’s top spot untilceding it last week to Rae Sremmurd’s Black 
Beatles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/15/mannequin-challenge-rae-sremmurd-black-beatles>
. The song’s loping beat got a bit of a jolt from Blink-182 drummer Travis 
Barker, but that did little to help its utter charmlessness.

Alt-rock hybridists (and two-time winners) Twenty One Pilots’ medley of their 
two 2016-dominating hits, the grimacing Heathens, and the petulant Stressed 
Out, highlighted the dourness common to both. Maroon 5’s limpid Don’t Wanna 
Know turned into an endurance test for Adam Levine’s falsetto, although 
Kendrick Lamar’s presence was welcome. Even the hyperactive DJ Khaled’s 
cameo-studded Do You Mind was more slow jam than takeover attempt, with August 
Alsina’s sinewy hook sounding pretty but feeling stuck on a loop.

Artist of the Year Ariana Grande took to an ad hoc jungle for Side To Side, 
her saucy duet with Nicki Minaj; R&B miserablistThe Weeknd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-weeknd> performed his paranoid Starboy 
inside a makeshift ice cave. Lady Gaga, known in the past for her 
tendon-defying footwear, showcased the real-girl side of her Joanne-era persona 
by performing the power ballad Million Reasons barefoot.

Sting led the night’s spate of sensitive dudes with feeling-stuffed songs. The 
Merit Award winner performed I Can’t Stop Thinking About You, a chiming track 
from his new album 57th & 9th, as well as two tracks by his former band The 
Police, the muscular Message In A Bottle and the still-creepy Every Breath You 
Take. One Direction’s Niall Horan was the best of the guy-with-guitar lot, his 
feather-light This Town showcasing his sweetly strong voice.

Drake <https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake> didn’t perform during the 
show, but he was certainly present, and he brought along a no-show. Nominated 
for a record 12 awards, he wound up winning four, including favorite 
rap/hip-hop song for Hotline Bling and favorite rap/hip-hop artist. While 
accepting the latter, he promoted his upcoming playlist (think of it as a 
mixtape for the Apple Music era) More Life and dropped a vague threat to any 
and all comers: “Watch how you speak on my name.”

But perhaps the Canadian actor-rapper’s biggest moment of the night came when 
a new Apple Music ad <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Caomh069vMc> debuted. An 
answer ad of sorts tothe spring spot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fK_zwl-lnmc> where Taylor Swift’s excitement 
about the hyperactive Jumpman led to her tumbling from a treadmill, this clip 
showed Drake cooling down from a particularly intense workout by belting out 
her mean-girl broadside Bad Blood. It was supposed to be funny, but given the 
rancorous feelings that have pervaded 2016’s politics as well as its pop, it 
felt awfully fitting.
 