
One sweltering afternoon last January on a film set in the Cambodian 
countryside, a local man approachedAngelina Jolie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/angelinajolie> with a large bucket of 
leeches. Jolie peered into the bucket and picked out one of the writhing 
creatures, studying it as it found its way to one of the prominent veins on the 
back of her hand and locked on. As it started to gorge on her blood, she 
carried it over to her nine-year-old lead actor, Sareum Srey Moch, who was 
sitting in a canvas chair in the shade of a tree.

“This is what a real one looks like,” she said. Sareum wrinkled her nose and 
stared at the leech. “Does it suck your blood?” the girl asked. Jolie’s 
13-year-old son, Pax, on crutches after breaking his foot in a jet-ski 
accident, hobbled over with his camera to take a closer look.

“Yes it sucks your blood,” Jolie answered after a slight hesitation, already 
resigned to the likelihood that live leeches might be a step too far for this 
young actor. She ordered a return to plan A, a box full of dozens of pretend 
leeches made out of black vinyl and double-pinned to a cardboard backing like 
biological specimens. The crew experimented with gluing plastic worms of 
different shapes to Sareum’s leg until both the child actor and Jolie agreed 
that it looked right. Actor and director high-fived each other and the girl 
walked back to the paddy field for her next scene.

Sareum plays the part of Loung Ung, who was only five when the Khmer Rouge, as 
Cambodia’s communist party was known,swept into the capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/18/khmer-rouge-cambodia-1975> Phnom 
Penh in 1975. Over the next four years, they drove its population out into the 
countryside, executing all those perceived as class enemies. More than two 
million people were killed, out of a total population of seven million. Ung’s 
father and mother and two of her sisters were executed.

At nine, Ung escaped to Thailand with her older brother, and they arrived in 
the US as refugees soon afterwards, with the help of a church foundation. At 
30, she wrote her autobiography,First They Killed My Father 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2000/04/19/books/books-of-the-times-chilling-first-person-tales-from-cambodia.html>
. On set, Loung Ung, now aged 46, watched playbacks on a screen with Jolie in a 
small black tent, next to a little corral where brown cattle were being kept 
for farm scenes. The two women have been friends for 16 years and Ung, who 
co-wrote the screenplay, was working as a consultant on the set.

Jolie dates the beginning of her involvement in humanitarian issues to her 
experience making the fantasy action movie, Lara Croft: Tomb Raider, in 2000. 
In that film, which was released in 2001, Cambodia was no more than an exotic 
backdrop for the action, but booby-traps and anti-personnel mines planted all 
over the country in the 1970s were still going off. There was a generation of 
orphans, then in their twenties, and a country still crushed by poverty, 
authoritarianism and mass trauma. Soon after filming Tomb Raider was over, 
Jolie returned as a volunteer for the UN refugee agency, UNHCR, and visiting 
mine clearance projects. She started giving large amounts of money to UNHCR and 
became agoodwill ambassador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/jun/25/angelina-jolie-un-rape-conflict-zones-video>
 for the organisation.

Jolie was planning to return to Cambodia with UNHCR later in 2001 when Ung’s 
autobiography landed on her desk. Ung at that time was working for a US Vietnam 
veterans’ organisation supporting landmine victims in the region. Her office 
had sent the book to Jolie on the off chance that she might publicise its 
cause. As soon as Jolie read the book she called Ung. It turned out the two 
women were to be inCambodia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia> at the 
same time. Jolie invited Ung to join her on a motorbike tour of the rugged 
countryside around the Battambang province in the north-west of the country.

“We travelled to some very remote areas – there were no roads, or hotels or 
restaurants,” Ung said. “We stopped at the roadsides and ate in people’s homes. 
And I was so impressed because Angie didn’t travel with an entourage. She will 
eat whatever, she’ll hang her hammock wherever and get dirty and muddy in the 
torrential rain.”

Ung taught Jolie the survival skills learned in the camp: how to check for 
leeches and catch frogs. “We very quickly became friends,” Jolie told me. “We 
got caught in a monsoon and stayed up at night sitting in hammocks in a pagoda 
in the rain, which is really fun for the first few hours and then it’s just 
freezing cold and relentless.”

One day, Jolie spent time playing and talking to children in a school in 
Battambang. She had no children at the time and says it was at that moment that 
she decided to adopt a child from the country. “I asked Loung, as a Cambodian, 
as an orphan, what would she think about that. And she was very supportive 
about it,” Jolie said. “And we had a talk about what would be important, to 
make sure he always knew about himself.” Jolie adopted Maddox Chivan, aged 
seven months, from a Battambang orphanage a year later, in March 2002. “And 
Loung’s been in his life ever since,” she said.

Jolie and Ung began adapting the book, but then shelved the project in part 
because Jolie was busy with other movies and because neither thought the 
political atmosphere in Cambodia was conducive to making a film about recent 
history. However, last year, Maddox, by then 14, persuaded them to make the 
film. “He was the one who just called it and said he was ready and that he 
wanted to work on it, which he did. He read the script, helped with notes, and 
was in the production meetings,” Jolie said.

In 2011, Jolie made a film about the Bosnian conflict, In the Land of Blood 
and Honey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/10/in-the-land-blood-honey-review>, 
for which the cast was entirely made up of people from the former Yugoslavia. 
The film adaptation of First They Killed My Father uses only Cambodian actors, 
and the language spoken throughout is Khmer, with occasional snatches of 
French, the imperial language of French Indochina, of which Cambodia was a part 
until the 1950s.

“When I said I wanted to make this film and I want to make it in Cambodia, 
everyone said: you can’t make it in Cambodia. You have to make it in Thailand, 
likeThe Killing Fields 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/nov/10/how-we-made-the-killing-fields-roland-joffe-julian-sands>
,” Jolie said. Roland Joffé’s 1984 film was Hollywood’s one major attempt to 
tackle the Cambodian genocide. It tells the story of a Cambodian 
photojournalist stranded after the evacuation of his western colleagues, who 
provide the western point of view for the audience. Jolie’s film makes no such 
concessions. There are no white characters to explain events in English and she 
is quite clear that the primary audience is the Cambodian public. The cast and 
crew are Cambodian.

The film will be launched across Cambodia in the middle of next month, seven 
months ahead of its release in the US.

Jolie’s humanitarian work marks the third act of her career. Although not the 
first actor to take this route, she has thrown herself into the role. “I’m 
doing less film now,” she said. “Not walking away from it all, but ideally 
doing projects like this one, where you can pull together all that matters to 
you at the same time.”

While filming scenes that took place in a Khmer Rouge camp for child 
labourers, Jolie – barefoot and wearing a T-shirt and a large straw hat – 
strode on to the dusty set after every few takes. It was mid-morning and the 
heat was still bearable. The atmosphere was of a sprawling, busy, extended 
family, particularly during the communal meals eaten under canvas. Jolie was 
relaxed and happy, laughing and joking.

She was clearly in her preferred element, at work but surrounded by close 
friends and family, and protected – by the remoteness of location and light set 
security – from the world’s curiosity about her private life. She said later in 
the day that one of the things she most liked about being in Cambodia was that 
she would wander in the markets and those people who recognised her, knew her 
for her philanthropy. “Maybe they’ve seen Tomb Raider but they don’t really 
watch a lot of movies,” she said. “Really, I’m that odd nice lady who likes 
Cambodia. If I go to the market, they do recognise me – they just don’t bother 
me. They say hi.”

The set, a cluster of open-sided wooden huts, was built around a large dirt 
drill yard hung with red flags. Long lines of young Khmer children in black 
pyjamas and red chequered bandanas marched up and down, in and out of shot. 
Others picked rice from a paddy as a drone camera hovered noisily above.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fangelina-jolie-cambodia-first-they-killed-my-father%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aa171f4aeb135983e5cafd383091f649d45aa79%2F201_662_7269_4360%2F7269.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Among%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Cambodia%E2%80%99s%20killing%20fields%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20Angelina%20Jolie%E2%80%99s%20new%20film%20%7C%20Julian%20Borger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fangelina-jolie-cambodia-first-they-killed-my-father%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Among%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Cambodia%E2%80%99s%20killing%20fields%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20Angelina%20Jolie%E2%80%99s%20new%20film%20%7C%20Julian%20Borger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fangelina-jolie-cambodia-first-they-killed-my-father%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aa171f4aeb135983e5cafd383091f649d45aa79%2F201_662_7269_4360%2F7269.jpg>
 Angelina Jolie, her son Maddox Chivan and Loung Ung on the set of First They 
Killed My Father. Photograph: Pax Thien Jolie Pitt/Netflix 
Most of the time, Ung’s role was as an auntie figure to the child actors, 
particularly Sareum (who she called “Mini-Me”), dispensing bottled water and 
advice and spending hours in the Lego tent. Lego is largely unknown in Cambodia 
because of the country’s strict restrictions on imports, but Jolie brought a 
large amount of the plastic building bricks with her to keep the children in 
the cast amused.

For Ung, the Lego tent symbolised the ultimate defeat of the Khmer Rouge. 
“Lego is brightly coloured, it’s fun and it’s laziness. In the camp you would 
be beaten or worse for laziness,” Ung said. Her sister, Chuo, witnessed a boy 
being beaten to death by camp guards who said he was idle.

In solidarity with the girls in the cast, who had to wear their hair in the 
severe short crop imposed by the Khmer Rouge, Ung had cut her hair and wore 
black. In breaks in the filming, she and Sareum strolled around as two versions 
of the same person, 40 years apart.

“When I met Mini-Me, we were both trying to suss each other out. We would walk 
around each other like roosters,” she said. But she is constantly surprised at 
how alike they are. “Mini-Me would do something and I would look at Angie and 
say: I do that!”

In writing her autobiography, Ung sought to recapture what it felt like to 
experience the upheaval, chaos and horror of life in a child labour camp. The 
young Ung had only a fragmentary understanding of the events unfolding around 
her. The film seeks to do the same thing – to show conflict as seen through the 
eyes of a young girl. To allow the audience to see the world through the young 
Ung’s eyes, much of the footage is filmed from her point-of-view, four feet off 
the ground with a Steadicam.

The pursuit of an authentic child’s-eye view had been the film’s defining 
technical challenge. “When filming adults you shoot over the shoulder and you 
frame each shot so that it’s interesting,” said Jolie. “With POV it is whatever 
Loung is focusing on at that moment. It has taken everyone, especially the 
cameramen, time to adjust and not to try to frame the shot as they normally 
would.” After a last minute change, Anthony Dod Mantle was hired as 
cinematographer just a few days before filming began in earnest in November 
2015.

“I felt like a Red Cross parcel thrown out of a B52 bomber,” Mantle said. He 
is known as one of the most insistent innovators in the business and won an 
Oscar for his work in Mumbai on Danny Boyle’s 2008 film Slumdog Millionaire. 
“Me and Angie are trying to egg each other on, to be radical.”

Watching her childhood experience of genocide played out on set had a visceral 
effect on Ung. After arriving in the US at the age of nine, Ung was dogged by a 
recurring dream of being chased by soldiers determined to kill her. She would 
wake up just as her pursuers grabbed her. She underwent the same torment night 
after night until finally, three years later, in a dream, she turned on one of 
her attackers.

“In my dream, which I remember very vividly, I was in America and he was 
chasing me and I was running and running and running. I came into a house and 
there were no weapons there, but what I found was a knife. And I grabbed it and 
I was trying to cut his head off and it was a butter knife. And I had to really 
hack at it,” Ung said. “This was when I was about 12 or 13 years old.”

Ung is short and slight, and her frequent smile and inclination to find the 
humour in almost any setting is at odds with the darkness of her life story. 
She described being happy as an act of will. As a young woman, she resolved 
that neither her parents nor her two lost sisters would want to see her spend 
her life consumed in misery. “So I have purposefully made myself not do that, 
and the great thing about habits is if you do it long enough, it sticks.”

Even Ung’s choice of career has involved the pursuit of pleasure. She and her 
husband, Mark Priemer, set up a microbrewery because they couldn’t get decent 
beer in America. “I thought if I die tomorrow I don’t want to die drinking 
fizzy water,” Ung said. The couple now run two breweries and three restaurants 
in Cleveland, Ohio.

Having my hand separated from my sister’s, and seeing my parents being pulled 
away from each other, that was brutal

“It’s one of those things your girlfriend tells you, and you think: Oh what is 
she doing?” Jolie recalled. “And then I didn’t even ask about it for a few 
years because I was worried. We talked about other things like books, and I 
turn around and she has a crazy number of employees and she’s really 
successful. It’s Brad’s favourite beer so I have it in my house all the time.” 
(During the filming, Brad Pitt stayed much of the time in Siem Reap, the resort 
town close to the ruins of Angkor Wat, helping look after the couple’s children 
in what turned out to be the final months of their marriage.)

But now that Ung was back in Cambodia for a long period, her hair cut short 
and dressed in black again after years of wearing the brightest colours she 
could find, her bad dreams were returning.

Over the course of making the film, she had broken down many times on set. 
“People are always asking me about war as a survivor,” she said. “They always 
ask about the bombing, the deaths, the soldiers. And I’ve always wanted to say 
that yes, those were horrible difficult moments, but having my hand separated 
from the clasp of my sister’s, and seeing my parents being pulled away from 
each other, and having to walk away from my brothers and sisters – that was 
brutal.

“I hope people see not just the horror of war but the love it takes to 
survive.”

The Khmer Rouge grew out of the communist ferment in south-east Asia that 
followed the second world war. The Cambodian communist party was taken over in 
the 1960s by a group of hardline ideologues who had studied in Paris, led by a 
radio engineer named Saloth Sar – a man who would later take the nom-de-guerre 
Pol Pot. The communist rebellion was seized upon by Lieutenant General Lon Nol, 
who ousted the country’s post-independence leader, Prince Sihanouk, in 1970, 
and countered the communist insurgency with heavy support from the US, which 
was conducting a secret and devastating bombing campaign along the country’s 
eastern border aimed at Viet Cong bases.

In its opening sequence, Jolie’s film uses news reports from the time to 
suggest that the US bombing campaign boosted support for the Khmer Rouge and 
contributed to the eventual collapse of Lon Nol’s forces in 1975. Loung Ung’s 
father was a conscripted military police officer in Lon Nol’s army and high on 
the Khmer Rouge hit list. Those marked for death included anyone educated and 
therefore corrupted by western ways. Through mass murder, the Khmer Rouge 
intended to restart civilisation and turn back the clock to “Year Zero”.

The Khmer Rouge and Cambodian genocide: how the Guardian covered it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2009/feb/16/cambodia-khmer-rouge> 
Last year, while Jolie was filming, I visited the grave of Pol Pot – the man 
who had presided over the killing fields. The forlorn and derelict site is in 
Anlong Veng, on Cambodia’s western border with Thailand, the location of the 
Khmer Rouge’s prolonged last stand against Vietnamese forces. He died in April 
1998, aged 73, waiting for a car that was supposed to be taking him out of the 
country to appear before an international tribunal. According to the official 
account, the cause of death was heart failure, though other versions point to 
suicide or murder.

A makeshift memorial stands over the spot where his body was cremated, 
amounting to no more than a strip of corrugated metal held up by two posts. A 
faded blue sign appeals to visitors to “preserve this historic site”, and it 
has been neither vandalised nor maintained. Dry grass has grown up around it.

The only signs of recent human presence were a small wilted bunch of lotuses, 
a couple of red candles and a small, locked red tin box. According to a 
watchman, the only regular visitor is a Thai businessman and gambler, to whom 
Pol Pot appeared in a dream 10 years ago and provided the winning lottery 
numbers. The watchman said the gambler comes once a month, taking a break from 
a new casino built on the border nearby, to leave flowers and fruit. More Thai 
gamblers have followed his example, hoping to emulate his luck, and recently 
visitor figures have risen to about 50 a month. With traffic on the rise, a new 
concrete booth is planned for the watchman.

Anlong Veng was a Khmer Rouge stronghold for more than a decade. Most of the 
residents are either former regime officials or their descendants, but the 
vestiges of Kampuchea – as the Khmer Rouge renamed Cambodia – seem to excite no 
local interest today. A few miles from the neglected grave is the house of Ta 
Mok, Pol Pot’s military enforcer, and later his rival, jailer and possibly his 
killer. The squat concrete shell of the house looks out on to an artificial 
lake that Ta Mok had built, and he decorated the walls with murals of the 
Angkor Wat temples. The murals are now covered with graffiti scrawled by lovers 
inspired by the romantic views.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fangelina-jolie-cambodia-first-they-killed-my-father%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd99634819e47e26a5343cae1f021738b29d19ff0%2F144_253_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Among%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Cambodia%E2%80%99s%20killing%20fields%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20Angelina%20Jolie%E2%80%99s%20new%20film%20%7C%20Julian%20Borger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fangelina-jolie-cambodia-first-they-killed-my-father%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Among%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Cambodia%E2%80%99s%20killing%20fields%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20Angelina%20Jolie%E2%80%99s%20new%20film%20%7C%20Julian%20Borger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fangelina-jolie-cambodia-first-they-killed-my-father%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd99634819e47e26a5343cae1f021738b29d19ff0%2F144_253_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Angelina Jolie with Loung Ung on the set of First They Killed My Father. 
Photograph: Pax Thien Jolie Pitt/Netflix 
The local government half-heartedly advertises the place to sightseers and a 
handful pass by each day. Kearn Sarin, a stocky man in a military jacket and a 
chequered Khmer scarf around an olive green cap, works there as a guide. Kearn 
was a bodyguard for Ta Mok until he was arrested in 1999. Ta Mok died in 2006 
awaiting trial for genocide and crimes against humanity.

Kearn remains a staunch defender of the Khmer Rouge, which he first joined as 
a teenager. He had heard about Ung’s book and the film, but dismissed it as 
“one person’s propaganda”. “It doesn’t tell the good actions done by the Khmer 
Rouge,” he said. “In Kampuchea, there was no rich or poor. Everyone was on the 
same simple level. Now the gap between rich and poor is big again.”

There are various small-scale shrines and memorials to the genocide around 
Cambodia, but there is only one war museum, inSiem Reap 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/26/travel/what-to-do-in-36-hours-in-siem-reap-cambodia.html?_r=0>
, where the hulks of ruined Soviet-era armoured cars, tanks and helicopters sit 
under a grove of mango trees. On either side, there are old guns stacked on 
wooden stands and a rather patchy account of the country’s long nightmare. 
Behind a pane of glass, a one-page summary of the Khmer Rouge regime makes no 
mention of the killing fields and the two million dead, just “a radical attempt 
at social engineering”. Other pictures on display are Khmer Rouge propaganda 
shots, most of them labelled: “Khmer Rouge troops go from place to place.”

Very few Cambodians come to the museum. “People don’t talk about the war. They 
don’t want to,” said Moun Sinath, who works as a guide at the museum. “It is 
difficult to talk about because there are some of the Khmer Rouge people still 
running the government.”

A foreigner coming to Cambodia to make a film about such an excruciatingly 
painful episode in the country’s history faces a delicate task. Every step 
along the way, from securing permission to film, to arranging movie screenings, 
has required patient negotiation. Not only are many former Khmer Rouge members 
still in positions of influence, Jolie had to navigate deep scepticism about 
foreigners in general. As Youk Chhang, the executive director of the 
Documentation Centre of Cambodia (an NGO dedicated to researching the history 
of Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge), points out, between occupation by the 
French, the later invasion by the Vietnamese and repeated bombing raids by the 
US, there is a lot for Cambodians to be wary about.

Chhang is a supporter of Jolie’s film, but he said there were some, including 
the country’s young film-makers, who felt they were better placed to tell the 
defining story of their parents’ lives. “It has to be understood that 
Cambodians’ mistrust of foreigners has deep roots,” he said.

However, Jolie is a Cambodian citizen – she was awarded the honour in 2005 in 
recognition of her conservation work – and she has a Cambodian son. Furthermore 
she undertook the project as part of a team with Ung, her co-producer Rithy 
Panh, who is an internationally celebrated film-maker in his own right, and an 
all-Cambodian cast.

“Because I did it in partnership with Luong and Rithy, it really wasn’t me 
leading it. It never was. And every day on set, it really wasn’t. I had to 
always defer to the Cambodian people who were there,” Jolie told me. “It’s not 
my story.”

These partnerships, and Jolie’s own diplomatic skills, also helped smooth the 
way with the government in Phnom Penh.

Cambodia’s quiet ambivalence about its own genocide goes to the heart of the 
establishment. Hun Sen, Cambodia’s prime minister since 1985, was a battalion 
commander in the Khmer Rouge but fled with his unit to Vietnam to escape a 
party purge in 1977. He was subsequently a commander of Cambodian rebels that 
formed part of the Vietnamese invasion force two years later, and was 
originally part of the government set up under the Vietnamese occupation. Since 
then he has presided over a managed semi-democracy, in which elections are 
held, but with a carefully controlled media and widespread allegations of vote 
rigging.

A joint UN-Cambodian court was set up in 2006 to try surviving Khmer Rouge 
leaders, but Hun Sen’s government limited its scope. Just five former leaders 
have been indicted – three were convicted and two died during their trials. 
Wider public debate on the genocide has been discouraged by the government 
until recently. The basic facts of what happened under Khmer Rouge rule only 
began to be taught in Cambodian schools four years ago. Jolie’s film is being 
made at a moment of transformation.

“A decade ago to talk about certain things [felt] very different than it does 
today. I don’t know what that is attributed to. It could be because it’s a 
certain generation change,” Jolie said.

“But I wondered if there were would be restrictions over making the film. I 
wondered if they’d say: You can’t do this here or here, because the country is 
too sensitive and we don’t want to see this in the streets. Or maybe someone 
would say, “Oh it wasn’t as bad as this – it’s blown out of proportion”; or 
some kind of advice to tone it down. But quite the opposite – we’ve had 
encouragement to be as accurate as possible.”

The world premiere of First They Killed My Father will be held in Siem Reap on 
18 February, seven months before its global release via Netflix. “I went to 
[Netflix] directly,” Jolie said, “because I want to make the kind of film where 
I don’t have to compromise and put a famous Chinese actress in as the mother, 
or make it in a different language in order to get people in the theatres on 
the first weekend.”

After all the labour camp scenes had been filmed, the crew had to set fire to 
the wooden huts for one of the climactic moments of Ung’s story, an attack on 
the camp during the Vietnamese offensive of 1979. Pyrotechnic specialists spent 
an afternoon rigging up burners and priming the straw roofs of the huts with 
fuel.

There would be just a narrow window for filming a long tracking shot following 
the young Ung into the blaze, and Jolie was in her black tent planning it. She 
had been violently sick the night before and looked frail but insisted she had 
“stabilised”. The shoot only had a few “insurance days” to cover the cost of 
over-runs, so nobody, least of all the director, could afford to be sick for 
long. Other crew members had collapsed or succumbed to hallucinations while 
trying to work through sickness.

Jolie was trying to determine whether it would have been a mortar or rocket 
that set the camp alight, and how each would make it burn. An added 
complication was the fact that the local farmer did not want any damage done to 
his wooden hut. A fire truck would be parked nearby in case it was ignited by 
stray sparks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fangelina-jolie-cambodia-first-they-killed-my-father%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cd70bec7893323680e3d54f540b50b6c95a9b07%2F192_172_5876_3527%2F5876.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Among%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Cambodia%E2%80%99s%20killing%20fields%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20Angelina%20Jolie%E2%80%99s%20new%20film%20%7C%20Julian%20Borger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fangelina-jolie-cambodia-first-they-killed-my-father%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Among%20the%20ghosts%20of%20Cambodia%E2%80%99s%20killing%20fields%3A%20on%20the%20set%20of%20Angelina%20Jolie%E2%80%99s%20new%20film%20%7C%20Julian%20Borger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fangelina-jolie-cambodia-first-they-killed-my-father%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cd70bec7893323680e3d54f540b50b6c95a9b07%2F192_172_5876_3527%2F5876.jpg>
 Huts are set alight for the climactic scene of First They Killed My Father. 
Photograph: Pax Thien Jolie Pitt/Netflix 
As the evening darkened on the set, the wooden huts were set alight, and 
Sareum, playing the young Ung, was filmed running across the parade ground 
surrounded by flames, calling for her sister. In a nearby field, children were 
running away from the flames, followed noisily by a pig. Actors playing Khmer 
Rouge soldiers ran the other way across the open field carrying AK-47s. A row 
of latex corpses of dead fighters had been lined up under a tree ready for 
dispersal around the battlefield.

Off to the side of the field, most of the crew had turned up to watch the set 
go up in flames. Brad Pitt, in a flat cap and T-shirt, had come with four of 
the couple’s children.

It is hard to predict what the emotional response of Cambodians to the film 
will be, but for those of the cast and crew old enough to remember the Khmer 
Rouge, the effect of making it has been devastating.

“Here everyone has been through it. Everybody is standing 10 feet away from 
someone else who has been through it. They’ve been helping each other as they 
always have,” Jolie told me. Before shooting started, she had made sure there 
was a Cambodian nurse with on set with experience of working with post 
traumatic stress.

“People were so badly treated and so dehumanised,” said co-producer Rithy 
Panh, “they had no great desire to recall what happened, to talk about when 
they had to eat roots and insects to survive. And what could they say? I am 
alone, I survived but I couldn’t save my parents? I find this long silence 
normal.”

Panh was 11 in 1975. He too lost his parents and siblings and ended up in a 
Thai refugee camp in 1979. Out of a dozen-strong household in Phnom Penh when 
the city fell, only he and one older sister survived. Now aged 52, Panh is a 
softly spoken man with round head and a goatee shielded by a wide-brimmed hat. 
He was seated at a desk in a recreation of a Khmer Rouge classroom with a straw 
roof and no walls.

Panh’s documentaries were the first to break the Cambodian silence. In his 
2003 film about Tuol Sleng, the most murderous of Khmer Rouge prisons, known as 
S-21, the handful of survivors from the jail confronted their former prison 
guards. His films won prizes abroad, but were barely seen in Cambodia. “People 
were saying I should make films about how beautiful the country is,” he said. 
“It’s only the young who watch my films.”

“The film that Angelina is making is important because it perhaps permits a 
new generation of young people to find out what happened to their grandparents. 
It’s not the sole solution. It’s just images, but it makes them able to face up 
to their history and understand.”

Finally, Panh added, the film demonstrates his country’s resilience. “They 
couldn’t destroy us. This creative act shows that we are able to express our 
history. There are those who say that after all that happened here, poetry is 
not possible any more. But I say we need more poetry. We need poetry, for 
creation, for imagination, to allow people to come through all this, turn their 
back on it and move forward.”

With a month to go before the film is shown in Cambodia, Jolie was at home in 
California, fretting about the complication of what “general release” might 
mean in a country largely without cinemas and a population that has not 
confronted the realities of its genocide.

“There are many smaller screenings we are going to be doing, which I am most 
excited by. It may just be a sheet and a projector out in a pagoda in the more 
remote areas,” she told me in a recent telephone interview.

Whether it will be possible to show such a film in the Cambodian countryside 
will depend on the availability of monks or therapists to help organise the 
screening and deal with the fallout. There will be time set aside for 
discussions after the screenings, and in some places Jolie plans to set up town 
hall meetings the morning after so that she and the cast can answer questions.

Judging from the experience of making the film, the reaction among ordinary 
Cambodians will be highly charged and emotional. In the best cases, it will 
also be hopeful.

“I tried very hard to make a film that is not just about policies or politics 
or war,” Jolie said. “It is a film at its core about the Cambodian people and 
family, and love, and survival. I hope that there will be a sense of pride for 
the Cambodian people when they see it, about what they survived, and who they 
are.”

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 