
In five words

Margaritas in a desert town

Sound of the city

Since 1881 a freight train has split the city in two. Very early in the 
morning and again at midnight, the sound of the train disrupts the silence of a 
mostly quiet city. It travels from southern Mexico into the US carrying 
assembled cars, clothing made inMexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> and construction chemicals.

Smell of your city

Carne asada (the smell of a barbecue) fills the air on any given Sunday – 
burning charcoal, fire, meat and beer.

Best building
 Art Museum building. Photograph: Luis Chaparro 
The Museum of art 
<http://www.mexicoescultura.com/recinto/52445/en/museum-of-art-of-ciudad-juarez.html>
 (INBA) was built in 1963 by the Mexican architectPedro Ramírez Vázquez 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/18/arts/design/pedro-ramirez-vazquez-mexican-architect-dies-at-94.html>
 as an attempt to break with all the existing architectural design in the 
country. It is a 400 sq metre circular building made from concrete, aluminium 
and glass which hosts artexhibitions and events.

The building is located at the geographical centre of the city, and can’t be 
missed – it’s the only non-rectangular structure around.

And the worst ...
 The ‘disco ball’ Gardié building. Photograph: Luis Chaparro 
The Gardié building is an architectural dream turned nightmare. In 1988, civil 
engineer Raul Simental Salazar had the great idea of building a disco 
ball-shaped restaurant with glass walls … in the middle of the desert. Called 
Gardié and known as one of the art deco icons of the city, it opened for a few 
months, until summer arrived and everyone inside scorched. It has been closed 
for more than 20 years.

How green is your city?

Ciudad Juárez is in the middle of the biggest desert in Mexico. The city 
itself is industrial, with more than 90% of its revenues coming from American, 
Japanese, Chinese, and German factories. We also have three international 
bridges that connect the city to El Paso, Texas, which are packed with cars for 
most of the day.

Although Ciudad Juárez is not very green, Tierra Savia 
<https://twitter.com/tierrasavia>, formed by local and international 
researchers started building eco houses made out of dirt, to help and reduce 
contamination in the city and to give those living in extreme poverty an 
affordable home.

Homegrown talent

Juan Gabriel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/juan-gabriel-legendary-mexican-singer-songwriter-dies-aged-66>
, known as El Divo de Juarez, was a prolific songwriter, flamboyant showman and 
icon of Mexican music who died this year at the age of 66. He wrote close to 
1,800 songs during a career that spanned around 50 years, including the Ciudad 
Juárez pop anthem, Ciudad Juárez Numero Uno.

El Divo was born in Michoacan, southern Mexico, but his artistic career was 
born in Juárez, where he performed at least one concert a year

Street style
 Street style in Juárez. Photograph: Luis Chaparro 
The Buffalo Bill fronterizo look is a true representation of people here.

Top insider’s tip

If you want to have an exclusive event while in Ciudad Juárez, check out the 
view from the roof of the “Multifamiliares” on Insurgentes Avenue, a complex 
designed in the 70s to accommodate Mexican families. Get to the top floor of 
this building around 4pm, then climb to the roof and settle in for a 
spectacular show that begins at around 6pm: the blue sky becomes all tones of 
pink, red and orange during the sunset.

Most under-rated location
 The cowyboy cantina El Buen Tiempo 
<https://www.facebook.com/Bar-El-Buen-Tiempo-550973105037187/> Photograph: Luis 
Chaparro 
El Buen Tiempo <https://www.facebook.com/Bar-El-Buen-Tiempo-550973105037187/> 
is a Mexican gay cowboy cantina. One of the first cantinas in Ciudad Juárez, 
through the years it has become a hidden and under-rated spot. Located in 
downtown, it consists of typical cantina doors, a u-shaped bar, old pool tables 
and dirty restrooms.

What does your city do better than anywhere else?

Potholes. There is no way you can miss them; they are all over the city. We 
even have an app to report potholes in the city, which in one month registered 
more than 2,000. We have great big holes, little annoying ones, ones hiding 
behind bumps, ones covered with water ...

Best Instagram

This account provides a real representation of the everyday life of Juárez’s 
residents. You can find anything from food and event promotion, to reposts from 
local citizens about the city’s night life.

Biggest controversy

In the past, Ciudad Juárez was named the world’s murder capital due to the 
thousands of killings that happened here every year because of a violent drug 
cartel war. It was used to receiving tourists, mostly from United States, but 
became a ghost town for years – that is until very recently. Now,things are 
looking up 
<http://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2016/06/juarez-mexico-border-city-drug-cartels-murder-revival/>
.

People have started opening art galleries, hosting poetry reading events and 
generally working totell the world we are safe and alive 
<http://www.economist.com/news/americas/21709362-mexican-security-success-story-faces-new-test-ciudad-ju-rez-trembles-again>
.

Moment in history

During the Mexican Revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/06/trespassers-on-the-rooftops-secret-history-mexico-city-cultural-revolutionaries>
 in Ciudad Juárez (La Toma de Ciudad Juárez) from 1910 to 1920, the city played 
a crucial part in trafficking ammunition and guns from the US into Mexico for 
the revolutionaries.

Since then the city has been a political trampoline for all of Mexico, and 
today it has a powerful group of activists who are looking out for the 
betterment of the city.

Five to follow

Miguel Á. Mendoza <https://www.instagram.com/nmdmiguel/>

Axel Pedraza <https://www.instagram.com/axelpedrazaavila/>

The Juárez Times <https://www.facebook.com/juareztimes/>

El Juárez De Ayer <https://www.facebook.com/ElJRZdeAyer/?hc_ref=SEARCH&fref=nf>

Lowers Net Label <http://www.m.soundcloud.com/lowersnetlabel>

About me

Luis Chaparro is a freelance journalist who splits his time between Ciudad 
Juárez, Texas and Mexico City. He mostly writes about Mexico’s drug war, 
immigration and his hometown of Ciudad Juárez. You can follow him on Twitterhere
 
<https://twitter.com/LuisKuryaki?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 and on Instagramhere <https://www.instagram.com/luiskuryaki/>.
 