
From afar it looks like an old hat. Or the elephant inside the snake in 
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry’s famous bookThe Little Prince 
<http://deji.chez.com/se_eng/textes/littprin.htm>. Isla de Lobos (Wolf Island, 
so named for the sea wolves, or monk seals, that once lived there) is a big, 
black lump of volcanic ashes, a short bumpy boat trip from the touristy, 
postcard-ish seaside town of Corralejo, on the Canary island of Fuerteventura, 
less than 100 miles off the coast of Africa. If you take the right boat, you 
can look through the glass bottom and see the vast white dunes, groups of 
speckled fish and an occasional octopus hiding behind a rock. After 15 minutes, 
you land at an indistinct pier.

Isla de Lobos is one of those great little places you’ll remember only if you 
are open to it. In fact, there’s nothing remarkable to see; still, it has been 
deemed a natural park, perhaps because of its distinct and mystifying 
landscape, carved by wind and sea. Its last permanent inhabitants left in the 
1960s, when the lighthouse was automated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fisla-de-lobos-fuerteventura-canary-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbbaa9216110d732f4133f4f56d25ac4daae5c9f%2F0_0_7000_4200%2F7000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20ideal%20place%20for%20contemplation%3A%20Isla%20de%20Lobos%2C%20off%20Fuerteventura&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fisla-de-lobos-fuerteventura-canary-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20ideal%20place%20for%20contemplation%3A%20Isla%20de%20Lobos%2C%20off%20Fuerteventura&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fisla-de-lobos-fuerteventura-canary-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbbaa9216110d732f4133f4f56d25ac4daae5c9f%2F0_0_7000_4200%2F7000.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
On the island, there are no tourist attractions, nowhere terribly exciting to 
go, nothing entertaining to do – except wander around the island on the stony 
paths. Let them take you to the sleepy beach, where kids can safely play in the 
shallow water, or lead you towards the only town-ish place on Isla de Lobos, a 
collection of almost invisible, abandoned houses, where there’s a cafe of sorts 
and lots of mesmerising views of the sea and the coast.

I chose Isla de Lobos as the setting for one of the vital scenes in my novel 
The Hermit because the complete and overwhelming feeling of being isolated and 
removed from society is so rare and gripping. Place yourself on the rocks above 
the cove and enjoy the winds from Africa and the view of Fuerteventura. This is 
a place for contemplation and disappearance. A rare treat. But remember to 
bring plenty of water and perhaps food, and as they say on theofficial Isla de 
Lobos website <http://www.fuerteventura.com/lobos/>: wear sunscreen and don’t 
leave any rubbish.

• Thomas Rydahl’s debut novel is The Hermit (Oneworld 
<https://oneworld-publications.com/the-hermit-hb.html>, £16.99). To buy a copy 
for £13.93 including UK p&p call 0330 333 6846 or visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hermit.html>
 