
The new Leeds United joint-owner, Andrea Radrizzani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/andrea-radrizzani-leeds-united-co-owner-massimo-cellino-garry-monk>
, has vowed to fix Garry Monk’s contract situation and ensure that the 
left-back Charlie Taylor is not sold during the January transfer window.

Radrizzani spoke officially as a 50% investor in Leeds for the first time on 
Saturday, hours after Monk’s side producedan emphatic performance to beat Derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/leeds-united-derby-county-championship-match-report>
 and strengthen their standing in the Championship play-off places.

Chris Wood heads Leeds up to third with win over Derby County
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/leeds-united-derby-county-championship-match-report>
The Italian TV rights mogul sat alongside the club’s chief executive, Ben 
Mansford, and his fellow joint-owner Massimo Cellino, who could sell his 
remaining 50% stake in Leeds to Radrizzani this summer. Last year a Chinese 
investment group bought a controlling stake in Radrizzani’s media rights group, 
MP & Silva, for $1bn.

Monk has surpassed expectations as manager but his one-year contract expires 
at the end of the season. Radrizzani said: “It’s not a big issue, to be honest. 
We are in communication – myself, Massimo and Garry. I see that all the three 
parties are convinced and have the intention to stay together. Sooner or later 
we will sit down. At the moment, everyone is focused on the day-to-day work. We 
will fix this, I am very confident we will fix it.”

Cellino, who became a 75% shareholder in Leeds in spring 2014 before buying a 
remaining 25% stake from the Dubai-based investment bank Gulf Finance House 
Capital to own the club outright, said there would be no flurry of incoming 
players during the transfer window. However, Radrizzani said Taylor – who has 
attracted interest from Premier League clubs including West Bromwich Albion, 
Middlesbrough and Crystal Palace – would not be leaving.

Leeds reject £7m offers from Middlesbrough, West Brom and Palace for Charlie 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/charlie-taylor-leeds-crystal-palace-west-brom-middlesbrough>
“The manager is working on it. We’ll try to do our best. But you need both 
parties,” said Radrizzani also said Leeds were confident of signing the 
defender Pontus Jansson on a permanent contract in the coming weeks.

“We need to find a balance. We need to try to keep the best players but when 
we look at the numbers and we have to sacrifice, then to do it with one player 
is probably better than to sacrifice the entire club and not progress.”

Unlike Cellino three years ago, Radrizzani has not promised promotion within a 
certain timeframe or definitively said he will buy back the stadium and 
training ground from private owners. However, he did say that a potential 
purchase of Elland Road would be explored. “It is an important topic,” he said. 
“Elland Road is an iconic venue in English football. All fans, including us, 
are loyal to this stadium, so it is one of my priorities to analyse and 
evaluate the opportunity to exercise the option to buy back the stadium. I am 
not promising this, but I will evaluate carefully in the next two, three 
months. We also need to make it a bit more modern.”
 