
Andrea Radrizzani, the Italian TV rights mogul, has completed the purchase of 
a 50% stake inLeeds United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leedsunited>.

The 42-year-old, who has been in talks for some time with the club’s 
controversial owner,Massimo Cellino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/massimo-cellino>, will consider whether to 
move for a full takeover in the summer.

Leeds United’s owner Massimo Cellino banned for 18 months by FA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/leeds-owner-massimo-cellino-banned-18-months>
Radrizzani will, for now, work under the title of co-owner – Cellino has 
retained a 50% stake – and is intent both on bringing stability to a club that 
have been synonymous with crisis and supporting the manager, Garry Monk, who 
has the team fifth in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> and in the hunt for 
automatic promotion.

Monk became the seventh manager in less than three years of Cellino’s 
stewardship when he was appointed last June.

Radrizzani talked of his pride and delight at making such a significant 
investment in one of England’s most famous clubs – one that he considers to be 
sleeping giants – and he said that he was fully aware of their “great heritage 
and traditions”.

“I am making a long-term commitment to Leeds United and will work to bring 
stability through ongoing investment,” Radrizzani said. “I aim to bring 
sustainable growth. I won’t do anything that will put the club’s future at 
risk. Through working in the sports industry for many years, I have developed a 
great passion for the English game and I am honoured to have become joint owner 
of one of the country’s biggest clubs.

“I am very impressed with the job Garry Monk has done this season and I will 
do all I can to support him and the team moving forward. The responsibility is 
on myself, Massimo and the executive management at the club to work together 
over the coming months to provide the best platform and environment for Garry 
and the team to achieve success.

“My immediate priorities over the coming weeks are to meet with Garry and the 
team; the club staff at Elland Road and Thorp Arch; supporters’ 
representatives; former players and media.”

It is unclear how Radrizzani will work with Cellino, given that the latter was 
banned by the Football Association for 18 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/leeds-owner-massimo-cellino-banned-18-months>
 in December and fined £250,000 for his involvement in Ross McCormack’s 
transfer from Leeds to Fulham in 2014. The case involved a payment of £185,000 
reaching an unlicensed advisor associated with McCormack. Cellino’s ban is 
scheduled to start on 1 February. He has pledged to appeal.

Radrizzani cofounded MP & Silva, an international sports agency that provides 
media rights distribution, digital and technology services, and sponsorship 
consultancy. They have offices in Singapore and London. In May last year, a 
Chinese investment group consisting of Everbright Securities and Beijing 
Baofeng Technology acquired a 65% stake in MP & Silva for more than $1bn. 
Radrizzani is also the founder of thePlay for Change foundation 
<https://www.playforchange.org/>, which supports disadvantaged children.
 