
Andy Robinson has left his role as Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> director of rugby, the club 
have announced.

Bristol suspend Andy Robinson after winless start to Premiership season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/bristol-suspend-andy-robinson-appoint-mark-tainton>
Robinson was suspended last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/bristol-suspend-andy-robinson-appoint-mark-tainton>
 following the club’s poor start to the season – they have failed to win any of 
their seven league games – and Mark Tainton was appointed as acting head coach.

The former England and Scotland head coach had been in charge since March 2013 
and led the club to the Championship title andpromotion to the Aviva Premiership
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/bristol-rugby-premiership-survival>
 last season but has departed Ashton Gate with immediate effect.

The Bristol chairman, Chris Booy, said: “We thank Andy for his contribution to 
the overall coaching setup at the club. Unfortunately, the board lost 
confidence that Andy would retain the club’s Premiership position, bearing in 
mind the results to date.

“Andy departs with the knowledge that he made a significant contribution in 
helping Bristol return to the Premiership this season. Andy leaves with the 
club’s very best wishes and we all wish him every success in the next chapter 
of his career.”

Robinson signed a new three-year deal with Bristol in August after helping 
them end their seven-year exile from the top flight, but the club sit seven 
points adrift at the foot of the Premiership table with two points from seven 
games.

They were also beaten by Cardiff Blues and Bath in the European Challenge Cup 
and lost to Worcester on Friday evening in their opening Anglo-Welsh Cup clash.

Robinson said: “I am extremely proud to have played my part in helping Bristol 
Rugby reach their goal of getting back to the Aviva Premiership after a long 
seven-year absence.

“As everyone appreciates, the start of the season for Bristol Rugby has been 
extremely tough. However, I was surprised and disappointed by the board’s 
decision.

“I would like to thank everyone involved with the club for some very special 
memories and wish them all the best for the future.”

The South African pair Heyneke Meyer and Gary Gold have previously been linked 
to Bristol’s senior coaching role.
 