
It may be easy for me to say this straight after the match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/liverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report>
 but that was the greatest experience I’ve ever had supporting Plymouth Argyle. 
I presumed it would be the same for everyone who sawthe game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/08/liverpool-v-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-third-round-live>
 but having spoken to some friends I now realise I am out of step with the 
nation. In reality, it was almost certainly an absolutely awful football match. 
But, frankly, who cares?

Plymouth hold out against Klopp’s young Liverpool to earn FA Cup replay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/liverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report>
When I was on the train on Sunday morning playing whist and drinking tea I 
thought this was going to be a relaxing day-out: we would just lose 4-0, it 
would all be fine and we’d all go home with a half‑and‑half scarf.

I couldn’t have been more wrong.

The last 10 minutes were absolutely awful, gut-wrenching, 
pray-to-a-God-you-think-doesn’t-exist stuff; I still don’t understand how I got 
through it alive.

I keep telling myself I deserve this, I went to Barnet away last Monday: it 
was freezing, we lost 1-0. I got a cold from it, it was depressing and I was 
thinking what a waste of my life.

But things like that (and 90% of being a Plymouth fan is like that) make the 
very occasional high-spots so much more rewarding than if I supportedLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> or Manchester United like 
everybody else at my school.

Astonishing scenes! <https://www.instagram.com/p/BPAms3rDBAt/>

A photo posted by @josh_widdicombe on Jan 8, 2017 at 8:05am PST

Josh Widdicombe and his brother Henry celebrate the final whistle

More to the point, the team deserved it, they were brilliant. We just couldn’t 
have played better (within our ability range). The team were well drilled, 
tight and did not let Liverpool really have one clear chance at our goal (from 
what I could see, which I couldn’t really as I was so low down behind the goal 
in the away end).

I’ve never seen possession like it, apparently it was 82% to Liverpool in the 
first half as they passed it forward and back across the area like a pastiche 
of how lower league fans imagine watching a fancy Premier League team.

There were two standouts for Plymouth: Sonny Bradley the centre-back was an 
absolute rock. I love huge centre-backs who absolutely boss everything in a 
very League Two manner and he is the ultimate example of that. Luke McCormick 
was the other. The goalkeeper was brilliant and did not seem at all fazed by 
the day. My friend Michael (who is a Liverpool fan) said: “I’ve never seen a 
goalkeeper kick the ball so high” – which I take as the day’s biggest 
compliment.

Though I am now claiming that this was one of my greatest experiences, in 
reality, it was pure pain. I don’t think I smiled once before the final whistle 
blew and neither did my dad, mum or brother, who I was sitting with.

It was just too tense. From the moment it started until the moment it finished 
I was just watching the clock, counting it down and praying to a God I was now 
pretty sure exists. I’m sure we’ll lose the replay but then I was just as sure 
that we would lose this one. Mainly, I just hope we get promoted.

Derek Adams is a brilliant manager and I think it is a great team and they 
deserve it. More to the point, the 8,500 Argyle fans who travelled up and 
outsung the whole of Anfield deserve it; they were amazing and deserve an 
amazing team.

Anyway, I’m off on holiday tomorrow, I’m coming back on the proposed date of 
the replay, so hopefully I will make it; I cannot imagine not being there. I’m 
going from Mauritius to Home Park, it feels like a natural kind of transition 
to me.

• Josh Widdicombe’s new DVD - What Do I Do Now: Live 2016 - is out now 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Josh-Widdicombe-What-Now-DVD/dp/B01H8SRBO4>
 