
Japan’s defence minister, Tomomi Inada, has provoked anger in South Korea 
following a visit to a controversial war shrine in Tokyo, a day after she 
accompanied the prime minister,Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, on his reconciliatory trip to 
Pearl Harbor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/shinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-horrors-of-war-memorial-hawaii-obama>
.


South Korea’s foreign ministry denounced as “deplorable” Inada’s visit to 
Yasukuni, a site it said “beautifies past colonial invasions and invasive war 
and honours war criminals”.


The defence ministry in Seoul said: “We express deep concern and regret over 
Japan’s defence minister visiting Yasukuni shrine, even as our government has 
been emphasising the need to create a new, forward-looking South Korea-Japan 
relationship.”
Why is the Yasukuni shrine controversial - explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=0ab66df1-193a-407c-a67e-d8c4ff501b1c>
Inada, a prominent rightwinger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/09/neo-nazi-photos-pose-headache-for-shinzo-abe>
 who has been tipped as a future prime minister, made the pilgrimage to the 
contentious shrine on Thursday morning – her first since becoming defence 
minister in August. As an MP she had made the trip every 15 August – the 
anniversary of Japan’s wartime defeat – between 2006 and 2015.


Television footage showed a smiling Inada arriving at the shrine, which 
honours 2.5 million Japanese war dead, including several leaders executed for 
war crimes.

She told reporters that her visit was intended to “create peace for Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> and the world”.

“This year the president of the country that dropped the atomic bomb visited 
Hiroshima and yesterday the prime minister made remarks of consolation at Pearl 
Harbor,” Inada said, in a reference to Barack Obama’shighly symbolic trip to 
Hiroshima 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/27/barack-obama-first-us-president-to-visit-hiroshima-japan>
 in May.

“I visited the shrine wishing to firmly create peace for Japan and the world 
from a future-oriented perspective.”

Asked if she risked prompting a diplomatic backlash from South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> and China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, she said: “I think that no matter 
what their historical views are and whether they were friends or foes, they 
understand my paying respects to those who dedicated their lives to their 
country.”


There was no immediate reaction from China, where Yasukuni visits by 
politicians are viewed as evidence thatJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has yet to atone for atrocities 
committed in parts of China and on the Korean peninsula before and during the
second world war <https://www.theguardian.com/world/secondworldwar>.

On Wednesday Inada watched as Abe and Obama talked about the power of 
reconciliation at the USS Arizona memorial, which has come to symbolise the 
December 1941 attack in which 2,400 US service personnel were killed.

Abe offered his “sincere and everlasting condolences” for the attack and vowed 
that Japan “must never repeat the horrors of war again”.

Abe, who shares many of Inada’s hawkish views, sparked anger in China and 
South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/26/japan-shinzo-abe-tension-neighbours-shrine>
 when he visited Yasukuni in December 2013, a year after he became prime 
minister for a second time.

That pilgrimage prompted an unusually critical response from the US, which 
said it was “disappointed that Japan’s leadership has taken an action that will 
exacerbate tensions with Japan’s neighbours”.

He has not been to Yasukuni since – in an apparent effort not to provoke 
Japan’s wartime victims – but sends cash offerings and gifts to mark 
significant dates in the shrine’s calendar.

Inada’s visit comes a day after Masahiro Imamura, who oversees the 
reconstruction of regions hit by theMarch 2011 triple disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan-earthquake-and-tsunami>, went to 
Yasukuni. Speaking just hours after Abe had paid tribute to fallen US service 
personnel in Hawaii, Imamura claimed the timing of his visit was a coincidence, 
adding that he had prayed for Japan’s peace and prosperity.

Some observers expected Inada to pay her respects at Yasukuni this August on 
the 71st anniversary of Japan’s surrender in the war. But she was unable to do 
so after being sent to Djibouti to meet Japanese troops taking part in an 
anti-piracy mission.
 