
Embattled FBI director James Comey has refused to clarify whether his 
organization is investigating Donald Trump’s ties to Russia in a closed 
briefing on Friday for members of Congress, angering legislators who recall his
high-profile interjections about Hillary Clinton during the 2016 presidential 
campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/james-comey-fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email>
, the Guardian has learned.

Comey’s lack of candor in a classified setting, intended to brief members on 
the intelligence agencies’ assessment that Russia interfered in the election to 
benefit Trump, follows apublic rebuff this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/james-comey-trump-russia-links-investigation-senate>
 to senators seeking clarification.

James Comey refuses to tell Senate if FBI is investigating Trump-Russia links
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/james-comey-trump-russia-links-investigation-senate>
In that earlier hearing, Comey said he would “never comment” on a potential FBI
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> investigation “in an open forum like 
this”, raising expectations among some attendees of Friday’s briefing that 
Comey would put the issue to rest in a classified setting.

But according to sources attending the closed-door Friday morning meeting, 
that was not the case. As such, frustration with Comey was bipartisan and 
heated, adding to intense pressure on the director of the FBI, whose conduct in 
the 2016 electionitself is now being investigated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/justice-department-fbi-review-james-comey-hillary-clinton-emails>
 by an independent US justice department watchdog.

One source in the meeting said Comey would not answer “basic questions” about 
the FBI’s current investigative activities. The FBI chief was grilled “over and 
over again”, according to the source, about his standards for acknowledging FBI 
investigations, with legislators repeatedly bringing up Comey’s dramatic public 
confirmation that the bureau was revisiting classification issues with Hillary 
Clinton’s private email server days before the election, as well as his summer 
press conference announcing that he would not seek indictment.

Clinton is said to blame Comey’s intervention, which contravened longstanding 
justice department rules, for her electoral defeat.

Jerrold Nadler, a New York Democrat who had pressed Comey during a September 
hearing about his criteria for acknowledging an investigation, sharply asked 
Comey if the director was applying a double standard to Trump.

Comey had said in September testimony that his standard was a “a need for 
public to be reassured, [and] when it’s obvious, it’s apparent, given our 
activities, public activities that the investigation is ongoing”.

Nadler, according to a different source, then asked Comey in the Friday 
meeting: “Do you believe that standard has been met with reference to the 
possible investigation of the Trump campaign’s possible connections to the 
Russian government? And if not, why not?”

Comey dodged the question, sparking anger among attendees. 

A spokesman for Nadler confirmed the congressman pressed Comey on the issue.

Joining Comey in the approximately 90-minute briefing on Friday were the 
director of national intelligence, James Clapper, CIA director, John Brennan 
and NSA director, Mike Rogers. None of their interactions with legislators were 
said to be contentious, in sharp contrast with Comey.

The Wall Street Journal said on Friday in an editorial 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/james-comeys-best-service-1484266535> that Comey 
ought to resign. The FBI has not made any comment on the editorial, and the 
question of Comey’s resignation is said to have not come up in the closed-door 
briefing. Trump has not definitively said if he will retain Comey in the new 
administration, though the director’s term is slated to run through 2023.

The FBI declined a request for comment. 
 