
Angelique Kerber, who had to save match point against the world No 64 Misaki 
Doi in her first contest of the 2016 Australian Open, finished the tournament 
in the most spectacular fashion by beating the incomparable Serena Williamsin 
three wonderful sets here on Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/30/serena-williams-v-angelique-kerber-australian-open-final-live>
.

Kerber, seeded seventh, won 6-4, 3-6, 6-4 in two hours and eight minutes in 
front of an incredulous audience on Rod Laver Arena. It was the American’s 26th 
appearance in a slam final, the German’s first.

Watching Kerber methodically dismantle the best player in the world since her 
own compatriot, Steffi Graf, it was incomprehensible that Kerber might have 
fallen at the first hurdle to Doi, a player of towering anonymity, 11 days and 
six wins ago. Williams remains one slam victory short of Graf’s Open Era record 
tally of 22. If Kerber does not win another major, she will not forget this 
achievement, and this performance.

Serena Williams v Angelique Kerber: Australian Open final – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/30/serena-williams-v-angelique-kerber-australian-open-final-live>
Williams took defeat with the best of humour, although she had betrayed 
anxiety all the way through a fractious match. “I’m glad you had a chance to 
witness some great tennis,” she told the crowd. “You truly deserve it,” she 
told the winner, adding, “It was remarkably fun.” The latter sentiment was hard 
to believe.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fserena-williams-on-losing-australian-open-final-im-not-a-robot-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Serena%20Williams%20on%20losing%20Australian%20Open%20final%3A%20'I'm%20not%20a%20robot'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fserena-williams-on-losing-australian-open-final-im-not-a-robot-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Serena%20Williams%20on%20losing%20Australian%20Open%20final%3A%20%27I%27m%20not%20a%20robot%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fserena-williams-on-losing-australian-open-final-im-not-a-robot-video&media=>
Serena Williams on losing Australian Open final: ‘I’m not a robot’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jan/30/serena-williams-on-losing-australian-open-final-im-not-a-robot-video>
Kerber, who moves to No2, is the first German to win this title since Graf in 
1994. “Congratulations to Serena,” Kerber, welling up, said on the podium. “You 
are an inspiration to so many, an unbelievably great person. I was [almost] on 
the plane to Germany in the first match. I took my chance to be in the final, 
and I’m honoured. It’s my dream come true. Now I can say I’m a grand slam 
champion, and it sounds really crazy.”

Three truly horrific misses in a row – two to allow Kerber to take a 5-3 lead 
and the next one in the ninth game as she served to stay in the first set – 
told the story of the champion’s early exasperation, and it rarely eased.

The scream of frustration as a winner finally settled in the lines was a 
borderline late one – such as the “Come on!” yell that cost her a point when 
she lost to Sam Stosur in the US Open final in 2011. That was also the last 
time Williams lost the first set of slam final.

She held for 4-5, but her movement – especially at the net which she now 
raided indiscriminately – was heavy-footed, and Kerber, serving conservatively 
and playing safety-first last-ball tennis, welcomed three weary errors in the 
10th game to take the first set.

Williams’s ball-toss was unreliable, her timing, from hand and off the floor, 
was ragged, and her demeanour was one of irretrievable despond. As in her shock 
loss to the lightly regarded Roberta Vinci in the semi-finals at Flushing 
Meadows last year when reaching for a calendar slam, she was off-balance and 
rocking on the back foot. Neither could she take advantage of her opponent’s 
ordinary serving, only 49% landing at first attempt in the first set.

Kerber’s return, meanwhile, was rock-like. In fact, pretty much nothing went 
right for Williams in the first 40 minutes or so – thereafter, apart from 
fleeting parity in the second set.

She held unconvincingly at the start of the second, but Kerber refused to 
buckle. Just as she was too steady for the British No1 Johanna Konta in their 
semi-final, so she stuck rigidly to her game plan against the best player in 
the world.

Williams finally found a chink in the German armour, breaking when Kerber hit 
long. It took her nearly an hour to hit her first ace, and she looked more 
relaxed after holding for 4-1. Kerber held to stay in the set, before Williams 
steeled herself, found an ace, and forced a loose forehand from Kerber to level 
at a set apiece.

The American continued to charge the net, regardless of the state of the 
rally, and Kerber passed her to break in the second game of the deciding set – 
then handed the break back immediately. There was little in the contest, but 
the Williams aura had disappeared, and she appeared reduced to gamesmanship in 
the changeover after the third game, when she went to the service line late and 
slowly, supposedly to unsettle her opponent, who was appearing in her first 
slam final at 28.

When Kerber passed her yet again in the fourth game, Williams turned to her 
box and mouthed, “I cannot put the effing ball away!” But she held for two-all.

Angelique Kerber's stunning Australian Open win over Serena Williams – in 
pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/jan/30/angelique-kerber-stunning-australian-open-win-over-serena-williams-in-pictures>
The sixth game was pivotal. At 15-30, Williams was clipped in the shoulder off 
the net cord in another doomed raid, then hit wide for two break points, saving 
the first after a 19-shot rally, the longest of the game to that point, getting 
to deuce with an ace. An extended grind through deuce followed – Kerber 
drop-shotting Williams for the second time in the set, and Williams 
double-faulting again for a fifth break point. When the champion overcooked a 
forehand, Kerber led 4-2 and stood on the verge of a remarkable unexpected 
upset.

Pinned to the baseline after so many failed net raids, Williams was now a 
sitting duck for Kerber’s controlled, angled ground strokes and short work. 
After shoving a backhand well wide, Williams needed to hold to stay in the 
final, and came through despite a double fault and some shaky groundstrokes.

Kerber, serving for the title, went love-30 down, Williams hit long under no 
pressure, grabbed a break with a blistering cross-court forehand and looked 
hugely relieved when the German could not keep a forehand down. They were back 
on serve.

It was now about belief as much as class. Serving for survival again, Williams 
looked the less convincing until an ace got her to 15-30. She won two more 
high-grade rallies, but Kerber forced deuce off a woefully slow second serve, 
and got to match point when she pushed Williams into another weary forehand.

When the American’s final forehand drifted long, an extraordinary deed was 
done and the championship had a new and worthy champion.
 