
Josh Charnley made his rugby union debut off the bench in Sale’s 17-13 victory 
overWasps. The wing, who scored the winning try for Wigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/warrington-wigan-super-league-grand-final-match-report>
 in the 2016 Super League grand final before switching codes, had little to do 
in the 20 minutes that he was on the field for the Sharks, but could make his 
first start against Bristol next week.

The game was effectively decided before then with Sale taking a 17-8 lead 
through Mark Jennings and Sam Bedlow tries. Although Jacob Umaga, nephew of All 
Blacks great Tana Umaga, reduced the arrears for Wasps, Sale held on to get 
theirAnglo-Welsh Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/anglo-welsh-cup> 
campaign off to a winning start.

Sale’s director of rugby, Steve Diamond, said: “For a side that have just been 
put together – they’ve not been playing much as a team – I thought they did 
pretty well in what were atrocious conditions for most of the game. It wasn’t 
the best spectacle but we just needed to win really.”

Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> also had facets of the 
game to be pleased about, according to their forwards coach, Andy Titterrell, 
as their young team competed well against a more experienced front-five.

“We always knew that it would be tough coming up here on a Friday night,” 
Titterrell said. “We asked the boys to front up and provide a platform and I 
think they did that in the first half. In the second half a sloppy first five 
minutes allowedSale <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/salesharks> back into 
the game and then we just struggled to get a platform from thereon in.”

Warren Gatland fears Lions could ‘die’ if tour matches are cut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/04/warren-gatland-british-and-irish-lions-tours>
Geordan Murphy praised the leadership skills of Freddie Burns after a youthful 
Leicester team opened their campaign with a 21-20 win at Bath.

The Leicester fly-half kicked 11 points on a night when first-half tries from 
Luke Hamilton and George Catchpole paved the way for the Tigers’ first win in 
the competition for four years. Bath threatened to steal the game late on, with 
tries from Jack Wilson, Jeff Williams and the replacement Dan Bowden, but
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> deservedly held 
on.

“Freddie Burns has been a great leader all week and really pulled the trigger 
out there for us,” said Murphy, the Leicester coach. ”It’s a very difficult 
place to come down and win here. For those young guys to grind it out, to stick 
with it and fight it out to win by one point, it’s huge. They will take a huge 
amount from that. They find out what it’s like to be a Leicester player, to 
have that pride and put that passion in and work for each other.”

Tabai Matson conceded that the scoreline did not really reflect the fact that 
Leicester controlled large parts of the game. “It was a really pleasing start 
but we weren’t really good enough tonight,” said theBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> coach. “The scoreline flattered us a 
bit. It was great to see Jack Wilson score though. He only got off the plane 
[from New Zealand] two days ago.”

The Bristol coach, Sean Marsden, accepted that it had been a tough time for 
the club after a week which had seenthe suspension of Andy Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/bristol-suspend-andy-robinson-appoint-mark-tainton>
 ended in defeat atWorcester. Bristol suspended their director of rugby 
following their dismal start to the season and the acting head coach, Mark 
Tainton, was unlucky not to oversee a victory after nine consecutive defeats. 
Bristol had deservedly built up a 13-5 lead but the sin-binning of full-back 
Jack Wallace and hooker Rob Hawkins early in the second half proved crucial, as 
Worcester scored 28 unanswered points to eventually win 31-25. Giorgi Nemsadze, 
Tom Varndell and Wallace scored Bristol’s tries with Billy Searle converting 
two and adding two penalties.

Marsden said: “It was a difficult week and all we could do is to focus on 
tonight’s game and I thought we showed character and belief. We are ultimately 
disappointed that we didn’t win the game. The two yellow cards were the turning 
point but we defended our line well and came back strongly so credit to the 
lads. We are going to grow as a group and I firmly believe we are going to kick 
on and hopefully win next week.”

Worcester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worcesterrugby> capitalised on 
Bristol’s errors to score five tries for a bonus-point win with Max Stelling 
and Josh Adams both scoring two. Their Australian debutant scrum-half, Michael 
Dowsett, scored the other with Jamie Shillcock adding three conversions. “It 
was frustrating that we put ourselves under so much pressure late on in the 
game but I’m delighted we found a way to win,” said Simon Cross, Worcester’s 
coach.
 