
Sometimes it is less the number of games a sportsman plays than the heart and 
soul he pours into the jersey he wears. Anthony Foley had the rare stamina and 
inner passion to satisfy both criteria, which is why the desperately sad news 
of his death at the age of 42 cast such a depressing shadow over European 
rugby. Foley was not just any old retired player; he was a genuineMunster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> legend whose central part in his 
province’s greatest hour will never be forgotten.

Rugby union: Foley stands guard again at Munster's fortress
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/jan/21/rugbyunion.comment> 
The blunt statistics record he played 62 times for Ireland in a Test career 
spanning the decade between 1995 and 2005. It was for his deeds in thered shirt 
of Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/may/20/rugbyunion.heinekencup2005062>, 
though, that the back-row will be primarily remembered. Forever frozen in the 
memory will be the May day in Cardiff in 2006 whenMunster’s long‑held dream of 
winning the European Cup <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIA7mx0b5OA> finally 
came true under Foley’s captaincy.

It meant so much to so many because Munster, for years, had supplied the 
tournament with so many vivid splashes of colour, in effect transforming 
European club rugby into something as breathlessly appealing as the 
international game, if not more so. Foley, known as “Axel” to his team-mates, 
was at the beating heart of the Red Army, one of its spiritual leaders 
alongside Mick Galwey, Peter Clohessy and Paul O’Connell. When he moved into 
coaching there was only one team he was ever going to guide.

His untimely death has shaken everyone to the core. Only last weekend he was 
apparently in fine form at Galwey’s 50th-birthday celebrations; those who spoke 
to him shortly before Munster left for their fixture in Paris reported the same 
thing. Foley was a hard man on the field but convivial company off it, as his 
Leicester and England back-row adversary Martin Corry remembered on Sunday: 
“Fierce and uncompromising but after [he] would always find you for a beer,” 
the former England captain tweeted. “Proper rugby bloke.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmunster-fans-sing-tribute-to-head-coach-anthony-foley-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Munster%20fans%20sing%20tribute%20to%20head%20coach%20Anthony%20Foley%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmunster-fans-sing-tribute-to-head-coach-anthony-foley-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Munster%20fans%20sing%20tribute%20to%20head%20coach%20Anthony%20Foley%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fmunster-fans-sing-tribute-to-head-coach-anthony-foley-video&media=>
Munster fans sing tribute to head coach Anthony Foley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/16/munster-fans-sing-tribute-to-head-coach-anthony-foley-video>
Foley was also a more than useful hurler in his youth. He grew up in Killaloe 
in Co Clare, down the street from Keith Wood, a fellow Munster legend, and the 
pair used to practise their hurling skills together. Both had notable 
rugby-playing dads; Brendan Foley won 11 caps and featured in the Munster side 
thatbeat the All Blacks in 1978 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_S2kvEMrC_g>. 
His son once got in to a Six Nations game at Lansdowne Road seated on the 
shoulders of the great Willie Duggan. By the age of 21 Foley Jr was playing for 
Ireland himself; his sister Rosie has also represented her country at rugby.

The former Ireland coach Eddie O’Sullivan once said that when Foley was on the 
pitch it was like having another coach there. For a long time no one else in 
Europe had played more Heineken Cup games; he played in all but one of 
Munster’s first 78 Heineken Cup games and his strike-rate of 23 tries in 86 
games underlined his value to his side.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fanthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d4cc8550cbd7e7eef08be1ac62d3cc9ea5bdf0c%2F0_377_1877_1127%2F1877.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Foley%2C%20a%20Munster%20legend%20to%20his%20core%20and%20%E2%80%98proper%20rugby%20bloke%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fanthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Foley%2C%20a%20Munster%20legend%20to%20his%20core%20and%20%E2%80%98proper%20rugby%20bloke%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Fanthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d4cc8550cbd7e7eef08be1ac62d3cc9ea5bdf0c%2F0_377_1877_1127%2F1877.jpg>
 Anthony Foley celebrates following Munster’s 2006 Heineken Cup final victory 
over Biarritz Olympique at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff. Photograph: David 
Rogers/Getty Images 
Playing his early club rugby at Shannon honed decent survival instincts and an 
appreciation of Munster’s traditions. A decade ago I asked him what it was like 
to run out at Thomond Park in Limerick carrying such a heavy weight of 
expectation. “It all depends if you’re a local lad or a visitor,” he replied 
softly. “If you’re a local it’s a lovely place to be; if you’re a visitor it’s 
not very nice. When it’s full there’s a very warm and encouraging atmosphere. 
You can almost feel the people on top of you.”

Munster’s secret ingredient was always that umbilical cord linking them with 
their supporters. Even with some players living in Cork and others in Limerick 
they would bond shoulder to shoulder under the same banner and stand up to 
fight all comers. As Foley explained to me, it was all about representing the 
place they called home, even for those unfortunate enough to have been born 
elsewhere: “It works for us having fellas living where they were brought up. 
It’s important, in our culture, that supporters can identify with the players.”

Which is why Munster’s supporters in Paris instinctively stood together when 
they heard the news andsang The Fields of Athenry as a tribute  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/16/munster-fans-sing-tribute-to-head-coach-anthony-foley-video>
to their fallen head coach. Donncha O’Callaghan, his former team-mate, recalled 
in his autobiography how the Limerick players used to poke fun at Foley’s gym 
routine and “slag him that he was the only man who could do a 30-minute bike 
exercise in 25 minutes”.

O’Callaghan also recounted a match against the Scottish Borders when an 
opposing hooker was rude about Foley’s slightly rotund appearance. “Are there 
no mirrors in your house?” shot back the big Munster man, causing both sets of 
players much mirth. He will be hugely missed, not just in Munster but across 
the rugby world.
 