
The first game of the Five Nations rugby championship in 1995 was not a happy 
one forIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. Will Carling’s 
England team swaggered into Dublin and in wretched conditions – the tournament 
still began in January in those days – their gargantuan pack of forwards helped 
them to a first win in what was to become a grand slam campaign. There was some 
consolation for the bedraggled Irish supporters, though. In the dying seconds, 
Anthony Foley, a 21-year-old flanker from the Shannon club, and one of three 
debutants in their side, marked his first game with a try from a tapped 
penalty. A great international career had begun.

Foley, who would go on to win 62 caps in the following decade, became a 
central figure forIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ireland-rugby-union-team> and Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster>, whom he would lead to a Heineken 
Cup victory over Biarritz in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/may/22/rugbyunion.heinekencup200506>. 
His 202 appearances for Munster are a record. At the time of his sudden death, 
at the age of 42, he was head coach of Munster and had been preparing his side 
for their opening game in theEuropean Champions Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-rugby-champions-cup> against Racing 
92 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/racing-metro-92> in Paris. As a mark of 
respect the game on Sunday afternoon was postponed.

He was nicknamed “Axel”, after Eddie Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/eddiemurphy>’s character in the 1984 film 
Beverly Hills Cop. It was an ironic soubriquet. No one could have been less 
like the garrulous Axel Foley. Ireland’s version was a quiet man who on the 
pitch played with a silent fury and off it was an amiable if bluff man. For the 
last two decades Munster, the hot-bed of Irish rugby, has been dominated by two 
high-profile characters, the former Lions captainPaul O’Connell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-o-connell> and the fly-half Ronan O’Gara
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/oct/17/rugbyunion.comment>. Both went 
on to careers in France, but Foley stayed true to his roots. He was the 
quintessential Munster rugby man and the first player from the Shannon club to 
become captain of Ireland when he led the team out toplay Samoa in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2001/nov/12/rugbyunion.samoarugbyunionteam>. 
He captained Ireland three times.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fanthony-foley-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdebe6d8172647882e32e6948dad491f137012627%2F276_0_1020_1275%2F1020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Foley%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fanthony-foley-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Foley%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fanthony-foley-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdebe6d8172647882e32e6948dad491f137012627%2F276_0_1020_1275%2F1020.jpg>
 Anthony Foley playing for Ireland against Italy in 2000. Photograph: 
Sportsfile/Corbis via Getty Images 
He was an unflashy No 8. An intelligent player, he was essentially a team man 
and best appreciated by his team-mates.Keith Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/aug/25/rugbyunion.comment>, the former 
Ireland hooker and captain, once said he never saw Foley play a bad game but, 
despite being a permanent fixture in the Irish back row, Foley, unlike Wood, 
was overlooked for the Lions side and his omission in the squad to tour 
Australia in 2001 particularly rankled.

Foley had only sketchy memories of the greatest day in Munster’s history, when 
the province beat the All Blacks in 1978 and his father, Brendan, an Ireland 
prop forward, was in the side. Foley was born in Limerick, the home of Thomond 
Park, the scene of that great triumph, and grew up in Killaloe, Co Clare. His 
family – his father, mother, Sheila, and sisters, Orla and Rosie – were fired 
with enthusiasm for the game of rugby union and little Anthony soon caught the 
bug.

He was educated at St Munchin’s college, a nursery for players, and captained 
them to the Munster Junior Cup in 1989. Three years later, the hulking 
youngster played for Ireland’s Schools side, making his debut against New 
Zealand, who includedJonah Lomu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/18/jonah-lomu> in their line-up. 
Foley had played for three years in the Munster Schools team and two years for 
Irish Schools and within six months of leaving school was in Shannon’s first 
team. He did not miss a game for five years as Shannon dominated the All 
Ireland League, winning four titles in a row from 1995 to 1998.

Foley’s debut try for Ireland in 1995 was followed by four more and he went on 
to score 39 tries for Munster. He took over the captaincy of Munster in 2005 as 
his international career was drawing to a close. The following year Foley led 
the province to their 23-19 Heineken Cup final win over Biarritz in Cardiff, 
Munster’s third final appearance after defeats in 2000 and 2002. Over 
two-thirds in the ground that day wore the red ofMunster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> and around 40,000 greeted Foley’s 
side on their return to Limerick the next day. The young Foley had at last 
emulated the feats of his father in 1978.

Munster’s stock as a European force has dropped in recent seasons and a 
Champions Cupdefeat to Stade Français last January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/stade-francais-munster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 saw them fail to make the knock-out stages of the competition for the second 
successive season. Foley, head coach sincetaking over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/04/leinster-munster-pro12-match-report>
 from Rob Penney in 2014, stood aside at the end of the season as the South 
AfricanRassie Erasmus arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/26/rugby-union-guru-british-coaches-international-club>
 to become the province’s director of rugby. Foley retained his head coach 
title and was said to be happier working with the players on restoring the 
glories of the old days.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fmunster-fans-remember-anthony-foley-limerick-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Munster%20fans%20remember%20Anthony%20Foley%20in%20Limerick%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fmunster-fans-remember-anthony-foley-limerick-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Munster%20fans%20remember%20Anthony%20Foley%20in%20Limerick%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fmunster-fans-remember-anthony-foley-limerick-video&media=>
Munster fans remember Anthony Foley in Limerick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/oct/17/munster-fans-remember-anthony-foley-limerick-video>
Foley’s sister Rosie also played rugby for Ireland. He is survived by his 
wife, Olive, and children, Tony and Dan, and by his parents and sisters.

• Anthony Foley, rugby player and coach, born 30 October 1973; died 16 October 
2016
 