
If Britain today provides a flourishing base from which to study Byzantium, 
the eastern Roman Christian empire that flowered between 330 and 1453, Anthony 
Bryer, who has died aged 78, is the individual responsible. He was an inspiring 
teacher and the pioneer in promoting the growth in interest in medieval Greek 
and Turkish culture in the 1960s, when “Byzantine” was more often used as a 
term of abuse.

Through his creation in 1976 of a centre for Byzantine studies at the 
University of Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/birminghamuniversity>, he built a beacon 
of excellence and revolutionised the subject’s appeal. Accompanied by 
generations of students, he led expeditions exploring the Byzantine and Ottoman 
buildings and culture of north-eastern Turkey, the Pontos and the Pontic Alps 
behind Trebizond. In 1975 he founded the journal Byzantine and Modern Greek 
Studies. His energetic enthusiasm generated worldwide devotion among scholars 
and the very large number of Byzantine PhDs he trained. The annual spring 
symposium he established was noted for its hospitality to visitors.

Born in Southsea, Hampshire, the elder son of Group Captain Gerald Bryer and 
his wife, Joan (nee Grigsby), Anthony spent part of his childhood in Jerusalem, 
and visited the historianSir Steven Runciman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/nov/03/guardianobituaries.books>, a 
family friend then in the city. They later worked together to promote the study 
of Byzantium under the auspices of the British Academy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fanthony-bryer-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ba3ce88249ccef813ea4fddccdda5ac0712a1b%2F0_110_2466_3081%2F2466.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Bryer%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fanthony-bryer-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Bryer%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fanthony-bryer-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44ba3ce88249ccef813ea4fddccdda5ac0712a1b%2F0_110_2466_3081%2F2466.jpg>
 In 1976 Anthony Bryer created a centre for Byzantine studies at the University 
of Birmingham. 
Bryer attended Canford school, Dorset, did his national service and studied 
history at Balliol College, Oxford (1958-61). When he chose the empire of 
Trebizond (1204-1461) on the south-east shore of the Black Sea for his DPhil 
research, it might have identified him with the periphery of Byzantium. 
Instead, his great work, written with David Winfield,The Byzantine Monuments 
and Topography of the Pontos <http:>, published in two volumes in 1985, brought 
that eastern frontier region into the centre to enrich its entire history.

These volumes document many spectacular churches and monasteries, notably the 
one dedicated to the Virgin ofSumela 
<https://www.lonelyplanet.com/turkey/black-sea-coast/attractions/sumela-monastery/a/poi-sig/1249156/360902>
, one of the oldest Greek Orthodox foundations in the world, hewn out of a 
mountain rock face like those of Mount Athos and Meteora in Greece. Bryer was 
the first modern historian to identify many of the Byzantine villages, castles 
and churches with important frescoes known from medieval records of the Vazelon 
monastery, in what remained a predominantly Greek area until it was abandoned 
after the exchange of populations in 1922-23. Yet he remained deeply committed 
to Constantinople as well as distant Trebizond.

While he was completing his doctorate (1967) under Professor Dimitri Obolensky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/jan/04/guardianobituaries.humanities>, 
Bryer moved with his first wife, Liz (nee Lipscomb), to the University of 
Birmingham in 1964. There, aided by local Hellenists such as Ellis Waterhouse, 
George Thomson,Sebastian Brock <http://www.orinst.ox.ac.uk/staff/ec/sbrock.html>
 and Meg Alexiou, and nationally by David andTamara Talbot Rice 
<https://dictionaryofarthistorians.org/ricet.htm> and Runciman, Bryer created a 
programme of Byzantine studies that immediately attracted students.

Philip Whitting, an expert on coins and seals, later donated his collection as 
well as his library, and in 1976 the centre was established. Bryer served as 
the university’s professor of Byzantine studies between 1980 and 1999.

He demonstrated his capacity for generating support for his chosen field in 
1966, when he expanded a one-day adult education spring symposium. This became 
the venue for internationally famous Byzantinists and graduates to present 
their research in an egalitarian setting. The champagne double-decker bus that 
ferried speakers from the university to the Bryers’ home in Harborne for lunch 
with Liz and their daughters, Theo, Anna and Katie, brought publicity to the 
event.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fanthony-bryer-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dc5db8f1c5cd6608099614ccfc70045d583a2eb%2F0_270_5421_3254%2F5421.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Bryer%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fanthony-bryer-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Bryer%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fanthony-bryer-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dc5db8f1c5cd6608099614ccfc70045d583a2eb%2F0_270_5421_3254%2F5421.jpg>
 Byzantine frescoes on the exterior walls of the main church (a ‘cavechurch’) 
of Sumela monastery. Photograph: Alamy 
It produced a series of impressive volumes: the 16th symposium was published 
as Continuity and Change in Late Byzantine and Early Ottoman Society (1985), 
and other titles included Diplomacy, Orthodoxies, Trade, Travel, Desire and 
Denial, Eastern Approaches, andHistory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/history> as Literature.

Bryer acted as chairman of the British committee of the International 
Association of Byzantine Studies (1989-95) and served on the managing 
committees of the British School at Athens and Institute at Ankara, while 
continuing to write and review for 40 years. In 2007, he was honoured with a 
festschrift, food and wine in Byzantium and in 2009 was appointed OBE.

Liz died in 1995, and three years later he married Jenny Banks.

She survives him, along with Theo, Anna and Katie and four grandchildren; two 
stepchildren and four step-grandchildren; and his brother, Robin.

• Anthony Applemore Mornington Bryer, Byzantinist, born 31 October 1937; died 
22 October 2016
 