
Anthony Watson is set to resume his international career when England name a 
squad for next week’s training camp in Brighton. TheBath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> wing missed the entire autumn series 
due to a fractured jaw sustained when Eddie Jones’s men last met on the south 
coast in October, but is poised to make his comeback off the bench against 
Exeter .

Also injured during the controversial training camp in Brighton was Jack 
Nowell. The Chiefs three-quarter is now three matches into his return from a 
thigh problem and will be reunited alongside Watson among the 33 players 
announced on Saturday.

Their return to fitness and the likely presence of Jonny May means there is 
unlikely to be a place in that group for Semesa Rokoduguni, while Marland 
Yarde’s place is also under threat if Jones opts to pick only three wings 
knowing that Elliot Daly is a genuine option in the position.

England will name two groups, the 45-strong elite player squad required by 
their agreement with the Premiership clubs and the smaller party that will give 
the clearest indication of Jones’ thinking for the Six Nations.

The back-row options continue to ebb and flow with the No8 Billy Vunipola 
almost certain to miss the entire championship with a knee problem while James 
Haskell closes in on his return from foot surgery. Haskell could be ready for 
the opening match of England’s Grand Slam defence against France on 4 February 
but the loosehead prop Mako Vunipola faces an uncertain short-term future as he 
battles a knee problem.

Maro Itoje is also available again after missing the victories over South 
Africa, Fiji, Argentina and Australia with a hand problem. Dylan Hartley will 
continue as captain, with Jones having already indicated he will not strip the 
hooker of the leadership duties following his red card for striking while 
playing forNorthampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>.

Meanwhile, George North will make his first appearance since being the subject 
of an investigation into his latest head injury when Northampton faceGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> on New Year’s Day.

North starts the Premiership match at Kingsholm on the left wing in place of 
Juan Pablo Estelles, in his maiden outing since appearing to have beenknocked 
out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/george-north-northampton-awkward-fall-leicester>
 in the match against Leicester on 3 December.

A joint review by the Rugby Football Union and Premiership Rugby opted not to 
charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/21/george-north-concussion-northampton-premiership-rugby-rfu>
 Northampton or their medical staff with misconduct for allowing North to 
resume playing despite his suspected loss of consciousness during an 
aerial collision.

North was cleared to play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/failure-sanction-northampton-george-north-head-injury-cop-out-alistair-hargreaves>
 in the 24-5 victory against Sale last Friday but Northampton omitted the Wales 
wing from their squad.

While North’s return to action brings to an end his most recent absence 
through concussion, the full consequences of allowing him to rejoin the match 
against Leicester are not yet known despite the outcome of the investigation.

The day after Northampton were cleared by the review, World Rugby announced it 
was seeking further information from the RFU aboutan “apparent non-compliance” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/world-rugby-to-seek-further-information-from-rfu-over-george-north-head-injury-northampton>
 with the international body’s concussion protocols.

Failure to punish anyone over George North injury sends wrong message | Robert 
Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/21/george-north-concussion-northampton-premiership-rugby-rfu>
In Saturday’s only fixture, Bath are at home against Exeter in a West Country 
derby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/semesa-rokoduguni-bath-england-exeter>
 that matches third against fourth in the Premiership. The Chiefs, the beaten 
finalists of last season, have stuttered through the current campaign but 
climbed back into the play‑off positions, one point behind Bath, with a31-10 
victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/exeter-chiefs-leicester-tigers-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 against Leicester on Christmas Eve.

“Last week against Leicester was a good performance from us,” Exeter’s 
director of rugby, Rob Baxter, said. “What you are seeing at the moment is that 
we are on the right track and that we are playing at a level and an intensity 
that we feel comfortable with.

“Earlier in the season we weren’t quite hitting those levels, but it certainly 
feels like we are now. We’re back in the top four and things are now back in 
our hands so to speak. If we want to try and get to a Premiership final again, 
this is the place you need to be.”on Saturday but his head coach, Gregor 
Townsend, does not see it becoming a permanent switch any time soon.

“Hoggy hasn’t started at 10 for us before but he has performed the role a lot 
in training sessions,” Townsend said. “But I don’t think he’s a frustrated 
fly-half, though. Maybe he was once upon a time. He played a bit of 10 when he 
was coming through the ranks. He was a centre during his first year at Glasgow 
but he didn’t really enjoy that and has now developed into a world-class 
full-back.”
 