
The “counter-jihad” movement in the UK is expanding rapidly, according to new 
analysis showing that 24 different far-right groups are currently attempting to 
whip up hatred towards Muslims and provoke a cultural civil war.

The most comprehensive report yet into the alliance of international 
counter-jihad organisations warns that Islamophobic groups in Britain are 
capitalising onpublic concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/01/marine-le-pen-front-national-political-gains-paris-attacks>
 following the Paris attacks and ongoing refugee crisis.

Next month, the former leader of the English Defence League, Stephen 
Yaxley-Lennon, often known by the pseudonym Tommy Robinson, will make his 
political comeback by fronting the relaunch of the UK arm of Pegida, the German 
anti-Islam organisation whose provocative rhetoric has promptedattacks on 
refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/pegida-germany-anti-immigrant-group-polarising-dresden>
.

The report, by the anti-racist group Hope Not Hate 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/>, chronicles 920 anti-Muslim organisations and 
key Islamophobes in 22 countries, noting that such groups are becoming 
increasingly well-resourced, particularly in the US, where eight foundations 
have donated more than £38m since the 9/11 attacks.

Nick Lowles, Hope Not Hate’s chief executive, warned that in Europe the hatred 
of Muslims “was moving from the margins to the political mainstream” while in 
the UK violence and prejudice against Muslims was likely to increase as 
far-right groups exploit tensions over immigration and homegrown jihadism.

“The very fabric of our multi- racial and multifaith societies is going to be 
severely tested in the next few years and it is incumbent on us all to 
strengthen the bonds that unify liberal democracies,” he said.

On Friday, Scotland Yard said Islamophobic attacks in London had more than 
tripled in the wake of the Paris attacks. The Metropolitan Police are still 
hunting a man who hurled acan of petrol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/29/north-london-mosque-targeted-in-suspected-arson-attack>
 at the Finsbury Park mosque last month in what the Met described as a “clear 
and deliberate attempt to cause arson”.

Among the UK organisations cited in the report for driving organised hatred 
against Muslims are the Infidels, an anti-multicultural group with increasing 
Nazi leanings, and the South East Alliance, a non-sectarian group linked to the 
National Front.

Following the decline of the EDL, the report identifies Britain First as the 
most prolific counter-jihad street protest group in the UK. Despite employing
provocative tactics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/14/britain-first-complaint-police-inquisition-london>
 that include invading mosques, it has more than 1.1 million “likes” on 
Facebook. Yaxley-Lennon, lauded as an inspirational figure by both the militant 
and political wings of the counter-jihad movement, has more than 109,000 
followers on Twitter.


Other UK-based groups include Liberty GB, an anti-immigration political party, 
whose chairman is Paul Weston, the former Ukip parliamentary candidate. He is 
named as a regular contributor to theGates of Vienna blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/27/mps-website-anti-muslim-paramilitary-manual-investigated-muhammad-cartoons-exhibition>
, where he writes about impending civil war against Muslims and “white 
genocide” in Britain.

One worrying trend, said Lowles, is an attempt to use the publication of 
images involving the prophet Muhammad with the aim of generating a violent 
reaction from Muslims. He is concerned that the authorities are not taking 
things seriously. “Groups are becoming more right-wing, many on the verge of 
being openly Nazi, and yet they are still categorised as a public order problem 
rather than as the extreme far right,” Lowles said.

The report also documents the counter-jihad movement in the US, where there 
are 42 anti-Muslim groups, such as ACT for America and the New-York based 
American Freedom Defense Initiative, and in Australia, citing 12 groups, 
including the Q Society, a Victoria-based grassroots anti-Islamist organisation 
that claims volunteer-run chapters across the country.

Globally, anti-Muslim sentiment is growing in the wake of the attacks in Paris 
and concerns over the continuing refugee crisis. A study by the Pew Research 
Center thinktank in 2014 of seven European Union countries found that at least 
half of those surveyed in Italy and Greece had a negative opinion of Muslims 
living in their country, with the most favourable rating of 72% in France. But 
a YouGov poll in the spring of this year, after theCharlie Hebdo shootings in 
Paris, showed 40% of French people held negative views of Muslims, the same 
level as in the UK.

 * This article was amended on 7 December to remove references to the Henry 
Jackson Society which was not featured in the Hope Not Hate report.  