
It is no surprise that the Irish government is kicking back hard against a 
Brusselsfinding <http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-2923_en.htm> that 
it gave Apple up to €13bn (£10.8bn) in illegal state aid via a secret, 
sweetheart tax deal spanning many years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/apple-cut-euro-13bn-irish-tax-bill-spreads-payments-eu-us>
.

These are the kind of deals, after all, that have become the lifeblood of 
Ireland’s economy over the past three decades. Inward investment has flowed as 
the country set out its stall as the go-to place for multinationals looking for 
loopholes that allow them to spirit their taxable profits off to tax havens in 
the Caribbean and elsewhere.

In August, however, the party abruptly stalled. The European competition 
commissioner,Margrethe Vestager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/margrethe-vestager>, announced a 
record-breaking state aid decision in relation to Apple. It must now pay an 
enormous bill for back taxes.


Ireland may not get Apple's €13bn back taxes in full, EU says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/apple-cut-euro-13bn-irish-tax-bill-spreads-payments-eu-us>
Some in Ireland had initially suggested a massive, unexpected windfall was 
nothing to complain about. But the finance minister, Michael Noonan, was quick 
toput them straight 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/noonan-taking-13bn-in-apple-taxes-would-be-destroying-the-future-for-shortterm-advantage-35007301.html>
. “To do anything [other than appeal against the Brussels decision] would be 
like eating the seed potatoes and destroying the future for people for 
short-term advantage now,” he said.


On Monday he unveiled details of Ireland’s appeal 
<http://www.finance.gov.ie/sites/default/files/161219%20Summary%20of%20Appeal%20Grounds%20Publised%20under%20Embargo.pdf>
, sent to the EU courts in Luxembourg last month. In a nutshell, Noonan simply 
refuses to accept that Apple’s corporate arrangements in Cork, which have 
regularly generated two-thirds of the global profits for the US company, have 
been in any way exceptional.

Nor is it at all odd that these handful of Cork-registered companies have been 
able to claim “stateless” income – that is, their profits are beyond the 
jurisdiction of any state to tax.

Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> is expected to take a 
similar line when it lodges its own appeal: that no rules have been broken, and 
that the company is the victim of a political attack that retrospectively and 
unreasonably unpicks tax treatments which have endured for decades without 
objection.

Having come so far, and with so much at stake, it is hard to imagine Apple and 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> throwing in the towel and 
conceding in the EU courts. That said, with each fresh round of public 
disclosures about the iPhone maker’s tax structure, it looks more and more 
indefensible on any measure.

At this rate, US critics of Vestager’s meddling may well have cause to 
reassess. Instead of calling the commissioner out for overreaching her powers, 
they may instead question the inaction of the Inland Revenue Service. Why is 
it, after all that the IRS is pursuing Amazon and Facebook through the US 
courts over their European tax structures, but have never challenged Apple?

 