
It’s the largest poisoning of a population in history 
<http://www.who.int/bulletin/archives/78(9)1093.pdf> (pdf). More than 20 
million people are thought to be at risk of drinking water contaminated by 
arsenic in Bangladesh.

Arsenic occurs naturally <http://www.who.int/bulletin/archives/78(9)1093.pdf> 
in groundwater supplies throughout parts of Bangladesh, India and Nepal. It was 
first identified as a problem in Bangladesh in 1987, and concentration levels 
in some places exceed 50 milligrammes per litre (mg/l) – way beyond the maximum 
level recommended by the World Health Organisation of 10 mg/l.


Millions of people in Bangladesh still drinking arsenic-laced water
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/06/millions-of-people-in-bangladesh-still-drinking-arsenic-laced-water>
Each year, an estimated 43,000 people 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/04/06/bangladesh-20-million-drink-arsenic-laced-water>
 die from arsenic poisoning in the country. The government has taken a number 
of steps and made policies to try to address the problem. Butdespite a 
country-wide campaign and social mobilisation activities by the government and 
NGOs 
<http://www.unicef.org/bangladesh/Towards_an_arsenic_safe_environ_summary(english)_22Mar2010.pdf>
 (pdf), knowledge and awareness levels among communities remain far below 
expectations.

We know that there are cheap and potentially life-saving solutions to this 
problem. What we need to do now is promote these solutions, and increase access 
to them.

An invisible problem 

Arsenic doesn’t change the taste or colour of water so the first problem we 
encounter is making people understand that it is present in their community.

From skin lesions, stomach cramps, diarrhoea and vomiting blood, to cancers of 
the bladder, lungs, skin and kidneys, the symptoms and effects of arsenic 
poisoning are debilitating and palpable. But without a proper diagnosis, often 
people do not know whether they are suffering from typical diseases or ones 
caused by long-term exposure to arsenic.

It is even more difficult, therefore, to make people realise that prolonged 
contact with arsenic-contaminated water may cause illness or even death. Liza 
Akhter, a 21-year-old girl in Bagerhat District, south-westBangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>, said to one of my colleagues: 
“The thing about arsenic is you get poisoned slowly, so you don’t know who has 
been affected around you already. Arsenic kills you every day, slowly.”

It is the poorest who face the biggest problems and those suffering from the 
symptoms of arsenic poisoning often find themselves in a vicious circle. Even 
though they may be suffering from multiple debilitating diseases, they often 
cannot afford to get treated. Many do not have enough land to install a water 
point so they are reliant on community points or the traditional untreated 
shallow tube wells. Often the roof of their home is not strong enough to 
support a rainwater harvesting system.

Those who are better off are more involved in the decision-making process and 
therefore have more control over where water is distributed. Very often, they 
can afford to install deep tube wells on their own land and access safe sources 
of water below the contamination levels.

Polluting the world's water – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2015/nov/13/polluting-the-worlds-water-in-pictures>
So what can be done?

In affected areas Practical Action has been working to educate people about 
the symptoms of arsenic poisoning. We have provided testing kits so that people 
can check if their water supply is contaminated and, if need be, install 
arsenic-removal systems or look into alternative safe water supplies.

Arsenic removal systems, where contaminated water if filtered through four 
chambers, are one available option. Due to a lack of testing systems, however, 
households don’t often know whether the removal system is working properly. We 
also find that the distribution of these filters is usually done in an ad hoc 
manner through government projects or by NGOs.

The distribution of arsenic removal systems should be linked with suppliers to 
ensure post-installation services for repairing, replacing and changing the 
filter for long-term sustainability. Proper pricing plans are also essential 
for running a community-managed water point sustainably, and ensuring they are 
not abandoned due to financial problems.

Rainwater harvesting does offer an alternative, but a lack of rain and the 
deterioration of water quality and taste during the dry season make it less 
popular. Usually, the equipment is not cleaned properly before the monsoon 
season which means that the water can become contaminated, causing sickness and 
diarrhoea. Other alternative sources of water could be found through 
“conjunctive use”, where surface water is stored in a groundwater basin in wet 
years, and withdrawn in dry years.

Facilities to test water quality are also needed at home along with a national 
testing mechanism; science clubs in schools or laboratory facilities in 
colleges could even be explored for establishing such facilities. Most 
importantly, an integrated approach between the health and water sectors is 
needed for working with the communities in arsenic affected areas. We would 
also like to see government mapping of awareness levels among communities, as 
this is something we just do not know presently.

The Indian village fighting fluoride poisoning with vitamins and clean water
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/29/the-indian-village-fighting-fluoride-poisoning-with-vitamins-and-clean-water>
All patients suffering from arsenic poisoning – arsenicosis – have less 
capacity to work, their income reduces, and their households are gradually 
marginalised. The provision of safe water alone is not enough; proper treatment 
for arsenic poisoning is also essential.

We know that there are solutions, but we need to scale up this work so that 
the 20 million people in Bangladesh, and millions more in India and Nepal, who 
are at risk from arsenic poisoning, can at least take a drink of water without 
worrying it is killing them.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 