
Tyrone Chalmers started drawing at age eight. “Art shadows me everywhere I go 
in life… my best work comes from within my dreams.”

Chalmers is a passionate and committed artist. He is also a convicted murderer 
on death row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/shortcuts/2013/sep/22/death-row-prisoners-artworks>
. In handwritten letters to Guardian Australia sent from Unit 2 atRiverbend 
Maximum Security Institution in Nashville, Tennessee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/19/tennessee-death-penalty-lawsuits>
, he and fellow inmates describe what art means to them.

Myuran Sukumaran's friends and family sing death row hymns at funeral
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/09/myuran-sukumarans-friends-and-family-sing-death-row-hymns-at-funeral>
For Harold Nichols, who received a death sentence for the rape and murder of a 
21-year-old woman in 1988, it’s all about the act of creation. “When I start 
with a blank paper or canvas and begin to make lines and marks and see these 
congeal into a reasonable form, this is the true moment when I have created 
something from nothing.”

For GDongalay Berry, art is “sadistic, it’s masochistic, passive, aggressive, 
good, evil, vanilla, erotic, it’s God, it’s Satanic ... all things in what we 
humans call life.” Berry was convicted of the 1995 murder of a 12-year-old 
girl, and a 1996 double homicide. The 1995 murder conviction was later 
overturned.

From expressing spirituality and identity to creating a meditative focus, art 
takes on a heightened value inside prison.

For inmates such as Donald Middlebrooks, it also provides therapy and a form 
of penance. He was convicted of the torture and murder of a 14-year-old boy.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>, says Middlebrooks, “is the way 
I express my pain from childhood abuse… [it] allows me to escape.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c430429fe64c1794e9892eacf94cf8acd002d0f%2F0_0_2946_2463%2F2946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20on%20death%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98it%E2%80%99s%20good%2C%20evil%2C%20vanilla%20...%20all%20things%20in%20what%20we%20humans%20call%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20on%20death%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98it%E2%80%99s%20good%2C%20evil%2C%20vanilla%20...%20all%20things%20in%20what%20we%20humans%20call%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c430429fe64c1794e9892eacf94cf8acd002d0f%2F0_0_2946_2463%2F2946.jpg>
 An artwork created by Holly Carden, a student at Watkins College of Art, and 
death row inmate Harold Nichols. They worked equally with the image; it went 
back and forth in and out of the prison for weeks. Photograph: Holly Cardin and 
Harold Nichols 
Their studio? A large cinder block prison building where, every Thursday 
night, they gather around two large tables.

Since 2013, they’ve been taught by Robin Paris and her colleague Tom Williams, 
professors of art at Watkins College of Art, Design and Film in Nashville. Over 
that time, their work has been shown in five art exhibitions in Tennessee and 
one at the Apexart Gallery in New York.

Living on death row in Tennessee: 'The rollercoaster is exhausting'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/19/tennessee-death-penalty-lawsuits>
For that show, Life After Death and Elsewhere 
<http://apexart.org/exhibitions/paris-williams.php>, poignantly, they created 
their own memorials: a rose, a spiral of books, a diorama of feathers and 
animal figures, an aeroplane with a painted skull, a ceramic tree.

What is death row like? Peaceful, says Williams: “Despite stories about death 
row being filled with ‘the worst of the worst’, these men get along with each 
other, and it’s easily one of the safest units in the prison.” Paris says a 
group of six men have formed the core for the past three years although “there 
have been as many as 15, some have dropped out and two have died [of natural 
causes].”

In the US, art has become a new weapon in the battle for hearts and minds over 
the justness of the death penalty – an increasingly heated and polarising issue 
touching on not just the ethics and morality of state-sponsored killing but 
prison reform, class and the inequities of the justice system.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dd0776919a0f52d69ab7b1f88209f60e5126167%2F0_0_2408_3035%2F2408.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20on%20death%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98it%E2%80%99s%20good%2C%20evil%2C%20vanilla%20...%20all%20things%20in%20what%20we%20humans%20call%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20on%20death%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98it%E2%80%99s%20good%2C%20evil%2C%20vanilla%20...%20all%20things%20in%20what%20we%20humans%20call%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dd0776919a0f52d69ab7b1f88209f60e5126167%2F0_0_2408_3035%2F2408.jpg>
 A letter from GDongalay Berry, who is on death row in the USA. Photograph: 
GDongalay Berry 
Close to 3,000 inmates are currently on death row while controversy rages 
following a series ofrecent botched lethal injection executions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/13/pfizer-blocks-drugs-lethal-injections>
,DNA-based exonerations of death row inmates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/03/record-number-people-exonerated-of-crimes-last-year>
 and growing concern overracial discrimination in the criminal justice system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/27/racial-bias-texas-death-penalty-cases-harvard-study>
.

Through art, a coalition of artists, educators and activists hope to humanise 
the plight of prisoners and sway public opinion. Organisations includeR 
.E.A.C.H. <https://reachcoalition.wordpress.com/> which provides workshops to 
Tennessee death row inmates,Minutes Before Six (MB6) 
<http://minutesbeforesix.blogspot.com.au/>, a blog by death row inmates 
dedicated to using arts and literature as a form of rehabilitation, andArt For 
Justice <http://www.artforjustice.org/>.

In some cases, the human body itself has become a political tool in this 
debate. In a macabre twist, Texas death row inmate Travis Runnels has given his 
consent for his body post-execution to be donated to Danish activist Martin 
Martensen-Larsen tobe painted gold and preserved as part of an installation 
<http://glasstire.com/2013/05/28/danish-man-to-exhibit-the-gilded-body-of-executed-texas-inmate/>
.

In 2012, the ashes of another executed convicted murderer from Texas, Karl 
Eugene Chamberlain,were exhibited as part of an installation by Martensen-Larsen
 <http://bigthink.com/Picture-This/should-a-death-row-inmates-corpse-become-art 
http://bigthink.com/Picture-This/should-a-death-row-inmates-corpse-become-art 
http://bigthink.com/Picture-This/should-a-death-row-inmates-corpse-become-art> 
in a Danish church.

Death-row prisoners' artworks: the story of a unique collaboration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/shortcuts/2013/sep/22/death-row-prisoners-artworks>
Windows on Death Row <http://www.windowsondeathrow.com/>, a travelling 
exhibition of over 60 works from death row inmates and some of America’s most 
famous political cartoonists, is currently on show at Ohio State University, 
while London-based artist Nicola White, founder of ArtReach: Reaching out with 
Art from Death Row – a project featuringa website of art by San Quentin inmates 
<http://www.artofsanquentin.com/> for sale, with proceeds used for victims of 
violent crimes, and to buy art supplies – plans four new shows of prisoners’ 
work this year in London. Her Twitter feed@DeathRowArtists 
<https://twitter.com/deathrowartists> provides a lively commentary on the art 
of San Quentin prisoners.

And in Sydney, a show of over 100 paintings by executed Bali Nine member 
Myuran Sukumaran,Another Day in Paradise 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/myuran>, has just opened at Campbelltown 
Arts Centre, organised by artist and co-curator Ben Quilty, who was Sukumaran’s 
mentor and teacher until Sukumaran was executed in 2015.

Why have these artists and educators become involved? For Williams, formerly a 
death penalty supporter, it is to provide a voice for the voiceless. He adds: 
“If we’re going to kill these men, then we should be willing to listen to what 
they have to say.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdebeffcc75c83d53d96dd02434cb3b677a83e1e6%2F0_0_1548_1817%2F1548.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20on%20death%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98it%E2%80%99s%20good%2C%20evil%2C%20vanilla%20...%20all%20things%20in%20what%20we%20humans%20call%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20on%20death%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98it%E2%80%99s%20good%2C%20evil%2C%20vanilla%20...%20all%20things%20in%20what%20we%20humans%20call%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdebeffcc75c83d53d96dd02434cb3b677a83e1e6%2F0_0_1548_1817%2F1548.jpg>
 Untitled self portrait by Myuran Sukumaran, 2015. Photograph: Mim Stirling 
For White, who has worked with more than 25 San Quentin inmates since 2015, 
art and self-expression is a basic human right that provides dignity to the 
condemned. These men are human – often showing “extraordinary talent” – not 
monsters, she says. Art can act as a powerful political weapon by putting a 
face and story to these lives.

White quoted Sister Helen Prejean, a Louisiana-based campaigner for death row 
prisoners and the families of murder victims, and an advocate for the abolition 
of the death penalty. “When she met a death row prisoner she had been writing 
to for the first time, [she] said, ‘When I saw his face, it was so human, it 
blew me away. I got a realisation then, no matter what he had done … he is 
worth more than the worst thing he ever did’.”

For many, art has provided a form of personal rehabilitation. Quilty points to 
Sukumaran, and his journey from drug-runner to sensitive and self-knowing 
artist. White cites former Crips gang member Steve Champion, who has been on 
death row since 1982, age 18; he is now a self-educated author.

Why should these men – convicted of the worst crimes – be provided a public 
platform for creativity? What of their victims, and their victims’ families, 
and their rights in this?

In some cases, Robin Paris explains, their guilt itself is in question; she 
cites a spate of recent death row exonerations –including that of Ndume 
Olatushani <http://www.windowsondeathrow.com/ndume-olatushani/>, “a man who was 
on death row for 22 years, was exonerated, and says that painting and art 
literally saved his life. He now leads a full and powerful life outside of 
prison.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc16bc788f5e0fb1c03c831e5718f920b359e8b88%2F0_0_1240_951%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20on%20death%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98it%E2%80%99s%20good%2C%20evil%2C%20vanilla%20...%20all%20things%20in%20what%20we%20humans%20call%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20on%20death%20row%3A%20%E2%80%98it%E2%80%99s%20good%2C%20evil%2C%20vanilla%20...%20all%20things%20in%20what%20we%20humans%20call%20life%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fart-on-death-row-its-good-evil-vanilla-all-things-in-what-we-humans-call-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc16bc788f5e0fb1c03c831e5718f920b359e8b88%2F0_0_1240_951%2F1240.jpg>
 American Car by Keith Loker, an inmate on death row at San Quentin. The 
artist’s work has been collected, alongside others, as part of the ArtReach art 
project run by advocate Nicola White. Photograph: Keith Loker 
But even for those whose guilt is beyond question, their advocates believe it 
is important to highlight the issue of how race and class twist legal outcomes: 
those on death row are overwhelmingly poor and of minority background. As Paris 
says, “there are no rich people, to my knowledge, on death row.”

A majority of death row inmates also come from backgrounds of terrible 
childhood abuse and deprivation. What would their lives have been like if they 
had been offered the chance to be creative, to express themselves through art, 
to have an education, asks Quilty, who believes art therapy should have a much 
bigger role in the “dehumanising” Australian prison system.

Sydney festival to exhibit paintings by Myuran Sukumaran of Bali Nine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/sydney-festival-to-exhibit-paintings-by-myuran-sukumaran-of-bali-nine>
“We have seen these changes in them,” says Paris. “The question I keep asking 
is why can’t that happen earlier, in school, in our communities? The meaning 
and insight these men have made come with the opportunities that a good, 
working social and educational system would provide. It wasn’t there for them.”

Quilty hopes the show will help change minds about the death penalty. “Myuran 
was very aware that there was an end point to his creative output and that end 
point is a profound metaphor for how stupid and violent and evil execution is.”

• Myuran Sukumaran: Another Day in Paradise 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2017/myuran> is on show at Campbelltown Arts 
Centre until 26 March; ArtReach have four upcomingSan Quentin death row art 
<http://www.artofsanquentin.com> shows in the UK, from March; Windows on Death 
Row <http://www.windowsondeathrow.com/> is on view at Ohio State University 
until 19 March, 2017
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fben-quilty-on-myuran-sukumarans-exhibition-of-portraits-from-death-row-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Quilty%20on%20Myuran%20Sukumaran's%20exhibition%20of%20portraits%20from%20death%20row%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fben-quilty-on-myuran-sukumarans-exhibition-of-portraits-from-death-row-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Quilty%20on%20Myuran%20Sukumaran%27s%20exhibition%20of%20portraits%20from%20death%20row%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fben-quilty-on-myuran-sukumarans-exhibition-of-portraits-from-death-row-video&media=>
Ben Quilty on Myuran Sukumaran’s exhibition of portraits from death row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2017/jan/11/ben-quilty-on-myuran-sukumarans-exhibition-of-portraits-from-death-row-video> 