
The French-American art dynasty scion Guy Wildenstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/04/wildenstein-art-dealing-dynasty-tax-trial-lift-lid>
 has been cleared of hiding paintings and properties worth hundreds of millions 
of euros from the French authorities after one of the biggest tax fraud trials 
ever held in the country.

State prosecutors had wanted the 71-year-old to be sentenced to two years in 
prison and given a €250m (£217m) fine over what they called “the longest and 
most sophisticated” tax fraud scheme in modern-dayFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>. But judges in Paris cleared him and 
seven other defendants of all charges.

The presiding judge, Olivier Geron, said there was a “clear attempt” by 
Wildenstein and the other defendants to hide assets but that shortcomings in 
the investigation and in French legislation on tax fraud made it impossible to 
return a guilty verdict. Both the “powerful and the poor” had an equal right to 
justice, Geron said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fguy-wildenstein-art-dynasty-cleared-tax-fraud-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e2b029cb620e8f17d4d7ad2969dc1125637d995%2F94_58_1851_2312%2F1851.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20dynasty%20heir%20Guy%20Wildenstein%20cleared%20of%20%E2%82%AC550m%20French%20tax%20fraud&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fguy-wildenstein-art-dynasty-cleared-tax-fraud-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20dynasty%20heir%20Guy%20Wildenstein%20cleared%20of%20%E2%82%AC550m%20French%20tax%20fraud&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fguy-wildenstein-art-dynasty-cleared-tax-fraud-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e2b029cb620e8f17d4d7ad2969dc1125637d995%2F94_58_1851_2312%2F1851.jpg>
 Jocelyn Wildenstein, née Perisse, became known by the unflattering nickname 
‘Bride of Wildenstein’ due to the effects of her cosmetic surgery. Photograph: 
Jamie McCarthy/WireImage 
The celebrated Wildenstein art clan – known in the French art world as simply 
“les W” – is as famous for its family feuds and eccentricities as its huge 
collection of old masters. The much-mocked cosmetic surgery of a former 
sister-in-law of Guy Wildenstein led to her becoming the face of the family’s 
excesses.

 Prosecutors accused the family, whose art business was founded in Paris in 
the late 19th century, of using a web of opaque trusts and tax havens to avoid 
paying about €550m in tax.

Guy Wildenstein’s co-defendants were his nephew Alec Jr, his estranged Russian 
sister-in-law Liouba Stoupakova, a notary, two lawyers and two offshore trusts. 
The case would probably never have seen the light of day had various 
Wildenstein widows and former wives, feeling shortchanged, not lifted the lid 
on the clan’s business dealings.


French tax authorities accused the defendants of grossly undervaluing the 
Wildenstein estate to minimise inheritance taxes. Described as the “trial of 
the missing millions”, the case raised questions about the system of financial 
management and opaque offshore trusts used by France’s wealthiest people.

The list of assets discussed in the case was eye-watering, and included the 
family’s 30,000-hectare private compound and wildlife sanctuary in Kenya, where 
parts of the film Out of Africa were shot, to racehorses, stables, a New York 
apartment, dozens of paintings and a Gulfstream jet.

 The authorities allege that following the death of their father, Daniel, in 
2001, Guy and his brother Alec, who died in 2008, began transferring assets out 
of France.

Guy Wildenstein is the heir of three generations of art dealers and racehorse 
breeders. His great-grandfather Nathan Wildenstein was an Alsace cloth merchant 
who amassed a large art collection that was passed to his son Georges, a patron 
of Pablo Picasso, Salvador Dalí and Max Ernst.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fguy-wildenstein-art-dynasty-cleared-tax-fraud-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F537072d80c02c49caac4a4fc95620d2c214f2d49%2F0_0_1979_1979%2F1979.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Art%20dynasty%20heir%20Guy%20Wildenstein%20cleared%20of%20%E2%82%AC550m%20French%20tax%20fraud&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fguy-wildenstein-art-dynasty-cleared-tax-fraud-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Art%20dynasty%20heir%20Guy%20Wildenstein%20cleared%20of%20%E2%82%AC550m%20French%20tax%20fraud&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fguy-wildenstein-art-dynasty-cleared-tax-fraud-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F537072d80c02c49caac4a4fc95620d2c214f2d49%2F0_0_1979_1979%2F1979.jpg>
 Alec Wildenstein pictured in 2004. He died in 2008. Photograph: Simon 
Roberts/Rex Features 
When Nazi Germany invaded France, Georges fled to the US. His son Daniel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/oct/26/guardianobituaries.arts> expanded 
the family’s art collection to make it one of the biggest in private hands 
anywhere in the world, encompassing Renoir, Caravaggio, El Greco and Monet, and 
cementing his own reputation as an art dealer, collector and historian.

Such was the family’s wealth that Daniel’s second wife, Sylvia, once described 
to lawyers <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/jun/12/france.arts> how her 
thankful husband once bought an island in the West Indies because it had 
provided shelter to their yacht in a storm.

 But the family’s personal battles were to tear them apart. After Daniel’s 
death at the age of 84, Sylvia accused her stepsons of tricking her out of her 
inheritance by claiming their father died broke. “I knew something was wrong 
when they took away my horses,” she told a French magazine. Sylviabattled for 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/may/15/jocelyne-wildenstein-inheritance-battle>
 to hunt down the missing “treasure”, including several paintings by old 
masters.

 Sylvia, who died in 2010, likened the long-running family battle to the US 
soap opera Dallas. But it was through the efforts of several other women 
aggrieved at their treatment by the Wildensteins that lifted the veil of 
secrecy over the family fortune. Daniel’s late son Alec was a fixture on 
France’s society pages during his messy divorce from the Swiss socialite 
Jocelyn Perisse. She was given the unflattering nickname “Bride of Wildenstein” 
due to the effects of her extensive cosmetic surgery, which her ex-husband 
reportedly said was intended to make her face look more feline.

 Guy Wildenstein, a close friend of the former French president Nicolas Sarkozy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nicolas-sarkozy>, claimed during the trial 
that he was mystified by the labyrinthine tax schemes put in place by Alec and 
his father. He also argued that there was no legal obligation to report his 
trust-held assets following his father’s death.
 