
ALEXIS 

Arthur Russell’s music is alive with invention, playfulness, spontaneity, and 
what we often call “soul”. He made music that defies categorisation and I think 
that is because, unlike a lot of musicians, he was not hemmed in by notions of 
genre; something that is useful only in helping to sell music, not to make it 
or listen to it. He was led by whatever style or styles he found fascinating 
and he explored those with the vigour and interest of a child at play.

Somewhere along the way, he became a pioneer within early house and disco, 
having started out somewhere more strummy and songwritery, before passing 
through the world of modern composition and improvised music. If you were to 
hear his pieces for electric cello you would likely not recognise them as the 
work of the same man who made underground club music. But they are each 
fantastic periods in their own right. Our Last Night Together (a bonus track on 
the reissue of 86’s World Of Echo) and Go Bang! (released under his avant-disco 
alias Dinosaur L) are some of the most moving yet brave and experimental pieces 
of music you will ever hear.

Arthur died of Aids-related illnesses in 1992 and a lot of the music we hear 
by him now seems to have only been “finished” or mixed posthumously. As far as 
I can tell, he was constantly revising and revisiting his music and auditioning 
it privately on his Walkman or publicly in nightclubs; he moved so quickly that 
each piece could be radically reimagined by him any time he worked on it. What 
we hear now is often only a rough mix of an exciting work in progress. Arthur 
is not dissimilar toDavid Hockney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/hockney>, Miles Davis, Picasso or 
Prince in his restlessness and ability to master whatever he chose to turn his 
hand to. If that sounds too much, maybe just listen to his records. I think 
you’ll love them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPjzsnNkL-7o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPjzsnNkL-7o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPjzsnNkL-7o&media=>
DEVENDRA 

Arthur Russell had a beguiling, mellifluous, totally unique voice. His music 
was incredibly complex but streamlined, with seemingly simple but remarkably 
profound lyrics; it was always sophisticated yet accessible with intensely 
moving melodies, and there was a tremendous variety in the scope of musical 
genres he explored. The minute you hear him you haven’t heard him; there is no 
definitive Arthur, or at least not one that can be immediately identified.

We’re talking about the man who booked proto-punkers the Modern Lovers to play 
at artsy Manhattan venue The Kitchen (to the chagrin of the so-called avant 
garde!) while composing country-folk ballads, before heading down to the studio 
to write radically innovative underground disco hits while marrying electronic 
music with solo cello Tibetan sutras in an outfit that makes no sense because 
it’s what people started wearing 20 years later. So much can be traced back to 
Arthur. People need to know.

Red Hot + Arthur Russell featuring covers of his songs by Alexis and Devendra 
among many othersis out now on YepRoc



 