
Disco. Opera. Minimalism. Solo meditations for voice and cello. Collaborations 
withAllen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/23/allen-ginsberg-howl-poem-film> 
on Indian-influenced meditations.Arthur Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/17/arthur-russell-alexis-taylor-devandra-banhart>
 was a musician whose output spanned a huge and bewildering range of styles. 
But, whatever music he approached, it was always idiosyncratic and always had a 
personal stamp; it was this experimentation with genres and blending of musical 
and cultural hierarchies that defined his approach. As creative director of New 
York’s downtown performing arts space the Kitchen, his innovations helped to 
reshape today’s music world and bridge the gaps between the concert hall and 
pop music. He was one of the first people to book performances ofSteve Reich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/03/steve-reich-80-birthday-best-works-pieces>
 andJohn Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/aug/13/john-cage-contemporary-music-guide>
, juxtaposing them with David Byrne’s new-wave experiments. His approach to 
both music-making and curation helped to dissolve barriers and open up new 
creative spaces.

Success eluded him during his lifetime (born in 1951, he died of an 
Aids-related illness in 1992), and it’s only with the advent of the internet 
and the breakdown of the boundaries that Russell’s work played with that his 
music has found a wider audience.


Russell released only two full-length records and a handful of well respected 
disco EPs while he was alive. But he left behind more than 1,000 tapes of 
unreleased work – he had a chronic inability to mark anything as finished. 
Since his death, archival label Audika Records (set up by Russell’s former 
partner Tom Lee) has released several compilations of his work and a 2008 
documentary,Wild Combination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/26/popandrock5>.

It was around the time of the documentary’s release that I came to know his 
music. I was particularly interested in his 1986 album World of Echo and the 
way he created space within songs through his use of echo, distortion and 
phaser when applied directly to his cello. It enabled him to extend the 
possibilities of the instrument and create a huge sense of space while 
retaining its intimacy and nuance. I was amazed by the array of tones he could 
produce from his instrument and the way in which his playing interacted with 
his effects. At points, it sounds like a tabla, at others, like a wall of 
distorted metal guitars. And he was able to achieve all this while retaining 
each track’s rhythmic and melodic shape.His aim was to “redefine songs” 
<http://thequietus.com/articles/03425-review-excerpt-hold-on-to-your-dreams-arthur-russell-and-the-downtown-music-scene-1973-1992-by-tim-lawrence>
, he wrote, “from the point of view of instrumental music, in the hope of 
liquefying a raw material where concert music and popular song can criss-cross”.

His instrumentals almost do the inverse. They contain some of the tropes and 
forms of pop and folk music but are situated in the context of minimalist 
music, which was fast becoming part of the accepted classical repertoire in the 
60s and 70s.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds1NQtwWN88U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds1NQtwWN88U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds1NQtwWN88U&media=>
There is some striking footage of him performing work from World of Echo shot 
by Phil Niblock on YouTube. It would have been just after his HIV-positive 
diagnosis. There is a beautiful sense of space and decay to the music he made 
around this time. As his friend and collaborator Ernie Brooks says in Wild 
Combination: “His gifts were increasing as his strength was leaving him.”

On 14 January, the London Contemporary Orchestra 
<http://www.lcorchestra.co.uk/> along with two of Russell’s original 
collaborators Peter Zummo and Bill Ruyle, bring his only other finished album, 
the instrumental Tower of Meaning,to Kings Place 
<http://www.lcorchestra.co.uk/upcoming-events/>, London, for its UK premiere. 
Originally written as music for a production of Euripides’s Medea by Robert 
Wilson in the 1980s, it was rejected owing to artistic differences between the 
two, but rerecorded for a release on Phillip Glass’s label Chatham Square in 
1983. It’s based more on his avantgarde classical studies (he studied figures 
such asLa Monte Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/30/la-monte-young-dia-chelsea-exhibit>
 and John Cage, as well as Indian classical music) than his other instrumentals 
are and is beautiful in its meditative effect.

A wide range of musicians have noted Russell’s influence on their work, from 
Hot Chip to Philip Glass. Even Kanye Westsampled him on 2016’s Life of Pablo 
<https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=QRI0ZJ4k5w4>. He’s influenced my band the 
Portico Quartet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2012/apr/19/portico-quartet-line-rubidium-video>
, too – in particular his manipulation of acoustic instruments. I try to 
incorporate that into the music I write; I try to find ways of extending 
instruments beyond their natural sounds without sacrificing the intimacy and 
nuance of playing live. We also found ways of altering the saxophone to imitate 
a trumpet, and to create large spaces through echo and multiple lines with loop 
stations. You can hear that inRubidium 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fnxZEwoMA_k>, and also in my recent 
collaborative work withSzun Waves <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-Jp0caEjmQ>.

Last year, a concert of Russell’s instrumental work sold out almost 
immediately and the venue size had to be increased – twice over. There is still 
a large amount of work that could be released. His legacy and audience is bound 
to continue to grow year by year, and deservedly so.

 * Bill Ruyle, Peter Zummo and the London Contemporary Orchestra will perform 
the UK premiere of Arthur Russell’s Tower of Meaning atKing’s Place 
<http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/whats-on/music/bill-ruyle-peter-zummo-london-contemporary-orchestra-arthur-russell-s-tower-of-meanin#.WHdt1DaLRdD>
, London, on 14 and 15 January. Box office: 020-7520 1490.
 