
The use of the government’s royal prerogative for executive actions, such as 
triggering Brexit, is not an ancient relic of outdated laws but a crucial part 
of the modern state’s powers, the attorney general has told the supreme court.

Brexit: article 50 supreme court hearing – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/05/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-live-updates>
Opening the argument on behalf of the Department for Exiting the European Union
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> in the pivotal constitutional case, 
Jeremy Wright QC said the EU referendum had been conducted “with the universal 
expectation that the government would implement the result”.

The high court – which last month declared that only parliament had the 
authority to initiate Brexit – had been wrong to dismiss the way the referendum 
was organised as “legally irrelevant”, the attorney general said. The result of 
the 23 June vote was 52% to 48% in favour of leaving the EU.


“The use of prerogative in foreign affairs is not an ancient relic but a … 
fundamental pillar of our constitutional state,” Wright said. “The need [for 
governments] to maintain control of strategy and policy matters is clear and 
compelling.” Parliament is sovereign, Wright added, but it had chosen to limit 
the government’s prerogative powers “sparingly, conscious of the need for 
executive powers”.

 At issue is whether the government, through its executive powers, or 
parliament, because it originally passed the European Communities Act 1972, can 
triggerarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/article-50-brexit-debate-britain-eu>
 of the treaty onEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, which 
formally begins the UK’s departure from the EU.

The four-day hearing in front of 11 justices of the UK’s highest court has 
provoked fierce attacks on the judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/attacks-brexit-judges-bad-democracy-law-lord-hope-article-50>
 who have to decide the politically sensitive dispute. The courtroom argument 
is straining the UK’s unwritten constitution, as rival lawyers stress different 
interpretations of legal precedents.

Most of the morning’s legal exchanges revolved around the nature of the royal 
prerogative, the executive powers inherited by the government from the crown, 
and how parliament had legislated to restrict such executive freedom in the 
past.
Fact box 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=2f00ae48-ade6-4d35-ace1-1024cc0ac8d8>
The Constitutional and Reform of Government Act 2010 introduced a series of 
controls on ratification of treaties “but it did not seek to control the 
prerogative powers [of the government] to make it withdraw from treaties”, 
Wright told the packed supreme court.

Parliament had been “fully and consciously” involved in drawing up the 
referendum legislation, the attorney general said. “Parliament expected the 
government to act on the answer the people gave.

“In this case, the imposition of a legislative pre-condition by the courts 
which parliament did not choose to impose cannot be supportive of parliamentary 
sovereignty,” Wright said.

James Eadie QC, who developed the government’s arguments after Wright’s 
opening submission, said powers to make war and peace had long been part of the 
government’s executive powers. “Governments can take steps without further 
parliamentary legislation including by removing [individuals’] rights,” he said.

The rights of UK citizens are frequently affected not only by the government’s 
international dealings but by other sovereign states making decisions. 
Greenland’s departure from the EU took away rights of UK citizens in relation 
to that country, Eadie pointed out.

He added: “The starting point is the expectation from parliament and the 
courts to require clarity before prerogative powers are removed … It’s no small 
thing to alter the constitutional balance by limiting longstanding powers.”

But the supreme court justice Lord Sumption intervened to point out that where 
statutory instruments are normally replaced by parliamentary legislation, 
prerogative powers are often removed only by implication.

 Eadie said parliament had already intervened in the areas of treaties and 
decided – in the 2010 Constitutional Reform and Governance Act – what 
prerogatives should exist.

But referring to the way in which the UK entered what was then the European 
Economic Community, both Lord Neuberger and Lord Wilson pointed out that 
parliament and the government had worked together in 1972.

“If entry was the result of a joint effort, should our departure [from the EU] 
also not be so,” Wilson inquired.

Neuberger said: “Parliament did its bit in passing the 1972 act. It was very 
much a joint affair. Whereas on [the government’s] argument, our withdrawal 
will not be a joint effort.”

The European Union (Amendment) Act 2008 was a review of parliamentary powers 
over relations with the EU, Eadie said. It even mentioned article 50 in its 
introductory notes but, Eadie continued, “parliament’s intention was to leave 
article 50 well alone. Parliament chose not to extend its explicit powers to 
include withdrawal from the EU.”

Turning to the 2015 legislation that authorised the EU referendum, Eadie 
acknowledged it did not explicitly explain how the result should be put into 
effect.

But that did not mean the act was, as the high court ruled, “legally 
irrelevant”, he said. It implied that the royal prerogative should be used to 
implement withdrawal.

“Was parliament in 2015 really in setting up the referendum doing nothing more 
than simply reserving to itself the right to leave the EU?” he asked. “Not 
merely is it highly improbable, but that would run counter to the repeated 
statements of ministers and the government.”

In his opening remarks, the president of the supreme court said none of the 
parties involved in the case had asked any of the 11 justices to stand down 
before the hearing.

Neuberger’s comments, made after fiercely critical coverage from pro-Brexit 
newspapers, reflects the court’s determination to assert its impartiality in 
the proceedings.

“It is right to record that, at the direction of the court, the registrar has 
asked all the parties involved in these proceedings whether they wish to ask 
any of the justices to stand down,” he explained. “Without exception, all 
parties to the appeal have stated that they have no objection to any of us 
sitting on this appeal.”

He also reminded the media that the names of some of the former claimants and 
their families should not be identified because of online abuse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbrexit-supreme-court-article-50-appeal-case-opens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5937757c485b6846263ddb4866cc259749b0f2db%2F0_66_5602_3361%2F5602.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Article%2050%20appeal%3A%20royal%20prerogative%20is%20crucial%2C%20attorney%20general%20tells%20court&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbrexit-supreme-court-article-50-appeal-case-opens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Article%2050%20appeal%3A%20royal%20prerogative%20is%20crucial%2C%20attorney%20general%20tells%20court&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fbrexit-supreme-court-article-50-appeal-case-opens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5937757c485b6846263ddb4866cc259749b0f2db%2F0_66_5602_3361%2F5602.jpg>
 Remain campaigners outside the court in London. Photograph: Guy 
Bell/Rex/Shutterstock 
“We have made this order largely because various individuals have received 
threats of serious violence and unpleasant abuse in emails and other electronic 
communications,” Neuberger said.

“Threatening and abusing people because they are exercising their fundamental 
right to go to court undermines the rule of law. Anyone who communicates such 
threats or abuse should be aware that there are legal powers designed to ensure 
that access to the courts is available to everyone.”

There are so many lawyers, journalists and members of the public in court that 
some of the barristers and solicitors taking part have had to sit in 
neighbouring courts, watching the hearing by live video link.

A handful of demonstrators gathered outside the court, some carrying union 
flags, as the dense legal argument probing the significance of past cases 
continued. Scores of police officers were on patrol outside the court in 
Parliament Square. There was no sign of any trouble.
 