
Artisanal charcoal will become the first legal Cuban export to the United 
States in decades under a deal betweenCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba>’s government and the former lawyer for 
imprisoned US government contractor Alan Gross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/27/former-cuba-prisoner-alan-gross-torture>
.

Attorney Scott Gilbert, who has sought to build economic ties between the two 
countries since Gross’s release, said a company that he founded will buy 40 
tons of charcoal made from the invasive woody plant marabu. The charcoal is 
produced by hundreds of worker-owned cooperatives acrossCuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> and has become an increasingly 
profitable export, valued for its clean-burning properties and often used in 
pizza and bread ovens.

Gilbert’s company will pay $420 a ton, which is significantly above the 
wholesale market price of about $360. The first delivery is scheduled for 18 
January, two days before the inauguration of Donald Trump as US president.

Products of privately run or cooperative farms in Cuba can be exported to the 
US under measures introduced by Barack Obama after the 17 December 2014, 
declaration of detente with Cuba. The measures loosen a 55-year-old trade 
embargo on Cuba.

The charcoal is sold by cooperatives to a local packager, which sells it on to 
state-run export firm CubaExport. Each middleman takes a 1% or 2% commission, 
CubaExport general director Isabel O’Reilly said. CubaExport said the charcoal 
would be the first legal export to the US in more than five decades, and it 
hoped to expand the deal to include honey and coffee.

Cuba offers to pay off debt to Czech Republic in rum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/cuba-pay-debt-czech-republic-rum>
The charcoal will be sold to restaurants and online to consumers in 33lb bags 
under the brand name Fogo, Gilbert said.

Cuba sells about 40,000-80,000 tons of marabu charcoal annually to buyers in 
Italy, Germany and about a half dozen other countries, O’Reilly said.

Gilbert said he was confident the Trump administration would allow the deal to 
continue, even though the president-elect has promised to reverse much of 
Obama’s opening with Cuba unless the island’s communist government makes 
political concessions.

“I think that once they have examined this situation and looked at all the 
facts, that they will be supportive of increased engagement and the economic 
changes that it will bring,” Gilbert said.

Under Obama’s changes, American visitors to Cuba can return with unlimited rum 
and cigars, but state-run companies cannot export those products to the US.
 