
In an era of rapid urbanisation, single-person households and a generational 
shift away from private car ownership, theworld’s largest car manufacturer last 
year, Toyota <http://www.forbes.com/pictures/eimi45eilh/no-1-toyota-motor/>, 
says it is redefining its core mission from making and selling cars to bridging 
small transport gaps in urban areas.

As Toyota <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> sees it, the future of 
cars for city drivers – particularly in the US – lies in covering the short 
distances between bus or subway stop and home. And so it wants to rebrand 
itself as a public transport provider, not merely a vehicle manufacturer.

In a strategy that could expand commuting options for city dwellers, the 
company is developing a number of new vehicles aimed specifically at 
car-sharing in mid-size urban environments.


“We are about mobility,” Jim Lentz, chief-executive of Toyota North America, 
told the Guardian. “We still are about making cars and trucks but other forms 
of mobility as well – not limiting ourselves to just thinking about traditional 
passenger cars, SUVs and trucks.”


The rethink has been foisted on car companies by rising rates of urbanisation 
and changes in consumer behaviour. America’s big cities are in the midst of a 
boom, and single-person households now account for a rising share of the US 
urban population (up to 45% in cities such as Washington DC and Atlanta). Such 
residents are not necessarily in the market for big, people-moving vehicles, 
while youngermillennials are also proving averse to outright car ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/11/detroit-motor-show-car-culture>
.

“I think the number of cars per household over time will drop,” Lentz said. 
“It may be that they don’t have two or three cars. It may be that they have one 
or two cars.”

I think it's inevitable we will have to spend more time on mass transit, so we 
might as well be part of the solution
Jim Lentz Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVdFXS8UExhw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVdFXS8UExhw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVdFXS8UExhw&media=>
 Toyota has experimented with a vehicle-sharing fleet of i-ROADs 
In European cities, planners are actively hastening an age when people get 
around by public transport, and shared bicycle and car fleets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
. But Lentz said this still leaves a niche for Toyota in what the company is 
calling “the last mile”: the relatively short distance between home and office 
and local public transit systems. Getting around by public transport is not as 
easy in the US as in European cities – and that is where Toyota sees new room 
to manoeuvre, Lentz said.

“How people get from their residence to public transportation and from public 
transportation to the place of work”, he said in an interview on the sidelines 
of last month’sAspen Ideas festival 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/live/events/aspen-ideas-festival/2015/>. “In many 
US cities, while there may be public transportation it probably is not quite as 
convenient as it is in other cities. Someone may be a mile or so away from 
where they need to go.”

End of the car age: how cities are outgrowing the automobile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
The company is testing a number of all-electric vehicles to fill that gap. In 
Grenoble, Toyota has experimented with a vehicle-sharing service of the 
three-wheeled i-ROAD, which looks like a cross between a motorcycle and a Smart 
car. It hopes to test the i-ROAD in an American city in 2016, Lentz said. But 
he admitted it was years away from deployment – if ever.

“We hope it will encourage people to use public transport in cities to help 
reduce overall congestion,” Lentz said. “I think it is inevitable that we are 
going to have to be spending more time on mass transit so we might as well be 
part of the solution.”

Not that Americans have completely forsaken their love for the big gas 
guzzler, especially for those with long commutes. The country’stop-sellers last 
year 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/06/business/us-auto-sales-jump-for-2014.html> 
remained SUVs and large trucks. But there is also a significant and growing 
number of peopleready to opt out entirely of the hassles of car ownership 
<http://wagner.nyu.edu/files/rudincenter/NYU-BMWi-Project_Urban_Mobility_Report_November_2012.pdf>
, including traffic and parking. As manufacturers well know, younger 
generations may never again prove as keen on car ownership as the “golden era” 
of post-war baby boomers.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 