
What do you call a band whose members have worked with Joe Meek and Jerry Lee 
Lewis, who've beensampled by Eminem 
<http://www.theimportanceofbeingtrivial.com/how-chas-and-dave-ended-up-on-an-eminem-song.html>
 and hailed by the Libertines, who've beenparodied by the Two Ronnies 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jxCrSgPWmsk> and had their own TV show? Chas 
and Dave <http://www.chasndave.net>, that's what. The kings of "rockney" 
returned last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/26/chas-and-dave-reunite-new-album> 
with a new album,That's What Happens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/24/chas-and-dave-thats-what-review>
, featuring guest appearances from Hugh Laurie and Jools Holland, and on 25 
April they willheadline at the Royal Albert Hall 
<http://life.royalalberthall.com/2013/10/23/chas-dave-to-return-for-a-knees-up-at-the-hall/>
.

Let's not beat around the bush: lots of people think Chas and Dave are a 
novelty act. That's a notion they dispute. "I always judge people on if they've 
been good, and we've always been good, even if we've done a funny song,"Chas 
Hodges told me last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/26/chas-and-dave-interview>.

"I remember reading a write-up in the Independent once, and it said: 'If Chas 
and Dave <https://www.theguardian.com/music/chas-and-dave> had been doing 
colleges instead of Crackerjack, they'd be right up there with Madness and Ian 
Dury," Dave Peacock added. "He might have a point."

There's no disputing the pair's rich musical history: they've been part of 
British pop sincethe days of Joe Meek 
<http://joemeekdoc.com/cast-member/chas-hodges/>, in the early 1960s. Chas and 
Dave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2013/oct/30/chas-dave-when-two-worlds-collide-aint-no-pleasing-you-live-session-video>
 joined us live on Tuesday 1 April to answer your questions on everything from 
keeping rabbits to entertaining metallers, and the relative allure of Margate 
and Southend.

Here are some of the highlights:

GlenPonder: What reaction are you -expecting from 50,000 cidered-up metallers 
when you share a stage with Slayer at Sonisphere this summer?

Dave: We've done similar shows before, so things should be good. Thirty-five 
years ago, we played with Led Zep on the Knebworth bill and we went down great. 
We also play the Rebellion Punk festival regularly and that's a stormer. In 
fact, this summer we're playing a folk, a metal and a country festival. Our 
music adapts to them all.

bltp: On a nice piece of grilled gammon, do you prefer fried egg or pineapple?

Chas: I like a couple of licorice pipes.

Steve196450: Who would you still like to work with?

Dave: Allan Toussaint and Ry Cooder. Joe Henry, who produced our new album, 
worked with Toussaint recently. We love that New Orleans sound – and were 
knocked out to be able to record with Clarence "Frogman" Henry back in the 80s. 
He even -covered a couple of our songs.

ShermanMLight: Do you listen to any modern bands?

Dave: I heard the Lumineers track Hey Ho and bought their album. And I saw 
Paolo Nutini do Pencil Full of Lead on Jools Holland. He set the studio alight.

shevadnadze: How did Gertcha originate?

Chas: It was the in-word in 1979 [meaning "Get out of it!"]. So me and Dave 
wrote a song about it – an informative song about different situations that 
would prompt our grand-daddies to say: "GERTCHA!"

llamalpaca: Assuming Tim Sherwood goes in the summer, who would be your choice 
for new Spurs manager??

Dave: Glenn Hoddle, I s'pose.

tc2011: Do you have any good memories of Colin Smythe when he worked with you? 
He was my uncle, but I never knew him too well.

Dave: We loved Colin. He worked for our label when we did the first Spurs 
song. He had to coordinate its release, which he did very well – despite being 
a big Arsenal fan. He once gave us a lift in his flash new car that had knobs 
all over the dashboard. We spent the whole journey asking if he'd nicked them 
off a gas stove.

ellatynemouth: Are there creatures living in your beards?

Chas: I've got a white rat and a black widow spider. Dunno about Dave's.

artmod: Do you think Adele should sing in her own accent like you do?

Dave: She seems to be doing all right as it is.

timebombtaylor: Isn't it about time you were given the lifetime achievement 
award at the Brits?

Dave: Thank you, but awards aren't -important to us. I'm not so sure Benny 
Goodman or Django ever won one. But if the Brits did invite us on to play, we'd 
give them something up-tempo!

budden1: What's your favourite punk song?

Chas: Jilted John by Jilted John.

Maruf Tonmoy: Why wear a fedora when we live in a world where you can choose 
not to wear a fedora?

Chas: For the same reason we wear trousers.

MrJelly: Just for clarification, which one of you is snooker loopy nuts?

Chas: Neither of us really.

avenue31: What's happened to Chalky, your drummer?

Chas: Who the fuck's Chalky?

FishKid: Over the span of your career, do you think London has changed for the 
better or worse?

Dave: There used to be a lot more live music venues and pubs to play.

Chas: Everything changes all the time – we are built to remember the good 
things and forget the bad.

TheHuxCapacitor: How many takes of the Rabbit chorus vocal did you have to do 
to get that bouncing sound?

Dave: We had a 15-minute practice then got it in a couple of takes. 

stuckinazoo: Do you keep rabbits? 

Dave: Nope. 

Scroll down to read more of Chas and Dave's answers to your questions.

• Chas & Dave perform When Two Worlds Collide / Ain't No Pleasing You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2013/oct/30/chas-dave-when-two-worlds-collide-aint-no-pleasing-you-live-session-video>
 