
In 1935, the Italian air force launched chemical attacks on Ethiopian villages 
in the second act of a 40-year campaign to establish their Africa Orientale 
Italiana (Italian East Africa). The nightmarish vision of modern flying 
machines delivering death from the skies was a futurist’s dream – the perfect 
marriage of modernity and war, inseparable bedfellows and defining experiences 
of the 20th century. ForAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, 
encounters with modernity were particularly brutal but, amid the destruction 
they caused, there were remarkable examples of construction.

One of the most surprising legacies of this campaign was Asmara, the jewel in 
Italy’s former imperial crown and today the capital ofEritrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea>, Ethiopia’s northern neighbour. The 
Italians arrived in Asmara in 1889, but Mussolini’s invasion of Ethiopia in 
1935 transformed the sleepy colonial town into Africa’s most modern metropolis. 
Overnight, the skeletal form of a modern and brilliant urban plan, conceived in 
the 1910s by a particularly enlightened Italian architect-engineer Odoardo 
Cavagnari, was lavishly clothed in modernist architecture.

Sitting on its mountain perch 2,500 metres above the Red Sea, Asmara is an 
unlikely setting for a modernist urban idyll. Unlike other North African 
colonial cities appended to older urban settlements – Casablanca, Rabat, 
Mogadishu, Benghazi, and Tripoli – the Italians planned Eritrea’s modern 
settlements largely from scratch. Modern urban planning was liberally applied 
in Eritrea – for example, in Agordat, Assab, Dekemhare, Keren, and Mendefera – 
but the simultaneous experience of Italy’s conquest of Ethiopia and modernism’s 
global pre-war climax is what makes Asmara so special.
 Giuseppe Pettazzi’s original concept drawing. Photograph: Asmara Heritage 
Project 
From 1935 until the allied defeat of Italy in 1941 (the allies’ first 
significant victory of the second world war), hundreds of buildings were 
designed by Italian architects and constructed by Eritreans in a variety of 
styles from modernism’s broad palette, including novecento, rationalism and 
futurism. Far from home, the imagination of Italian architects in Eritrea could 
run a little wild. The result was a startling collection of sumptuous cinemas, 
fantastical factories, stylish shops, beautiful bars and restaurants, plush 
hotels and abundant residences. Even government buildings exuded style. While 
Asmara’s renowned architectural character was derived largely from the 
geometric simplicity and aesthetic purity of rationalism (a specifically 
Italian brand of modernism), the city’s most remarkable structure, the Fiat 
Tagliero service station, is an unashamed tribute to futurism, an Italian 
artistic movement that had comparatively little architectural exposure.

Futurism’s founding father, the Italian poet and theorist Filippo Tommaso 
Marinetti, rejected the past and idolised speed, technology and war. Embodying 
these qualities in a colonial context, Fiat Tagliero was a monument to the 
aeroplane and a concrete reminder of the often-bitter universal experiences of 
the 20th century that shaped so many cities around the world. With its 
breathtaking 30-metre cantilevered wings, cockpit body and sleek wrap-around 
windows, Fiat Tagliero suits its surreal surroundings high above the clouds. 
Completed in 1938, the building was designed by Giuseppe Pettazzi months after 
Italian aeroplanes dispensed thousands of sulphur mustard shells and the 
asphyxiate diphenylchloroarsine (nicknamed mask-breaker by German troops in the 
first world war for its agonising effectiveness) killing tens of thousands of 
innocent Ethiopian civilians. These modern machines were even fitted with 
special vaporisers to enhance the chemicals’ dispersal. Protests to the League 
of Nations by Ethiopia’s Emperor Haile Selassie fell on deaf ears.

Futurism’s technologically inspired nihilism excited Italy’s fascists as much 
as Mussolini’s conquests in Africa excited the futurists.Marinetti’s Manifesto 
of Futurism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/13/first-world-war-futurism> in 
1909 was an ode to war. In 1912, he reported from Libya during an earlier 
chapter in Italy’s empire building, writing: “War is beautiful because it 
initiates the dreamt-of metallisation of the human body.” In 1914 he was 
briefly imprisoned with fellow pro-war activist Benito Mussolini, whom he 
joined as a fascist electoral candidate for Milan in 1919. In 1935 he returned 
to Africa to witness Italy’s conquest of Ethiopia and to fuel his grisly 
artistic fascination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fasmara-eritrea-fiat-tagliero-service-station-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428580400581%2Ff3b06a12-5234-4496-bdfa-1a2a4c1a43c8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Asmara's%20Fiat%20Tagliero%20service%20station%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2018&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fasmara-eritrea-fiat-tagliero-service-station-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Asmara%27s%20Fiat%20Tagliero%20service%20station%3A%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2018&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fasmara-eritrea-fiat-tagliero-service-station-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428580400581%2Ff3b06a12-5234-4496-bdfa-1a2a4c1a43c8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The service station’s signature wings remain volant to this day. Photograph: 
Edward Denison 
Fiat Tagliero was built on a major intersection where any of Asmara’s 50,000 
cars could stock up on petrol and supplies before departing the metropolis for 
the airport or Eritrea’s southern towns and Ethiopia beyond. Its location was 
strategic in the wider context of Italy’s new Roman Empire in Africa. Modern 
transportation helped define Italian colonialism and Eritrea was the hub 
linking other colonies of Somalia, Libya and Ethiopia. Airports in Asmara and 
Italy’s “Seconda Roma”, the modernist town of Dekemhare a few miles south of 
Asmara, plugged Eritrea into a fledgling international network of air travel. A 
breathtaking steam railway and marvel of Italian engineering recently restored 
by Eritreans wound its way tortuously from Eritrea’s Red Sea port of Massawa 
over the highlands and down towards Sudan. Eritrea even boasted the world’s 
longest cable car route, which delivered supplies directly from the coast.

Facing south on a busy junction with its wings aloft, poised for flight, Fiat 
Tagliero’s volant structure exemplified Eritrea’s colonial experience. The 
building’s audacious design stunned the sceptical municipal authorities. 
Unconvinced by the architect’s calculations, they insisted that the wings 
should be supported by columns. Technical drawings submitted to the 
municipality showing each wing propped up by 15 poles attest to the architect’s 
deception. However, at the building’s unveiling, Pettazzi is said to have put a 
gun to the contractor’s head and ordered him to remove the supports. Under 
duress, the builder complied and, to the astonishment of the crowd, the massive 
wings stayed up.

Syria's war-scarred citadel of Aleppo: a history of cities in 50 buildings, 
day 2
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/24/syria-war-citadel-aleppo-history-cities-buildings>
Still standing and recently refurbished, Fiat Tagliero has long since 
jettisoned its original associations and assumed a more progressive role as the 
symbol of the Asmara Heritage Project, which is applying to Unesco for world 
heritage status. Fascist-era buildings are not the most obvious candidate for
representing “outstanding universal value” <http://whc.unesco.org/en/criteria/>
, but while Eritrea’s harsh encounter with modernity and war has caused untold 
misery, it has also bestowed on this small African nation a unique form of 
urbanism that post-independence Eritrea has made its own. It would be hard to 
find a capital city in Africa, or perhaps even in the world, that is so revered 
by its own people and visitors alike. In a country where aeroplanes were once 
synonymous with colonial suppression, Fiat Tagliero symbolises the quiet 
determination of Eritreans to protect their rich cultural heritage, forged over 
centuries by their country’s strategic position at the nexus of Africa, Europe 
and the Middle East.

Today, as global problems cause tens of thousands of Eritreans to risk their 
lives reaching Europe, the international community is desperate for solutions.
Asmara’s Unesco bid <http://whc.unesco.org/en/tentativelists/2024/> is being 
supported by an enlightened international coalition that includes the British 
and Norwegian governments, who recognise the capacity of architecture, 
irrespective of its past, to effect positive change in the future. Fiat 
Tagliero is a fitting symbol of hope for a remarkable city.

Edward Denison is an architectural historian, writer and photographer 
specialising in 20th-century architectural and urban history. He also teaches 
architectural history and theory at the Bartlett School of Architecture (UCL). 
Click here <http://edenison.zenfolio.com/f661837504> to see more of Denison’s 
images from Eritrea.



 