
Jonathan Kodjia’s eighth goal of the season was enough to hand Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> a deserved 1-0 win at QPR, 
the lively striker bouncing back from a first-half penalty miss.

Kodjia had squandered a golden opportunity to give Steve Bruce’s side the lead 
at Loftus Road, as his spot-kick was denied by Alex Smithies, who had an 
excellent game in the hosts’ goal.

But the 27-year-old Ivorian made amends with 15 minutes remaining, smashing a 
low effort home to give Villa only their second away win since the start of 
last season.

Both teams traded blows early on, as Alan Hutton’s fourth-minute effort was 
deflected wide while at the other end Conor Washington had the first shot on 
target saved by the recalled Mark Bunn two minutes later.

The first real chance arrived on eight minutes as a brilliant ball from Grant 
Hall split the Villa defence, and Pawel Wszolek’s attempt was smothered by 
Bunn. Both sides then saw penalty shouts waved away, as first Washington went 
down under the challenge of Jordan Amavi, before Gary Gardner was bundled over 
by Joel Lynch six minutes later.

But the referee, Geoff Eltringham, had no choice but to point to the spot on 
the half-hour mark when Kodjia robbed Wszolek in the box, and theQPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> winger hauled him to the ground.

Kodjia’s limp penalty however was saved by Smithies – who has now kept out 
five of the last seven penalties he has faced in theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> – down to his left, and 
Ross McCormack somehow put his follow-up attempt wide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fqpr-aston-villa-championship-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc55355753126c9cfbbbb8238d7dc7a8907c151%2F468_0_3643_2187%2F3643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aston%20Villa%E2%80%99s%20Jonathan%20Kodjia%20recovers%20from%20penalty%20miss%20to%20down%20QPR&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fqpr-aston-villa-championship-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aston%20Villa%E2%80%99s%20Jonathan%20Kodjia%20recovers%20from%20penalty%20miss%20to%20down%20QPR&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fqpr-aston-villa-championship-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc55355753126c9cfbbbb8238d7dc7a8907c151%2F468_0_3643_2187%2F3643.jpg>
 Jonathan Kodjia’s penalty is saved by Alex Smithies as QPR fans look on. 
Photograph: Matthew Childs/Reuters 
Villa were still in the ascendant however, and after both Gardner and Kodjia 
could not get anything on Amavi’s fine ball from the left, there was still time 
before the break for Gardner to have a long-range effort punched away awkwardly 
by Smithies.

There was more urgency about QPR immediately after half-time, but still the 
hosts were unable to create many chances and Villa again began to build up a 
head of steam. Smithies was called into action twice in two minutes, producing 
almost identical saves at full stretch to his right to deny both Kodjia and 
Leandro Bacuna.

Ian Holloway began to make changes to try and turn the game in QPR’s favour, 
and replacement Olamide Shodipo almost made an immediate impact on 62 minutes 
when his snap shot was blocked well by Baker.

James Perch’s looping header drifted wide eight minutes later, but a goal was 
coming and it arrived with a quarter of an hour left on the clock. Kodjia had 
terrorised the QPR defence all afternoon, and he finally got his reward as he 
rolled his marker from a throw-in and drilled a shot underneath Smithies.

The QPR replacement Jamie Mackie fired wide from a tight angle late on, but 
Villa held out to record their seventh win of the campaign.
 