
One of the asylum seekers forcibly returned to Sri Lanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/srilanka> by Australia has said his claim 
for refugee status was ignored by officials.

Colombo human rights lawyer Lakshan Dias, who is acting on behalf of the man, 
Kumara, his wife and two children, said the asylum seeker group was put through 
an abbreviated and unfair refugee assessment process.

“They were only asked their name, where they came from, and why they came,” 
Dias told Guardian Australia from Colombo. “No other questions. This man has a 
case for asylum that he wanted to present, but he was not given any 
opportunity.”

Asylum seekers should not be sent back to Sri Lanka yet, say religious leaders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/08/asylum-seekers-should-not-be-sent-back-to-sri-lanka-yet-say-religious-leaders>
According to Dias, Kumara, who is illiterate, felt he was not listened to.

“They were not given lawyers’ assistance even after they seek those 
assistance, their case was not heard and not given any opportunity to tell 
their story as well.


“They did everything in a secret manner, no transparency.”

Kumara was one of 12 Sri Lankan asylum seekers – some Tamil, some Sinhalese – 
on board a boat that sailed into the lagoon at Cocos Islands on 2 May. The 
group was held on board Australian Border Force vessels, before being brought 
ashore on Cocos, put on a bus with blacked-out windows, and driven to the 
island’s airstrip, from where they were flown directly to Colombo.

All 12 were arrested upon arrival in Colombo, but, according to Dias, only 
two, including Kumara, have been charged with leaving the country unlawfully, 
under section 45C ofSri Lanka’s immigration and emigration act 
<http://www.refworld.org/docid/46a6015327.html>.

The pair is being held at Negombo prison, near Colombo airport. It is 
understood it will be alleged in court that the two charged were involved in 
organising the boat journey.

In 2014, after Australia returned 41 Sri Lankan asylum seekers intercepted at 
sea, the UNHCR said the abbreviated assessment processwas unlawful under 
international law <http://www.unhcr.org/53baa6ff6.html>.


“UNHCR has previously made known its concerns to Australia about its enhanced 
screening procedures and their non-compliance with international law,” it said.

“UNHCR’s experience over the years with shipboard processing has generally not 
been positive. Such an environment would rarely afford an appropriate venue for 
a fair procedure.”

Under the 1951 Refugees Convention <http://www.unhcr.org/3b66c2aa10.html>, to 
which Australia is a party, and under customary international law, countries 
cannot “refoule” a person, that is, send them back to a place where they will 
face harm.

Rights groups 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2012/05/29/uk-suspend-deportations-tamils-sri-lanka> 
worldwide have raised serious concerns about Sri Lankan asylum seekers – 
particularly members of the ethnic Tamil minority – being returned.

In the UK, deportations to Sri Lanka have been halted by the high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/feb/28/border-agency-tamils-sri-lanka>, 
and government documents show at least15 Tamil asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/feb/12/sri-lanka-asylumseekers-torture-claims-uk-deportation>
 sent back to Sri Lanka subsequently escaped again and were granted refugee 
status because they had been tortured upon return.

Several reports 
<http://www.theage.com.au/world/we-live-in-fear-every-day-20120723-22koc.html> 
have alleged that asylum seekers returned from Australia to Sri Lankahave faced 
arbitrary arrest, persecution, police brutality, and torture 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/sent-home-to-arrest-torture-20120723-22kur.html>
.

Sri Lankan asylum seeker tells of terror on Nauru: 'If I am sent back, I will 
kill myself'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/03/sri-lankan-asylum-seeker-tells-of-terror-on-nauru-if-i-am-sent-back-i-will-commit-suicide>
On the same Saturday that the group was returned the United Nations’ special 
rapporteur on torture, Juan E Méndez, said while progress had been made in 
post-war Sri Lanka,torture remained a common practice by the government 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=53903#.VzrTU4x975s>. 


“The testimonies I heard from victims, including detainees, who took the risk 
of speaking to me despite safety concerns, persuade me that torture is a common 
practice inflicted in the course of both regular criminal and national 
security-related investigations.

“Severe forms of torture continue to be used, although probably less 
frequently, while both old and new cases of torture continue to be surrounded 
by total impunity.”


“More reforms are needed before Sri Lanka can be considered to be on a path to 
sustainable democratisation.”
 