
Flooding from heavy rains hammering Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand>’s south has left at least 18 
people dead and thousands of villages partially submerged.


The flooding, which was roof-high in some areas, has affected nearly one 
million people in 10 southern provinces since it started a week ago, according 
to the country’s interior ministry.

At least 18 people had died and one was missing, the government said, with the 
rains turning roads into rivers, inundating farmland and damaging more than 
1,500 schools in the region.

The downpour was expected to persist for at least two more days, according to 
Thailand’s meteorological department, which warned of flash floods.

“The situation is very bad today and tomorrow. It’s still raining heavily,” 
said Junjuda Pornsri, a meterological official.

Armed forces across the region were mobilised to help evacuate flood victims, 
provide temporary shelter and distribute emergency aid, the government said on 
Saturday.

In hard-hit Nakhon Si Thammarat province two army helicopters were deployed to 
deliver food to families trapped inside their homes in Cha-uat district.

Bapha Suthiphanya, a 60-year-old who has spent the past three nights in a 
makeshift government shelter in the district, said she was forced to evacuate 
her home after the waters rose above her head.

“I was so shocked and scared. I’ve never seen water like this and I also can 
not swim,” she told AFP.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fat-least-18-dead-from-flooding-in-thailand-and-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F723c7a0251656ec42e0c4986c6d0bdec9e9746e0%2F0_129_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=At%20least%2018%20dead%20in%20Thailand%20floods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fat-least-18-dead-from-flooding-in-thailand-and-malaysia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=At%20least%2018%20dead%20in%20Thailand%20floods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fat-least-18-dead-from-flooding-in-thailand-and-malaysia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F723c7a0251656ec42e0c4986c6d0bdec9e9746e0%2F0_129_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 A flooded area in Jal Besar, Malaysia, on the border with Thailand. 
Photograph: Mohd Rasfan/AFP/Getty Images 
The monsoon rains are unusually heavy for this time of year in Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/thailand>, which normally sees a 
three-month stretch of relatively dry and cool weather starting in November.

It is high season for tourists who flock to the kingdom’s island resorts. 

But the deluge disrupted beach holidays in several traveller hot spots, 
including the popular islands of Samui and Phangan.

Hundreds of tourists had their flights delayed, while train and bus services 
on the mainland were suspended.

Some travellers refusedto let the storm stop the fun, coasting through flooded 
streets on pool floats and sipping drinks.

“Some tourists are enjoying the flooding, they’re taking pictures and going 
swimming,” said Nongyao Jirundorn, a tourism official on Samui island.

Neighbouring Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/malaysia> was also 
hit by severe flooding earlier in the week, with thousands stranded in relief 
centres in two north-eastern states.

By Saturday the number of evacuees in Kelantan and Terengganu had dropped to 
about 13,500, from almost 23,000 on Wednesday, as weather conditions improved 
and authorities forecast less rainfall over the weekend.

The prime minister, Najib Razak, visited Kelantan on Saturday and met with 
people sheltering at a relief centre.
 