
Not for the first time, Papu Gómez’s biceps stole the show. The Atalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> captain has made headlines all 
season with his unconventional armband designs. First there was the Mother’s 
Day tribute, then the Spiderman logo, the Holly & Benji cartoon and, most 
famously, a celebration of Pro Evolution Soccer’s original Master League XI. As 
Serie A returned to action on Sunday, he unveiled a new design, inspired by the 
movie Frozen.

It was chosen to mark his daughter Constantina’s second birthday, with her 
face appearing alongside those of Anna, Elsa and Olaf. But he might 
unintentionally have also captured the spirit of the footballing moment. Frozen 
was a fitting theme for a weekend when one game – Pescara v Fiorentina – was 
snowed off, while the status quo at the top of the table was perfectly 
preserved.

Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, Roma, Napoli, Lazio 
and Milan all won – even if some of them did make hard work of it. Napoli 
required a 95th-minute goal from Lorenzo Tonelli to squeeze past Sampdoria. 
Milan failed to puncture Cagliari’s defence – which had previously conceded 42 
times in 18 games – until the 88th.

Gómez’s Atalanta began the weekend just behind them, in sixth place. Rarely 
has this club flown higher; the 53 Serie A points that they earned in 2016 were 
their most ever in a calendar year. But the build-up to Sunday’s game at Chievo 
was overshadowed by news that the midfielder Roberto Gagliardini was to be sold 
toInternazionale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/internazionale>.

The Guardian’s inaugural Footballer of the Year: Cagliari’s Fabio Pisacane
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/29/fabio-pisacane-guardian-footballer-of-year-award>
The 22-year-old only broke through into a regular first-team role at the end 
of October, but with his long limbs and powerful stride had already drawn 
comparisons to Paul Pogba. Playing alongside the similarly dynamic Franck Kessié
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/chelsea-atalanta-talks-franck-kessie>
, Gagliardini had helped to propel Atalanta to seven wins in his eight starts – 
a run that included triumphs over Napoli and Roma.

Nobody in Bergamo wanted to see him depart so soon, but Inter refused to take 
no for an answer. A reported transfer fee of close to €28m (£24.3m) would 
represent an exceptional return on a player developed by Atalanta’s own academy.

Still, with Kessié away representing Ivory Coast at the Africa Cup of Nations, 
they had effectively lost two-thirds of their starting midfield. Gagliardini 
had been training apart from the rest of the squad ahead of his anticipated 
move, but as it became clear that nothing would be settled before Sunday, the 
manager Gian Piero Gasperini told reporters that he might select the player to 
faceChievo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chievo> anyway.

Perhaps it was a glance at Gómez’s armband that finally persuaded him to Let 
It Go. Instead of Gagliardini, the manager chose another homegrown player, the 
21-year-old Alberto Grassi, for a first-ever start in midfield. It turned out 
to not really matter as Atalanta raced to a 4-1 win.

Grassi himself struggled, collecting an early yellow card and otherwise 
failing to impose himself on the game before being subbed in the second half. 
But this was a day for Gómez to remind us that his team’s successes this season 
should not solely be attributed to bright young things.

Set to turn 29 next month, Gómez is hardly getting set to collect his pension, 
but he is one of the oldest regulars in Gasperini’s starting XI – as well as 
the shortest, at a shade under 5ft 5in. He might also be the single most 
important player in the side, pulling the strings from his position just behind 
the attack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fserie-a-atalanta-papu-gomez-leads-by-example%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F770e34d3c222ab3b6f9a75fccf2d9b44123fa499%2F0_91_2925_1755%2F2925.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Atalanta%20captain%20Papu%20G%C3%B3mez%20leads%20by%20example%20as%20his%20club%20let%20young%20talent%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fserie-a-atalanta-papu-gomez-leads-by-example%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Atalanta%20captain%20Papu%20G%C3%B3mez%20leads%20by%20example%20as%20his%20club%20let%20young%20talent%20go&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fserie-a-atalanta-papu-gomez-leads-by-example%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F770e34d3c222ab3b6f9a75fccf2d9b44123fa499%2F0_91_2925_1755%2F2925.jpg>
 Gómez opens the scoring for Atalanta against Chievo. Photograph: Filippo 
Venezia/EPA 
Gómez has described his own role as a “false second striker”, typically lining 
up just behind Andrea Petagna but with licence to roam out to either flank. It 
is a new dynamic for a player who has spent most of his career as a 
conventional winger, and he is the first to insist that Atalanta’s early-season 
struggles – theylost four of their first five games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/07/atalanta-rise-gasperini-serie-a-blog>
 – were caused by the failure of himself and his team-mates to grasp the 
movements Gasperini required.

Increasingly, it is clear that the manager’s vision was a fine one. With his 
low centre of gravity, brilliant dribbling and endless roaming, Gómez has 
bamboozled opposing defenders in a way that would not have been possible if he 
were confined to one side of the pitch.

He did it again on Sunday, finding space inside the box to score simple goals 
twice in the first 25 minutes. Only a sharp save from Stefano Sorrentino 
stopped him from completing a first-half hat-trick and even then Andrea Conti 
was on hand to slot home the rebound. Sergio Pellissier pulled one back for 
Chievo before Remo Freuler grabbed Atalanta’s fourth.

Gasperini described it afterwards as one of his team’s best performances of 
the season. It was all the more impressive for the absences of not only 
Gagliardini and Kessié, but also brilliant the young centre-back Mattia 
Caldara, who was suffering with a fever. Atalanta recently agreed a deal to 
sell the latter player to Juventus – but not until 2018.

Gómez, too, has been the subject of transfer speculation. His whole career to 
date could be written as a tale of missed opportunities, with Inter, Atlético 
Madrid andMilan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> all close to 
signing him at different times, only for deals to fall through due to changes 
of manager or the excessive transfer fees demanded by his clubs.

Chelsea’s £21m offer for midfielder Franck Kessié rejected by Atalanta
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/franck-kessie-chelsea-bid-rejected>
There has been similar frustration on the international stage. Overlooked by 
Argentina ever since helping them to win the Under-20 World Cup in 2007, he 
obtained Italian citizenship this May only to subsequently find out that he was 
still ineligible to represent his adopted home. Fifa regulations require any 
player switching nation in this manner to hold passports for both at the time 
when they first represent either.

Gómez, though, is a glass half-full kind of guy. A quick glimpse of his social 
media accounts – packed with videos of himgoofing around with his wife, Linda 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BOsEHkiBRpa/>, or scything down his four-year-old 
sonin a game of beach football <https://www.instagram.com/p/BOhUnOKBBpZ/?hl=it> 
– give a clear picture of a man who enjoys his life just fine.

That mindset ought not to be interpreted as a lack of seriousness about his 
profession. In a recent interview with Corriere della Sera, Gómez outed himself 
as a rarity among Argentinians in not admiring Diego Maradona. “He was abandiera
 on the pitch,” Gómez said. “But he lived a life that had nothing to do with 
sport. I have other models: [Pablo] Aimar, [Juan Román] Riquelme and above all 
[Juan Sebastián] Verón: a true player, a man, a leader.”

He aspires to provide a similar example himself now to Atalanta’s youngsters. 
The tricky question is: how many will still be there by the time this transfer 
window closes?

Talking points

• Juventus set a new Serie A record by winning their 26th consecutive home 
game on Sunday. They blew away the cobwebs fromthe Supercoppa defeat to Milan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/milan-juventus-supercoppa-italiana-match-report>
 bycruising to a 3-0 victory over Bologna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/serie-a-roundup-juventus-gonzalo-higuain>
, and could take particular satisfaction from seeing Paulo Dybala grab his 
first goal since October. The Argentinian had missed his penalty during the 
shoot-out in Doha, but converted confidently from the spot after Stefano 
Sturaro was brought down.

• It was actually the top seven teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball/table> that all won in 
Serie A, with Inter keeping pace behind Atalanta as well. TheNerazzurri were 
fortunate to take all three points against Udinese – they fell behind early and 
might easily have been three down before Ivan Perisic equalised from their 
first real chance There is encouragement to be taken from the ability to 
prevail without playing well, when it wasso often the other way around 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/19/frank-de-boer-inter-era-europa-league-southampton>
 in the recent past. One way or another, Inter have now won four on the bounce.

• Lazio were yet another team who left things late, Ciro Immobile finally 
breaking the deadlock in injury time after a previously frustrating afternoon 
at home to Crotone. Only once in their history (in 2012-13) have the
Biancocelesti had more than their current 37 points 
<https://twitter.com/OptaPaolo/status/818139062636871680> at the midway stage 
of a 20-team Serie A season.

• It was a tale of two keepers at the Marassi as Wojciech Szczesny pulled off 
a series of impressive saves to help Roma defeatGenoa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/genoa>. Mattia Perin made one of his own 
for the home side early on but tore a cruciate ligament minutes later, and was 
seen weeping on the bench after he was helped from the field. It is a cruel 
blow for a player who had only returned from the same injury in August.

Results: Chievo 1-4 Atalanta, Empoli 1-0 Palermo, Genoa 0-1 Roma, Juventus 3-0 
Bologna,Lazio <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lazio> 1-0 Crotone, Milan 
1-0 Cagliari, Napoli 2-1 Sampdoria, Sassuolo 0-0 Torino, Udinese 1-2 Inter.
 