
Pre-emptive military strikes against terrorist targets overseas are required 
for national self-defence and the legal basis on which they are carried out 
should be made more explicit to deal with increasing threat levels, the UK’s 
attorney general is due to say on Wednesday.

In a speech to the International Institute for Strategic Studies, Jeremy Wright
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-wright> QC will set out the 
requirements that have to be met before ministers authorise the deployment of 
armed drones or other weapons systems to disrupt imminent jihadi or terror 
plots targeting the UK or British citizens.

The threshold for resorting to lethal force is not being lowered and the test 
for acceptable “collateral damage” is not being relaxed, Wright insists. Nor is 
his speech timed to coincide with any anticipated RAF action in Syria or 
elsewhere in the world.

The aim, he says, is to update international law and help the public 
understand the legal basis of any future strikes.


“So we really want to see the principles [of pre-emptive self defence] that 
the US have already adopted, which we think strikes the right balance of all 
the different factors,” he said.

“[The al-Qaida attack on the US in] 2001 was a big leap forward and I think 
it’s important that international law also takes a big leap. The threat now is 
different again … [but] we are not lowering the threshold [for authorising 
attacks].”

Wright will say that he is adopting a series of tests devised in 2012 
<http://www.20essexst.com/sites/default/files/Bethlehem%20-%20Self-Defense%20Principles.pdf>
 by Sir Daniel Bethlehem, a former foreign office legal adviser, to assess the 
military intervention required to prevent an attack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fattorney-general-calls-for-new-legal-basis-for-pre-emptive-military-strikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cb9e003373f113e3e1c0912bd5442967179f96f%2F3_549_2988_1794%2F2988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Attorney%20general%20calls%20for%20new%20legal%20basis%20for%20pre-emptive%20military%20strikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fattorney-general-calls-for-new-legal-basis-for-pre-emptive-military-strikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Attorney%20general%20calls%20for%20new%20legal%20basis%20for%20pre-emptive%20military%20strikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fattorney-general-calls-for-new-legal-basis-for-pre-emptive-military-strikes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cb9e003373f113e3e1c0912bd5442967179f96f%2F3_549_2988_1794%2F2988.jpg>
 The UK attorney general, Jeremy Wright QC. Photograph: Paul Hackett/Reuters 
 The factors Bethlehem advocates include the nature and immediacy of the 
threat, the probability of an attack, whether it is part of a concerted pattern 
of continuing activity, the likely scale of any threat and the injury, loss or 
damage likely to result, and the likelihood that there will be other 
opportunities to undertake effective action in self-defence that may be 
expected to cause less serious collateral injury, loss or damage.


The legal doctrine of pre-emptive self-defence dates back to 1837, when 
British troops seized a ship, the Caroline, in US waters as it was being 
prepared for an attack on Canada and was deemed to be an imminent threat to 
British interests.

“If we are trying to define ‘imminence’ in relation to a test that was 
developed in the 1840s, we are going to struggle,” Wright told the Guardian. 
“This is about ensuring international law keeps pace with events.


“The nature of the threat we face today is not remotely comparable to what was 
around then.” Intercepting intelligence of terrorist plans is becoming ever 
more difficult.


The attorney general will also say: “The UK is a world leader in promoting, 
defending and shaping international law, and for the first time we are setting 
out how we determine whether an attack is imminent.

“We are a long way from being able to see troops massing on the horizon. 
Technology has made it easier for terrorists to carry out attacks. The law has 
to keep up with the changing times.

“The government has a primary duty to protect the lives of its citizens, but 
it can only use lethal force where there is a clear legal basis for doing so.”

Lethal action should always be a last resort, Wright will maintain, when there 
is no other alternative means to detaining, disrupting or preventing those 
plotting terrorist acts. That principle means pre-emptive strikes are likely to 
be used in countries such as Syria, where conventional law enforcement has 
broken down.


Wright will tell his IISS audience that the challenges the UK faces in 
protecting national security are increasing. He will refer to the recent spate 
of Islamic State attacks across Europe.


He will also point out that attacks that would previously have taken months of 
planning can now be orchestrated quickly.

Wright says he supports international law and believes it should be supported, 
but that if it is not updated it will become “atrophied” and will not command 
widespread support.

He said he wanted to be as forthcoming as he could so that the public could 
understand the justification for pre-emptive attacks.

As attorney general, it is his advice the prime minister or cabinet seeks on 
the legality of military strikes.


Among the drone strikes carried out in Syria was the November 2015 attack that 
killed the Islamic State extremistMohammed Emwazi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/13/us-air-strike-targets-mohammed-emwazi-uk-terrorist-known-as-jihadi-john>
, widely known as Jihadi John.
 