
Aung San Suu Kyi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aung-san-suu-kyi> has 
arrived in Thailand, where she is expected to push for the rights of millions 
of Burmese migrant workers during her highest profile overseas trip since 
taking office.


Her three-day visit to the neighbouring country, which has been run by the 
military following a coup in 2014, is the second trip she has made since 
becoming Myanmar’s state counsellor, a prime minister-type position shecreated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/01/aung-san-suu-kyi-set-to-get-pm-type-role-in-myanmar-government>
 as she was barred from the presidency.

The Nobel laureate, who is also the foreign minister, visited Laos in May.

Thailand’s giant seafood industry employs more than 100,000 Burmese labourers. 
But fishing companies have been accused of ignoring workers’ rights and, in 
many cases, indentured labour.

There are possibly 3 million Myanmar nationals in Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand>, most of them Buddhists, although 
many are unregistered.

Glaringly absent from Aung San Suu Kyi’s official agenda is any discussion of 
Myanmar’s minority Muslim Rohingya population,thousands of whom have fled 
persecution to Thailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-muslims-allowed-how-nationalism-is-rising-in-aung-san-suu-kyis-myanmar>
 only to find themselves entrapped by human traffickers.

'No Muslims allowed': how nationalism is rising in Aung San Suu Kyi's Myanmar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/no-muslims-allowed-how-nationalism-is-rising-in-aung-san-suu-kyis-myanmar>
Despite widespread international pressure, including from the US, the Burmese 
leader has refused to use the term “Rohingya” and her government has suggested 
the 1.1 million people be called the “Muslim community in Rakhine state”.

But the label has been rejected by both Rohingya activists and hardline 
Buddhists in Myanmar, whereRohingya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rohingya>
 people are considered immigrants from Bangladesh.

The Thai government has also sought to avoid discussion of abuses against 
Rohingya. It is currently investigating several officials accused of 
involvement in the people smuggling trade.

An event at the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of Thailand 
<http://www.fccthai.com/> on Thursday, where three Rohingya rights activists 
spoke on a panel, was attended by plainclothed Thai police who said speakers 
could make brief statements but not answer questions.

Haji Ismail, a Rohingya man who represents the community in Thailand, released 
a statement at the event which addressed Aung San Suu Kyi directly.

“All our hopes in the leadership of democratic statesmen have faded away,” it 
said. “Indeed we did not hope for this sort of harsh and negative political 
stance and undemocratic rhetoric from our Nobel peace laureate.”

The Burmese leader’s trip has been tightly organised to prevent any questions 
being raised. The official schedule for her joint press conference on Friday 
with the Thai prime minister, Prayuth Chan-ocha, had “No Q&A” in underlined 
text.

Aung San Suu Kyi tells UN that the term 'Rohingya' will be avoided
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/21/aung-san-suu-kyi-tells-un-that-the-term-rohingya-will-be-avoided>
The National League for Democracy party, led by Aung San Suu Kyi, won a huge 
victory during elections last year, ending close to half a century of military 
rule. Critics of the Thai junta, which took over from a civilian government, 
juxtapose Myanmar’s recent democratic gains against Thailand’s return to army 
power.

The 71-year-old leader, who spent much of the past two decades under house 
arrest, was due to visit a temporary shelter in Ratchaburi, west of Bangkok and 
on theMyanmar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar> border, to meet 
migrants but the visit was cancelled “due to adverse weather”, the document 
said.

More than 100,000 Burmese refugees live there, a small proportion of them 
Rohingya.
 