
An Australian woman whose two sisters and eight nieces and nephews remain held 
onNauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> after three years, has 
pleaded with the Australian government to abandon offshore processing and allow 
her family – and others separated by the policy – to be reunited.

“What they have done to be treated this way?” Fida said in Sydney Tuesday. “In 
Australia we always have people talking about human rights, but in this case, I 
see there’s no human rights at all.”

An emotional Fida – the Guardian has chosen only to report her first name for 
fear of repercussions against her family – pleaded with the government to 
abandon the policy which she says has irreparably damaged her sisters’ mental 
and physical health. One of her nephews was allegedly abused inside the 
processing centre.

ABC and Nauru government clash over Four Corners exposé of offshore detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/abc-and-nauru-government-clash-over-four-corners-expose-of-offshore-detention>
Speaking at the official launch of Amnesty International’s report into 
offshore processing on Nauru,Island of Despair 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/17/AMNESTY_INTERNATIONAL___ISLAND_OF_DESPAIR_FINAL.pdf>
, Fida, supported by her mother, said her family had fled Lebanon after 
violence had killed friends in her neighbourhood.


Both of her sisters have four children. The youngest was seven when they left 
their homeland.

“They left their country looking for a better life for their kids. They didn’t 
know how they are going to end up. It’s not a better future at all.”

One of Fida’s sisters on Nauru has been the subject of reports in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/06/refugee-with-growing-breast-lump-has-medical-transfer-from-nauru-cancelled>
 and other news outlets. After discovering possibly cancerous lumps in her 
breast more than three years ago, doctors on Nauru ordered a biopsy, which 
couldn’t be performed on the island.


A medical transfer to Papua New Guinea last month ended without any treatment 
at all being performed because of other complicating health problems, and she 
was returned to Nauru. She has not yet received treatment.


“Her kids worry her, they say ‘we lost everything, we have nothing left, 
except Mum. And if we lost Mum, there would be nothing’.

“I always ask myself, ‘what has she done to be treated this way’.”

The Amnesty report 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/17/AMNESTY_INTERNATIONAL___ISLAND_OF_DESPAIR_FINAL.pdf>
, compiled following a five-day visit to Nauru in July, and based on interviews 
with more than 60 asylum seekers, refugees, Nauruan locals, and processing 
centre staff, argues Australia’s offshore detention regime is a form of 
torture, because the abuses that occur there are systemic, are sustained and 
not addressed by the Australian authorities in charge, and that the whole 
regime is designed to induce an outcome: that of coercing refugees to return 
home, and deterring others from making boat journeys to Australia.

Nauru files: review confirms 19 police referrals over abuse claims, yet no 
prosecutions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/15/nauru-files-review-confirms-19-police-referrals-over-abuse-claims-yet-no-prosecutions>
Amnesty’s senior director for research, Anna Neistat, said the allegation of 
torture was not made lightly.

“We believe that this policy amounts to torture. We make this conclusion based 
on the systematic nature of the harm that is being caused, it’s intentional 
nature, and the fact that it is being perpetrated that the Australian 
government is, quite honestly, not even trying to hide: the goal is deterrence. 
The policy of deterrence relies on the idea of causing as much suffering as 
possible to ensure that others do not attempt to do what these asylum seekers 
have tried to do ... reaching Australia’s shores.”


Neistat said offshore processing should be ended immediately because of the 
critical situation for those held in the Australian-run camps. “This is not a 
situation where people can wait.”


She said the government rationale for the policy of “saving lives at sea” and 
deterring others from coming by boat was deeply flawed.

“Saving lives at what cost? Saving lives, really? People are still dying on 
Nauru.”

Omid Masoumali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/iranian-asylum-seeker-severely-burnt-after-setting-himself-on-fire-on-nauru>
, an Iranian refugee,died after self-immolating on Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
 in April this year. The Amnesty report outlined several cases of children 
repeatedly attempting to kill themselves.


At least 19 alleged crimes, including assaults and sexual abuse of children, 
have been reported to Nauru police.But there have been, to date, no convictions 
of anybody for a crime committed against an asylum seeker or refugee, after 
three years of offshore detention. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/15/nauru-files-review-confirms-19-police-referrals-over-abuse-claims-yet-no-prosecutions>

The Nauru files: the lives of asylum seekers in detention detailed in a unique 
database – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/aug/10/the-nauru-files-the-lives-of-asylum-seekers-in-detention-detailed-in-a-unique-database-interactive>
The Amnesty report 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/17/AMNESTY_INTERNATIONAL___ISLAND_OF_DESPAIR_FINAL.pdf>
 comes after the Guardian’s publication ofthe Nauru files 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/nauru-files>, more than 2,100 of the 
offshore processing regime’s own incident reports detailing critical abuses 
such as systemic abuse of children, violence against asylum seekers and 
refugees, rape and sexual assault of women and children, inadequate medical 
care, and regular self-harm and suicide attempts, especially by children. The 
reports, as was reported by the Guardian at the time, also detail the totality 
of life on Nauru, and include more prosaic complaints about broken toilets or 
kitchen equipment, poor food or clothing, and disagreements with staff or 
between refugees.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchildren-on-nauru-speak-i-want-to-feel-the-pain-i-am-having-in-my-heart-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Children%20on%20Nauru%20speak%3A%20'I%20want%20to%20feel%20the%20pain%20I%20am%20having%20in%20my%20heart'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchildren-on-nauru-speak-i-want-to-feel-the-pain-i-am-having-in-my-heart-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Children%20on%20Nauru%20speak%3A%20%27I%20want%20to%20feel%20the%20pain%20I%20am%20having%20in%20my%20heart%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchildren-on-nauru-speak-i-want-to-feel-the-pain-i-am-having-in-my-heart-video&media=>
Children on Nauru speak: ‘I want to feel the pain I am having in my heart’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/oct/18/children-on-nauru-speak-i-want-to-feel-the-pain-i-am-having-in-my-heart-video>
Also released on Tuesday, more than 5,000 doctors from across Australia signed 
anopen letter  
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/18/Open_Letter_to_Mr_Dutton_from_doctors_re_refugees.pdf>
to the immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/18/Open_Letter_to_Mr_Dutton_from_doctors_re_refugees.pdf>
, urging an immediate end to offshore processing.

“As doctors, we cannot condone or accept treatment of innocent and already 
traumatised people, particularly vulnerable women and children, which knowingly 
and deliberately causes harm,”the letter 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/18/Open_Letter_to_Mr_Dutton_from_doctors_re_refugees.pdf>
 says.

“We urge you to immediately close the camps on Nauru and Manus Island and 
bring all detainees to Australia for rapid processing and appropriate medical 
and psychological support.”

The Australian government has rejected the Amnesty report.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, told ABC radio on Tuesday morning he did 
not believe conditions in offshore processing amounted to torture: “I reject 
that claim totally, that ... is absolutely false,” the prime minister said. 
“The Australian government’s commitment is compassionate and strong.”

The secretary of the immigration department, Mike Pezzullo, told a Senate 
estimates hearing 
<http://parlview.aph.gov.au/mediaPlayer.php?videoID=326139&operation_mode=parlview>
 that offshore processing was “part of a broader policy of deterrence” but that 
“the idea that the Australian government, presumably with the complicity of 
Nauru and PNG ... are knowingly engaged in a program of torture is something 
that I reject categorically”.

“I refute categorically ... that we flout any laws international or otherwise. 
And as to the notion, inference, implication that we use torture as some sort 
of instrument of state policy, I personally find that to be offensive.”

Government-contracted healthcare provider International Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> and Medical Services has 
rejected criticisms of its operation by Amnesty, in particular stating that 
asylum seekers and refugees are always given access to their health records, 
and that patients are referred to by name, and never by boat ID.


“We have developed robust systems to assure high standards of care for all of 
our patients, in full compliance with international healthcare standards and 
regulations,”it said in a comprehensive statement 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/17/20161017_IHMS_statement_in_response_to_AI_Report.pdf>
.

IHMS said it employed 36 full-time mental health staff on Nauru, but 
highlighted the difficulties of managing mental health issues on the island.

“Management of mental illness and psychological distress is complex ... as in 
any community, many causative factors relating to mental health matters are 
outside of the control of the primary health and mental health providers.”
 