
The immigration department has conceded it should not have used the Australian 
Border Force Act to deny an academic’s request for previously published data on 
the location of visa holders.

Australian National University migration and labour mobility expert Henry 
Sherrell was last monthrefused access to aggregated data 
<https://henrysherrell.wordpress.com/2016/11/24/my-battle-with-the-australian-border-force-act-a-small-but-worrying-example/>
 on the location of second-year working holiday visa holders.

The information, which had removed the identifies of the visa holders, had 
already been published in a submission to a Senate inquiry, but only in map 
form, and Sherrell sought the raw data to use in his research.

But the department refused his request, saying it “did not comply with the ABF 
Act”.

Teachers, social workers demand right to talk about offshore detention centres
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/21/teachers-social-workers-demand-right-to-talk-about-offshore-detention-centres>
Sherrell, a former immigration bureaucrat, feared the refusal was “a small, 
but worrying” example of how the law’s secrecy provisions might stymie 
legitimate research.

 A provision in the act allows the disclosure of information that has already 
been lawfully published 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/abfa2015225/s49.html>. 


“I want to make sure people are aware that this is happening, and even people 
in the department are aware that this is happening,” Sherrell said.


“I want people to know that the Australian Border Force Act is having these 
implications, because I don’t imagine anyone who drafted that legislation 
intended for it to have this kind of effect,” he said.

After Guardian Australia put questions to the department, it again contacted 
Sherrell, telling him it was granting him full access to the data.

On Tuesday morning a spokeswoman conceded the department had made a “mistake” 
in refusing the request.

The data was initially handed to the agriculture department, which 
subsequently used it in a submission to the Senate inquiry into working holiday 
reforms.

Open letter on the Border Force Act: 'We challenge the department to prosecute'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/01/open-letter-on-the-border-force-act-we-challenge-the-department-to-prosecute>
The immigration spokeswoman said the original data given to the agriculture 
department had contained extra detail, which could not be passed on to Sherrell 
due to privacy provisions in the act.


“The original data provided by the department to the Department of Agriculture 
contained postcodes, number of grants, industry and citizenship,” the 
spokeswoman said.

“The researcher was willing to forgo the industry and citizenship information, 
however this reduction in the data requested was missed by departmental 
officers leading to the data request refusal.”

Sherrell’s initial efforts to extract a more detailed explanation for the 
refusal were unsuccessful.


But he believes the secrecy provisions of the act, 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/abfa2015225/s42.html> which 
carry a two-year jail sentence for workers who disclose “protected 
information”, were behind the department’s early reluctance to give him the 
information.

No one has yet been charged under those provisions. 


But opponents say they have a chilling effect on officials or anyone else who 
believes they have protected information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/01/open-letter-on-the-border-force-act-we-challenge-the-department-to-prosecute>
.

Health workers feared the laws would prevent them speaking out about 
conditions in immigration detention, although an amendment in September
specifically excluded them from prosecution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/doctors-freed-to-speak-about-australias-detention-regime-after-u-turn>
.
 