
A sharp start to the season, this, and a defeat that stung like the autumn 
weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/wales-australia-rugby-union-autumn-international-math-report>
. Australiahad lost seven of the 10 games they had played this season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/michael-cheika-allows-all-blacks-and-steve-hansen-to-get-under-his-skin>
, three to England, three to New Zealand, another to South Africa. There was a 
thought that they were weaker than they had been in a while but the Wallabies 
poured cold water all over it.They have now won their last 12 Tests against 
Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/04/wales-australia-losing-streak-11-matches-michael-cheika>
, a run started way back in 2008. It already felt like Wales had lost to them 
in pretty much every which way a team can; undone by penalties, drop goals, and 
tries in the final minutes, beaten in both tight kicking contests and 
free-scoring try-fests. But none of the previous 11 defeats were quite like 
this one.

Wales were utterly outplayed and lucky, in the end, to lose by only 24. The 
game was pretty much up at half-time.At that point Australia were leading by 17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/05/wales-v-australia-live-rugby-union>
 and could have been many more ahead if they had only been a little more 
clinical with their finishing. Australia are a conundrum Wales just cannot seem 
to solve and they have never looked further from figuring it out than they did 
here, where they did not even seem to understand the question, much less 
approach an answer. It was the final quarter before something like a 
competition broke out. But then wing Dane Haylett-Petty scored Australia’s 
fifth try, sprinting in after sweeping up a loose pass on the halfway line.

Despite the best efforts of the Welsh Rugby Union, who laid on a firework show 
before the start, the atmosphere had been unusually flat throughout. But then 
for 60 minutes the crowd had precious little to cheer. They roused themselves 
into a chant when Scott Williams scored their only try, chasing his own grubber 
kick to the try-line after a good break and even better underhand offload by 
Hallam Amos. But by time Haylett-Petty dived over the line, thousands had 
turned their backs and started to walk out. Beating the rush seemed a better 
idea than enduring any more of the match.

Australia dispel rumours of demise with five-try demolition of Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/wales-australia-rugby-union-autumn-international-math-report>
Wales showed more wit and skill in that one passage of play by Amos, Webb, and 
Williams than they did in the entire first half. There are some telling stats 
for those first 40 minutes: Australia made 90 carries for 400m between them, 
Wales 30 carries for 30m. Australia had 70% of the possession, and 80% of the 
territory. One-sided doesn’t cover it. Wales only made two trips into the 
Australian half, both forays ending in penalty shots at goal, one of which 
Leigh Halfpenny kicked, the other he missed. Otherwise, they were always back 
in their own ground, scrambling around trying to patch the gaps in their 
defence, throwing themselves after all those onrushing Australian runners 
tearing through their line.

Foley was superb, the man of the match. He played the Welsh for fools, made 
them look like rubes. It was as though he was flicking the ball back and forth 
underneath three upturned cups. Around him, Australia’s backs, brilliantly
orchestrated by their attack coach, Stephen Larkham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/28/stephen-larkham-aspires-to-wallabies-coaching-job-just-not-quite-yet>
, drew the Welsh in with dummy runs and decoy lines, while Foley spat the ball 
this way and that. Wherever the tacklers were, the ball was not. It had already 
shifted some place else along the line. Australia should have scored three 
more. They had two good chances while Dan Biggar was in the sin-bin, one missed 
when Haylett-Petty knocked on with the line wide open in front of him, another 
cut short when Halfpenny put in a bone-rattling tackle on Reece Hodge.

Wales somehow held themselves together while Biggar was off but as soon as he 
came back they broke open. Foley’s inside pass put Hodge through on a sharp 
angle and he then swapped a simple one-two with Israel Folau on the way to the 
try-line. Tevita Kuridrani scored a third when George North got himself in a 
tangle backtracking between two oncoming runners. Befuddled by Kuridrani’s 
dummy, he picked the wrong man to tackle. And Foley himself finished the fourth 
after a turnover, the try made by a swift pass by the giant lock Adam Coleman. 
Wales were reeling.

Wales 8-32 Australia – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/05/wales-v-australia-live-rugby-union>
They were without Sam Warburton, Taulupe Faletau, and Alun Wyn Jones, as well, 
of course, as Warren Gatland,who is on sabbatical in the run-up to the Lions 
tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/06/warren-gatland-lions-wales-new-zealand-2017>
. It showed. They looked listless and lacked leadership. Until Amos came on for 
North, they were blunt and bleary, as if caught short by the intensity of the 
match. Australia, hardened by their recent games in the Rugby Championship, 
were in a higher gear. Wales have an inexplicably poor record against the 
southern hemisphere teams for a side who have been so consistently competitive 
in the Six Nations. Before the match Martyn Williams suggested it was “a mental 
thing”. In this match their problems were simpler than that.

As for Australia, it feels as if they have been underestimated up here in 
Europe. On the morning of the match their head coach, Michael Cheika, was 
warned by his old Randwick team-mate Glen Ella that he was “skating on thin 
ice” because “as the old saying goes, you are only as good as your last game”. 
By that measure, Cheika’s doing just fine. They look to be in ominously good 
form at the start of this brutal tour. They play Scotland next week, then 
France, Ireland, and England. Seems unlikely any of the papers round these 
parts will berunning cartoons of him dressed as a clown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/hanson-accuses-fuming-michael-cheika-of-hijacking-all-blacks-celebrations>
 this winter.
 