
The upstairs room at the Birkbeck Tavern in Leyton is supposed to hold 120 
people. On Thursday night it felt as though double the number had made it their 
business to be there and, five minutes into the meeting of theLeyton Orient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leytonorient> Fans’ Trust (Loft), the 
call went up from the back.

There were still more stuck outside and on the stairs – could everybody, 
please, budge up? And so those seated at the front shuffled forward. It was 
like one of those chair races from the old school days and, briefly, there were 
smiles at the silliness of it all.

Nobody is laughing at the situation that the 135-year-old club finds itself in 
and the headline details provide merely the broadest of brushstrokes. In May 
2014 the Os were denied a place in the Championship aftera penalty shootout 
loss to Rotherham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/25/leyton-orient-rotherham-united-league-one-play-off-report>
 in the League One play-off final. Today they sit second from bottom of League 
Two and nobody at the Birkbeck could say with any assurance that they would 
lift themselves above the cut-off into non-league football by the end of the 
season.

Orient, who play at Colchester on Saturday, are going down in every sense. 
Their squad, on paper, ought to be contending for the play-offs, at least, but 
football is not played on paper. It is played by meticulously prepared and 
highly motivated teams and Orient have come to look a long way from what is 
required on both counts.

The club are on to their eighth manager in a little over two years – including 
caretakers, which is probably an accurate description of them all – and Alberto 
Cavasin, a 60-year-old Italian, whose previous job was in the final months of 
the 2010-11 season, when he oversaw Sampdoria’s relegation from Serie A, has 
one win and six defeats from his seven matches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-owner-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb43504ee9a8c84dbe8c1beea26a204615d98031c%2F0_63_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bad%20buys%2C%20sackings%20and%20a%20careless%20custodian%3A%20Leyton%20Orient%E2%80%99s%20sorry%20descent%20%7C%20David%20Hytner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-owner-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bad%20buys%2C%20sackings%20and%20a%20careless%20custodian%3A%20Leyton%20Orient%E2%80%99s%20sorry%20descent%20%7C%20David%20Hytner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-owner-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb43504ee9a8c84dbe8c1beea26a204615d98031c%2F0_63_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Leyton Orient’s owner, Francesco Becchetti. Photograph: Jordan Mansfield/Getty 
Images 
This is Cavasin’s first experience of English football. He does not speak the 
language and he is struggling to get his messages across, via his translator – 
Matteo Gerardo Festa, the son of Gianluca Festa, the former Internazionale and 
Middlesbrough defender. The training is stop-start, because of the need for 
translation, and there is the clear sense that confusion has gripped. 
Communication problems have been a frequent lament.

It is the club’s owner and president, Francesco Becchetti, who is the villain 
of the piece in the eyes of the Loft members. The 50-year-old Italian 
businessman, who made his fortune in waste management and recycling, and 
founded the TV station Agon Channel, which was based in Albania and broadcast 
in Italy, took over at Brisbane Road in July 2014, when he bought out the 
previous owner, Barry Hearn, for £4m.

Becchetti has since invested £6m in a combination of equity and loans but it 
is not the colour of his money that has driven many Os fans to distraction, 
rather how, and on whom, he has chosen to spend it. There have been expensive 
mistakes in the transfer market, amid a remarkable churn of players – not one 
of the match-day squad from the 2014 play-off final remains at the club – and 
off-field, the turnover of staff has been similarly high.

Orient have always been a family club that occupies a valued space in the east 
London community but the connection has come to feel undermined, as Becchetti 
has dispensed with experienced employees – many of whom are lifelong supporters 
– such as Matt Porter, who was the chief executive under Hearn for eight years.

Leyton Orient sack Andy Hessenthaler after suffering back-to-back defeats
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/26/leyton-orient-sack-andy-hessenthaler-defeats-football-league>
Becchetti replaced Porter with Alessandro Angelieri, who had been the head of 
commercial affairs at the Agon Channel and a driver of the station’s 
X-Factor-style football show, which was produced during the 2014-15 season. It 
saw boys from Italy come over to compete for a professional contract at Orient 
and, with them playing on the Brisbane Road pitch, it quickly came to be 
considered a farce in some quarters at the club.

Bizarrely, the winner never did join up with Orient and the Agon Channel would 
be taken off air towards the end of 2015, after Becchetti saw his assets in 
Albania seized by the country’s government. They had issued a warrant for his 
arrest in June of that year, which related to alleged fraud and 
money-laundering over a failed hydroelectric scheme that had supposedly cost 
them tens of millions of euros in grants and unpaid taxes.

The Albanian government requested that Becchetti be extradited to face trial 
but, in July of this year, a British judge turned down the request. Becchetti 
has described the allegations against him as “groundless and politically and 
improperly motivated”.

Becchetti’s recruitment processes and criteria for senior positions at Orient 
– on the technical and administrative sides – have been questioned by the Loft 
members, with one particular case seeming to highlight a lack of joined-up 
thinking.

Fans believe they must be ready if and when Becchetti leaves and have written 
a recovery plan

When Roberto Gagliardi, a former non-league goalkeeper, was hired after 
Becchetti’s takeover, it was, in part, to help out with translation. He would, 
however, become the club’s goalkeeper coach in December 2014 only to leave at 
the end of the season, after the faintly ludicrous relegation from League One 
under Fabio Liverani. Gagliardi went to Welling United, where he worked as the 
goalkeeper coach, but, in February of this year, he returned to Orient as the 
head of recruitment.

Two things were plain at the Loft meeting. First, the members have lost all 
confidence in Becchetti and the other two directors on the club’s board – 
Angelieri and Vito Miceli, the chief operating officer. And, second, they 
unanimously believe that the time has come where something has to be done.

It speaks volumes that, four weeks ago, Loft had 350 members whereas now there 
are 600 and, for context, this is at a club that has 3,000 season-ticket 
holders. It reflects the urgency of the situation and the imperative to make 
their voices heard because, from their little corner of the capital, they fear 
that nobody is aware of their crisis and, if they are, they are not listening.

Loft passed a few resolutions on Thursday night, the most immediate being to 
stage a peaceful protest against the Becchetti regime at the next home game, 
which is against Blackpool on Saturday 19 November. It will be staged, jointly, 
with members of the Blackpool Supporters’ Trust, who have grievances against 
their club’s owner, Owen Oyston.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-owner-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59335587507dd26c89445d0dad050f823498de64%2F0_89_5608_3365%2F5608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bad%20buys%2C%20sackings%20and%20a%20careless%20custodian%3A%20Leyton%20Orient%E2%80%99s%20sorry%20descent%20%7C%20David%20Hytner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-owner-fans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bad%20buys%2C%20sackings%20and%20a%20careless%20custodian%3A%20Leyton%20Orient%E2%80%99s%20sorry%20descent%20%7C%20David%20Hytner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleyton-orient-francesco-becchetti-owner-fans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59335587507dd26c89445d0dad050f823498de64%2F0_89_5608_3365%2F5608.jpg>
 Leyton Orient fans plan to protest against Francesco Becchetti ‘s ownership in 
the match against Blackpool on 19 November. Photograph: Alan Walter/Action 
Images 
Both sets of supporters will march from the Birkbeck to Brisbane Road, and 
they intend to display banners, declaring that they want their clubs back. 
There are also plans to do something during the match, possibly in the 18th 
minute and between the 81st and 87th minutes – as Orient and Blackpool were 
founded in 1881 and 1887, respectively.

Loft would like to engage in dialogue with Becchetti to explore ways in which 
his tenure could become more stable and productive but the chances of that 
happening are slim. Instead, they believe that they must be ready if and when 
Becchetti leaves and, to that end, they have written a recovery plan and are in 
the process of trying to mobilise major financial backing for what would be a 
fan-driven takeover. There was also apocalyptic talk at the meeting of an AFC 
Wimbledon-style “Phoenix club”.

Becchetti has made some bad choices and one of the worst was his appointment 
of Mauro Milanese, the former Italy defender, as sporting director in the 
summer of 2014. By January 2015 he had been dismissed following claims of 
serious misconduct.

Milanese would sue for wrongful dismissal but Mrs Justice Whipple ruled in May 
of this year that his handling of an agreement involving a 14-year-old academy 
player was a serious breach of trust and constituted gross misconduct. Milanese 
was found to have tried to pressure the boy, who was wanted by several leading 
clubs, including Arsenal, and his father into signing with a particular agent.

What also emerged at the high court were the details of some of Milanese’s 
excesses on the transfer market. When he oversaw the signing of the Italy 
defender Andrea Dossena, he gave him a weekly wage of £7,677 and the agent 
involved a fee of £25,730.

The agent of the striker Darius Henderson, who joined from Millwall, received 
£46,800 and the defender Shane Lowry, who also came from Millwall, was given a 
weekly wage worth £3,800, which was set to rise to £4,050 after the first year. 
The Guardian understands that Henderson was given £9,000 a week, plus a 
signing-on fee of £150,000, and other additions such as Jay Simpson and Jobi 
McAnuff were on lucrative deals.

Some of the motivational tactics on Becchetti’s watch have been dubious

None of the big signings could be said to have worked out and it is worth 
noting that every senior player from the squad that had made it to Wembley in 
2014 was earning from a little over £2,200 a week to a little under £2,000 a 
week. None were granted pay rises and many came to feel let down.

Milanese was involved in the notorious incident after the team’s 2-0 home 
defeat to Colchester United in September 2014, when he went into the dressing 
room and told the manager at the time, Russell Slade, that he would be sacked 
if he did not win the next game at Notts County. Slade kept his job, despite a 
1-1 draw, but, when Cardiff City came calling for him the following week, he 
upped sticks and left.

Leyton Orient players forced to stay in hotel for week after Hartlepool defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/19/leyton-orient-players-forced-to-stay-in-hotel>
Some of the motivational tactics on Becchetti’s watch have been dubious and 
they have included the decision to call in the players for two weeks of tough 
training at the end of the relegation season. It was difficult to see that as 
anything other than a punishment. Then there was the Waltham Abbey Marriott 
affair when, after the defeat at Hartlepool in November 2015, the players and 
staffwere ordered to stay at the hotel for a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/19/leyton-orient-players-forced-to-stay-in-hotel>
.

The issue of interference from Becchetti in team selection has also been a 
bone of contention. “There was a lot of interference from above,” Ian Hendon, 
the manager from May of last year to January of this,told BBC London 
<https://audioboom.com/posts/5118347-lofc-dulcetdave-leytonorientear-former-o-s-boss-ian-hendon-tells-philcparry-what-the-job-was-like>
. “Did it go as far as being told who to pick? They tried, I’ve got to say. I 
wanted to do the job my way. That probably wasn’t how they wanted it done. When 
you are out on the training ground and you have four of the entourage, if you 
like, standing around on the side of the pitch and watching every move you’re 
making and reporting back to the owner every day, it is difficult.”

Hindsight is a wonderful thing. Now, though, is not the time to look back. 
Now, as some of the club’s supporters have concluded, is the time for action.
 