
Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> groups in Bahrain 
have urged the country’s allies in the EU and the UK to “speak out before it’s 
too late”, after the prominent activist Nabeel Rajab was released on bail 
following several months of pre-trial detainment only to be reimprisoned hours 
afterwards.

Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, the director of advocacy of the Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> Institute for Rights and Democracy, 
said: “Bahrain plays with [Rajab’s] life despite his deteriorating health 
condition and UN calls for his unconditional release. The latest judicial 
harassment exposes Bahrain’s mockery of justice. Bahrain’s allies in the EU & 
UK must speak out before it’s too late.”


Rajab was to be released on bail on Wednesday until prosecutors made a sudden 
reversal and ordered him back into custody over other investigations.


Rajab, the president of the Bahrain Centre for Human Rights 
<http://www.bahrainrights.org/> and a leading figure in the country’s 2011 Arab 
spring protests, faces up to 15 years in jail for comments made on Twitter 
criticising the war in Yemen, as well as making allegations of torture by 
authorities at a local prison.

The 52-year-old is also accused of “defaming the state” by publishing “false 
news … and malicious rumours that undermine the prestige of the kingdom” in an 
opinion piece in the New York Times, in which he wrote that “no one has been 
properly held to account for systematic abuses that have affected thousands” in 
the Shia-majority nation of Bahrain, which is ruled by a Sunni monarchy.

Another ongoing investigation by authorities focuses on a letter recently 
published by the French newspaper Le Monde 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/idees/article/2016/12/20/berlin-et-paris-revisez-vos-liens-avec-les-monarchies-du-golfe_5051494_3232.html>
.

Rajab’s defence lawyer, Jalila Sayed, originally told the Associated Press 
that the activist was released after a long court hearing on Wednesday, and 
that he was due to appear again in court on 23 January to continue a trial 
which has been criticised by the United Nations and others as an attempt to 
suppress free speech.

The reversal by the authorities and re-imprisonment has stunned Rajab’s 
supporters. “Nabeel is overall weak because of so many health problems he 
started facing, including heart problems and other physical issues,” Sayed had 
said. “He’s under tremendous stress because of this length of detention.”

Human rights groups call for release of Bahraini activist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/08/human-rights-release-bahraini-activist>
The lawyer said she believed the court granted bail because a witness for the 
prosecution could not specifically prove that Rajab had control of the Twitter 
account in his name or show he had sent the tweets in question. “We hope this 
will end with an acquittal because the case has no evidence,” she continued.

The accusations against Rajab and his detention – most of which has been in 
solitary confinement – have been roundly criticised by human rights groups. 
Amnesty International called the charges a “barefaced assault on freedom of 
expression”, and Human Rights Watch’s executive director, Ken Roth, named Rajab 
as one of two imprisoned activists he thought most resembled “the next Nelson 
Mandela”.

Earlier this month, more than 20 MPs from seven parties in the UK parliament  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/14/mps-urge-uk-foreign-secretary-boris-johnson-bahrain-activist-nabeel-rajab-release>
– including the Conservatives, Labour, the Scottish National party, the 
Democratic Unionist party, the Liberal Democrats, the Greens and the Social 
Democratic and Labour party – urged the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, to 
echo US government calls for Rajab’s release.

In September, Mark Toner, the US state department spokesman, said the American 
government had called for the immediate release of Rajab. “We have concerns 
about the state of human rights in general in Bahrain and we’re engaging with 
the government … on all these issues,” Toner said.

During Theresa May’s visit to Bahrain in December, her spokeswoman would not 
say if any specific cases had been raised in bilateral talks, but said the UK 
did raise human rights cases as part of a wider engagement on Gulf reforms. But
rights campaigners in Bahrain have argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/boris-johnson-urged-call-release-bahraini-campaigner-nabeel-rajab-new-york-times>
 that although the UK has been engaging closely with Bahraini authorities on 
judicial andpolice reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/13/british-police-trainers-ignore-human-rights-abuses-bahrain>
 since 2012, this has not prevented crackdowns on journalists and pro-democracy 
activists.

“We have seen how Theresa May lashed Boris Johnson over his comments on Saudi 
[Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/saudi-arabia-row-boris-johnson-yemen-conflict>
]. Nabeel Rajab criticised Saudi Arabia and Bahrain over their bombardment in 
Yemen and is facing prison for it,” Alwadaei said recently. “If May or her 
government fail to publicly call for his release,Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> will take it as a green light for 
their repression.”

Since the 2011 demonstrations, Bahrain has faced low-level unrest, protests 
and attacks on police.As a result, several prominent opposition figures and 
human rights activists have been imprisoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/13/bahrain-detains-rights-activist-un-official-criticises-repression>
 or stripped of their citizenship and deported.

In a speech in June, the UN high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad 
al-Hussein, said at least 250 people had lost their citizenship in Bahrain in 
recent years “because of their alleged disloyalty to the interests of the 
kingdom”. “Repression will not eliminate people’s grievances, it will increase 
them,” he added.

Bahrain’s foreign minister, Khalid Al Khalifa, responded on Twitter: “We will 
not allow the undermining of our security and stability and will not waste our 
time listening to the words of a high commissioner who is powerless.”

 