
The chief of police in Bangalore has said there is no evidence a “mass 
molestation” took place in the south Indian city on New Year’s Eve.

Indians have been angered by reports that women in the city centre were 
sexually harassed and assaulted on Saturday evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/mass-molestation-bangalore-blamed-on-indians-copying-west>
. Six men were arrested on Wednesday in connection with another alleged attack 
elsewhere in the city that night.

Praveen Sood said a review of almost 70 CCTV cameras trained on two popular 
streets in the city centre had shown no proof of a mass attack on women in the 
crowd.

He told the BBC <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-38515887> that 
footage used by the Indian media to allege a large-scale molestation was 
actually the aftermath of a melee that was forcefully broken up by police.

“People ran. There were a lot of girls there,” he said. “There was panic, 
there was a melee, they got separated, they were crying.


“So that 30 seconds of confusion is being projected as a mass molestation. I 
categorically say that nothing of that sort has happened,” he said.

His remarks clash with reports from one newspaper in Bangalore that its 
journalists in the area were “first-hand witnesses to the brazen, mass 
molestation of women”.

It also published pictures of one woman pressed in by a crowd of men and 
another appearing to cower on the shoulder of a female police officer.

'I punched and kicked him': victim of Bangalore molestation tells of her fight 
back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/i-punched-and-kicked-him-victim-of-bangalore-molestation-tells-of-her-fight-back>
A witness also told the Guardian: “I saw women being molested in the crowd and 
people trying to find places where they could hide themselves and not be 
attacked.”

“There were inhuman acts,” said Sammy Aqeel. “People were acting like they 
were helping the women, but actually they were molesting them, insulting them, 
just provoking them.

“Any girl who was passing through those streets was at least being monitored 
with [the men’s] eyes. That was the minimum,” the 27-year-old said.

“The maximum was that even if she was suffocated and someone was trying to 
pick her up, there would be lots of people trying to grab her. I couldn’t stand 
it; I felt helpless.”

In another account, published by the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-38504186>, a woman identified as 
Pooja said she witnessed the crowd “pushing and shoving, touching, grabbing 
[and] groping” women.

She said she tried to navigate the crowd surrounded by a protective circle, 
but “even then when we were walking, there were guys who were trying to touch 
here and there”.

Sood said he had seen such reports and that police were ready to use them as 
the basis for further investigations.
 