
Police in Bangalore say they have detained at least six suspects over an 
alleged “mass molestation” in the south Indian city on New Year’s Eve, as the 
release of CCTV footage from the night fanned outrage.

An estimated 60,000 people gathered on two major roads in the centre of the 
city on Saturday to celebrate the new year. Witnesses and local media reports 
said the crowd turned unruly and a number of women were sexually assaulted or 
harassed.


'I punched and kicked him': victim of Bangalore molestation tells of her fight 
back
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/i-punched-and-kicked-him-victim-of-bangalore-molestation-tells-of-her-fight-back>
Law enforcement officials in Bangalore initially said no complaints were filed 
on the night and asked possible victims to come forward. But on Wednesday 
police officer Hemant Nimbalkar said at least six men had been detained after 
several video clips of women being attacked by groups of men went viral on 
social media.

Earlier in the day, the city police commissioner, Praveen Sood, said officers 
had seen images from 45 CCTV cameras and had enough evidence to begin an 
investigation.

“As promised we have found credible evidence, repeat credible evidence, in a 
case of wrongful confinement, molestation and attempt to rob,” Sood tweeted.

He said officers would investigate the case “silently”, after days of intense 
scrutiny of the police’s handling of the crowd, and criticism of the initial 
reaction by officials in the state.

Indian’s National Commission for Women on Tuesday sought the resignation 
<http://www.financialexpress.com/india-news/ncw-notice-to-karnataka-home-minister-over-shocking-bengaluru-molestation-remark/494845/>
 of G Parameshwara, the home minister for Karnataka state, for his claims that 
incidents such as the alleged mass sexual assault “do happen” and were the 
fault of young people acting and dressing “like westerners”.

“Such remarks from the home minister [are] unacceptable and regrettable,” the 
head of the commission, Lalitha Kumaramangalam, said. “I want to ask this 
minister, are Indian men so pathetic and weak that when they see a woman in 
western clothes on a day of revelry, they get out of control?”

Parameshwara has said his remarks 
<http://www.sify.com/news/bengaluru-horror-my-remarks-on-molestation-twisted-says-karnataka-minister-news-national-rbdwucegbcafh.html>
 were misinterpreted and he had always “stressed on the protection of women and 
children”.
T S Sudhir (@Iamtssudhir) 
Look at the accomplices standing at the end of the road. Horrifying how the 
beasts crawl out under the cover of darkness in#Bengaluru 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Bengaluru?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/B6pdmKbHiL 
<https://t.co/B6pdmKbHiL>
 <https://twitter.com/Iamtssudhir/status/816496742057345024> January 4, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/Iamtssudhir/status/816496742057345024> 
Outrage over the alleged attacks grew on Wednesday after the Times of India 
published 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/bengaluru/cctv-grabs-show-beasts-that-roamed-bengaluru-roads/articleshow/56323896.cms>
 CCTV footage showing a woman being attacked by two men on a motorcycle, who 
appeared to try to wrestle her on to the bike, before throwing her to the 
ground.

The incident occurred about 2.30am on Sunday morning in an alley several 
kilometres from the central Bangalore streets where the mass molestation 
allegedly took place, the newspaper said.

Another victim of a sexual assault on the night, Chaitali Wasnik, told the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/i-punched-and-kicked-him-victim-of-bangalore-molestation-tells-of-her-fight-back>
 she had been trying to find a taxi on a crowded street when two suspicious men 
started walking towards her.

“Out of nowhere one of the guys tried to grope me,” she said. “I went blank, 
totally blank. Like I couldn’t understand what had happened.

“I attacked him back and he started panicking. He didn’t expect I would fight 
back. I started punching him and kicking him, whatever I could do at the time.

“Fifteen to 20 men started pulling me back, so I wouldn’t hit him anymore. And 
so he took his chance and slid away.”

The violence in Bangalore has received extensive coverage in the Indian media 
and triggered another round of national soul-searching, the latest since a 
notorious 2012 gang-rape and murder of a Delhi student shone a spotlight on 
sexual violence inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.


Indian Olympian Krishna Poonia said she had prevented an attack in Rajasthan’s 
Churu district on New Year’s Day,telling the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-38504978> that she intervened when 
she saw thee men trying to molest two teenage girls.

“I chased and caught one of them, and then helped the girls file a complaint,” 
the discus thrower said. “I was shocked and horrified … Nobody did anything 
until I got out of the car and chased them myself.”

Aamir Khan, one of India’s most popular actors, was among those to voice their 
disgust at the recent incidents, saying Indians were “saddened and feel ashamed 
when something like this happens in our country”.

 