
A former banker from Singapore accused of laundering money linked to 
Malaysia’s 1MDB scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia>
 used a tax haven company as part of an $8.2m-plus splurge on Gold Coast 
property over little more than a year.

Yeo Jiawei’s foray into Australian property began with a $1.3m luxury 
oceanfront apartment in Surfers Paradise, which he bought in 2014 direct from a 
collapsed developer.

Guardian Australia can reveal that Yeo is a director of a 
Seychelles-registered company that then paid a further $6.9m for commercial 
properties in Broadbeach, the tourist town’s trendy dining precinct, a year 
later.

US 'troubled' over Malaysia's detention of activist and Najib critic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/us-malaysia-detention-activist-maria-chin-abdullah>
Australian federal police are reportedly examining whether money illegally 
taken from Malaysia’s1MDB <https://www.theguardian.com/world/1mdb> state 
development fund has been parked locally. That investigation includes whether 
any Australian citizens, residents or companies breached proceeds-of-crime laws.

It is not known whether the AFP is examining the properties linked to Yeo, who 
wassentenced to 30 months in jail 
<http://www.straitstimes.com/business/1mdb-scandal-former-bsi-banker-yeo-jiawei-gets-30-months-jail-in-witness-tampering-case>
 last month by Singapore’s district court for witness tampering during a 
Singaporean investigation into the alleged laundering.

The court in that case heard that Yeo had acquired $6m of Australian property 
while allegedly playing a central role in the illicit movement of S$23.9m 
($22.6m) of 1MDB funds when employed as a wealth manager at BSI BankSingapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/singapore>.

Money-laundering charges against Yeo are due to be heard in April, with the 
34-year-old having denied committing the offences.

Property records in Australia show that Yeo paid $1.3m in October 2014 for a 
fifth-floor apartment in the Soul building, the Gold Coast’s second-tallest 
highrise, which overlooks Main Beach at the heart of the Surfers Paradise 
tourist strip.

Two months later a Seychelles-registered company called Connect Capital Global 
Investments Limited, of which Yeo is a director, obtained an Australian 
business number. It also registered to pay goods and services tax, indicating a 
predicted annual income of $75,000 or more.

1MDB: The inside story of the world’s biggest financial scandal | Randeep 
Ramesh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia>
Connect Capital is based in the Seychelles, where it was registered with the 
help of Offshore Incorporations, a rival of Mossack Fonseca, the company at the 
centre of thePanama Papers scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> that shone on a light 
on the secretive world of tax havens.

In September 2015 Connect Capital registered with the Australian Securities 
and Investments Commission as a foreign company, lodging documents showing its 
local agent is Australian Taxation Accountants in Surfers Paradise, which 
provides its registered office.

The next month Connect Capital paid $2.4m for four retail premises, now 
housing pizza and seafood restaurants, in the ground floor of a building in 
Broadbeach.

A week before Christmas 2015 the company shelled out almost $3.4m for a 
further two retail premises nearby in Broadbeach, rented out to Italian and 
Brazilian restaurants. And four days later Connect Capital paid just over $1m 
for a neighbouring shopfront in the same building, leased to a doughnut 
business which pays more than $63,000 in rent a year.

A spokeswoman for Australian Taxation Accountants said the company had no idea 
of Yeo’s legal travails and said it was a “shock” to hear of his conviction and 
further charges.

The Australian newspaper reported on Monday 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/foreign-affairs/afp-looks-into-whether-imdb-loot-stashed-here/news-story/73b90b36a5080948dcd68fd8053e0418>
 that AFP officers were assisting at least one of the three known authorities — 
in Switzerland, the US and the Singapore — that are investigating where 
US$3.5bn allegedly looted from 1MDB, Malay­sia’s sovereign-wealth fund, has 
wound up.

An AFP spokeswoman told the newspaper that officers were “assisting foreign 
law-enforcement partners in their investigations”. This included “evaluating” 
whether any Australian citizens, residents or companies had breached 
­proceeds-of-crime laws, it reported.

“Given this matter is the subject of evaluation, it is not appropriate to 
comment­ further,” the spokeswoman said.

Federal police had not been in contact with Australian Taxation Accountants in 
relation to any of the properties owned by Connect Capital, a spokeswoman for 
the accountancy firm said.

Connect Capital was not required to seek Foreign Investment Review Board 
approval for its purchases as their value was below the $252m threshold for 
regular commercial property deals involving developed land.

Foreign non-residents are required to seek the board’s approval to buy 
residential properties but are normally allowed to purchase new dwellings.

Malaysian editors charged with 'intent to annoy' after reporting on 1MDB
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/malaysian-editors-charged-with-intent-to-annoy-after-reporting-on-1mdb>
Yeo’s $1.3m apartment purchase in 2014 was directly from the developer, 
Juniper Group, which had fallen into receivership in 2012. Developers of large 
projects routinely obtain “exemption certificates” to allow them to market 
off-the-plan apartments to overseas buyers.

1MDB was set up by Malaysian prime minister, Najib Razak, in 2009 “to drive 
sustainable economic development by forging strat­egic global partnerships and 
promoting FDI (foreign direct investment)”.

The US Department of Justice alleges it was illegally drained of funds by 
others including Najib’s associate the Malaysian businessman Jho Low, the 
alleged mastermind of the scheme.

The US has frozen about $1.3bn in assets so far, including profits from the 
Hollywood filmWolf of Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/20/us-justice-department-1mdb-fund-seizure-fraud-investigation>
; a Van Gogh painting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/23/van-gogh-and-monet-paintings-seized-in-1mdb-corruption-investigation>
 and luxury properties in New York, Los Angeles and London. It alleges in a 
lawsuit that Low fraudulently received US$1bn from 1MDB, laundering more than 
US$400m into the US where the funds were used for “the personal gratification 
of Low and his associates”.

Singaporean authorities froze about $120m in assets held by Low and his 
immediate family last year. Low has said he occasionally consulted for 1MDB but 
denies any wrongdoing and he has not been charged either in the US or 
Singapore. Singaporean police regarded Low as a “key person of interest”, the 
court heard in Yeo’s trial.

Yeo’s conviction last month related to attempts to conceal his ties to Low and 
hide his wealth, which grew by $23.9m over just 15 months while he was a wealth 
manager at BSI.

Yeo denied wrongdoing throughout his trial, including the prosecutor’s claim 
that he received “secret profits” from a 1MDB money laundering scam.
 