
It’s been ages – actually only three years – since the last parliamentary 
inquiry into the banking industry, but here comes the tireless Andrew Tyrie 
with another. The Treasury select committee is toask whether the revamped 
capital rules, supported by arrangements to wind down failing banks, are up to 
the job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/mps-test-rules-uk-bank-bailouts-andrew-tyrie>
. Taxpayers are supposed to be protected in another 2008-style crisis. Would 
they be?

A collective groan, one suspects, will have passed across the banking sector 
at news of this inquiry. The so-called capital and resolution regime, after 
years of debate and fine-tuning, is supposed to be set in stone. The regulators 
perform stress tests on the big institutions every year; and the banks’ role is 
to get on with the job of reorganising their operations to fit the new 
ringfenced model while reordering their capital structures to contain the 
correct portion of instruments capable of absorbing losses.

MPs to test rules aimed at insuring against UK bank bailouts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/mps-test-rules-uk-bank-bailouts-andrew-tyrie>
Yet there are at least three reasons why Tyrie is right to have a prod. First, 
Sir John Vickers, one of the architects of ringfencing,is not convinced that 
the banks yet hold enough capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/26/bank-of-england-rejects-claim-watered-down-ringfencing-plans>
. The Bank of England disagrees, pointing out that the UK brigade has raised 
£130bn of new equity since the 2008, about twice the level of losses experience 
in the crisis. But that debate needs to be settled once and for all, preferably 
before the next crisis arrives.

Second, the current crisis in the Italian banking industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/monte-dei-paschi-bank-cash-call-bailout>
 is a reminder that talk of state-funded bailouts has not been banished 
forever, at least in the eurozone. The Italian banks may, in the end, get all 
their capital from the private sector, but it is not reassuring that there is 
even room for doubt. UK taxpayers deserve to hear, in detail, how it could 
never happen again here.

Third, Royal Bank of Scotland is still 73% owned by taxpayers. To what degree 
is the state still on the hook should calamity strike?

The select committee, let’s hope, will be reassured. But this is the right 
moment to ask hard questions. Here’s one for Tyrie to add to his list: given 
that the ringfencing rules don’t come fully into force until 2019, how would 
the too-big-to-fail question be addressed before that date? Regulators tend to 
mutter and obfuscate when the question is put directly. Tyrie could do us all a 
favour by insisting on clarity.

Drax fired up after EU nod

It is only a slight exaggeration to say that Drax Group had bet the farm on 
winning EU state-aid approval to convert a third coal-burning unit to run on 
wood pellets. Without a thumbs-up, Drax would not have been able to afford its 
planned corporate reinvention viathe £340m purchase of Opus Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/drax-coal-opus-energy-gas-plants>
, a supply business serving small and medium-sized businesses. That deal, 
unveiled earlier this month, was conditional on Brussels coming good.

There was relief all round, then, that EU approval arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/19/power-station-shares-jump-ec-approves-wood-burning-subsidies-coal-switch>
, just as the long-serving chief executive, Dorothy Thompson, predicted. The 
handout may only be a last hurrah for biomass subsidies since the last UK 
government made clear its preference for offshore wind in the renewables 
stakes. But there’s nothing like the sight of guaranteed income – Drax will get 
£100 a megawatt hour at the converted unit – to lift an energy generator’s 
spirits. Drax’s shares rose 8% and have now improved by a quarter since the 
Opus announcement.

Justified? Yes, probably. A month ago, Drax, the UK’s largest power station, 
seemed destined to become an exercise in managed decline. Now “retooling for a 
post-coal future” – the clunky corporate slogan – may mean something tangible. 
Aside from coal and biomass,Drax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/draxgroup> will have a beefed-up supply 
business plus development sites to get into gas-fired stations one day.

It is an odd collection of assets that one probably wouldn’t design from 
scratch. But, yes, given Drax’s turbulent history, one can call it a sensible 
diversification of risk.

Apple’s rotten jibe at Vestager

The great EU versus Apple and Ireland tax battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/apple-cut-euro-13bn-irish-tax-bill-spreads-payments-eu-us>
 will be fought on facts, in particular the right of Brussels’ competition 
commissioner to intervene in the tax affairs of an EU member state. The legal 
scrap will take years.


In the meantime, though, note Apple’s petulant line about why it thinks it 
found itself in the sights of Margrethe Vestager. The Danish EU commissioner 
wanted a target that “generates lots of headlines”, claims the US technology 
company. This is self-regarding nonsense. When the sum at stake is €13bn 
(£10.8bn) in allegedly unpaid taxes, Vestager would be failing in her job if 
she didn’t act.
 