
Tsai Ing-wen is new to the job and the strain is beginning to show. Elected 
president of Taiwan ina landslide victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/taiwan-elects-first-female-president>
, shetook office in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/taiwans-new-president-tsai-ing-wen-vows-to-reduce-dependence-on-beijing>
, buoyed by high approval ratings. Yet in a few short months, Tsai’s popularity 
has plunged by 25%. The reason may be summed up in one word: China. Suspicious 
that Tsai’s Democratic Progressive party, which also won control of parliament, 
harbours a pro-independence agenda, Beijing suspended official and back-channel 
talks with its “renegade province” and shut down an emergency hotline.

More seriously, for many Taiwanese workers, China also curbed the lucrative 
tourist trade, which brought millions of mainland visitors to the island during 
the accommodating presidency of Tsai’s predecessor, Ma Ying-jeou.Cross-strait 
investment and business 
<http://www.latimes.com/world/asia/la-fg-taiwan-tsai-snap-story.html> have also 
been hit.

Tsai faces contradictory pressures. The public wants the benefit of closer 
economic ties with China but Beijing’s intentions are rightly distrusted by a 
population that increasingly identifies itself as Taiwanese, not Chinese. Given 
President Xi Jinping’sominous warnings 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-asia-apec-china-taiwan-idUSBRE99503Q20131006>
 that reunification cannot be delayed indefinitely, China’s military build-up 
and hawkish suggestions that Beijing may resort to force, Taiwanese ambivalence 
is wholly understandable.

This dilemma – how to work constructively with a powerful, assertive China 
without compromising or surrendering national interests – grows steadily more 
acute. It is shared by states across the east and southeast Asian region. From 
Indonesia and the Philippines to Vietnam,Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, Seoul, Malaysia and Singapore, the 
quandary is the same. But the answers proffered by national leaders are 
different and sometimes sharply at odds.

The China dilemma is felt strongly in Washington. The US has striven in recent 
years to strengthen Asian alliances, increase trade and raise its regional 
military profile – Barack Obama’s so-called rebalance orpivot to Asia 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/09/03/the-legacy-of-obamas-pivot-to-asia/> – in 
a bid to contain and channel China’s ambitions peacefully. But analysts say the 
pivot appears to be in trouble. For Europeans fixated on Syria and immigration, 
this may not seem especially worrying or relevant. That’s shortsighted. If 
Obama and future US presidents get China wrong, the resulting damage could be 
global, threatening the security and prosperity of all.

Obama is already badly off-track. His grand plan to promote interdependent 
economic self-interest across the Pacific Rim while excluding China – the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership or TPP (similar to the controversial US-Europe 
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership or TTIP) – isin deep trouble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/trans-pacific-partnership-provisions-questionable-says-productivity-commission>
.

Shinzo Abe, Japan’s prime minister, declared last week that the TTP was a 
crucial “pillar” of future US influence. “Success or failure will sway the 
direction of the global free trade system and [shape] the strategic environment 
in the Asia-Pacific,” Abe said.

His warning reflected alarm in Tokyo that a risk-averse Obama is again proving 
an unreliable partner and will fail to get the deal ratified by Congress. It 
has already been disowned by both his most likely successors, Hillary Clinton 
and Donald Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fobama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e0893e6786bda86d6309e0b9869771507e2fbf%2F68_0_2063_1238%2F2063.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%E2%80%99s%20failed%20%E2%80%98Asian%20pivot%E2%80%99%20leaves%20China%20ascendant%20%7C%20Simon%20Tisdall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fobama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%E2%80%99s%20failed%20%E2%80%98Asian%20pivot%E2%80%99%20leaves%20China%20ascendant%20%7C%20Simon%20Tisdall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fobama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e0893e6786bda86d6309e0b9869771507e2fbf%2F68_0_2063_1238%2F2063.jpg>
 An image from United States Navy video purportedly shows Chinese dredging 
vessels in the waters around Mischief Reef in the disputed Spratly Islands.
 Photograph: HANDOUT/Reuters 
Washington’s painfully obvious inability to curb China’s controversial 
island-building programme straddling the international shipping lanes of the
South China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> is seen as 
further evidence that the pivot is failing. Each week seems to bring news of 
another Chinese airstrip or newly fortified reef. Ignoring neighbouring 
countries’ rival claims, Chinese has effectively unilaterally annexed 80% of 
the sea’s area, through which passes $5tn of world trade annually. “Freedom of 
navigation” patrols by US warships, soon to be backed by Japan’s navy, have had 
little discernible impact while increasing the risk of direct military 
confrontation.

China has flatly rejected a precedent-setting UN court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
 that deemed its claim to own the Spratly Islands, also claimed by the 
Philippines, to be illegal. Beijing has taken a similarly intransigent stance 
in its dispute with Japan over the Senkaku (Diaoyu) Islands in the East China 
Sea.

Some observers detect ulterior motives. China’s military construction on the 
Spratlys and “its effort to exhaust and eventually displace Japan in a contest 
for the Senkakus can be seen as an attempt psychologically and physically to 
isolate Taiwan and to prepare the battle space for China’s possible use of 
military force to unify the PRC and Taiwan”, ananalysis 
<http://www.iiss.org/en/publications/strategic%20comments/sections/2016-e7c1/turbulence-in-the-taiwan-strait-c26e>
 by the International Institute for Strategic Studies said.

Perceived American weakness has led some allies to take matters into their own 
hands. Itemerged last week 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-southchinasea-taiwan-idUSKCN11R109> that 
Taiwan’s military is also engaged in island fortification, at Itu Aba, its sole 
possession in the South China Sea.

More dramatically still, the maverick Philippines president, Rodrigo Duterte, 
switched sides last week 
<http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2016-09-14/duterte-turns-back-us-orders-philippines-buy-weapons-russia-and-china>
, announcing Manila would cease maritime co-operation with the US. China, he 
said, was the stronger partner. Duterte’s shift reflects his anger at American 
criticism of human rights abuses rather than a deep strategic rethink. But it 
will certainly hearten Beijing.

This feeble anxiety to play down differences, and evident lack of confidence 
in US leadership, plays into China’s hands

Other regional players are more cautious, an attitude encouraged by Beijing’s 
divide-and-rule tactics. Vietnam’s prime minister, Nguyen Xuan Phuc, meekly 
agreed in talks with Xi this month that “maritime co-operation through friendly 
negotiations” was the best way forward. But likeChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, Hanoi is rapidly building military 
capacity and cementing alliances with India, among others, in anticipation of 
less amicable times ahead.

Similar diplomatic hedging of bets was on display in Laos this month, when an 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) summit deliberately avoided 
mention of the UN court ruling. This feeble anxiety to play down differences – 
and evident lack of confidence in US leadership – plays into China’s hands.

The China dilemma extends far beyond the South China Sea. Having made nuclear 
disarmament a top priority in 2009, Obama has failed dismally to halt North 
Korea’s accelerating pursuit of nuclear weapons. The threat was underscored by 
Pyongyang’s biggest ever test explosion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/09/north-korea-nuclear-test-earthquake>
 earlier this month. China, the only country with real leverage, has helped 
impose additional UN sanctions on North Korea. But it has consistently balked 
at taking game-changing measures, such as cutting off fuel oil supplies, which 
could force Kim Jong-un to think again. Beijing also says it will block 
“unilateral” measures by other countries.

Obama’s impotence has intensified questions in Japan and elsewhere about the 
credibility of the American security umbrella, encouraging nationalists who 
argue that Tokyo should re-arm in earnest – or even deploy its own nuclear 
weapons. But their main concern is notNorth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> – it is China.

Xi is not looking for a fight. His first-choice agent of change is money, not 
munitions. According to Xi’s “One Belt, One Road” plan, his preferred path to 
21st-century Chinese hegemony is through expanded trade, business and economic 
partnerships extending from Asia to the Middle East and Africa. China’smassive 
Silk Road investments <https://www.clsa.com/special/onebeltoneroad/> in central 
and west Asian oil and gas pipelines, high-speed rail and ports, backed by new 
institutions such as the Asia Infrastructure Investment Bank, are part of this 
strategy, which simultaneously encourages political and economic dependencies. 
Deng Xiaoping once said to get rich is glorious. Xi might add it is also 
empowering.

Western neoliberals are optimistic. They typically argue that market-based 
economic exchanges can produce a win-win situation for rival states. In this 
way, China’s rise may be peacefully accommodated, they say.

Xi must also calculate that time is on China’s side. “China’s economic 
development and military modernisation programmes have witnessed dramatic 
progress since the early-1980s,” said Karl Eikenberry in theAmerican Interest 
<http://www.the-american-interest.com/2015/06/09/chinas-place-in-u-s-foreign-policy/>
. “China’s aggregate GDP in 1980 was the seventh largest in the world… By 2014, 
China’s GDP had multiplied 30 times to more than $9tn and is now the second 
largest in the world… The PRC’s military spending, less than $10bn in 1990, 
grew to more than $129.4bn in 2014, second only to that of the US.” On current 
trends, China’s 2035 GDP could be a third larger than the US, Eikenberry said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fobama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F319fa7dff33d84e5d4a210edbbd8b957d66d6d87%2F0_146_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%E2%80%99s%20failed%20%E2%80%98Asian%20pivot%E2%80%99%20leaves%20China%20ascendant%20%7C%20Simon%20Tisdall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fobama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%E2%80%99s%20failed%20%E2%80%98Asian%20pivot%E2%80%99%20leaves%20China%20ascendant%20%7C%20Simon%20Tisdall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fobama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F319fa7dff33d84e5d4a210edbbd8b957d66d6d87%2F0_146_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 People watch a TV news showing an image that North Korea’s Rodong Sinmun 
newspaper reports of the ground test of a high-powered engine of a carrier 
rocket at the country’s Sohae Space Centre in Seoul, South Korea. Photograph: 
Ahn Young-joon/AP 
Yet for less sanguine analysts, this prospective disparity, this growing lack 
of balance, plus the expanding number of potential flashpoints in the South 
China Sea,Taiwan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> and elsewhere, 
point only one way – towards future military conflict between the US and China. 
The Pentagon now officially refers to the Chinese “threat”.

This is the so-called “Thucydides Trap 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2015/09/united-states-china-war-thucydides-trap/406756/>
”, a reference to the Athenian historian’s account of the seemingly inevitable 
conflict between the rising city-state of Athens and the status quo power 
Sparta in the fifth century BC. Nowadays, the US is the status quo power and 
China the bumptious usurper.

Open conflict is not inescapable, but it is under active discussion. A recent 
study by the Rand Corporation 
<http://nationalinterest.org/blog/the-buzz/new-report-details-why-war-between-china-america-would-be-17210>
 made a detailed examination of who might “win” such a military showdown. It 
concludes that it would probably be catastrophic for both sides. Yet the study 
also suggests that, if war cannot be avoided, the US might be best advised to 
strike first, before China gets any stronger and the current US military 
advantage declines further.

The dilemma is clear: amid rising nationalism in both countries, China is not 
willing to have its ambitions curbed or contained and the US is not ready to 
accept the world number two spot. These two juggernauts are on a collision 
course. It’s unclear who or what can prevent a pile-up.

The other players in the conflict between Beijing and Washington

JAPAN


Faced by what it perceives to be a growing threat from China, Japan’s 
government, led by its conservative prime minister, Shinzo Abe, has sought 
greater freedom to project military force beyond the country’s borders. This is 
controversial, since it involves the “reinterpretation” of Japan’s postwar 
pacifist constitution. Concrete steps include joint naval patrols with the US 
in the South China Sea and direct help for coastal states such as the 
Philippines.

VIETNAM 


The communist one-party regime in Hanoi is an unlikely partner for the US, 
given still painful memories of the Vietnam war. But Vietnam has been wooed by 
Obama and George W Bush as part of Washington’s attempts to control and channel 
China’s regional ambitions. Vietnam has been involved in deadly fishing grounds 
clashes with China, with whom it fought a war in 1979. It has also sought help 
elsewhere. Earlier this month, the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, 
offered a $500m credit line for defence co-operation. But Hanoi is also 
carefully hedging its bets by keeping diplomatic lines open to Beijing.

INDONESIA


The world’s most populous Muslim country, Indonesia has vast human and natural 
resources and is seen as one of the new 21st-century economic players. Anxious 
to balance development needs and national pride, President Joko Widodorecently 
visited the Natuna Islands 
<http://time.com/4379401/indonesia-china-jokowi-natuna-sovereignty-maritime-fishing-dispute/>
 in the southern South China Sea, scene of repeated, minor fishing boat clashes 
with Chinese vessels. Widodo vowed to defend “sovereign territory” against 
foreign encroachment. But, officially, Indonesia calls itself a “non-claimant” 
country and says it is not formally in dispute with Beijing. This suits both 
countries, at least for now. By sidestepping their differences, they can get on 
with business.

SOUTH KOREA 


The Seoul government is more worried about its unpredictable northern 
neighbour than it is about China. Its defence minister said last week that 
South Korea hasplans in place to assassinate Kim Jong-un 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/09/23/asia/south-korea-plan-to-assassinate-kim-jong-un/>
 and the North Korean leadership if the nuclear threat becomes critical. Seoul 
sticks close to the US, which maintains military bases in the country. But 
abiding South Korean distrust of Japan, Washington’s other key east Asian ally, 
dating back to the Second World War, has undermined attempts to present a 
united front to Beijing – with which Seoul maintains friendly relations.

INDIA


Like China, India is rapidly expanding its military capabilities, spending an 
estimated$100bn on new defence systems 
<http://www.defenseworld.net/news/15986/Reliance_Defense_Eyeing_Indian_Defense_Market_Worth__100_Bn__Receives_16_New_Licenses#.V-U8hXqHr7I>
 since Narendra Modi became prime minister in 2014. Like China, its ambition is 
to project itself as a regional superpower looking both east and west. This 
potentially brings the two countries into conflict. They have long-standing 
border disputes in the Kashmir/Xinjiang and Arunachal Pradesh areas. In a 
forerunner to Obama’s pivot to Asia, George W Bush’s administration launched a 
strategic partnership with Delhi, partly as a counterbalance to China. For its 
part, Beijing maintains close ties with Pakistan, India’s historical foe.

RUSSIA 


China and Russia are old enemies dating back to the cold war, but these days, 
they claim to be close friends. A visit to Beijing by President Vladimir Putin 
in June saw the launching of a number oftrade and oil deals worth up to $50bn 
<https://www.rt.com/business/348391-putin-china-visit-rosneft/>. China sees 
Russia as a valuable provider of raw materials but also as a political and 
military partner in relation to the US. In defiance of Washington, the two 
countries held large-scale war games in the South China Sea last week, 
practising taking over islands in disputed waters. Putin also values 
collaboration as a way of circumventing sanctions imposed by the US and EU 
after Russia’s invasion of Crimea.
 