
The election of Donald Trump as the next US president will have been terrible 
news for the 60 detainees still unlawfully incarcerated in Guantánamo Bay. In 
the election campaign, Trump said that he would reverse Obama’s plan to shut 
Guantánamo. He has declared that he would keep it open and andfill it with “bad 
dudes” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/23/donald-trump-wins-nevada-caucuses-results>
, even if they are US citizens.

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has no problem 
with torture. Responding to a question about waterboarding, he replied “I like 
it a lot, I don’t think it’s tough enough … I would bring back waterboarding 
and I’d bring back a hell of a lot worse.”

President Obama has only a few days left to fulfil his pledge of eight years 
ago – to close Guantánamo and end this shameful chapter of US history. All the 
detainees have suffered a total denial of their human rights and years of abuse 
and torture. Many are old and infirm, and in need of long-term medical care. 
Most have been in Guantánamo since it opened nearly 15 years ago. Obama must 
end this gross injustice. Even President George W Bush wanted to close 
Guantánamo. Obama must act with urgency and let the remaining prisoners go home 
to their families before Donald Trump becomes the next commander-in-chief on 20 
January.
Joy Hurcombe
Worthing, West Sussex 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

More readers’ letters on Donald Trump’s election victory 


US election result is a sharp lesson from globalisation’s losers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/us-election-result-is-a-sharp-lesson-from-globalisations-losers>

Brexit Britain and Trump’s America: two nations divided by a common politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/brexit-britain-and-trumps-america-two-nations-divided-by-a-common-politics>

Voters crave politicians who actually stand for something 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/voters-crave-politicians-who-actually-stand-for-something>

The rule of law and a reboot for democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/the-rule-of-law-and-a-reboot-for-democracy>

Media and politicians are out of touch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/media-and-politicians-are-out-of-touch>

The man who’ll make America grate again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/the-man-wholl-make-america-grate-again>



 <mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>


 <mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 