
When I was about 10, I decided I was going to be a musician. I wasn’t sure 
what kind, but conducting was not something I even considered. Growing up in a 
small village on the east coast of Canada in the 70s and 80s, I thought women 
could only conduct choirs or, at best, school orchestras. I didn’t know what 
sexism meant – that was just the way it was. Besides, I loved singing and soon 
realised this was to be my place.

I’ve spent much of my career focusing on contemporary classical music, working 
with composers on new creations, and exploring the works of the 20th century. 
One of my favourite roles is Alban Berg’s Lulu. For me, she is not a femme 
fatale, a sex kitten, or even the victim she’s all too often played as. She’s 
an endlessly fascinating, deliciously contradictory woman who might defy 
labels, but is always true to herself. Whether she wears high heels and a sexy 
red dress or gym clothes, she is comfortable in her own skin, right up until 
the end of the opera when, forced into prostitution, she orchestrates her own 
murder to escape a future she cannot bear. She’s an enormously powerful woman. 
Incorporating her into my life had a huge impact on me.

Turning 40 was painful for me. I had ideas about my worth and place as a 
performer – perhaps also outside performing – that were related to my age. I 
started to avoid myself in the mirror. I wanted to keep my age a secret. I 
spent way too much money on useless face creams. In part, it had to do with my 
shelf life as a singer. Many of us feel we have a best-before date stamped on 
our foreheads. Once we pass 50, voices, especially the higher lighter ones, 
lose elasticity, flexibility and beauty of tone. I was feeling the pressure of 
time.
 ‘Incorporating Lulu into my life had a huge impact’. As Lulu at La Monnaie, 
Brussels. Photograph: PP Hofmann/. 
But Lulu helped me grow older. I sang her at 41. She made me realise that I 
could never have been ready to sing her until exactly that age – my years of 
investment, experience, the 10-20,000 hours of practice really paid off. I had 
needed all that time. And because Lulu is so at home with herself, she 
encouraged me to be the same. Once the production was over, once I had survived 
the experience of becoming her, I kept those qualities and felt a different 
kind of confidence.

As I neared my 40s, I had also started to conduct, and made my debut at the 
Châtelet in Paris with Stravinsky’s chamber opera Renard and Ligeti’s Mysteries 
of the Macabre (which I sang and conducted). It was an overwhelming experience, 
a humbling realisation that the conductor is part servant, part leader and, 
most of the time, just trying to stay out the way. Offers to conduct and sing 
with major orchestras started to come.Simon Rattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/simon-rattle> asked me to perform William 
Walton’s Façade withhim and members of the Berlin Philharmonic in 2012 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=79ahguBURn4&list=RD79ahguBURn4#t=46>, 
splitting the conducting and narrator duties between us.

Being a soprano is, of course, a women-only field. With conducting I was 
expanding into a field dominated by men. I didn’t think of it like that though 
– it was simply something I needed to explore as a musician. But as time went 
on, I noticed that “female” was now attached to the “conductor” label, where it 
had never been attached to the singer label.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8ZKaMuALMMY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8ZKaMuALMMY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8ZKaMuALMMY&media=>
For Façade, I wore something appropriate to the theatricality of the piece – a 
strapless evening gown. A friend commented on the expressivity of my arms, and 
it struck me that this was part of my strength as a conductor. When I’d made my 
debut at the Châtelet, I’d worn a suit: many women conductors wear either 
gender-neutral outfits or something resembling a man’s suit. I thought trousers 
and jacket were the “costume” I had to put on. However, to cover my arms in a 
jacket might serve convention, but not the music – and I never wear suits in 
real life! Ever since, I’ve worn a sleeveless dress to conduct. It’s something 
I can move in that doesn’t distract me or the orchestra – and it fits the music 
on the programme. I don’t tie my hair back, either, because I never do unless 
I’m having a bad hair day. I’ve had nothing but positive feedback about this 
from orchestras and audiences. None find it a problem that I’m not soberly clad 
in a dark suit. Critics do invariably always remark on my attire, though, which 
isn’t something they regularly do with male conductors.

Public discussion of gender issues is so loaded. Sticky. I even hesitate here 
and begin to censor myself.Vasily Petrenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/02/male-conductors-better-orchestras-vasily-petrenko>
, the conductor of theRoyal Liverpool Philharmonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/liverpool-philharmonic-orchestra>, and Bruno 
Mantovani <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/dec/10/bruno-mantovani-review>
, head of the Paris Conservatory, have set the bar high regarding the top 10 
lame comments on women conductors; even my own teacher, Jorma Panula,made 
disparaging comments on TV a day or two 
<http://www.limelightmagazine.com.au/Article/381595,jorma-panula-claims-women-should-not-be-conductors.aspx>
 a day or two before I was to conduct at the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam. Even 
though his comments weren’t personal, I felt terribly hurt. We’d been working 
intensely together on Stravinsky, Schöenberg and Ligeti, and here he was 
criticising musicianship and skill based on gender, claiming that women should 
only conduct “women’s music”, such as Debussy and Fauré. “It’s not a problem,” 
he said, “if [women conductors] choose more feminine music. Bruckner or 
Stravinsky will not do, but Debussy is OK. This is purely an issue of biology.”

I wonder if he regrets what he said. We spoke about it the following day, but 
he didn’t take it back, even though he must have known how much it hurt me and 
many other people, men and women alike. Some friends suggested maybe it was a 
“trick” – that he said it to spur on women conductors who had studied with him. 
Who knows? Wishful thinking, probably.

Whenever I was asked about the issue in interviews, I used to dismiss it. But 
as time has gone on, I realise it is important. Earlier this year, en route to 
a concert, I read in the New York Times that twofree climbers in Yosemite 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2015/01/150114-climbing-yosemite-caldwell-jorgeson-capitan/>
 had finally reached the top of the Dawn Wall. “I hope [our achievement] 
inspires people to find their own Dawn Wall,” said one. I went on stage that 
evening energised by that quote, and I’ve carried it with me since: conducting 
has become my own not so secret Dawn Wall. Conducting is one of those few final 
frontiers in which there is a dearth of women. For me, though, the issue is 
much more complicated than a call of “We need more women conductors!” It is 
musicianship, psychology and technical skill all bound together in a rare type 
of leadership that is elusive. It is neither male nor female. Convention has 
kept the field dominated by men. Convention and, of course, some everyday 
sexism – because before a woman gets on the podium, she needs to get into a 
conducting class at university, and before that even, she needs to see the 
career as a viable option, something I didn’t as a child.

A friend’s young daughter saw me conducting on TV the other day, and said: 
“Mommy, I didn’t know women wereallowed to be conductors.”

• Barbara Hannigan  <http://www.barbarahannigan.com/>conducts the Britten 
Sinfonia in Birmingham on 5 May, in London on 6 May, in Saffron Walden on 9 May 
and at the Brighton festival on 12 May. Details:Britten Sinfonia. 
<http://www.brittensinfonia.com/>

• The headline of this article was amended on 12 March 2015 to match the one 
that appeared in print.
 