
Barclays has reached a $100m (£77m) settlement with more than 40 US states for 
fraudulent and anticompetitive conduct in relation to theLibor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor> rigging scandal.

The agreement, announced by the New York attorney general, Eric Schneiderman, 
follows the£290m fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/27/barclays-chief-bob-diamond-bonus-fine>
 imposed on Barclays four years ago by UK regulators – and others such as the 
US Department of Justice – for manipulating the benchmark interest rate.
What is Libor? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=what_is_libor>
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> is the first of 
several banks involved in setting the US dollar Libor to resolve investigations 
with attorney generals across the US. Seven states are not involved in this 
latest agreement.

Schneiderman said government entities and not-for-profit organisations were 
defrauded of funds because they did not know Barclays and other financial firms 
were manipulating the rate, which is used to price an estimated $350tn of 
financial products.

“There has to be one set of rules for everyone, no matter how rich or how 
powerful, and that includes big banks and other financial institutions that 
engage in fraud or impair the fair functioning of financial markets,” said 
Schneiderman. “As a result of Barclays’s misconduct, government entities and 
not-for-profits were defrauded of funds that otherwise could have been used to 
benefit the people ofNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>.”

The settlement agreement (pdf) 
<https://ag.ny.gov/sites/default/files/ag_barclays_settlement_agreement_signed_execution_copy_8_8_16.pdf>
 included details of emails and conversations between Barclays staff about 
making changes to the Libor rate during two periods: during the financial 
crisis when the bank tried to reduce its rate to avoid the idea it was in 
trouble, and later to benefit the positions of traders.


Barclays said it was pleased to have resolved the investigation. “We believe 
this settlement is in the best interests of our shareholders and clients, and 
allows us to continue to focus on the future and serve our clients,” the bank 
said.

EU bank stress tests: vulnerability of Barclays and RBS under scrutiny
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/30/eu-bank-stress-tests-vulnerability-of-barclays-and-rbs-under-scrutiny>
The way Libor <https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor> is calculated has 
been changed since the scandal, but at the time, it was set by a panel of banks 
making submissions about the rate they thought they would be asked to pay to 
borrow from rival banks over different time frames.

In one exchange in December 2007, a Barclays employee involved in submitting 
rates told his supervisor: “At the same time that we were setting at 5.30% I 
was paying 5.40% ... in the market. Given a free hand I would have set at 
around 5.45% ... My worry is that we [both Barclays and the contributor bank 
panel] are being seen to be contributing patently false rates. We are therefore 
being dishonest by definition and are at risk of damaging our reputation in the 
market and with the regulators.”

The settlement is with 43 US states and the District of Columbia.
 