
Barclays has agreed to hand over internal documents to the Serious Fraud 
Office in a change of approach towards the SFO’sinvestigation into its rescue 
fundraising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/aug/29/sfo-investigation-barclays-qatar>
 during the financial crisis.

The bank will give the SFO communications linked to the inquiry into whether 
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> and its leaders made 
false and misleading statements about a £7bn deal with Middle Eastern investors.

Barclays had argued that the documents contained legal advice protected by 
client-lawyer privilege. However, it changed its stance before a court hearing 
due in March at which the SFO intended to argue that legal privilege did not 
allow documents to be withheld from a fraud inquiry.

The SFO is examining Barclays’ payment of £322m in advisory fees to Qatar 
Holdings, a subsidiary of Qatar’s sovereign investment fund, when the bank 
strengthened its finances in 2008. The capital injection allowed Barclays to 
stay out of the government’s bailout of UK banks and avoided the Treasury 
becoming a shareholder.


The SFO pressed its case for the release of the documents at a private hearing 
in December. The chairman of Barclays, John McFarlane, and the chief executive, 
Jes Staley, have said they want toend disputes with regulators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/28/barclays-appoints-jes-staley-new-chief-executive>
 that have damaged the bank’s reputation.

Senior Barclays managers interviewed by the SFO for its investigation, which 
has been going on for at least three years, include the former finance director 
Chris Lucas.

Barclays admitted three years ago that the City regulator, the Financial 
Conduct Authority, hadissued it with a £50m fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/16/barclays-fined-reckless-2008-fundraisings>
 for “reckless” behaviour in relation to its fundraising, which was backed by 
Qatar. The bank is contesting the fine.

Barclays made much of its ability to avoid a taxpayer bailout at a time when 
Royal Bank of Scotland and LloydsBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group were forced into 
state-backed rescues. But the deal has come back to haunt it.

As well as the SFO’s inquiry and the contested FCA fine, Barclays faces a 
claim for nearly £1bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/barclays-1bn-lawsuit-deal-2008-financial-crisis>
 brought by Amanda Staveley, who helped arrange a £3.5bn investment by Abu 
Dhabi’s Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan as part of the fundraising. Staveley 
is seeking fees that she believes her company is due from the deal.

Responding to the Staveley suit, Barclays said last week: “We believe the 
claim against Barclays is misconceived and without merit and Barclays will be 
vigorously defending it.”

If the hearing over the Qatar documents had gone ahead, it would have been the 
first time the SFO, under pressure to achieve results after a series of botched 
investigations, challenged a company over the matter in court.

Barclays and the SFO declined to comment.
 