
Segways have lots of advantages: they’re environmentally friendly, silent and 
sort of fun ... maybe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/31/usain-bolt-how-hard-it-is-to-ride-a-segway>
. What’s more, despite being acommon joke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ocVQDKZ3TQ8> in film and TV shows, they have 
found a solid economic niche: city tours. But they can also be tremendously 
annoying for pedestrians.

Barcelona, for now at least, has had enough. After summer upon summer of what 
the mayor’s office calls “complaints and problems” from residents of Ciutat 
Vella – the central neighbourhood and the one most affected by mass tourism – 
the city council has provisionallybanned Segways from the waterfront 
<http://www.citylab.com/commute/2016/07/barcelona-has-finally-had-enough-of-segways/489992/>
 for the summer months.


The proliferation of personal mobility vehicles in recent years has caught 
Barcelona, and other cities around the world, off guard. “These include 
tricycles, electric scooters, flying wheels … Anything you could imagine,” says 
Mercedes Vidal, mobility councillor for Barcelona. “Technology has progressed 
much more quickly than any possible regulations cities could introduce.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsegways-ban-barcelona-spain-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F573d80527eb6d8c17edba301157d620d19b950eb%2F0_0_8000_5333%2F8000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%20bans%20Segways%20on%20seafront&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsegways-ban-barcelona-spain-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%20bans%20Segways%20on%20seafront&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsegways-ban-barcelona-spain-summer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F573d80527eb6d8c17edba301157d620d19b950eb%2F0_0_8000_5333%2F8000.jpg>
 People driving Segways take over the streets of Barcelona. Photograph: Artur 
Debat/Getty Images 
Indeed, with bikes, Segways, tricycle taxis, vendors, bathers, wanderers, 
walking tours, scooters and actual citizens who are trying to get from A to B 
coexisting in a stretch of pavement five metres wide – and with searing 
temperatures thrown into the mix – it’s easy to imagine how clashes could 
happen. While apparently there’s only been one accident and complaints at the 
inconvenience of sharing the street, with seven separate companies offering 
tours along the beach operating a total of 136 Segways, it could have just been 
a matter of time.

The Segway issue is 'only the tip of the iceberg'
Mercedes Vidal 
The council is now working on city-wide regulations, but the urgent need to 
decongest the area during the summer to “avoid an excessive pressure on 
neighbours” has prompted it to introduce a temporary ban of Segways between the 
W Hotel and the Olympic Port, through to 1 October. All unregulated vehicles 
(those that don’t require permits, unlike Segways) have been banned as well. 
Riders in the no-go area will face a €90 fine, and up to €1,125 for riding “in 
a dangerous or inconsiderate fashion”, such as breaking the 10km/h speed limit.

“We turned to other European cities like Paris, Amsterdam and London for 
guidance, but these vehicles have never been regulated in a thorough way,” said 
Vidal. She notes that most other cities “don’t have the pressure Barcelona has 
on its public spaces. As always, we’re dealing with the fact that it’s an 
incredibly dense city, with an added high touristic pressure.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsegways-ban-barcelona-spain-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7455752865fac47bd636fb5175ed9ca9ce67e63b%2F0_520_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barcelona%20bans%20Segways%20on%20seafront&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsegways-ban-barcelona-spain-summer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barcelona%20bans%20Segways%20on%20seafront&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsegways-ban-barcelona-spain-summer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7455752865fac47bd636fb5175ed9ca9ce67e63b%2F0_520_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Bad weather won’t even stop Segwayers in Paris. Photograph: Alamy 
In London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/12/uk-hoverboard-crackdown-all-you-need-to-know>
, Hong Kong andNew York City 
<http://abc7ny.com/news/police-confirm-hoverboards-are-illegal-in-new-york-city/1090166/>
, the solution has been to ban Segways outright. Prague recently joined that 
club, fearinga serious accident could be imminent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/prague-seeks-to-put-brakes-on-segway-boom>
. This all resurfaced, with no little confusion, whenhoverboards made a 
comeback (from fiction) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/12/hoverboards-illegal-pavements-roads-scooters>
 last year.

In other cities, however, Segways have taken over: an online directory 
<http://www.segwayguidedtours.com/> lists 622 guided tours in 56 countries and 
427 cities, with the US at the top with 324 tours, followed by Spain with 44. 
Their coexistence with pedestrians remains problematic, as does deciding 
whether they belong in car, pedestrian orcycle lanes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-living-blog/2010/jan/11/segways-bike-lane>
.


Barcelona has a population density that is high enough by itself (15,685 
people per sq km, compared to London’s 5,491 or Copenhagen’s 1,850) without 
taking into account the27 million tourists who visit every year 
<http://www.thelocal.es/20150705/barcelona-struggles-with-rising-tide-of-tourists>
. The Segway issue is, says Vidal, “only the tip of the iceberg”.

Superblocks to the rescue: Barcelona’s plan to give streets back to residents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/17/superblocks-rescue-barcelona-spain-plan-give-streets-back-residents>
The Ada Colau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/ada-colau-barcelona-most-radical-mayor-in-the-world>
-led council has been grappling with the effects of mass tourism, one of the 
city’s economic engines but also a threat to the very quality of life that 
makes it so attractive. Among the efforts to clamp down on its negative effects 
are amoratorium on new hotel beds 
<http://elpais.com/elpais/2015/07/02/inenglish/1435828213_655223.html> 
(recently extended to a second year), crackdowns onAirbnb 
<http://www.citylab.com/housing/2015/12/barcelona-airbnb-tourism/421788/> and 
similar tourist apartments, restrictions onbar crawls 
<http://www.lavanguardia.com/local/barcelona/20150707/54433254470/ciutat-vella-multara-promotores-bares-rutas-borrachera.html>
 and measures to reduce street noise.

Last summer, Segway companies joined forces with electric bikes and bike taxis 
to form the Association for Sustainable Mobility and Tourism. “All of a sudden 
they all felt like criminals,” says the group’s secretary, Santi Torrent. He 
thinks Segways have been tackled because they are very visible. “You have these 
people on these kind of pulpits, smiling, and here we are getting disastrous 
salaries. Segways are an easy target.”

Torrent admits, however, that “we can’t talk about a common space, a citizen 
space, when this space is completely over-saturated. Especially in a city where
car density 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/17/superblocks-rescue-barcelona-spain-plan-give-streets-back-residents>
 is through the roof, any solution to make Barcelona breathe is welcome.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 