
Barnaby Joyce has delivered a strong defence of the 457 visa program and its 
importance to regional Australia, saying temporary workers are essential to 
fill demand for jobs such asdoctors and meatworkers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/george-christensens-ban-on-457-visas-would-hit-own-electorate-hard-analysis-shows>
.

In the face of strident criticism of the program from fellow National MP 
George Christensen and Labor,Joyce wrote in an article for Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/in-the-country-we-dont-see-457-visa-holders-as-a-threat-we-see-them-as-a-benefit>
 that such workers were a benefit not a threat.

“The first thing that all Australians would love in their town is an 
Australian doctor,” Joyce wrote.


In the country we don’t see 457 visa holders as a threat, we see them as a 
benefit | Barnaby Joyce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/in-the-country-we-dont-see-457-visa-holders-as-a-threat-we-see-them-as-a-benefit>
“And if they can’t get an Australian doctor, the next best thing is a foreign 
doctor. It’s a real worry for people in regional Australia that if you or your 
child gets sick, there simply is no doctor there.

“Now the Australian Medical Association might say that there are too many 
doctors coming on line, but maybe they all live in Double Bay.”

Joyce said while skills for jobs such as abattoir workers and doctors might 
exist in Australia, those people might not want to move to the areas where 
their skills were required.

“The only way we can attract people to many of these towns is if the business 
structure is complete and furnished with all the right skills at all the right 
levels,” Joyce said.

“And foreign workers are often necessary for that. People in regional towns 
expect that. There is no animosity.”

In 2013, Labor proposed tightening up the 457 visa system after significant 
growth in the use of the program by employers.

Malcolm Turnbull says Shorten a 'rank opportunist' over 457 visas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/malcolm-turnbull-says-shorten-a-rank-opportunist-over-457-visas>
Before this year’s federal election, Labor proposed a crackdown 
<http://www.100positivepolicies.org.au/a_fairer_temporary_work_visa_system_fact_sheet>
 on foreign workers under the 457 program, promising to implementa mandatory 
requirement for all jobs to be advertised as part of labour market testing 
obligations, minimum advertising periods before hiring foreign workers and bans 
on advertising for foreign workers only.

Bill Shorten then highlighted the policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/bill-shorten-vows-labor-will-crack-down-on-457-visa-program>
 in a regional tour in the week after Donald Trump won office in the United 
States.

At the same time, Christensen wrote to Joyce and the ministers for employment 
and immigration requesting a moratorium on 457s in his Queensland region 
hardest hit by the mining downturn.


The Coalition announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/coalition-announces-cut-to-how-long-457-visa-holders-can-seek-work>
 it was already tightening the rules on 457 visa workers by forcing them to 
leave Australia within 60 days instead of 90 if they lost their jobs.


But Joyce said the lack of doctors in regional and rural areas infuriated 
people when there were many doctors in some cities.


“If doctors wanted to spread themselves evenly across the country, then we 
would all probably be OK,” Joyce said. “But they don’t.”


Apart from health workers such as doctors and nurses, Joyce said abattoir work 
was unpopular so vacancies were filled by temporary foreign workers who could 
use the experience to become Australians.

“Do you want to pack offal, or the smelly guts of a cow?” Joyce wrote. “Do you 
want to bone out skulls, do a bovine form of ‘alas poor Yorick’? No, you don’t.

“Most people would want to work as the accountant at the abattoir or one of 
the other higher level jobs. But someone has to do these unpopular jobs if the 
abattoir is to work properly.

“And when people come in from overseas to do it, the town is happy, the 
abattoir is working, and people have jobs.”

He said in Rockhampton, the number of meat workers on 457 visas had gone down 
because temporary workers were transitioning to full residency.

“These 457 workers wanted to become Australians and constructive members of 
the community: buying houses, bringing up their kids,” Joyce wrote. “And that’s 
exactly what happened.”

He said foreign workers were also necessary because a small number of 
Australians did not want to work, and he would not want to close down a local 
abattoir to find out why some did not want to work.

Coalition announces cut to how long 457 visa holders can seek work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/16/coalition-announces-cut-to-how-long-457-visa-holders-can-seek-work>
“The overwhelming numbers of Australians want to work, and they work very 
hard,” Joyce wrote.

“I’m not a social worker being paid to determine why someone thinks that 
sitting around getting fat and playing video games is a better outcome than 
having a job.

“And I’m not going to close down the local abattoir by trying to discover a 
solution or a reason. That’s why I believe in decentralisation – it is an 
active process of expanding the opportunity and social texture of regional 
cities and towns. Because people attract people.”
 