
The bereaved husband of a young woman killed in the Paris attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> has written an open letter to 
her killers, vowing that he and the couple’s baby son will never live in fear 
of terrorists.


Antoine Leiris, a journalist at the French radio network France Bleu, decided 
to address the gunmen after his wifeHélène Muyal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/nov/16/paris-attack-victims-lives-cut-cruelly-short>
, 35, was killed in theatrocity at the Bataclan concert hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/something-from-dantes-hell-harrowing-details-of-bataclan-siege>
 on Friday night.

In an emotional note on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/antoine.leiris/posts/10154457849999947> titled “You 
will not have my hatred”, Leiris wrote: “On Friday evening you stole the life 
of an exceptional person, the love of my life, the mother of my son, but you 
will not have my hatred.

“I don’t know who you are and I don’t want to know, you are dead souls. If 
this God for whom you kill blindly made us in his image, every bullet in the 
body of my wife is a wound in his heart.

“So no, I will not give you the satisfaction of hating you. You want it, but 
to respond to hatred with anger would be to give in to the same ignorance that 
made you what you are.”

The scene at La Belle Equipe after the Paris attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/nov/17/la-belle-equipe-paris-attacks-photographs>
Muyal, a makeup artist, was among the 89 people killed when gunmen opened fire 
at the Bataclan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/paris-attacks-man-helped-pregnant-woman-hanging-from-window-of-bataclan>
 during a gig by the US rock band Eagles of Death Metal.

The letter continued: “You would like me to be scared, for me to look at my 
fellow citizens with a suspicious eye, for me to sacrifice my liberty for my 
security. You have lost.


“I saw her this morning. At last, after nights and days of waiting. She was as 
beautiful as when she left on Friday evening, as beautiful as when I fell head 
over heels in love with her more than 12 years ago.

“Of course I am devastated with grief, I grant you this small victory, but it 
will be short-lived. I know she will be with us every day and we will find each 
other in heaven with free souls which you will never have.

“Us two, my son and I, we will be stronger than every army in the world. I 
cannot waste any more time on you as I must go back to [my son] who has just 
woken from his sleep. He is only just 17 months old, he is going to eat his 
snack just like every other day, then we are going to play like every other day 
and all his life this little boy will be happy and free. Because you will never 
have his hatred either.”

The open letter, which had been shared more than 100,000 times by Tuesday 
evening, is one of several extraordinaryacts of defiance and bravery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/15/architect-student-engineer-critic-among-identified-paris-attack-victims>
 that have emerged in the aftermath of the murderous attacks.

Ludovic Boumbas, a 40-year-old Congolese man, has been hailed as a hero of the 
Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> attacks after it emerged that 
he threw himself in the way of a bullet aimed at his friend Chloe Clement. He 
was one of 19 people killed in the assault on La Belle Equipe restaurant. 
Clement is believed to have survived.

'Something from Dante's hell': harrowing details of Bataclan siege
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/something-from-dantes-hell-harrowing-details-of-bataclan-siege>
Also killed at the cafe were Ionut Ciprian Calciu, 32, and his girlfriend 
Mariana Lacramioara Pop, 29, who had an 18-month-old son. They were not 
supposed to be at the cafe on Friday night, according to Calciu’s cousin, 
Ancuta Iuliana Calciu.

“They weren’t even sure what restaurant to go to. There was another one about 
250 metres away they wanted to go to,” the cousin told Associated Press. Calciu 
repaired elevators and Pop, who also had an 11-year-old daughter from a 
previous relationship, worked in a bar. “I’m so glad they didn’t take their son 
that night,” the cousin said.

At another restaurant, Petit Cambodge on rue Alibert, businessman Sebastien 
Proisy, 38, was killed by a bullet in the back after stepping outside while his 
dinner partner smoked.

Proisy, who had a son with his Bulgarian wife, had recently ventured into 
international business consulting. He was at a business dinner on Friday night, 
accompanying one of his guests outside to smoke when the gunmen opened fire on 
the restaurant, his great uncle Daniel Senecaut told La Voix du Nord website.
 