
Bath, who have not made the Premiership play-offs in five seasons, face 
Leicester, the side never missing from the semi-finals in a decade, full of 
beans with their head coach, Mike Ford, hailing a break-through into the 
Premiership’s top four.

Ford has an injury-free squad from which to select for Saturday’s semi-final. 
“Everyone’s fit,” he said after Bath had claimed their ninth bonus point win of 
the season with a 50-30 victory againstGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby> at The Rec. “It’s a 
fantastic position to be in, playing Leicester at home with a fully fit squad. 
We can’t wait.”

Bath had just ended the regular season with a seven-try romp, beating an 
under-strength Gloucester side who included eight from their academy in the 
match-day 23 and five making their Premiership debuts. Ford conceded Bath versus
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> – they have been 
knocking lumps off each other since well before the dawn of professional rugby 
– would be a different matter “not unlike a Test match”.

“I know we conceded 30 and there was a bit of an end-of-season, 
nothing-at-stake feel to the game, but looking at the 22 matches it’s been a 
great season. Last year we were one point off getting fourth place. This year 
we’re one point off top.

“Over the last four or five years it’s only been Northampton, Leicester, Quins 
and Sarries. We’ve now broken into the top four,” said Ford.

Gloucester have their own play-off to prepare for. On Sunday they play Connacht
 in the first of two play-offs for the 20th and final place in next season’s 
Champions Cup.

Gloucester got there by winning the Challenge Cup and rescuing their season. 
Connacht <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/connacht>, who fought back to get 
within four points of the Ospreys on Saturday, are there as the highest-placed 
Guinness Rabo12 side not to have already qualified for Europe’s top tier.

Should Gloucester win at Kingsholm on Sunday, they will play the 
seventh-placed French side in the Top 14, currently Racing Métro, although they 
have one match to play. That will also be a Gloucester home fixture, but at 
Worcester rather than Kingsholm where Madness are centre stage.

The Rabo12 was sorted on Saturday with all six games kicking off at 3pm and 
Glasgow coming out on top. Their Scotland fly-half Finn Russell scored two 
tries and claimed 22 points to beatUlster 32-10.

Glasgow scored four tries in 18 minutes in the second half in front of a 
packed Scotstoun Stadium to take the bonus points which guaranteed a home 
semi-final and their first top-of-the-table finish.Ulster return to Glasgow on 
Friday for that semi.

Munster, in second place, and Ospreys also made the play-offs while Scarlets 
andLeinster qualify for the Champions Cup – the Dublin side running in five 
tries againstEdinburgh at Murrayfield to ease some of the pressure on their 
coach, Matt O’Connor.
 