
More than a week after a Philippine supreme court’s decision, the former 
president Ferdinand E Marcoshas been buried at the Heroes’ Cemetery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/philippine-dictator-ferdinand-marcos-given-controversial-heros-burial>
, in Metro Manila. In what is seen as a surprisingly quick move by his family, 
the enbalmed dictator’s body was flown over in secret in an attempt to avoid 
protests.

Public concern over Marcos’ final resting place, who died aged 72 in 1989, is 
focused on whether he deserved to be buried at Heroes’ Cemetery, known as 
Libingan ng mga Bayani (LNMB). The cemetery, in Taguig City, south-east Metro 
Manila, commemorates war veterans and “national heroes” and is also a burial 
site for dignitaries and renowned artists and scientists, as well as presidents.

Marcos is a polarising figure among the people of the Philippines. His 
presidency spanned 1965 to 1986 and during his first term the government 
developed the country’s infrastructure building many schools and hospitals. But 
Marcos is most likely to be remembered for his declaration of martial law, in 
his second term, a period which led to the closure of more than80 newspapers, 
292 radio stations and public utility services 
<http://www.gov.ph/featured/infographic-day-marcos-declared-martial-law-september-23-1972/>
 providing electricity, water and transport.

While Marcos sought to implement his vision of a new republic – promoted in 
the movement Kilusang Bagong Lipunan – his martial law, from 1972 to 1981, 
caused the deaths of 3,240 people, imprisonment of 70,000 and torture of 
34,000, according to Amnesty International.

Rodrigo Duterte, the current president of the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> defended the decision over the 
burial of Marcos, ruling it to be in the public interest, and stressing that 
the president had been a war veteran.

Here we hear from members of the public about what the burial means for them.

‘LNMB regulations are very clear’


Should he have been buried in LNMB? Yes, very much so. As [he was] a former 
soldier and twice elected president of the country, the supreme court decision 
is as straightforward as it gets. Regulations stipulate who should be buried at 
the LNMB and these are very clear. [Burial] there does not confer any sort of 
hero status to anyone, and one can argue that the name of the place is a 
misnomer given that not everyone buried there deserves to be called a hero. 
That being said, a lot of the coverage ignores the fact that a sizable number 
of Filipinos view Marcos as a great president for one reason or another. The 
decision brings closure to countless Filipinos who can finally put an end to a 
widely divisive issue.

Ronald Po, 35, industrial engineer, Quezon City

‘I suffered 13 years hiding underground, a year and a half in prison’

I am one of many petitioners who asked the supreme court to overturn their 
decision. Due to martial law, I suffered 13 years hiding underground and a year 
and a half in prison, with over a month in solitary confinement. I graduated 
from the University of the Philippines Diliman in 1969 and went on to teach 
English there. During this time I was a contributing editor at Graphic magazine 
and wrote articles attacking Marcos, beginning with the “first quarter storm” 
in 1970 [an uprising against Marcos led by students and workers].
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmarcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f47afce1b5148fff2917b3f49525c469fac19f9%2F0_62_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battle%20over%20Marcos%3A%20Philippine%20citizens%20react%20to%20'hero's%20burial'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmarcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battle%20over%20Marcos%3A%20Philippine%20citizens%20react%20to%20%27hero%27s%20burial%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmarcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f47afce1b5148fff2917b3f49525c469fac19f9%2F0_62_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Mila (pictured left) with friends at the Great Lean Run in University of the 
Philippines Diliman. Photograph: Mila D Aguilar 
In 1972, my husband and I were accused of subversion and rebellion and had to 
go into hiding. I had to leave my son with my mother – he was only 18 months 
old. When I finally saw him again he was already 17 years old. In 1984 I was 
arrested and imprisoned. I was freed in 1986 through the auspices of President 
Cory Aquino.

Mila D Aguilar <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mila_D._Aguilar>, 67, poet, 
Quezon City
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmarcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4f8af728c7310bbdfaa512647d9a50c7d08b806%2F0_28_1932_2415%2F1932.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battle%20over%20Marcos%3A%20Philippine%20citizens%20react%20to%20'hero's%20burial'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmarcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battle%20over%20Marcos%3A%20Philippine%20citizens%20react%20to%20%27hero%27s%20burial%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmarcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4f8af728c7310bbdfaa512647d9a50c7d08b806%2F0_28_1932_2415%2F1932.jpg>
 Krip Yuson 
‘Many Filipinos still bear the scars of his plundering’


He should definitely not have been buried in the LNMB. He is no hero, and so 
many Filipinos still bear the scars of his depredations and plundering during 
his one-man rule. Our people power revolution that ousted him is enough to mean 
that his rule as president ended dishonourably, so that no legalistic reckoning 
of his right to be buried in hallowed ground should take precedence over our 
memories of how he and his family did our country much harm – and yet they 
managed to insinuate themselves back into political power, with absolutely no 
remorse.

The blame can also largely be laid on our new president who has been using his 
so-called popularity to ram through his callous decisions and policies, similar 
to his unconscionable “war on drugs”.


Krip Yuson <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alfred_Yuson>, 71, writer and 
editor, Manila


‘He is a soldier after all’


He deserved a hero’s burial. He is a soldier who almost died in the Bataan 
death march during the second world war. Also, God forgives sinners. Some of 
the accusations made against him have not been proven, there are so many 
ambiguities and theories going around that it should be left alone. People 
should move on.

Ferdy, government employee, Tacloban
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmarcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd9b1aad0c66d54852a2889441283dba96b22e3%2F235_0_4676_2805%2F4676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battle%20over%20Marcos%3A%20Philippine%20citizens%20react%20to%20'hero's%20burial'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmarcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battle%20over%20Marcos%3A%20Philippine%20citizens%20react%20to%20%27hero%27s%20burial%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmarcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cd9b1aad0c66d54852a2889441283dba96b22e3%2F235_0_4676_2805%2F4676.jpg>
 Demonstrators by the Lapu Lapu monument in Rizal Park, Manila. Photograph: 
Jilmer Cariaga 
‘The burial has been long overdue’


Marcos built a lot of our present day infrastructure, be it the LRT, Cultural 
Centre of the Philippines, or National Arts Centre, etc. The burial at the LNMB 
has been long overdue. He fought as a guerrilla in the second world war. Proud 
and patriotic as a Filipino, he lived his life serving the nation. I agree with 
Duterte allowing him his deserved burial. We need to move forward, heal the 
wounds and learn from the ugly past.

Venz P, 48, food chemist, Clark City, Pampanga
 Marah 
‘It would be spitting on the legacy of the people who fought to give me and 
others the freedom we enjoy today’


He is not worthy to be buried there. Heroes are those who have sacrificed 
their lives for this country. Marcos had stolen money, killed and tortured 
people (through his orders), and this alone should be reasons for him not to be 
buried there.

There are many families who have not had closure from the years of martial 
law. Some of their family members or friends are yet to be found. Women in 
detention centres were reportedly sexually abused, with people subjected to 
psychological, emotional and physical abuse, and the poverty rate of the 
Philippines increased during his time as president.

Burying Marcos in the LNMB would be spitting on the legacy of the people who 
fought to give me and younger people the freedom we enjoy today. It is because 
of those brave people that we owe our lives to them. If anyone should be buried 
in the Heroes’ Cemetery it should be them. Not a lying, stealing, dictator.


Marah, 23, brand manager, Quezon City
 