
 The government has spent at least £600,000 of taxpayers’ money trying to 
prevent a civil case being brought against it by a husband and wife who allege 
that British intelligence was complicit in their detention, rendition and 
torture.

Figures released under the Freedom of Information Act reveal the extraordinary 
lengths to which the government is going to prevent the civil case against it, 
former home secretaryJack Straw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>
, and former MI6 spy chief Sir Mark Allen coming to court.

Special report: Rendition ordeal that raises new questions about secret trials
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/08/special-report-britain-rendition-libya>
The case is being brought on behalf of Abdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj>, an opponent of Colonel 
Muammar Gaddafi, and his wife, Fatima Boudchar, who were seized in Malaysia and 
rendered via Bangkok to Libya in 2004 in an operation conducted jointly by MI6, 
the CIA and Libyan intelligence. Boudchar says she was chained to a wall for 
five days and subsequently taped to a stretcher for a 17-hour flight, which 
left her in agony. She was held in a Libyan prison until just before the 
delivery of her son, who was born weighing just four pounds. On arrival in 
Libya, Belhaj was imprisoned for six years, during which time he says he was 
regularly subjected to torture.

Their claims are similar to those made by another opponent of Gaddafi, Sami 
al-Saadi, who alleges that he, his wife Karima and their four children, aged 
12, 11, nine and six, were detained in Hong Kong before being rendered toLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> with the full knowledge and help of 
MI6.

Saadi’s eldest daughter, Khadija, has described 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/24/britain-family-gaddafi-legal> 
hearing her mother “saying that we were being taken back to Libya to be 
executed by Colonel Gaddafi”, and says she “fainted, because I was sure we were 
going to be killed”. Saadi, like Belhaj, was held for six years and also 
alleges that he was tortured.

The UK’s role in the two rendition operations was revealed in 2011, when faxes 
fromMI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6> to Gaddafi’s spy chief, Moussa 
Koussa, were found following the fall of the regime. The faxes revealed Allen, 
MI6’s former head of counter-terrorism, discussing the role of UK intelligence 
in securing the arrival of what he termed the “air cargo”.

The Metropolitan police carried out a criminal investigation into the two 
renditions but the Crown Prosecution Service ruled earlier this month that 
there was“insufficient evidence” to bring charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/10/libyan-rendition-couple-boudchar-belhaj-criticise-cps-decision>
.

The Saadi family received a £2m settlement two years ago. However, Belhaj and 
Boudchar have pursued a civil court action as they seek an apology. Supporters 
say the case represents one of the few remaining opportunities they have of 
exposing the role played by the UK government in rendition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fmi6-600k-legal-bill-block-libyan-couple-rendition-civil-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F791db82e2435ea4ce6624146064aeb0bfc34c67e%2F0_29_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battle%20to%20stop%20Jack%20Straw%20facing%20Libya%20rendition%20charges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fmi6-600k-legal-bill-block-libyan-couple-rendition-civil-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battle%20to%20stop%20Jack%20Straw%20facing%20Libya%20rendition%20charges&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fmi6-600k-legal-bill-block-libyan-couple-rendition-civil-case%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F791db82e2435ea4ce6624146064aeb0bfc34c67e%2F0_29_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 Abdel Hakim Belhaj, former Libyan rebel commander. Photograph: BBC 
However, information released under FOI shows that by 10 September last year 
the government had spent £355,000 on internal legal advice and £259,000 on 
external advice as it sought to have the case dropped. Of this, £27,000 was 
spent on advice relating to Straw and £110,000 on advice relating to Allen.

The FOI data reveals that the government has been paying as much as £250 an 
hour to two senior barristers involved in defending the action. A number of 
junior barristers have also been charging between £45 and £120 an hour.

Given that the figures are 10 months old, there is speculation that the total 
cost of fighting the case – before it even comes near a court – could be well 
in excess of £10m.

“The government has wasted over half a million pounds in taxpayers’ money 
arguing that torture cases shouldn’t get their day in court, simply to spare 
the blushes of MI6 and the CIA,” said Cori Crider, a lawyer for the victims at 
international human rights organisationReprieve <http://www.reprieve.org.uk/>. 
“Meanwhile my clients, Abdel Hakim and Fatima, are prepared to settle for just 
£3 – one pound per defendant – and an apology.”

The government argues that the case should not be heard on the grounds that it 
would involve ruling on the activity of a foreign government. The Supreme Court 
is currently considering this.

The issue of rendition will be thrown into sharp relief on Wednesday when it 
is the subject of a parliamentary debate. “The government must use this week’s 
debate on renditions as a chance to finally come clean over Britain’s 
involvement in rendition and torture, and apologise to the victims of this 
shameful practice,” Crider said.

“Saying sorry to the women and children that were kidnapped and abused by 
British intelligence is not only the right thing to do – it will allow our 
country to finally move on from this dark chapter in the ‘war on terror’.”
 