
Bayern Munich will be able to count on the fit-again winger Arjen Robben 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/best-goals-week-carlos-tevez-arjen-robben-jack-grealish>
 when the Bundesliga leaders host second-placed RB Leipzig on Wednesday in 
their final league match of the year.

Robben, who missed the 1-0 win over Darmstadt 98, was ruled fit along with 
Philipp Lahm who also missed Saturday’s match.

Bundesliga managers on edge before winter break as Red Christmas awaits | 
Raphael Honigstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/bundesliga-managers-on-edge-before-winter-break-as-red-christmas-awaits>
“Arjen Robben has trained well,” the Bayern manager, Carlo Ancelotti, said. 
“So far he is fit and we will need all our players tomorrow. He has been 
playing very well this season and he is an extremely important player for us.”

The winger Franck Ribéry, who played 20 minutes against Darmstadt is set to 
start against Leipzig.

Bayern are on 36 points, ahead of promoted Leipzig on goal difference, with a 
draw or a win enough for the champions to secure top spot until the league 
resumes on 20 January after the winter break.

Leipzig have broken almost every record for Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> newcomers, racing to 
11 wins out of 15 matches and losing only once.

“We know Leipzig’s character. They play together, they play fast. We have to 
play our game and be focused,” said Ancelotti, whose team are chasing a 
record-extending fifth consecutive Bundesliga title.

Ancelotti praised his opponents, loathed by many German fans because of owners 
Red Bull’s massive cash injections, saying money was not enough to make a team 
successful. Red Bull bought the licence of an unknown amateur club back in 2009.

It has since seen their team race through the divisions to reach the 
Bundesliga this season and earn the wrath of many fans, who accuse Leipzig of 
lacking tradition and being only a promotional tool to sell drinks.

“Money is not the most important thing in football. Leipzig have struck the 
right balance and success boosts their confidence,” Ancelotti said. “They are a 
young team, playing with a lot of enthusiasm. We will not change much. Our aim 
is to win the game and for that we need the right balance between our own 
lines.”
 