
Bayern Munich swept aside RB Leipzig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/21/bayern-munich-v-rb-leipzig-bundesliga-live>
, scoring all their goals in the first half, in a one-sided top-of-the-table 
Bundesliga match.

Bayern Munich v RB Leipzig: Bundesliga – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/21/bayern-munich-v-rb-leipzig-bundesliga-live>
The visitors played for an hour with 10 men after Emil Forsberg was given a 
straight red card in the 30th minute, but they were already two goals behind.

Thiago Alcântara and Xabi Alonso got Bayern off to a flying start with two 
goals in a seven-minute spell midway through the first half and Robert 
Lewandowski added a third from a penalty on the stroke of half-time.

Bayern moved three points clear of promoted Leipzig, who had previously lost 
only one game, at the top as theBundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> reached its winter 
break.

“I’m very satisfied. We were very aggressive and quickly got the game under 
control,” said the Bayern manager, Carlo Ancelotti. His Leipzig counterpart, 
Ralph Hasenhüttl, recognised Bayern’s superiority. “That was a lesson for us 
and a top performance from Bayern. Our system only works when everyone is in 
synchrony and that wasn’t the case today. I’m still proud of what the team has 
achieved until now. You don’t get a point deducted for losing 3-0.”

Leipzig did not initially appear overawed and made a lively start, but Bayern 
got the crucial first goal after 17 minutes. Philipp Lahm sent in a low cross 
from the right, Lewandowski fired against the post and Thiago managed to force 
the ball over the line with his thigh.

Eight minutes later, Naby Keïta was dispossessed by Arturo Vidal in midfield 
and the ball was quickly worked to Alonso who scored with an angled shot. It 
got worse for Leipzig when Forsberg halted a Lahm breakaway with a studs-up 
challenge from behind. The referee got out a yellow card but changed to it red 
amid Bayern protests and after consulting with his linesman.

Another Leipzig error led to the third goal when Douglas Costa was clumsily 
sent flying by the goalkeeper Peter Gulacsi and Lewandowski converted the 
penalty.

Bayern eased up after half-time although they still continued to dominate and 
carve out chances almost at will. Lewandowski saw a dinked effort land on the 
roof of the net, Douglas Costa had a piledriver of a free-kick saved by Gulacsi 
and Franck Ribéry hit the underside of the crossbar.
 