
Bayer Leverkusen <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> will 
not extend Javier Hernández’s contract and are planning to sell the player this 
summer. The Mexico striker’s deal runs until June 2018 but the Guardian 
understands the Bundesliga club is expected to cash in on the former Manchester 
United and Real Madrid player in the next transfer window.

Transfer window January 2017: all the latest moves and news – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Despite reports in Germany linking Hernández with a €25m (£21.4m) move in 
January, the club has yet to receive any offers or notable interest and does 
not plan on selling the 28-year old before the summer.

Hernández joined Leverkusen in August 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/31/javier-hernandez-manchester-united-bayer-leverkusen-move>
 for a modest fee of €11m after limited success on loan at Madrid during the 
2014‑15 season and, although he will be 30 by the time his contract expires, 
they are hoping to make a profit.

Hernández has scored only five goals in 15 Bundesliga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> games this season as 
part of a Leverkusen squad that has largely underperformed, with the club’s 
sporting director, Rudi Völler, going as far as to suggest the striker had to 
step up his game because the team “need a Chicharito who functions”.

Before the winter break the squad were warned by the coaching staff about 
recent performances but there was no falling out between Hernández and either 
the coach or his fellow players, as reported by Bild. Hernández arrived at the 
club’s training camp in Orlando on Wednesday as usual.

He took to the Bundesliga with relative ease, scoring 33 goals in 48 games all 
told. With 17 Bundesliga goals, he finished behind only Robert Lewandowski, 
Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Thomas Müller in his opening German campaign.

However, Hernández has struggled to recreate such form this season, with his 
last league goal coming in a 2-0 win over Borussia Dortmund on 1 October. The 
striker has gone 649 minutes without scoring.

Nonetheless he is likely to fetch a reasonable price in the summer, with clubs 
in England or Spain likely to offer the opportunity to continue his career in 
Europe, although a return to Mexico may be an option.
 