
The BBC’s security correspondent, Frank Gardner, has criticised the treatment 
of disabled passengers travelling by plane after being left on aneasyJet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> flight when it landed at Gatwick 
airport.

Gardner, whose legs were paralysed when he was shot six times by al-Qaida 
sympathisers in Saudi Arabia in 2004, said on Twitter he was left on the plane 
after all other passengers had departed because special assistance staff failed 
to turn up.

The journalist, who was returning from the French Alps, blamed the outsourcing 
group OCS, which is responsible for disability access at the airport, but also 
criticised easyJet for not using an airbridge that was standing within sight of 
the plane.
Frank Gardner (@FrankRGardner) 
Once more stuck on empty plane at Gatwick Airport after all passengers off and 
heading home as special assistance have failed to turn up.
pic.twitter.com/2fFgJFwGOQ <https://t.co/2fFgJFwGOQ>
 <https://twitter.com/FrankRGardner/status/818187369471950853> January 8, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/FrankRGardner/status/818187369471950853> Frank Gardner 
(@FrankRGardner) 
Dear @Gatwick_Airport <https://twitter.com/Gatwick_Airport> @easyJet 
<https://twitter.com/easyJet> @Ocs_Assist <https://twitter.com/Ocs_Assist> Your 
failure to get disabled pax promptly off planes even AFTER all others r off is 
inexcusable.
 <https://twitter.com/FrankRGardner/status/818208612594098177> January 8, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/FrankRGardner/status/818208612594098177> Frank Gardner 
(@FrankRGardner) 
For those kindly following my @Gatwick_Airport 
<https://twitter.com/Gatwick_Airport> hassles the responsibility rests 
primarily with@Ocs_Assist <https://twitter.com/Ocs_Assist> but @easyJet 
<https://twitter.com/easyJet> ignored airbridge pic.twitter.com/qGdNK5WNfL 
<https://t.co/qGdNK5WNfL>
 <https://twitter.com/FrankRGardner/status/818205816448749568> January 8, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/FrankRGardner/status/818205816448749568> 
Speaking on the BBC News channel, Gardner said: “It happens so bloody often, 
that it’s just really tedious. Time and time again if the plane lands at a 
British airport and it’s not on an airbridge, disabled passengers like me have 
to wait for the ... high lift to come and get you off.

“Sometimes it arrives on time, which is great. But often, and last night was 
one of those times, when the minutes are ticking, all the passengers are off, 
they’re already going through customs, some of them will even have gone out to 
their friends and taxis and I’m still on the plane and the cleaners have 
started to come on board, and ground staff.

“I’m saying to the flight crew: where’s the lift to get off the plane? ‘Oh, 
we’ve called them several times, but they haven’t turned up.’ They did turn up 
eventually and they said: ‘Well, thing is, we’re understaffed.’

“OCS, which is the company that does this, say they’re not understaffed but 
the problem in this case was that easyJet, which doesn’t like using airbridges 
because it’s more expensive, I’m told, gave them only three days’ notice, 
saying: ‘We’re not going to use the airbridge, we’re going to use steps 
instead’”.

Gardner said it was not the first time he had been stranded on a flight. 

“Nothing’s changed, it happens time and time again,” he said. “I think it’s 
perfectly reasonable to say disabled passengers shouldn’t have to get off at 
the same time as everybody else, it would cause a congestion.

“But once everyone else is off, get them off the plane. Don’t keep people 
waiting there so long that the cleaner’s already on the plane for the next 
flight. It’s not on. This is 2017. And it’s the UK. And we can do better than 
this.”

Gardner said he did not expect the experiences of disabled passengers would 
change unless “financial inducements or penalties” were introduced.

He said on Twitter that Gatwick airport, easyJet and OCS had all responded and 
pledged to investigate the issue of disabled passengers being stranded on 
flights.


A spokeswoman for easyJet said it was sorry Gardner had been delayed on 
disembarking. “We have taken this up with OCS who are the special assistance 
provider to all airlines at London Gatwick airport and are in contact with Mr 
Gardner about his experience.”

The Guardian has approached OCS for comment.

Last week, the award-winning Paralympic athlete and disabilities campaigner, 
Anne Wafula Strike, told the Guardian she wasforced to wet herself on a 
three-hour train journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
 after the CrossCountry service failed to provide an accessible toilet.

Wafula Strike, 42, a British wheelchair racer who has no use of her legs, said 
she was “completely robbed of her dignity”.
 