
The future of music has been revealed: according to votes cast by 170 
international industry figures, solo stars – ranging from rap and grime MCs, 
soul singers and DIY producers – are going to be prevalent in 2017.

Next year’s longlist includes 15 rising acts and was assembled by music 
experts, including critics, broadcasters and DJs. For the first time, the panel 
also included international pundits.

2017’s list includes grime MCs AJ Tracey, rappers Nadia Rose and Stefflon Don, 
soul singer Jorja Smith, contemporary blues artist Rag ‘n’ Bone Man and rapper 
and producer Dave. In among the less familiar names isAnderson Paak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/10/anderson-paak-interview-malibu-dr-dre>
, Dr Dre’s protege who released his acclaimed second album earlier this year. 
Another is American producer and songwriter Maggie Rogers,who rose to fame 
earlier this year after a video of <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G0u7lXy7pDg>
 an amazed Pharrell Williams listening to her music in a masterclass went 
viral. Rock and indie acts remain minimal, however, with Cabbage and The 
Amazons the only two guitar groups featured.

“The BBC Music Sound of 2017 longlist shows that next year is already shaping 
up to be a big one filled with amazing music from homegrown talent that are 
already being supported across Radio 1 and 1Xtra,” said MistaJam,BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 1Xtra DJ . “From the driving rock 
of The Amazons to Dave’s 18-year-old inner city street tales via Maggie Rogers’ 
folk meets electronic soundscapes, the list shows the breadth and quality of 
what we can expect next year.”

The top five will be revealed in January on BBC Radio 1, with one artist 
announced each day from Monday 2 January. Previous winners include Sam Smith, 
Haim, Elllie Goulding and Adele. This year’s winner will be unveiled on 6 
January on Clara Amfo’s show.

The poll, now in its 13th year, was topped last year by British 
singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist Jack Garratt. Listen to a Spotify 
playlist of the featured artists below:

The BBC Music Sound Of 2017 long list in full:

· AJ Tracey

· Anderson Paak

· Cabbage

· Dave

· Declan McKenna

· Jorja Smith

· Maggie Rogers

· Nadia Rose

· Rag ‘n’ Bone Man

· Ray BLK

· Raye

· Stefflon Don

· The Amazons

· The Japanese House

· Tom Grennan

 * Read the Guardian’s Future 50 feature: featuring Jorja Smith, Cabbage and 
more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/the-future-50-the-rising-stars-to-look-out-for> 