
As the Serpentine Gallery prepares to open its annual summer pavilion, dusting 
off the champagne flutes for its glitzy VIP receptions next week, the first 
ever pavilion in the 15-year-old programme is playing host to a parallel summer 
party of a rather different kind. Three hundred miles south-west, in a 
far-flung corner of Cornwall, thezig-zagging roof of Zaha Hadid’s experimental 
marquee 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/serpentine-gallery-pavilion-2000-zaha-hadid-0>
 is providing an unusual shelter for an under-12s’ fancy dress ball.

Gimme shelter: afterlives of the Serpentine Gallery pavilions – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jun/16/serpentine-gallery-pavilions-afterlives-in-pictures>
“I admit it’s looking a bit sad and sorry for itself, but it has served us 
well,” says Michael Enright, managing director ofFlambards 
<http://www.flambards.co.uk/> theme park in Helston, where the pavilion now 
stands between a fibreglass model of Humpty Dumpty and the Shiver Me Timbers 
adventure playground. Shrieks of terror rain down from the teetering tower of 
the nearbySkyraker <http://www.flambards.co.uk/rides/detail/skyraker> ride, 
while more screams come from dangling chairs, whirling from a carousel above a 
bucolic backdrop of rolling fields.

As just another tatty marquee in a jumbled landscape of peaked tents and 
ageing geodesic domes, the formerSerpentine pavilion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/serpentine-pavilion> is barely 
recognisable as the futuristic origami structure that landed in Kensington 
Gardens in 2000. Its white canvas roof is sagging and stained, its formerly 
transparent walls replaced with crumpled sheets of silvery PVC.

“It’s quite a challenge to maintain,” says Dean Woods, the park’s 
entertainment co-ordinator, as he sets up for the afternoon’s I’m a Celebrity 
Bug Eating Challenge, laying out bowls of insects on a stage decorated with 
plastic jungle ferns. “Because of all the different angles in the roof, as soon 
as I’ve fixed one bit, then the water ponding shifts to another area.” He has 
fitted makeshift yellow plastic gutters and added poles to prop up the roof, 
while a Wall’s ice-cream bin on top of the chipboard dressing room keeps the 
ceiling from caving in behind the stage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434469534214%2Fdb4755d3-2a42-48d0-81c8-9c6e141ea58f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beach%20cafe%2C%20billionaire's%20retreat%2C%20wedding%20marquee%3A%20second%20lives%20of%20the%20Serpentine%20pavilions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beach%20cafe%2C%20billionaire%27s%20retreat%2C%20wedding%20marquee%3A%20second%20lives%20of%20the%20Serpentine%20pavilions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434469534214%2Fdb4755d3-2a42-48d0-81c8-9c6e141ea58f-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The Ito-Balmond Serpentine pavilion now serving as a beachside restaurant in 
the grounds of the luxury hotel Le Beauvallon, in Côte d’Azur. Photograph: 
James Reeve 
Over the years, the Serpentine pavilion programme quickly became established 
as an annual christening of starchitects’ baubles, and most pavilions have been 
sold off to private collectors – with the help of estate agent Knight Frank – 
and a Rolodex of high-net-worth individuals. The collectors see their purchases 
as charitable donations to the gallery: the sum covers around 40% of the 
project cost, with the rest made up by sponsorship and help-in-kind.


Last year’s ethereal space-egg, by Smiljan Radic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/24/serpentine-pavilion-smiljan-radic-architecture>
, was bought by theHauser and Wirth gallery 
<http://www.hauserwirthsomerset.com/>, where it is now ensconced in a meadow in 
the grounds of their Somerset outpost. But it’s one of the few that are open to 
the public.Daniel Libeskind’s 2001 pavilion briefly popped up in Cork 
<http://www.cork2005.ie/programme/strands/architecture/eighteenturns.shtml>, 
for the city’s European Capital of Culture celebrations in 2005, where it was 
described as an “icon of contemporary Cork, as well as an expression of the 
creative architectural possibilities for the city’s future”. It hasn’t been 
seen since, now likely languishing in storage.

But 15 years ago, the inaugural pavilion wasn’t on any collectors’ radar. So 
after its spell at the Serpentine, it became a temporary theatre in the car 
park of the Royal Shakespeare Company in Stratford-upon-Avon. When its 
undulating roof proved a challenge for audience sight-lines, it was dismantled 
anddonated to a local farmer 
<http://www.domusweb.it/en/architecture/2012/11/12/tales-from-beyond-the-grave.html>
.

“It was a very good buy,” says James Hale, former director of Flambards, who 
acquired the structure a decade ago. “It was much cheaper than an off-the-peg 
marquee, because they wanted to get rid of it. I had a thing for collecting 
unusual buildings – we’ve got pavilions from Goodwood and a tensile dome from 
Switzerland – so I snapped it up.”

Since then, the pavilion (which is now known as the Kingsford Centre, hireable 
for £500) has played host to weddings and discos, comedy nights and concerts. 
On rainy days they screen cartoons here and have face-painting sessions. A 
Stranglers gig once attracted a crowd of 600, while a World Cup evening 
bequeathed the building its green carpet floor, which sinks in places where the 
original wooden base has rotted away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434548819593%2F28468e9a-cce6-48fc-be0f-66c3a77618e0-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beach%20cafe%2C%20billionaire's%20retreat%2C%20wedding%20marquee%3A%20second%20lives%20of%20the%20Serpentine%20pavilions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beach%20cafe%2C%20billionaire%27s%20retreat%2C%20wedding%20marquee%3A%20second%20lives%20of%20the%20Serpentine%20pavilions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F17%2F1434548819593%2F28468e9a-cce6-48fc-be0f-66c3a77618e0-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Inside Zaha Hadid’s Flambard’s marquee. Photograph: Oliver Wainwright for the 
Guardian 
The provenance of this humble tent comes as news to the current staff at 
Flambards, although they seem unfazed when I explain that they are proud owners 
of one of Zaha Hadid’s first-ever buildings, the early work of a designer who 
is now dotting the world with fantastical opera houses, art museums and 
rippling skyscrapers. “Her first building?” says general manager Richard Smith 
with a wry smile. “Well that explains a few things.”

While Hadid’s pavilion has led an anonymous afterlife, other Serpentine 
structures have gone on to be resurrected as celebrated trophies by their 
wealthy owners. Two pavilions are currently enjoying a sun-kissed retirement in 
the south of France:Toyo Ito’s triangulated white box 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/serpentine-gallery-pavilion-2002-toyo-ito-and-cecil-balmond-arup>
 from 2002 now stands on a beach near Nice, where it is undergoing 
refurbishment as a cafe forLe Beauvallon hotel 
<http://www.fivestaralliance.com/luxury-hotels/beauvallon/le-beauvallon-hotel>. 
It was brought there by Hong Kong property developer Victor Hwang, the one-time 
owner of Battersea Power Station, where it was briefly deployed as a venue for 
eating overpriced cakes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434469185801%2Faeb33aac-5c5a-493e-8b56-c06adb413d81-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beach%20cafe%2C%20billionaire's%20retreat%2C%20wedding%20marquee%3A%20second%20lives%20of%20the%20Serpentine%20pavilions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beach%20cafe%2C%20billionaire%27s%20retreat%2C%20wedding%20marquee%3A%20second%20lives%20of%20the%20Serpentine%20pavilions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434469185801%2Faeb33aac-5c5a-493e-8b56-c06adb413d81-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Frank Gehry’s Serpentine pavilion in Aix-en-Provence 
Two hours’ drive west, near Aix-en-Provence, stands the crooked heap of Frank 
Gehry’s 2008 pavilion 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/serpentine-gallery-pavilion-2008-frank-gehry-0>
, a wayward pile of chunky wooden columns and faceted glass canopies that 
appear to be caught mid-collapse. It might look like the instruction manual got 
lost in shipping, but this is how it was always meant to be. Indeed, the 
structure makes more sense here inChateau-la-Coste 
<http://www.chateau-la-coste.com/>, surrounded by an elysian landscape of 
vineyards and wooded hills, than it ever did lurching drunkenly outside the 
Serpentine Gallery.

It was acquired by Irish property developer Paddy McKillen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/06/hotel-wars-claridges-connaught-berkeley>
, whose luxury empire includes Claridge’s and the Connaught hotels, and who has 
assembled something of an architectural menagerie on his French domain over the 
last decade. Gehry’s pavilion, which is used for outdoor concerts and events at 
this centre of biodynamic wine production, joins a concrete visitor building by 
Tadao Ando, a barrel-vaulted winery by Jean Nouvel and an 18th-century teahouse 
from Vietnam. Awine cellar-cum-art gallery by Renzo Piano 
<http://www.rpbw.com/project/120/chateau-la-coste-art-gallery/> is currently 
under construction, along with a Richard Rogers pavilion and designs by Kengo 
Kuma, Sou Fujimoto and Junya Ishigami in development. Buying the pavilion seems 
to have given McKillen something of a bug for amassing signature architectural 
trinkets. And he’s not the only one to have caught it.

“I suppose the addiction started in 2003,” says a collector who has acquired 
no less than four of the past Serpentine pavilions, speaking to me on condition 
of anonymity. “I fell in love withthe Oscar Niemeyer project 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/serpentine-gallery-pavilion-2003-oscar-niemeyer>
, and I just had to have it.” Then cameAlvaro Siza and Souto de Moura’s wooden 
gridshell 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/serpentine-gallery-pavilion-2005-alvaro-siza-and-eduardo-souto-de-moura-cecil-balmond-0>
, which he was “bowled over by”, then theRem Koolhaas balloon 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/serpentine-gallery-pavilion-2006-rem-koolhaas-and-cecil-balmond-arup-0>
, thenOlafur Eliasson’s spiralling cone 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/serpentine-gallery-pavilion-2007-olafur-eliasson-and-kjetil-thorsen>
, all of which he acquired “for many millions” – but which now lie packed up in 
storage. His long-term ambition is to find a site where they can be rebuilt and 
opened to the public, “rather than being a private folly,” but he has no 
current plans for what or where. So what brought an end to his pavilion 
spending spree? “Money,” he says. “They got rather pricey. I’m not in the 
league that allows me to go round buying things for the sake of buying things.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473873301%2F5c78440b-f748-46f0-8bb5-0104c708247a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beach%20cafe%2C%20billionaire's%20retreat%2C%20wedding%20marquee%3A%20second%20lives%20of%20the%20Serpentine%20pavilions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beach%20cafe%2C%20billionaire%27s%20retreat%2C%20wedding%20marquee%3A%20second%20lives%20of%20the%20Serpentine%20pavilions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F16%2Fserpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473873301%2F5c78440b-f748-46f0-8bb5-0104c708247a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ai Weiwei’s Serpentine pavilion on Usha and Lakshmi Mittal’s estate in Surrey 
One couple who are very definitely in that league, and who funded and then 
acquired the2012 pavilion by Ai Weiwei and Herzog and de Meuron 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/exhibitions-events/serpentine-gallery-pavilion-2012-herzog-de-meuron-and-ai-weiwei>
, live just across the park from the Serpentine on the “billionaires’ 
boulevard” of Kensington Palace gardens, in what was reported to bethe most 
expensive house in the country 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/2014300/Lakshmi-Mittal-to-buy-Britains-most-expensive-house-for-117-million.html>
 when they bought it. But Lakshmi and Usha Mittal’s London pile is nothing 
compared to what the steel magnate and his wife are building on their 340-acre 
estate in Surrey. In the leafy surrounds of Alderbrook Park, near Cranleigh, is 
fast risingan eco-mansion crowned with a pair of tapering stupas 
<http://www.prsarchitects.de/tfl_palestra_building.php?id=98&180_prsa_web=37dacc93ecd5f268850ed3d9da3e2d75>
, beyond which the 2012 pavilion now nestles, its circular steel roof 
shimmering next to an ornamental lake.

“We haven’t had a chance to use it much yet because of all the building work,” 
Usha Mittal tells me. “But when everything is finished I think it will be a 
very peaceful place to meditate or read a book.”

She was attracted to the design, which takes the form of an excavated dell, 
lined with cork steps and topped with a circular reflecting pool, because “it 
has a very serene atmosphere and an almost oriental feeling”, and they already 
owned some of Ai’s vases. But she admits it is hard to maintain in the English 
climate: the water pool gets coloured and the cork gets a bit musty after rain. 
The pavilion will be open to the public by appointment, she says, as part of the
Royal Academy’s Ai Weiwei exhibition 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibition/ai-weiwei> later in the year.

So have they set their sights on acquiring any more pavilions? This year’s 
structure, a psychedelic chrysalis by Spanish architects Selgas Cano, has 
already been sold to another anonymous buyer. “It wasn’t us,” says Mittal, with 
a chuckle. “I think one is enough.”

Julia Peyton-Jones on 15 years of selling the Serpentine pavilions

In the early days, people used to walk into the gallery and say: “I’m going to 
buy the pavilion.” Which was quite frustrating – because you could bet your 
bottom dollar those were the people that never would.

The people who buy the pavilions do so in enormously good faith. They need to 
have a lot of land, as well as the ability to pay for dismantling the 
structure, moving it and resurrecting it, as well as fulfilling all of the 
statutory requirements of planning permission. There was someone who was 
desperate to buy the Niemeyer pavilion [in 2003] for a site in the south of 
France, but all their discussions with the mayor indicated they wouldn’t get 
planning permission, so they didn’t.

Knight Frank were very important in the early days [the gallery stopped using 
them four years ago], dealing with the contractual side of things, and the 
whole discussion of “will you, won’t you, how much?” More recently, the whole 
business has settled down. People now buy the pavilion before it has even been 
built.

The model was established from the first year: the idea that there was a 
legacy, that the things should not disappear, but have a life ahead of them. 
The Libeskind pavilion [in 2001] was conceived as a flat-pack, which could have 
been made as an edition – but no more buyers ever came forward, so the idea 
never played out. The pavilion project is predicated on the exhibition model, 
rather than the architecture model, so several people could buy the rights to 
rebuild a pavilion.

All the architects know the pavilion will move, but it has never been designed 
with another site in mind. We obviously prefer the buildings to be on public 
view, rather than being kept in storage, but sometimes the time just isn’t 
right to show them. We were once approached by someone who wanted to do an 
exhibition of all the pavilions and travel it around the world – but the sums 
involved were too enormous. I remember as a child being told the story of the 
American who bought the old London Bridge and removed it bit by bit to 
reinstall it in America. We like to think the pavilions explore this idea of 
temporariness and permanence, with each building having an ongoing afterlife in 
a very different way.Interview by Oliver Wainwright.
 