
The legalisation of marijuana in several US states has not curbed beer sales, 
according to new research, as Americans managed to find room in their social 
schedules for both.

Analysts at investment firm Bernstein said fears that the brewing industry 
would be sent into chronic decline 
<https://www.ft.com/content/f72c1f00-b254-11e6-a37c-f4a01f1b0fa1> by red-eyed 
revellers reaching for joints instead of beers have proved unfounded.

“At first sight, one would regard marijuana and alcohol in general as clear 
rivals and that every extra dollar spent on weed meant a dollar less on booze,” 
they said.

Pot blocks: obstacles keep small business owners from a multibillion-dollar 
market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/31/legal-marijuana-pot-cannabis-dispensary-small-business-regulation>
But rather than swapping Budweiser for bud-smoking, the legalisation of 
marijuana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/state-ballot-initiative-election-results-live-marijuana-death-penalty-healthcare>
 for medical or recreational purposes has in some cases corresponded with an 
uptick in beer consumption.

In states where medical marijuana is legal, beer consumption was down 0.6% on 
average in the three years leading up to legalisation, but rose 0.1% in the 
three years after.

Bernstein admitted its analysis was based on a relatively small number of 
states over just a few years but said: “Our analysis indicates that the 
legalisation of medical marijuana had a positive impact on beer volume trends.”

It said this suggested “beer and weed are complements rather than substitutes”.

The picture was more mixed in states where recreational marijuana use has been 
legalised, but showed no signs that beer was losing out in favour of weed.

The surprising results could be down to smokers having more money in their 
pockets to spend on beer, thanks to a fall in the price per gram of marijuana 
since legalisation, said Bernstein.

In the state of Washington, habitual tokers paid around $10 per gram in March 
2016, down from $25 in September 2014.

While the budding legal weed industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/may/23/marijuana-conference-billion-dollar-business>
 faces higher costs from taxes and regulation, Bernstein said retail prices had 
still fallen because black-market dealers require a premium to offset the risk 
of imprisonment.

“This would imply that previous users of marijuana now have more disposable 
income to spend on either more booze or more weed,” they said.

The report, put together by a team of 10 analysts, also highlighted anecdotal 
evidence suggesting a degree of overlap in the cultures surrounding marijuana 
and craft beer.

It pointed to what has become known as the “St Patrick’s Day massacre” 
<https://lagunitas.com/the-st-patricks-day-massacre>, when police raided an 
event staged by the Lagunitas beer brand, at which pot-smoking was commonplace.

Lagunitas later produced a brand of beer commemorating the event, while its 
annual production figures still make reference to 420, a number commonly used 
as shorthand for marijuana culture.

Its published beer output figures for the years 2010 to 2014 all ended in the 
figures 420.

“One does not need to look far into popular culture to see that beer and weed 
cultures can be highly complementary,” said Bernstein.

The investment firm also highlighted several other industries that stood to 
benefit from marijuana legalisation, mainly companies likely to benefit from an 
onset of the munchies.

They include Domino’s Pizza, Mexican food chain Chipotle and salty snacks firm 
Frito Lay.

California became the first state to legalise medical marijuana in 1996, but a 
wave of states have since followed suit.

There are currently 28 states whose citizens can reach for a joint to ease 
their suffering and eight where its use is allowed for recreational purposes.

• This article was amended on 17 January 2017 to remove a reference to Oskar 
Blues
 