
In the summer of 1812, Goethe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johann-wolfgang-von-goethe> and Beethoven 
were walking arm in arm through the streets of the Bohemian spa resort of 
Teplitz when their path was blocked by a gaggle of oncoming dukes and 
duchesses. “They must make way for us, not the other way around,” composer told 
poet. But Goethe, 21 years his senior and a seasoned courtier, removed his hat, 
stepped aside and bowed. “I have waited for you,” said Beethoven when Goethe 
finally caught up, “because I respect you and I admire your work, but you have 
shown too much esteem to those people.” For Beethoven, the only true royalty 
were artists.

 The incident was described 20 years later by the writer Bettina von Arnim, a 
friend of both. Her account inspired Carl Rohling’s 1887 paintingThe Incident 
at Teplitz 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/01/Incident_Teplitz_1812.png>
. On the left is Goethe, hand on heart, bowing deeply. In the foreground is 
Beethoven, barrelling towards us grumpily. The image dramatises various 
positions: age hobbled by compromise; youth fearlessly challenging old values; 
the artist as proto-hipster at odds with society and civility.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e2e8f55043d31063b00a88a7b8ba68d1b8c452%2F0_0_4550_6088%2F4550.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beethoven%20in%20dreadlocks%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20show%20that%20celebrates%20great%20myths%20about%20the%20composer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beethoven%20in%20dreadlocks%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20show%20that%20celebrates%20great%20myths%20about%20the%20composer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e2e8f55043d31063b00a88a7b8ba68d1b8c452%2F0_0_4550_6088%2F4550.jpg>
 Beethoven, la joue appuyée sur une main, by
Antoine Bourdelle. Photograph: Musée Bourdelle / Roger-Viollet 
Only one problem: it probably didn’t happen, certainly not as Von Arnim 
described it. It’s one of several anecdotes about Beethoven that are 
simultaneously celebrated and debunked in a scintillating exhibition in Paris 
calledLudwig Van: Le Mythe Beethoven 
<http://philharmoniedeparis.fr/fr/ludwig-van/parcours-de-lexposition>. It’s a 
story that typifies how, as far as Beethoven and other great artists are 
concerned, myth trumps reality. The former serves our needs, the latter is what 
scholars put in dusty old books.


As Beethoven mutated from man to myth, his deafness – a tragedy for him, no 
doubt – became a Kiplingesque just-so story. Victor Hugo, the exhibition tells 
us, considered Beethoven’s hearing loss a boon to the composer and certainly to 
us: it freed him to write music unencumbered by tradition. For the sculptor 
Antoine Bourdelle, whose bronze Baudelairean Beethoven is among a room of busts 
of the composer, deafness enabled him to perceive the harmonies of heaven, 
perhaps even to hear God.


In an installation commissioned for the exhibition, Samuel Aden plays with 
this idea of clairvoyant composer by means of a peep show featuring shimmering 
moonlight effects and a bone-conduction hearing aid that supplies to visitors a 
non-auditory version of the Moonlight Sonata. It’s an experiment in another 
kind of hearing, echoing what Beethoven had to resort to, and it exposes the 
myth of the composer having a hotline to heaven.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F981f367b56065df5c8981ec2837825c489bdea7d%2F0_0_2787_2807%2F2787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beethoven%20in%20dreadlocks%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20show%20that%20celebrates%20great%20myths%20about%20the%20composer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beethoven%20in%20dreadlocks%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20show%20that%20celebrates%20great%20myths%20about%20the%20composer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F981f367b56065df5c8981ec2837825c489bdea7d%2F0_0_2787_2807%2F2787.jpg>
 Chuck Berry’s Roll Over Beethoven, 1956. Photograph: Chuck Berry, BackBiter DR 
Myth also makes for a better story. The truth? Let others worry about that for 
us. Did Mozart, when asked to play the keyboard à la Salieri, conclude his 
parody with a fart? <https://youtu.be/9A0a7QCLTcE?t=3m20s> Sure, why not? Was 
Salieri driven into such existentially unholy rage that God made a vulgar fop 
into a musical genius whose music would resound eternally while his own 
costively achieved oeuvre would become fast obsolete, that he killed his 
revival? Yeah, whatever.

Those drawn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/27/amadeus-review-national-michael-longhurst-lucian-msamati-salieri>
 to theNational Theatre’s current revival 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/amadeus> of Peter Shaffer’s play 
don’t want the truth. Yes, historianAlex von Tunzelmann is no doubt right to 
give the film D plus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/22/amadeus-reel-history> for 
historical accuracy and to argue that “the fact that the entire premise of this 
film – that Salieri loathed Mozart and plotted his demise – is probably not true
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/22/amadeus-reel-history>” But 
still. Accuracy? Yawn.

I’m so long accustomed to Tom Hulce’s interpretation of Mozart in Milos 
Forman’s adaptation of Peter Schaffer’s playAmadeus as vulgarian with 
irritating laugh <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YkaDRvFYoZA> that the truth 
about what Mozart looked like comes as a shock. InJohann Georg Edlinger’s 
painting 
<http://kids.britannica.com/comptons/art-51264/Wolfgang-Amadeus-Mozart-portrait-by-Johann-Georg-Edlinger-in-the>
, sometimes considered to depict the composer not long before his death in 
1790, Mozart looks – to my eyes – infinitely more sophisticated and cultured 
than the Schaffer-Hulce version. He’s a man of the world, meeting our gaze with 
intelligent eyes, a genial genius rather than profane petomane.

But my supposed truth about Mozart turns out to be another projection, another 
myth masquerading as documentary fact. Apparently, hardly any scholars believe 
that Edlinger’s portrait actually depicted the composer. The Mozart I want to 
exist – sophisticated, worldly, the eternal anti-Hulse – did not exist either, 
or at least there are no such versions of him in the 14 depictions of the 
composer made during his life. Perhaps the truth is that Mozart really was the 
libidinous, scatological yob of Amadeus. After all, his canon for six voices in 
B flat isLeck mich im Arsch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C78HBp-Youk> 
(K231), translating literally as “Lick me in the arse”.

When great dead artists – particularly great dead composers – are concerned, 
we are lost if we seek to know the truth about what they were like or looked 
like.

 Or are we? Consider Beethoven.

Imagine, whispered my audio guide as I walked towards a vitrine in room two, 
having your face smothered with plaster, only able to breathe through two 
straws inserted into your nostrils. This is what Viennese sculptor Franz Klein 
did to Beethoven in 1812. The first attempt failed since Beethoven, 
suffocating, pulled the plaster from his face. The next was successful, yet the 
resulting life mask – depicting the composer with eyes closed – came to be seen 
as what it was not: his death mask. Again myth trumps, and distorts, reality.


Beethoven wasn’t dead when Klein’s plaster hardened over his lightly oiled 
faced. The 42-year-old was at the height of his powers and had 15 more years to 
live. Which is why it is so heartening to see, in this vitrine containing the 
mask, the full context explained. That’s not to say the exhibition seeks to 
present the truth of Beethoven shorn of myth: rather, it draws attention to 
what we have done to him since his death: made him immortal, transformed bits 
of him into holy relics (a lock of his hair is exhibited in the show), made his 
house a place of pilgrimage, converted his life into symbolic anecdotes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5fffacaef1a175dfea5d90b90b9b71f4d1ca442%2F613_78_1438_1845%2F1438.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beethoven%20in%20dreadlocks%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20show%20that%20celebrates%20great%20myths%20about%20the%20composer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beethoven%20in%20dreadlocks%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20show%20that%20celebrates%20great%20myths%20about%20the%20composer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5fffacaef1a175dfea5d90b90b9b71f4d1ca442%2F613_78_1438_1845%2F1438.jpg>
 Terry Adkins’s Synapse (from the Black Beethoven series), 2004. Photograph: 
Courtesy of the Estate of Terry Adkins and Salon 94, New York 
After his death in 1827, Beethoven became, as the curators nicely put it, 
l’omnipresent absent. The exhibition opens with a cacophony of Beethovens: a 
video mash-up of concert performances,Chuck Berry duckwalking through Roll Over 
Beethoven <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EOrMg3pY7hw>, the Fab Four in Help! 
singing Ode to Joy in a pub cellar to tame a tiger (don’t ask). Was he a 
proto-Nazi, a Leninist avant la lettre, the humane voice of peace? All of these 
things and none, the show suggests. Was he upholder of European civilisation or 
a man of African ancestry whose genealogy has been suppressed for racist 
purposes? Both, no doubt, but the latter possibility is poignantly explored in 
a video by Terry Adkins: before your eyes, dead white male mutates into living 
black man with braided locks.


One fascinating room traces how the composer became a political tool. “Will 
Beethoven stop Hitler?” asks The Etude music magazine in 1941. It hangs on the 
wall next to a screen showing the opening ceremony ofHitler’s 1936 Berlin 
Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/aug/03/archive-1936-hitler-opens-berlin-olympic-games>
 to the soundtrack of Ode to Joy. Nearby, Beethoven is co-opted by Lenin. In 
Yuri Vyshinsky’s 1964 film Appassionata, the Bolshevik revolutionary is 
listening to a pianist perform the titular sonata in his apartment as snow 
falls outside. Lenin muses on the movement of the sonata from capitalist hell 
to communist nirvana. “The future,” he says, “is Beethoven.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617c5ab835118a284ee1dfcff6cc3e96064f278c%2F245_96_2241_2531%2F2241.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beethoven%20in%20dreadlocks%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20show%20that%20celebrates%20great%20myths%20about%20the%20composer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beethoven%20in%20dreadlocks%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20show%20that%20celebrates%20great%20myths%20about%20the%20composer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Froll-on-beethoven-cultures-favourite-dead-composer-ludwig-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617c5ab835118a284ee1dfcff6cc3e96064f278c%2F245_96_2241_2531%2F2241.jpg>
 Will Beethoven stop Hitler ? The Etude, September 1941. Photograph: Biblioteca 
Beethoveniana – Collezione Carrino, 2016 
Like much of the art in this show, the film clip is unintentionally hilarious. 
This is an exhibition that teems with fascinating ideas, wonderful music, 
fascinating commissions – and terrible art.Friedrich Geselschap’s painting of 
the birth of Beethoven 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e2/Friedrich_Geselschap_-_Beethovens_Geburt_,_Entwurf.jpg>
, for instance, mythically puts little Ludwig in a crib, flanked by, among 
others, a Grecian goddesss and the Virgin Mary who is presenting the little 
chap with a crown of thorns – this last is a symbolic reminder, according to 
the audio guide, of the suffering to come. Roll over Beethoven? No: roll over 
Jesus. There’s a new wunderkind in town.

Indeed, one aspect of Beethoven the show explores is composer as Christ-like 
healer. A clip fromAbel Gance’s 1936 biopic 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z-PdDSDr9Oc> has a mother soothed over the 
death of her child by hearing the Pathétique sonata 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SrcOcKYQX3c>, while Lionello Balestrieri’s 
1900 painting Beethoven 
<http://quitrieste.it/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/BEETHOVEN-1024x577.jpg> 
depicts a room of suffering people – the recently bereaved? Heartbroken 
refugees? – all benefiting from the balm of Beethoven, who is depicted on the 
right of the canvas playing violin bathed in sacred light.

True, much of the art here provokes reactions akin to what Oscar Wilde said of 
the death of Little Nell: it would take a heart of stone not to laugh. But, as 
one wanders the show in headphones, there’s always the music to counter the 
giggles.

But hold on. Was Lenin right? Was Beethoven writing musical communist 
manifesto? Unwittingly – if at all. He was also writing music that can be 
deployed as anti-communist manifesto. To clinch that point, there’s footage of
Leonard Bernstein conducting Ode to Joy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IInG5nY_wrU> in celebration at the recent fall 
of the Berlin wall. And then there’s Malcolm McDowell’s Alex in Kubrick’s 1972 
film A Clockwork Orange, eyelids pinned open so he can’t look away from a 
screen of unspeakable images. The soundtrack ? “A bit of the old Ludwig van 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cQCQRLA05AA>,” as Alex puts it elsewhere in 
the film. Beethoven has been reconfigured not so much as communist visionary as 
the man who unwittingly wrote a soundtrack to torture.

What was it about Beethoven’s music that lent itself – lends itself – to being 
politically repurposed? “Profoundly human, the energy of Beethoven’s music 
liberates not just an aesthetic emotion but also a political conscience,” 
writes one of the curators. Does it? Why not Wagner, Bach, Mozart? Why not 
Miles Davis, Ravi Shankar, Public Enemy, Skepta?

There is, the curators suggest, something special about a bit of the old 
Ludwig van: “Beethoven’s legacy in itself also participates in the same desire 
to make a connection between the authority of a remarkable figure and the 
innovations of the present day, but with one notable difference: his human 
dimension and even, in the noble sense of the term, his popular vision, both 
manage to connect with individual and collective aspirations.” But the 
corollary of this is that his music can connect to any aspiration. Beethoven 
has become, in the phrase Umberto Eco coined, an open text, endlessly 
interpretable, endlessly significant.

This exhibition deconstructs the Beethoven myth and then puts it back together 
again

In one room there’s an interactive map of the world through which one can 
scroll to find monuments to the composer. Ever since Ernst Julius Hähnel’s Bonn 
monument to Beethoven 
<https://media1.britannica.com/eb-media/04/101804-004-539EBE5C.jpg> in 1845, 
the world has seen a veritable statumania that has spread his aura around the 
world. There are Beethoven monuments and statues in Germany, Austria, even 
Mexico – and more recently Naruto, Japan, and Qingdao, China, though not one in 
Britain. The map may reveal the UK’s native philistinism and insularity but it 
may also show something else: judging by how grisly most existing monuments to 
Beethoven are, the absence of the omnipresent in sculptural form this side of 
the Channel makes us fortunate indeed.

The French are good at this sort of show, exploring the life and afterlife of 
a dead genius. Like thePompidou Centre’s show devoted to Roland Barthes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/feb/22/art.classics> (which 
opened with by a pristine black 1957 Citroën 19 in all the semiotic pomp 
conferred on it in Barthes’ essay), this is a vast multi-media celebration. But 
while that was hagiographic, this is more critical: the Barthes show made 
critic into icon; le Mythe Beethoven deconstructs the myth and then puts it 
back together again. In the Salle Pierre Boulez upstairs, there has been a 
swaggering series of allied concerts, including a fabulous concert performance 
of Fidelio.

If only this show would come to Britain. Yes, the Victoria and Albert Museum 
has staged two lavish shows about mythic pop musicians recently,one about David 
Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/david-bowie-is-exhibition-review>
 and the current one about Pink Floyd. And yes, the British Museum and Library 
have had similarly good multimedia exhibitions devoted to Shakespeare. But the 
great icons of classical music seem beyond our curators’ imaginations.

In the exhibition’s final room, a few of us had our own silent disco through 
our audio guides. Perhaps the woman dancing around John Baldessari’s sculpture 
of Beethoven’s oversized ear with matching ear trumpet was listening to Pierre 
Henry’s cheeky imagining of Beethoven’s 10th. I was savouringDaft Punk’s 
Technologic Sonata <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1WV8-wpCfpw>, a mashup of 
techno and Beethoven you can watch on YouTube, and read this comment: “No doubt 
somebody is spinning in their grave.”

No doubt someone is. But perhaps that someone is not Beethoven. He might well 
have dug Daft Punk. Ever since he died and became posterity’s plaything, it has 
been hard to know, or even imagine, what Beethoven would really think about 
anything.

 * Ludwig Van: Le Mythe Beethoven is at the Philharmonie de Paris until 29 
January <http://philharmoniedeparis.fr/fr/ludwig-van/parcours-de-lexposition>.
 