
The Byrds happened. Suddenly, with little enough warning for any of us. For 
me, it started a couple of days after I arrived in Hollywood in February, when 
a cameraman I had met on theBeatles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/06/beatles-did-not-revolutionise-music-study-claims>
’ tour sauntered into my then uncluttered office and dropped a couple of 
pictures casually on my desk. “There’s a group here you may like to look at,” 
he said. “They’re called the Byrds. They may be lousy for all I know.”


 I had come to California to work as a press agent. I had two clients – both 
rock groups. One was Paul Revere & the Raiders, the other the Beau Brummels. 
All long-haired. So here was a third. Nothing was known about them. They hadn’t 
performed together in public as a group. They hadn’t released a record. They 
weren’t good looking. And they had no money at all. Very promising.

 However, I called their manager and he came into the office. His name was Jim 
Dickson, a roly-poly man, prematurely bald, who had been an A&R man for folk 
singers. He had a kind smile and gentle eyes and he looked honest. Which is 
something in Hollywood. He too, was broke. But, he said the Byrds were pretty 
good and Columbia Records had recorded them with a number called Mr Tambourine 
Man. He had a copy of it and he played it to me. Bob Dylan, he explained, had 
written the song and had approved theByrds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/apr/16/old-music-byrds>’ 
version. I said, “I think it’s a hit.” And he said, “We think so too.” They 
were due to make their first public appearance for $10 each at Ciro’s, a large, 
unfashionable nightclub on Sunset Strip.

Difficulties

 It was the haunt of Errol Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/24/kevin-kline-errol-flynn-sex-scandal>
 and Humphrey Bogart in their brawling prime, and of Van Johnson and Cary Grant 
and a thousand glamorous ghosts. So I went to see the Byrds. They had 
unimaginable mechanical difficulties – amplifier breakdown, inadequate 
microphones. Collectively, they had never faced an audience and they were shy, 
ill at ease and not at all a unit. Yet something was happening on stage. It was 
something over and above normal rock experience.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuPqAvgN6Tyw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuPqAvgN6Tyw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuPqAvgN6Tyw&media=>
 I offered to represent them for a few dollars a week just for the hell of it. 
But manager Dickson and his partner, Eddie Tickner, a slim cautious man who 
used to work for the US army audit department, said: “Stick around and keep 
smiling, but we can’t afford to pay anything yet.” I stuck around and stuck out 
and offered to take a percentage of the group’s income. Finally, Tickner and 
Dickson agreed and I was in.

 Mr Tambourine Man was released in America in April. Radio Station KRLA in Los 
Angeles liked it and the city’s Beatlemaniac disc jockey, Dave Hull, decided to 
pick it as his Tip for a Hit.

 I went into print in the station’s newspaper to forecast it as a nationwide 
No 1. Five weeks later, it had bounded in leaps of 30 places to the top of all 
the national charts – Cash Box, Billboard, Record World, plus hundreds of local 
lists. By the end of June, the Byrds were the pop music talking point of 
America.

 They were featured on the front cover of all the trade newspapers. Their fan 
club members were numbered in thousands. And both sides of their second 
American release, All I Really Want to Do and I’ll Feel a Whole Lot Better, 
are, at this moment, climbing rapidly to replace Mr Tambourine Man at the top.

Packed

 Abroad, Mr Tambourine Man was also one of the records of the year. It went 
into the Australian and Canadian top five, and after a rush-release in Britain 
it climbed into the coveted English charts.

 The Byrds returned to Ciro’s, and for the first time in years packed the 
place. There were queues up and down Sunset Strip of desperate teenagers 
clamouring to get in.

 The dancefloor was a madhouse. A hardcore of Byrd followers – wayward 
painters, disinherited sons and heirs, bearded sculptors, misty-eyed nymphs and 
assorted oddballs – suddenly taught Hollywood to dance again. This was no 
Shake, Watusi or Frog session. It was an exercise in “Byrdmania”. A frenetic 
extension of the talents of five quite exceptional pop musicians.

 None of the Byrds is easy to get to know. In this – as in many other respects 
– they resemble the Beatles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbehind-byrdmania-an-archive-piece-from-1965%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436971934375%2F6feb915d-86e0-4785-82f9-fcd90e5c60c2-2060x1796.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Behind%20Byrdmania%20%E2%80%93%20an%20archive%20piece%20from%201965&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbehind-byrdmania-an-archive-piece-from-1965%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Behind%20Byrdmania%20%E2%80%93%20an%20archive%20piece%20from%201965&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbehind-byrdmania-an-archive-piece-from-1965%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436971934375%2F6feb915d-86e0-4785-82f9-fcd90e5c60c2-2060x1796.jpeg>
 The Byrds: left to right, Chris Hillman, Dave Crosby, Mike Clark, Roger 
McGuinn and Gene Clark. Photograph: Hulton-Deutsch Collection/CORB 
 They are all intelligent, cool, acutely aware of the follies, extravagance 
and hypocrisy in show business. But because they had willingly abandoned their 
separate impoverished careers in the less remunerative branches of the 
industry, they plunged into the hurly-burly of the contemporary rock scene. 
Though they had only seven weeks’ experience, they were hired for all seven of 
the southern California Rolling Stones concerts in May.

Fashionable

 They were booked for a huge prestigious charity show at LA’s Shrine 
Auditorium, and were the hit of the night in a $100,000 rock’n’roll show at the 
Hollywood Bowl. Also – and America is not without its social strata – they 
became fashionable.

 The Byrds were booked by Henry Fonda’s daughter Jane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/jane-fonda-youth-plastic-surgery-sex-cannes>
 for her Independence Day celebrations in Malibu. At the party were Lauren 
Bacall, Steve McQueen, George Cukor, Sidney Poitier, Diahann Carroll, Roddy 
McDowall, Mia Farrow and Warren Beatty. Adding international flavour, among the 
British guests were Peter Finch, James Fox, Ian Bannen, David McCallum and Jill 
Ireland. France was represented by Louis Jourdan, Roger Vadim and Leslie Caron.

 The Byrds’ diligent management – with all the enterprise and zest of an 
Epstein – secured them appearances on every American television show from 
Hullabaloo to Shindig. The only gap in the Byrds’ TV scene is The Ed Sullivan 
Show. That follows this autumn. Columbia Records – grateful to the Byrds for 
the label’s first No 1 since January 1963 – paid all expenses for an appearance 
at the company’s convention in Miami. And the Willard Alexander Agency – 
bookers of Frank Sinatra, Count Basie, no less – filled every night in July 
with coast-to-coast dates.

 © Derek Taylor, 1965
 