
China has sent a coded warning to the United States to stay out of the South 
China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> dispute after 
Beijing was again accused of building permanent structures on islands in the 
area.

Speaking after talks with rival countries at a regional summit in Laos, premier
Li Keqiang <https://www.theguardian.com/world/li-keqiang> said China wanted to 
work with other countries to “dispel interference” in the contested maritime 
zone.

But US president Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> responded by warning that 
Beijing must abide by an international tribunal ruling that China’s sweeping 
claims to the South China Sea had no legal basis.

Undiplomatic language: five of the worst geopolitical insults
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/worst-political-insults-philippine-president-barack-obama>
“The landmark arbitration ruling in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
, which is binding, helped clarify maritime rights in the region,” Obama told a 
summit of Asian leaders in Laos on Thursday. Beijing has vowed to ignore the 
verdict.

“I recognise this raises tensions,” Obama said referring to the ruling “but I 
also look forward to discussing how we can constructively move forward together 
to lower tensions and promote diplomacy and stability.”

The Philippines <https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> said earlier 
on Wednesday it was “gravely concerned” that Chinese boats were preparing to 
build structures at a disputed shoal in the South China Sea, upsetting the 
diplomatic peace at the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) summit 
in Vientiane.

China claims much of the South China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
Sea, through which more than $5 trillion of trade moves annually. Vietnam, the 
Philippines, Malaysia, Brunei and Taiwan also have claims.
South China sea 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/sep/2016-09-08T02:00:33.html> 
 Officials said talks between regional leaders and Li on Wednesday went 
smoothly, but there was no reference to a July court ruling in The Hague  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
that declared some of China’s artificial islands illegal and invalidated its 
claims to almost the entire waterway.

 In a statement released later on Wednesday by China’s foreign ministry about 
the meeting, Li was paraphrased as saying China was willing to work with Asean 
countries in “dispelling interference ... and properly handling the South China 
Sea issue”.

 He did not elaborate, but such wording is typically used by Chinese leaders 
to refer to not allowing countries from outside the region with no direct 
involvement in the dispute,like the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/03/g20-obama-warns-beijing-against-south-china-sea-aggression>
, from getting involved.

 With joint efforts from China and Asean members, the situation in the South 
China Sea was moving in a positive direction, Li added.

 Peace and stability in the area was directly related to prosperity and 
development of neighbouring countries, he said.

 “Countries in the region are the biggest beneficiaries of peace in the South 
China Sea. History and facts have repeatedly showed that the South China Sea 
can only be peaceful and stable so long as the regional countries themselves 
get hold of the key to fixing the problems,” Lie said.

China may dispute South China Sea verdict, but it's a huge setback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/13/china-may-dispute-south-china-sea-verdict-but-its-a-huge-setback>
 Increasingly assertive action by China’s coast guard ships in the South China 
Sea risks destabilising the region, according to the authors of new research 
tracking maritime law enforcement incidents across the vital trade route.

 Hours before the meeting, however, the Philippines’ defence ministry released 
photographs and a map showing what it said was an increased number of Chinese 
vessels near Scarborough Shoal, which China seized after a standoff in 2012.

 Li made no direct mention of Scarborough Shoal in the comments provided by 
the foreign ministry.
 