
Though Lebanon has been swept by a gentrifying and disfiguring development rush
 
<http://stateofmind13.com/2015/01/22/5-major-projects-to-take-place-in-beirut-the-city-losing-itself-to-money/>
, some older monuments still stand tall. Strolling downhill from the Clemenceau 
neighbourhood for a coffee on the seaside Corniche, you’ll see the towering 
building of the Holiday Inn: bullet-riddled and rocket-pierced.

The once-plush hotel, which opened for business just two years before the 
Lebanese civil war <http://imgur.com/a/VKVxL> broke out in 1975, has remained 
in Beirut’s collective memory – not for its glamour or architectural design, 
but as a front-line, a demarcation between east and west, and a symbol of war.

The Holiday Inn represented an affluent time for the city: the building became 
part of a luxury developmental bubble at a time when Beirut’s banks were 
growing fat on deposits from the region’s petrodollars. However, the civil war 
obliterated the hotel’s ambitions of becoming a social hub, with cinemas and 
restaurants crowned by a rooftop rotating restaurant towering over the district.

In October 1975, just months into the Lebanese civil war, the hotel became 
part of an epic battle dubbed “the war of the hotels 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/opensecurity/camillo-boano-dalia-chabarek/memories-of-war-in-divided-city>
”. It lasted until March 1976 and mobilised around 25,000 fighters from both 
sides, resulting in more than 1,000 dead and 2,000 injured.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fbeirut-holiday-inn-civil-war-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430389648606%2Fbb4b442a-4e58-4b19-9e0a-aed3731f93b0-2060x1337.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beirut's%20bullet-riddled%20Holiday%20Inn%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2028&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fbeirut-holiday-inn-civil-war-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beirut%27s%20bullet-riddled%20Holiday%20Inn%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2028&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fbeirut-holiday-inn-civil-war-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430389648606%2Fbb4b442a-4e58-4b19-9e0a-aed3731f93b0-2060x1337.jpeg>
 A pro-Palestinian fighter in the destroyed Holiday Inn hotel, after militias 
dislodged Lebanese Christian forces from the hotel. Photograph: Xavier 
Baron/AFP/Getty Images 
The Holiday Inn was the biggest in an area already jammed with hotels – an 
area that became strategically important because of its proximity to the sea: 
it was located between the coastal neighbourhoods of Ain el-Mresi and Mina 
al-Hosn, on top of a hill overlooking the city.

As the civil war began to polarise the city into east and west, the two main 
antagonists – the Lebanese Front (Christian rightwing militias backed by the 
Lebanese army) and the National Movement (Lebanese leftist parties backed by 
Palestine’s PLO) – raced to capture the district.

The Holiday Inn was then sold on the streets of Beirut: beds, silver spoons, 
curtains
Abu Ali 
Seen by militants as a strategic military asset, the Holiday Inn became a 
trophy in the battle. “We descended on the hotel district from three 
directions,” recalls Abu Ali, 66, a veteran of the war on the side of the 
National Movement. “The battle to take the Holiday Inn dragged on. That 
building felt like an unshakable castle. The Christian fighters who had raced 
us to it managed to create supply lines that kept feeding their fighters 
barracked in the hotel, and positioned their snipers on the upper floors and 
rooftop.”

Heavy artillery was fired from surrounding rooftops, pounding the Holiday Inn 
and creating the damage that is still visible today.

“Shortly after the battle, hordes of scavengers entered the building and 
stripped it down to its bones,” Ali said. “The Holiday Inn was then sold on the 
streets of Beirut: beds, silver spoons, curtains.”

Later, after the 1982 Israeli invasion of Beirut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2013/jan/04/lebanon-israel-palestinians-thatcher-reagan>
 – in the second phase of the civil war – the Holiday Inn building was once 
again disputed turf, this time between former allies; with the al-Mourabitoun 
losing control of the building to theAmal Movement 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amal_Movement>.

These battles were, in a sense, an introvert war fought by the city’s 
occupants who turned their own homes into an open battleground – a war fought 
from alley to alley, building to building.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fbeirut-holiday-inn-civil-war-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430390334182%2F839faa28-5380-4532-9029-bf8c193ff0ca-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beirut's%20bullet-riddled%20Holiday%20Inn%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2028&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fbeirut-holiday-inn-civil-war-history-cities-50-buildings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beirut%27s%20bullet-riddled%20Holiday%20Inn%20-%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2028&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fbeirut-holiday-inn-civil-war-history-cities-50-buildings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F30%2F1430390334182%2F839faa28-5380-4532-9029-bf8c193ff0ca-2060x1373.jpeg>
 A symbol of Lebanon’s golden age, but also its brutal civil war, the empty 
shell of the Holiday Inn hotel could soon be redeveloped. Photograph: Joseph 
Eid/AFP 
Since the conflict’s end, the shareholders of the bullet-riddled building have 
been locked in a dispute over its future. The Lebanese partners Compagnie 
Immobiliere Libanaise wanted to renovate the building and set up luxury lofts 
for rent or sale. However, the Kuwaiti group that owns half wanted to demolish 
it, and build a new tower block similar to those in the surrounding downtown 
area.


Today, entry is forbidden to the public. The building’s 24 floors are 
desolate: shrubs sprout from the concrete floors, the grey mouldering walls 
still bearing scars of countless bullet holes and political graffiti from a 
bygone era. Its Lebanese and Kuwaiti ownersrecently declared their intention 
<http://assafir.com/Article/3/351109/RssFeed> to put the building up for 
auction.

Many years after the fighting ceased, the building has become a popular site 
for underground dance parties. On a Saturday night in 1998, many Lebanese 
mingled in the same building where 23 years earlier their parents had fought 
each other. I was one of the revellers: we snuck out of our parents’ homes and 
drank and danced until the early hours on a site still vividly synonymous with 
the 15-year civil war.


In spite of the postwar efforts to resurrect Lebanon’s elusive golden age, the 
country once more teeters on the edge of an abyss. Lurking in the background of 
the glitzy, redeveloped downtown district, the disfigured façade of the Holiday 
Inn stands as a reminder that Lebanon’s civil war politics are far from 
resolved.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  