
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has nominated 
former opponent Ben Carson as his secretary of housing and urban development.


In a statement from his transition team on Monday, Trump said he was “thrilled 
to nominate” Carson, saying the retired neurosurgeon had “a brilliant mind and 
is passionate about strengthening communities and families within those 
communities”.

“Ben shares my optimism about the future of our country and is part of 
ensuring that this is a presidency representing all Americans,” he added.

Nikki Haley chosen to serve as Trump's US ambassador to United Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/nikki-haley-named-us-ambassador-to-united-nations>
Carson responded to the announcement with a brief statement accepting Trump’s 
nomination.


“I am honored and look forward to working hard on behalf of the American 
people,” he wrote.


Carson had previously taken himself out of the running to serve in Trump’s 
cabinet amid speculation that the former doctor was being considered to head 
the Department of Health and Human Services. ACarson spokesperson said 
<http://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/306045-carson-turned-down-offer-to-serve-in-trump-administration-report>
 he did not feel he had the experience to run a federal agency and did not want 
to assume a role “that could cripple the presidency”.


But Carson signalled his thinking had changed in a Facebook post late last 
month, in which he hinted at a possible position at the federal agency tasked 
with overseeing America’s fair housing laws and urban development policies.

“After serious discussions with the Trump transition team, I feel that I can 
make a significant contribution particularly to making our inner cities great 
for everyone,” Carson wrote in thepost on 23 November 
<https://www.facebook.com/realbencarson/posts/738670639632738>. “We have much 
work to do in strengthening every aspect of our nation and ensuring that both 
our physical infrastructure and our spiritual infrastructure is solid.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20five%20dangerous%20views%20of%20the%20housing%20secretary%20nominee%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20five%20dangerous%20views%20of%20the%20housing%20secretary%20nominee%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video&media=>
Ben Carson: five dangerous views held by the housing secretary nominee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/05/ben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video>
Republicans praised Carson’s personal attributes but were relatively muted in 
response to Trump’s decision to place an outsider at the helm of one of the 
nation’s top agencies.


“We appreciate Dr Carson’s willingness to take on such a challenging task at 
an agency that is in need of reform to better serve all Americans,” Mitch 
McConnell, the Republican Senate majority leader, said in a statement. “I’m 
confident his life-long career of selfless service will be a positive addition 
to the incoming administration.”

Democrats, by contrast, assailed the retired neurosurgeon as wholly 
unqualified for the role.


“Dr Ben Carson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ben-carson> is a 
disconcerting and disturbingly unqualified choice to lead a department as 
complex and consequential as Housing and Urban Development,” said Nancy Pelosi, 
who was recently re-elected as the Democrats’ leader in the House of 
Representatives, in a statement.

“There is no evidence that Dr Carson brings the necessary credentials to hold 
a position with such immense responsibilities and impact on families and 
communities across America.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Pathological%20and%20lacking%20faith'%3A%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20many%20attacks%20on%20Carson%20before%20endorsement%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Pathological%20and%20lacking%20faith%27%3A%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20many%20attacks%20on%20Carson%20before%20endorsement%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement&media=>
‘Pathological and lacking faith’: Trump’s many attacks on Carson before 
endorsement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/11/donald-trump-ben-carson-comments-pre-endorsement>
Charles Schumer, the incoming Democratic leader in the Senate, said he had 
serious concerns about Carson’s lack of expertise and experience in the field 
of housing. “Someone who is as anti-government as him is a strange fit for 
housing secretary, to say the least,” he said. “As he moves through the 
confirmation process, Americans deserve to know that their potential HUD 
secretary is well versed in housing policy and has a vision for federal housing 
programs that meets the needs of Americans across the country and seeks to 
provide access to those that we haven’t reached already.”

The largest civil rights organization for LGBTQ individuals also sounded alarm 
over Carson’s nomination, pointing to his steadfast opposition to gay equality.

The Human Rights Campaign (HRC) said past comments by Carson referring to 
homosexuality as “a choice” and support for conversion therapy raised serious 
concerns over how HUD would address the housing needs of the LGBTQ community, 
while citing research showing that LGBTQ youth account for up to 40% of the 
total unaccompanied homeless youth population.

“Throughout his failed presidential campaign, Carson ran on a platform on 
inequality, and, if nominated, his hateful views could have disastrous effects 
on LGBTQ people,” said HRC president Chad Griffin.

 “As a community already faced with housing insecurity, we need an ally, not 
an agitator, who will protect every American’s right to a safe place to lie 
down each night.”

Carson and Trump feuded bitterly during the Republican presidential primaries, 
with Trump at one point characterizing Carson as having a “pathological temper” 
akin to the illness of a child molester.

But Carson endorsed Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/11/ben-carson-endorses-donald-trump-florida-primary>
 in March, saying the two men had “buried the hatchet”, and went on to be one 
of the real estate mogul’s most loyal supporters for the duration of the 
election campaign.


Trump’s decision to tap Carson as the housing and urban development (HUD) 
secretary followed his announcement nominating the South Carolina governor, 
Nikki Haley, asambassador to the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/nikki-haley-named-us-ambassador-to-united-nations>
, and Elaine Chao as transportation secretary. Haley, Chao and Carson are the 
first people of color chosen by Trump to serve in his cabinet.

 * This article was amended on 5 December 2016. Due to an editing error, an 
earlier version omitted that Elaine Chao, who is Taiwanese American, had been 
nominated as transportation secretary. Chao, Haley and Carson are the three 
people of color nominated to Trump’s cabinet.  