
The health benefits of cycling and walking outweigh the harm from inhaling air 
loaded with traffic fumes in all but the world’s most polluted cities, 
according to a study.

An international team of researchers who have modelled the effects say only 1% 
of cities in the world have such high levels of air pollution that cycling or 
walking could make a person’s health worse.

Lazy Britons are missing out on the joy of walking | Phil Daoust
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/lazy-britons-joy-of-walking-cycling-walkers>
“The good news is that across the world, in 99% of cities it is safe to cycle 
up to two hours a day,” said Dr Audrey de Nazelle from thecentre for 
environmental policy <https://www.imperial.ac.uk/environmental-policy/> at 
Imperial College London, one of the study’s authors.

“That’s because physical inactivity is such a public health issue – it is not 
that pollution is not detrimental.”

In respect to air pollution, London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> is 
one of the safer cities in the world in which to cycle and walk, with the 
researchers finding it safe to do so all day.

“Our model indicates that in London health benefits of active travel always 
outweigh the risk from pollution,” said Dr Marko Tainio from theCambridge MRC 
epidemiology unit <http://www.mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk/>, who led the study.

“Even in Delhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi>, one of the most 
polluted cities in the world – with pollution levels ten times those in London 
– people would need to cycle over five hours per week before the pollution 
risks outweigh the health benefits.

 “We should remember, though, that a small minority of workers in the most 
polluted cities, such as bike messengers, may be exposed to levels of air 
pollution high enough to cancel out the health benefits of physical activity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Fbenefits-cycling-walking-outweigh-air-pollution-risk-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba1c7de9b309a017219bf0b8289761bfd380acc0%2F0_260_4709_2826%2F4709.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benefits%20of%20cycling%20and%20walking%20'outweigh%20air%20pollution%20risk'%20in%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Fbenefits-cycling-walking-outweigh-air-pollution-risk-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benefits%20of%20cycling%20and%20walking%20%27outweigh%20air%20pollution%20risk%27%20in%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Fbenefits-cycling-walking-outweigh-air-pollution-risk-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba1c7de9b309a017219bf0b8289761bfd380acc0%2F0_260_4709_2826%2F4709.jpg>
 Pollution in Delhi, India. Even here the benefits of walking or cycling can 
often outweigh the harm caused by traffic fumes. Photograph: Chandan 
Khanna/AFP/Getty Images 
Air pollution in major cities including London is of increasing concern, 
particularly to those who are regularly exposed to it when commuting to work. 
In February, the Royal College of Physicians published a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/22/indoor-and-outdoor-air-pollution-claiming-at-least-40000-uk-lives-a-year>
 looking at exposure to air pollution across a lifetime and concluded that 
40,000 people die as a result of it every year.

The report linked polluted air to cancer, asthma, stroke and heart disease, 
diabetes, obesity, and dementia, and calculated that NHS, business and other 
costs in the UK came to more than £20bn a year. The college called for tougher 
action against polluters and for local authorities to be given powers to close 
roads and divert traffic when pollution levels were high.

The truth about London's air pollution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/05/the-truth-about-londons-air-pollution>
The authors of the study, from the UK, Switzerland, Spain and Brazil, say 
their findings published in the journalPreventive Medicine 
<http://www.journals.elsevier.com/preventive-medicine/> are not a reason for 
complacency. “While this research demonstrates the benefits of physical 
activity in spite of air quality, it is not an argument for inaction in 
combatting pollution,” said Dr James Woodcock from the Centre for Diet and 
Activity Research <http://www.cedar.iph.cam.ac.uk/>. “It provides further 
support for investment in infrastructure to get people out of their cars and on 
to their feet or their bikes – which can itself reduce pollution levels at the 
same time as supporting physical activity.”

The researchers modelled the effects of cycling and walking at different 
levels of air pollution and established a tipping point – the length of time 
after which there was no further health benefit, and a break-even point, when 
the harm from air pollution began to outweigh the health benefit.

For Delhi, the most polluted city on the World Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation’s database, the 
tipping and break-even points for cycling were 30 and 45 minutes per day 
respectively, while for walking they were 90 minutes and six hours and 15 
minutes respectively.

While the researchers looked at the levels of particulates – PM2.5 – in the 
air and not NO2, which has also been established as harming health, “we did 
lots of sensitivity analyses and the message would have been the same”, said De 
Nazelle.
 