
Four years ago, when Solange Knowles first started sketching out the bare 
bones of the songs that would formA Seat at the Table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/30/solange-a-seat-at-the-table-a-stately-sprawling-celebration-of-black-identity>
, Barack Obama was settling into a second term in office. The notion of a Trump 
presidency would have seemed laughable. But even then, under the false 
impression of a post-racial America, Knowles felt like something wasn’t quite 
right. She had to get a few things off her chest, and collected those 
observations and reflections on this textured, billowing, 21-track third album.

Mostly, this is a record about empowerment – and about imbuing that word with 
meaning again, now that it’s been diluted into a commodity to be sold by brands 
from Dove to Nike. Identity politics has turned into the new “race card”, but 
you’d struggle to find a better term to encompass what A Seat at the Table 
identifies, worries about and celebrates. Everyone, for the most part, engages 
with identity politics – those who’ve been seen as the default ethnicity, 
sexual orientation or gender just don’t often have to verbalise it as frankly 
as this.

After getting used to people making quick mental deductions to classify her 
based on her appearance, Solange chooses to interrogate what that says about 
American society. You’re left with her voicing a combination of hope for what 
blackness could become when it’s no longer seen as a threat, while also sighing 
into the sadness of being seen as an “other” who needs to justify their right 
to take up space.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbest-albums-of-2016-no-5-a-seat-at-the-table-solange%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd9620fe065b2e3852c99755afb90ff85dd1ba4%2F0_0_1500_1500%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20albums%20of%202016%3A%20No%205%20A%20Seat%20at%20the%20Table%20by%20Solange&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbest-albums-of-2016-no-5-a-seat-at-the-table-solange%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20albums%20of%202016%3A%20No%205%20A%20Seat%20at%20the%20Table%20by%20Solange&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbest-albums-of-2016-no-5-a-seat-at-the-table-solange%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd9620fe065b2e3852c99755afb90ff85dd1ba4%2F0_0_1500_1500%2F1500.jpg>
 Solange: A Seat at the Table. Photograph: PR Company Handout 
Musically, Solange continues to gather a pick’n’mix of genres in her grab-bag 
of influences, from the jubilant horns onDon’t Touch My Hair’s 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YTtrnDbOQAU> gentle electro-funk to the 
melancholy piano plink-plonking over Where We Go and meticulously layered vocal 
melodies on gentle soul opener Rise. Her gossamer voice holds it all together 
like a delicately sticky, sweet glue. Even when singing about being racially 
profiled in her own neighbourhood on FUBU or trading verses with Lil Wayne 
about feeling a buildup of rage over injustice on Mad, a warmth and positivity 
still buoys this album. Case in point:Cranes in the Sky 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S0qrinhNnOM> may be one of the year’s 
prettiest songs about a wobbling stiff upper lip.

It feels a long way off from the days when most people recognised Solange as 
Beyonce’s younger sister, the eccentrically dressed Knowles sibling who earned 
the indie world’s respect thanks tolinks to Grizzly Bear and Dev Hynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/03/solange-knowles-true-dev-hynes>. 
Rather, A Seat at the Table brings everyone else up to speed with her pro-black 
upbringing. Where it would probably feel too heavy-handed to make certain 
statements herself, she defers to interludes spoken by people who shaped her 
views: her mother, father and – rather unexpectedly –Master P 
<http://uk.complex.com/music/2016/10/master-p-interview-solange-new-album-seat-at-the-table>
.

That her most political release to date earned her first number 1 slot on the 
US Billboard 200 albums chart puts to bed the idea that pop-R&B can’t both have 
a message and sell. Instead, this album sees Solange at her most self-assured 
and raw. She’sdescribed her 2012 EP True 
<http://saintheron.com/featured/a-seat-with-us-a-conversation-between-solange-knowles-mrs-tina-lawson-judnick-mayard/>
 as “having an intentional goal in wanting to exude joy and provoke happiness”. 
A Seat at the Table feels more like a meditation; ahealing balm 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/11/11/501165834/weve-always-had-a-seat-at-the-table-solange-on-conversations-that-heal?utm_source=twitter.com&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=nprmusic&utm_term=music&utm_content=2038>
 in a year that’s otherwise felt like a tumultuous hall of mirrors where the 
rug was pulled from beneath a substantial number of people on both sides of the 
Atlantic. Sure, Trump may be her president-elect, but this is undeniably her 
voice and her story. And who knows what she’ll be able to produce in another 
four years.

 * More of the best albums of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/30/the-best-albums-of-2016> 

 