
He promised it would be an “album of the life” 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/692083418083921921?lang=en> and sure 
enough, Kanye delivered a piece of work that was as true to him as it was to 
the spirit of 2016: volatile, unexpected and era-defining. Did this seem a 
stretch? The Life of Pablo wasn’t West’s most influential record (that was808s 
& Heartbreak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/nov/21/kanye-west-808s-heartbreak>), 
nor his most coherent (My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/25/kanye-west-beautiful-dark-twisted-review>
) or innovative (Yeezus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/17/kanye-west-yeezus-review>), but 
it was as close to a perfect compendium of his career as there has been to 
date: an endlessly appealing hot mess, casually and frequently scattered with 
genius.

Kanye West: The Life of Pablo review – 'You can see why his immodesty rubs 
people up the wrong way'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/14/kanye-west-the-life-of-pablo-review-you-can-see-why-his-immodesty-rubs-people-up-the-wrong-way>
The Life of Pablo skipped through four name changes and three post-release 
edits in the three years it took to arrive. So Help Me God became Swish, and 
then Waves, before West arrived at the definitive title of his seventh album. 
He launched it in February with impressive audacity: at Madison Square Garden 
while unveiling the third collection of his fashion line. Fans paid $160 a 
ticket to hear the album played back from a laptop in an 18,000-seat arena. The 
event was simultaneously streamed in sold-out cinemas across the world. The 
hype was swapped for relief – the album wasgood, the tunes banged – before 
confusion set in about its conclusion: West said there would be no physical 
sales, that it would only be available to stream and that he would be adding 
more songs and “finishing” others already on the tracklist.


“Release dates is played out” 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/2084609/kanye-west-best-quotes-the-breakfast-club/> he 
said the year before, and for all the criticism he faced for tinkering with 
Pablo – re-editing and refining it months after it was first premiered on Tidal 
– consider how much West achieved in what he called a “living, breathing, 
changing creative expression”. Thematically, he had promised cookout music with 
a gospel flow – a Sunday best, summer BBQ vibe under which Ultralight Beam, 
Waves, No More Parties in LA, easily rest. But then there were the jarring mood 
changes. The dense claustrophobia of Freestyle 4. The controversy of Famous. 
The wry, meta self-deprecation of I Love Kanye, in which he acknowledged the 
frustration he provokes even now: “I hate the new Kanye, the bad mood Kanye / 
The always rude Kanye, spaz in the news Kanye / I miss the sweet Kanye, chop up 
the beats Kanye / I gotta say, at that time I’d like to meet Kanye.”


Real Friends included a familiar nag about his epochal fame, of having a life 
his friends couldn’t relate to, a family he didn’t speak to, and of the cousin 
who stole his laptop, who he “had to pay $250,000 to get it from”. It was 
guilt, anguish, sadness straight from 808-era Kanye, followed up with the 
brutal Yeezus-ish minimalism of Wolves, AKA the song in which he recasts 
himself and Kim Kardashian as a modern-day Joseph and the Virgin Mary, neurotic 
and vulnerable.


Did such ambitious scope come at a cost? West’s hospitalisation last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/22/kanye-west-taken-to-hospital-after-cancelling-tour>
 occurred after an extended period of unravelling both in his work and in the 
public eye. To a degree, he courted the mania. As he rapped on Feedback: “I’ve 
been out of my mind a long time … name one genius that isn’t crazy.” It’s a 
difficult myth to keep operating under and you wonder how much mileage Kanye 
has left in putting his mental health under such strain. At this point, the 
argument about whether he can be the biggest idiot or most influential maverick 
in music is long played out; the two are not mutually exclusive and the genesis 
and journey of The Life of Pablo keep proving it. Here’s an album that is 
soulful, troubled, brilliant and, in plenty of ways, defines the tumultuous 
year we’ve had.
 