
At the start of the year it was unclear whether we would ever hear the debut 
album from Skepta 2.0. The rapper – whose image had descended over the last 
decade from grime original tocringeworthy chart-chaser 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tnar90VEwe4> – had reinvented himself with two 
anthemic tracks inThat’s Not Me <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dyONbqggasY> 
andShutdown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MQOG5BkY2Bc>, yet his album proper 
was plagued by delays. Finally, in May it materialised, and it was clear the 
pushbacks hadn’t been a bad omen: the great hope for contemporary British music 
did not disappoint.

The best albums of 2016: 40-10
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/30/the-best-albums-of-2016> 
Full of stark, simmering beats and slick, swaggering vocals, Konnichiwa went 
on to reach No 2 in the charts and was awardedthe Mercury prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/skepta-konnichiwa-a-mercury-winner-few-can-argue-with>
 in September. But these achievements seemed small fry compared to how the 
album managed to sell grime to a new generation of young fans, transforming 
something that had been associated withLethal Bizzle trying to get “dench” in 
the dictionary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/12/lethal-bizzle-dench-dictionary-campaign>
 into the closest thing to a countercultural movement Britain’s had in years.

It all hinged on the way Skepta <https://www.theguardian.com/music/skepta> 
redefined authenticity. The grime revival he guided into being might have been, 
in part, a celebration of the genre’s roots, but this wasn’t about musical 
purism – it was about being true to yourself and your own tastes. It was a 
mindset that worked in tandem with Skepta’s newfound industry independence – he 
distributed Konnichiwa from his front room – which wasn’t so much born out of a 
hatred of consumer capitalism as from the idea that his tastes were superior to 
those of industry types (his foray into watered-down pop-rap suggested he had 
once been at their beck and call). Similarly, this authenticity was not about 
rejecting image, it was about the ownership of it. It’s an attitude best summed 
up by That’s Not Me: “I used to wear Gucci/I put it all in the bin because 
that’s not me.” At another point, he declares: “Sex any girl? Nah that’s not 
me.”

Konnichiwa’s world is predicated on style and taste – especially when it comes 
to women (“I’m in love with the way that you mix the Palace with Céline / How 
you mix the Chanel with the Preme / Too clean, the best piece of art I ever 
seen,” he coos on Text Me Back). Rap has always been image obsessed, but not to 
this level of sophistication. Konnichiwa may not have been a chin-stroking 
“visual album” likeBeyoncé’s Lemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/01/beyonce-lemonade-visual-album-review-woman-scorned>
, but its aesthetic component was just as important – from the amusingly crap 
Photoshop style of the 2014 That’s Not Me video (still very much on trend, see 
Lil Yachty) to the homespun gloss of the Shutdown video, in which the tropes of 
the council estate are made glamorous and covetable due to the sheer elegance 
of the monochrome tracksuits.


Once you’ve established this kind of Midas touch, it begins to act as a 
vortex, making everything you do, think and say – even reminiscing about 
“sitting in the flats” or getting drenched on a London street (“Man shutdown 
Wireless, then I walked home in the rain”) – seem somehow aspirational. For all 
Konnichiwa’s baggage and expectation, Skepta managed to do something simple but 
very impressive with it: he made British music cool again.


 * More on the best culture of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/best-culture-2016>
 