
As album titles go, you’d be hard pressed to find one more appropriate for 
2016 than Hopelessness. It was a statement of despair – angry and unwavering, 
bold and unmistakably bleak, furious at the world. You’d also be hard pressed 
to find an album this year as fearlessly political – or at least one with a 
danceable song about execution. The artist formerly known as Antony and the 
Johnsons made her name with nimble piano torch songs, but forher first album as 
Anohni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/09/trans-singer-anohni-new-album-hopelessness>
, she emerged as a velvet-voiced harbinger of doom, her anguish at drone 
warfare, climate change, Guantánamo Bay, the Obama administration and humanity 
at large set to an exuberant electronic soundtrack.

If that suggested an uneasy listen, then that was the point. At times 
Hopelessness could shake you to the core: the lyrics ofCrisis 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQ0BxhMfijg>, for example, were more brutal 
than a news report and the song had an emphatic crescendo of static and strings 
that made your ribcage want to burst. But the album succeeded in bringing such 
difficult subjects into the dance arena: it could be escapist as well as 
subversive.

Anohni has said 
<http://pitchfork.com/features/interview/9872-anohni-finds-hope-in-hopelessness/>
 the album was inspired by late-80s club music, when people danced away their 
rage during the peak of the Aids crisis. Hopelessness, for all its tales of 
burning landscapes and beheadings, had engulfing head-nodding rhythms and 
shades of R&B, hip-hop and gospel. At times, Anohni sounded like a diva-house 
star on the apocalypse’s podium.

Hopelessness has been hailed as a modern protest album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/05/anohni-hopelessness-review-the-most-profound-protest-record-in-decades>
, full of environmental bangers and cinematic crisis reports – some such as 
Drone Bomb Me sung from the perspective of a civilian, inviting a drone bomb 
strike like a lost lover. But it was also an achievement for the simple yet 
staggeringly beautiful combination of vocals and visceral instrumentals. Its 
songs are among the best work that co-producers Ross Birchard (AKA Hudson 
Mohawke) and Daniel Lopatin (Oneohtrix Point Never) have made yet, and their 
Disneyfied hellscapes of crystal synth and majestic horns were luminous paired 
with Anohni’s breathtaking voice.4 Degrees 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fi0q0O4V5Qs>, in particular, had a sweeping 
grandeur that suggested a camera crew panning over melting ice caps from the 
air as Anohni, inhabiting a Mother Earth scorned, called for the animals to 
burn.

Complex, rich and formidable, Anohni’s masterwork proved that political music 
in 2016 need not be hackneyed and earnest. Instead it could be galvanising and 
confrontational. Just imagine what she has in store for Trump.

 * More of the best albums of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/30/the-best-albums-of-2016> 


 