
To say that David Bowie’s final album was coloured by his death two days after 
its release, and the revelation that he recorded it beneath the terminal shadow 
of cancer, would be an understatement. It was flooded by it. Few albums have 
ever beensubjected to so much exegesis so quickly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/11/was-david-bowie-saying-goodbye-on-blackstar>
. Was the central image, coming from the author of Starman and multiple 
ruminations on stardom, an act of self-erasure? Were thelyrics of Lazarus 
<http://www.davidbowie.com/news/lazarus-lyrics-full-55371> (“Look up here, I’m 
in heaven”) not just a reference to the lead character inBowie’s confounding 
stage musical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/25/david-bowie-musical-lazarus-michael-c-hall-ivo-van-hove-london-run>
, an alien trapped in a Manhattan purgatory between life and death, but a 
loaded farewell? And what about those allusions to Elvis, Aleister Crowley, 
cosmology and the villa of Ormen? What did it all mean? One thing is certain. 
Regardless of the circumstances or the rune-reading, Blackstar ranks among 
Bowie’s very best albums.

Blackstar is a self-contained world. Despite drawing inspiration from recent 
albums byD’Angelo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/dec/15/dangelo-black-messiah-first-listen-review-investing-vintage-soul-with-a-fresh-lustre>
 and Kendrick Lamar, and featuring percussion from LCD Soundsystem’s James 
Murphy, it never strains to be of-the-moment like his 90s albums Outside and 
Earthling. Nor does it reference Bowie’s past as blatantly as his 2013 comeback 
The Next Day. Instead, he struck out for the fringes, the dark corners, the 
shadowlands, looking for one last new way to be David Bowie — one final 
incandescent flare of creativity.


David Bowie: Blackstar review – a spellbinding break with his past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>
Bowie was always a consummate collaborator who sought out great players to 
facilitate each transition. Saxophonist Donny McCaslin’s forward-thinking jazz 
band, especially the extraordinary drummer Mark Guiliana, enabled him to go in 
several directions at once. The songBlackstar 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kszLwBaC4Sw> opens like a black mass, with an 
incense-whiff of dread, fades into the gloaming, re-emerges as a torch song, 
twists into a funk chant and loops back to the first section with twice the 
power. It’s as commandingly ambitious a composition as Station to Station, the 
title track of the album with which Blackstar shares the most DNA.

Like Station to Station, Blackstar is an inky labyrinth of human cruelty and 
frailty shot through with moments of grace and transcendence, and obsessed with 
different kinds of transformation. And it’s another record on which each song 
carves out its own unique space, with no room for repetitions or redundancies. 
Even Bowie’s voice never does the same thing twice. It’s haunted, wired, 
seductive, menacing, mischievous, kind: a final multifaceted performance from 
pop’s great actor.

There is panic and brutality in the surly nadsat paranoia of Girl Loves Me; 
the murderous sexual jealousy of febrile drum’n’bass psychodrama Sue (Or in a 
Season of Crime); and the cackling vulgarity of ’Tis Pity She Was a Whore, a 
century-hopping fable of sex and violence. Then there are songs of liberation 
and transmogrification. OnLazarus <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y-JqH1M4Ya8>
, death becomes a kind of freedom. Dollar Days is an expat’s farewell to “the 
English evergreens” and a plea for more time.I Can’t Give Everything Away 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sE1Zcngd3VA> pivots on the title’s poignant 
double meaning: a refusal to explain himself and a reluctance to let go. The 
wistful harmonica nods toA New Career in a New Town from Low 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JhZqsYkl1zI>, while McCaslin’s saxophone, 
often an agent of chaos, becomes a means of elevation, sending the record 
spiraling into the sky, out of view.

“I know something is very wrong,” Bowie sings on the final track, and indeed 
it was, but then he was always fascinated by lives wrenched out of joint. And 
long before he was ill, he was preoccupied with death: the looming darkness 
that makes the light so much brighter. In 2002, Interview magazine editor 
Ingrid Sischy asked Bowie what he felt the point of art was. “It’s a 
head-spinning dichotomy — of the lust for life against the finality of 
everything,” he replied. “It’s those two things raging against each other, you 
know? And that produces these moments that feel like real truth … That is the 
entire story, right there. That’s it. There’s no more to be said.” Blackstar 
says it beautifully.
 