
One of the year’s more heartening success stories was that of the Frenchwoman 
who, depressed, lonely and insecure, fell under the wing of a group of Soho 
drag queens in London. The performers saw inHéloïse Letissier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/04/christine-and-the-queens-heloise-letissier-interview>
 a kindred spirit and nurtured her, sending her back to Paris to become 
Christine and the Queens, a character who expressed Letissier’s fears and 
confronted them, and who became the most unlikely crossover success in a long 
time.

Chaleur Humaine (meaning Human Warmth) was released in June 2014 in France, 
but didn’t creep out in the rest of the world until early 2016, a few tracks 
replaced by new ones, a few with lyrics reworked in English. The translations 
were not literal; in fact, you’d struggle to call them translations at all. The 
song Tilted, which had been called Christine on the original release, opened “I 
will die before Methuselah / So I’ll fight sleep with ammonia,” whereas the 
French version had been something along the lines of: “I start books at the end 
/ And I hold my head high for nothing.”

Christine and the Queens: 'I just want to shatter everything'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/04/christine-and-the-queens-heloise-letissier-interview>
Anyone going to Letissier’s lyrics looking for a definitive statement is 
likely to be disappointed. There are hints and allusions throughout, but she 
usually pulls the listener away after having dropped a clue. It’s hard not read 
the chorus ofiT <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i9XeN3MSbyk>, in which she 
sings “I’m a man now” as a comment about her own gender identity, but it’s then 
mocked by the backing vocals: “She wants to be a man / But she lies.”

But Chaleur Humaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/03/christine-and-the-queens-chaleur-humaine>
’s triumph was that it expressed Letissier’s personality through the whole 
package of words and music, and showed that music could still be a vehicle for 
personal transformation while also speaking to those who had never felt the 
need to redefine themselves. It was music that looked inward but reached 
outward, perfectly judged by Letissier, with her collaborators, Ash Workman, 
Gabriel Stebbing and Michael Lovett – all part of the Metronomy team at various 
times. It was avowedly non-maximalist: every song lets space hang darkly 
inside, nothing is pushed too far. The elements – electronics, keyboards, 
programmed drums – are those of the dancefloor, but Chaleur Humaine, even at 
its most insistent, sounds as if Letissier parked several streets away from the 
club and chose not to get out of her car.

Tilted <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9RBzsjga73s> was where the elements 
combined perfectly, in a piece of pop that sounded at once perfectly pitched 
but also subtly dislocated – tilted, indeed. The way the main synth line seems 
to fade in and out on each chord suited its mood of distorted reality; 
Letissier’s voice is perfectly in control, pitched in a netherworld where 
vulnerability, melancholy, joy and resilience sit alongside each other. And 
while the lyric seems ungainly, you don’t need the whole song to get the sense: 
“I’m actually good / Can’t help it if we’re tilted” might not make literal 
sense, but everyone who has felt uncertainty can identify that precise feeling.

In the year of David Bowie’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-at-the-age-of-69\>
, Chaleur Humaine was a salutary reminder that pop can be inspirational and 
comforting, that it need not be the preserve of either the gimlet-eyed 
careerists nor the glum exponents of authenticity. Like Bowie’s 1970s albums, 
it was the sound of someone using pop as a vehicle for self-realisation, and 
finding along the way that the commercial, the experimental and the personal 
could combine in such a way that they struck chords with an awful lot of other 
people.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9RBzsjga73s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9RBzsjga73s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9RBzsjga73s&media=>
Watch the video for Tilted on Christine and the Queens’ YouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9RBzsjga73s> 
 * More of the best albums of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/30/the-best-albums-of-2016>  