
Critics hailed it as the messiest album release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/28/up-the-anti-how-rihanna-rewrote-the-rules-of-pop>
 campaign in recent memory. Rihanna’s eighth record was delayed, leaked and 
eventually given away, with the singer hosting an incongruous event in which 
she unveiledbraille poetry in between 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/08/rihanna-anti-album-cover-changes-history-of-album-art>
. The press rejoiced when it looked as if one of the biggest artists on the 
planet had sold only 1,000 copies in a week, with tabloids suggesting that 
Rihanna’s muddled head – from a much publicised fondness for weed – hadcaused 
Anti’s alleged flop 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/archives/news/55682/has-pop-princess-rihannas-career-gone-up-in-smoke/>
.

But while the convoluted nature of partnerships with Tidal and Samsung were 
largely responsible for the record’s poor commercial performance in traditional 
terms, it was a streaming smash and later wentdouble platinum 
<http://www.rap-up.com/2016/05/05/rihanna-anti-certified-double-platinum/>. And 
the fact that so many people were quick to celebrate her supposed failure 
simply complimented the album’s unflinching temperament. For a decade, Rihanna 
has worked in an industry that expects its female starts to be slick and 
subdued, and Anti was the musical manifestation of her rejection of the rules. 
Like an antihero in a neo-noir crime film, Rihanna was sophisticated and 
fearless. An arch, ominous atmosphere ran through this record, from the 
gunslinging ballad Desperado to the instructive slow-jam Yeah, I Said It.

When the album’s lead single Work came out – featuring Drake and a sample of 
Sail Away Riddim <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1r5Wd6O9yY> by producers 
Richie Stephens and Mikey 2000 – it sounded unlike anything else. HerBarbadian 
accent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/04/talk-that-talk-rihanna-the-cunning-linguist>
 the most pronounced it had ever been, this was a dark, melancholic 
dancehall-elevated track full of frosty futurism. But in spite of the track’s 
ubiquity – not to mention fellow singleNeeded Me’s 42-week reign in the Top 100 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/chart-beat/7588020/rihanna-needed-me-longest-charting-hit-hot-100-chart-moves>
 – Anti is a relatively hitless album, especially considering the chart success 
of her Grammy-crammed back catalogue. Its tracks became a slow-developing 
addiction rather than a quick fix of fizzy pop. They foundnew life on stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/24/rihanna-review-wembley-stadium-anti>
 and infan-made videos 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BI_qxx-jdP8/?taken-by=badgalriri&hl=en>.

Unlike the clarity of her early material, Rihanna’s songs on Anti were 
intimate and unusual. Sonics were rough, distorted, stoned: the rattling bass 
on Woo, the musty Channel Orange-like interlude of James Joint. Album opener 
Consideration (featuringSZA <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/08/sza>
) swaggered in, holding a melody at gunpoint, and then sauntered out without 
breaking a sweat. Sex With Me, which appeared on the deluxe version of the 
album, was a deadpan ode to her own prowess and excused some dodgy Disney 
ballads.

Compared to industry swots such as Ed Sheeran and Taylor Swift, Anti’s arrival 
may have seemed shambolic. But anyone who’s kept an eye onRihanna’s antics 
<http://time.com/4431632/rihanna-wine-glasses/> should know that “launch 
efficient album campaign” is about as high on her to-do list as buying nicotine 
patches and going for a jog. Her defiance surfaced on previous albums (with 
songs such as Unapologetic, Rated R and Good Girl Gone Bad), but this was the 
first one on which she successfully aligned her music with her true 
rebelliousness. On Anti, Rihanna morphed from cowboy, to gangster, to the 
world’s most accomplished lover, maintaining throughout her status as pop’s 
greatest rock star.

 * More of the best albums of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/30/the-best-albums-of-2016> 


 