
One day in early August, 36-year-old Gavin bumped into an old friend outside 
That’s Entertainment music and DVD shop in Preston market.

“He pulled me to one side, but I didn’t recognise him,” Gavin (a pseudonym) 
says when we meet a week later. “He was like, ‘How you doing? I’m just going to 
get some stuff, make some money.’ He’s opened his bag and it’s full of razor 
blades. He’s selling razor blades for a tenner a pop, all of that business.”

Gavin says that he and the man were former “grafting partners”: commercial 
burglars and thieves, working around Lancashire. But in the six years since 
they had last seen one another, their lives had taken divergent paths.

“He’s ended up on the gear, shoplifting,” Gavin says. “I was like, ‘See you 
later mate.’ I felt guilty, tight, leaving him, but I thought: ‘What would 
happen if I’m with him and he gets pulled over and I’m in the hospital?’ I’d be 
in a lot of trouble, wouldn’t I? I gave him a couple of quid to buy himself a 
couple of pies, a cup of tea, and he wandered off … I sat there and thought: 
‘If I’d not been in here, it’d be me doing that.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc77ad89de5d6f71b3dd4c1649b1422c53ff1933%2F0_0_794_520%2F794.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK's%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK%27s%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc77ad89de5d6f71b3dd4c1649b1422c53ff1933%2F0_0_794_520%2F794.png>
 Guild Lodge hospital in Lancashire 
Gavin relates the story inside a meeting room at Guild Lodge 
<https://www.lancashirecare.nhs.uk/guild-lodge> hospital, in the Lancashire 
village of Whittingham, where he has lived for the past three years. Guild 
Lodge is one of 60 medium-secure mental health hospitals in England and Wales 
that house people deemed to be a danger either to themselves or others on 
account of their mental illness. Most of the 149 patients have committed 
offences while mentally ill, or have been diagnosed with a mental illnesswhile 
already in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/14/mental-health-problems-male-prisoners-hospital-treatment-ministry-of-justice-figures>
. Some have been in higher-security institutions; almost all are being held 
under the terms of the Mental Health Act.

Rise in prisoners moved to mental health hospitals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/14/mental-health-problems-male-prisoners-hospital-treatment-ministry-of-justice-figures>
Gavin, who has schizophrenia, describes a life of substance abuse and crime, 
sometimes with violence, that took him in and out of prison and secure care 
settings for the past 18 years – his entire adult life. He was most recently 
admitted to a medium-secure ward at Guild Lodge in 2013, and is now in 
low-secure, from which he is permitted release to go into town, as he waits 
first for a tribunal hearing that could clear him for discharge and then, 
crucially, for a bed in supported accommodation.

“It might not work if I was just kicked out like I was in the prison system. I 
would have nowhere to go,” Gavin says. “I’d be on the street, in a hostel, back 
in crime or something. When I’ve been released from prison, it’s been a few 
weeks at the most. I’ve been straight back in for something else.”

From 1873 until 1995, the leafy park that surrounds Guild Lodge’s complex of 
modern buildings concealedWhittingham Hospital 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whittingham_Hospital>, which was Britain’s 
largest psychiatric institution and a centrepiece of the notorious Victorian 
asylum system. But Guild Lodge, which opened in 1999, is a striking 
representation of the advancements in secure-care provision across the UK – 
particularly at a security level one step belowBroadmoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/16/broadmoor-hospital-rated-inadequate-by-watchdog>
, Ashworth and Rampton, England’s three high-secure forensic psychiatric 
services.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a6ef8d60d60a163339e9e2b14aa138baaa67bee%2F0_329_6582_3949%2F6582.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK's%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK%27s%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a6ef8d60d60a163339e9e2b14aa138baaa67bee%2F0_329_6582_3949%2F6582.jpg>
 Staff helping a service user (right) during a crafts session at Guild Lodge. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
From the outside, the pale bricks and long windows of the medium-secure area 
of Guild Lodge could pass for a leisure centre. Even the high mesh fence that 
surrounds it could be for tennis courts or a five-a-side football pitch. The 
low-secure area that sprawls outside looks and feels like a business park. 
There is little to distinguish buildings containing administration offices and 
meeting rooms from the wards in which patients sleep.

Service users (the preferred term for patient) considered low-risk are free to 
wander through the adjacent woodland, around an Anglican church, a cemetery and 
even a cricket pitch. One service user, who told me he spends much of his days 
watching wildlife and listening to music on a wind-up radio, insisted that a 
relative of local hero Andrew Flintoff was the groundsman.

As with all hospitals, the aim is that patients will one day be discharged 
from Guild Lodge with their illnesses under control. It is recovery-focused 
rather than punitive, and although the Ministry of Justice retains a 
controlling interest in the onward progression of many patients (some will go 
back to prison), funding for medium-secure hospitals comes entirely from NHS 
England’s special commissioning budget.

The unique challenge is to balance care with custody; to maintain the public’s 
security while effectively treating patients’ illnesses. For thousands of 
people like Gavin, who is genial, articulate and rational when his 
schizophrenia is under control, secure care units can prove the difference 
between what might be considered a worthwhile life, and one wasted as hostage 
to an unpredictable and often dangerous illness.

Such endeavours are not cheap. According to figures from NHS England, 
expenditure on medium- and high-secure mental health services during the past 
year was £1.23bn, which accounts for 74% of the special commissioning budget 
and is one fifth of all public spending on adult mental health care. Accurate 
figures on a patient-by-patient basis are difficult to obtain, but conservative 
estimates put the cost of a bed and care for a year in a medium-secure hospital 
at £150,000, nearly five times as much as a male inmate in a category B prison.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a4b2415b6c7223f7eb61fe6f814048b7d21e262%2F0_0_6582_4388%2F6582.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK's%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK%27s%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a4b2415b6c7223f7eb61fe6f814048b7d21e262%2F0_0_6582_4388%2F6582.jpg>
 A view of one of the security fences at Guild Lodge. Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond for the Guardian 
Partly because of their cost, forensic psychiatry hospitals are under almost 
constant review. Medium-secure services in particular have remained a focal 
point for mental health campaigners, who say patients are often too readily 
admitted to an unnecessarily high level of security and then stay too long. The 
most recent government taskforce report on mental health – titledFive Year 
Forward View for Mental Health 
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/mentalhealth/taskforce/>, released in February – 
made fresh commitments to “prevent avoidable admissions”, support recovery in 
the “least restrictive setting” and “address existing fragmented pathways in 
secure care”. In essence, it emphasises a need to get patients hastily into 
secure care when mental illness is the root cause of their offending, but also 
to discharge them quickly and safely, with adequate continued care, to get on 
with their lives.

Yet there remain frequent claims that the Ministry of Justice is overly 
cautious in approving discharge from secure hospitals, and that there is 
inadequate onward housing provision for patients reintegrating into 
communities. In general, treatment for mental illness has progressed 
significantly since the days of the asylums, but age-old misconceptions persist 
about psychiatric institutions. Patients still suffer familiar prejudice on 
account of their illness, compounded by their detention in hospital.

“It’s very, very risk-averse stuff,” says Jenny Shaw, the recently retired 
clinical director for specialist services at Lancashire Care Foundation Trust, 
which oversees Guild Lodge. “Even having conversations with some of my friends, 
who should know better, [I hear] ‘How can you ever let people who have 
committed those kinds of offences out?’ It’s a complete lack of understanding 
of what we’re trying to do. I think there’s still a massive stigma around 
mental health, and people with mental health problems and who are offenders – 
it’s a massive double whammy.”

I visited Guild Lodge twice earlier this year, touring the medium-secure unit 
and talking to some service users about treatment programmes and the challenges 
they face. Journalists are rarely permitted inside secure care environments: 
service users are often vulnerable and their recovery programmes easily 
undermined by external distractions. Administrators are also wary of the 
sensationalist reporting mental health hospitals have been known to attract, 
while victims and their families stand to gain little by repeated exposure to 
the perpetrators of the crimes against them. All names have therefore been 
changed and details of offences omitted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdab000af1a0e1a65e65f85db50b00d6f8eeb169a%2F0_265_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK's%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK%27s%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdab000af1a0e1a65e65f85db50b00d6f8eeb169a%2F0_265_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Staff in the woodwork room at Guild Lodge. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for 
the Guardian 
In general, people who have committed offences as a result of a mental illness 
tend to be blighted by extreme guilt for their actions. Many people hear voices 
or suffer delusions that have encouraged their offences.Hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> house people suffering from a 
vast range of illnesses – schizophrenia, psychosis, acute depression, bipolar 
disorder – from hugely varying backgrounds, many of whom have suffered extreme 
trauma. The propensity to self-harm is also high.

The area “over the fence” – as one service user described the medium-secure 
part of the hospital – has the atmosphere of a vocational college, albeit one 
in which most doors are permanently locked. Staff and visitors pass through an 
air-lock security door, past a small office where patients can meet guests, and 
then into a courtyard, with various separate buildings situated either side of 
an access road and areas of green lawns. After appropriate risk assessment, 
service users are allowed access to an art room and wood and metal-working 
workshops, or to learn gardening skills in an on-site greenhouse and nursery. 
There is also a music room, and a service-user band regularly plays gigs both 
in and outside the hospital.

My visit to the medium-secure unit coincided with lunch, when the common areas 
were almost entirely deserted. Patients were in gender-specific wards, where 
they sleep in single-occupancy rooms, with washing facilities, and are locked 
in overnight. Although neither staff nor service users denied that tempers can 
flare, and that patients’ moods and illnesses can often raise tensions inside 
the hospital, I saw no threatening behaviour. Patients at different stages of 
recovery demand varying levels of supervision, but I met service users for 
interview in the low-secure area to which they brought themselves and left 
unescorted.

Many patients in secure care have co-morbidity issues – drug or alcohol 
misuse, or personality disorders – and programmes work to tackle these, as well 
as to improve patients’ physical health. Smoking is entirely prohibited inside 
Guild Lodge, and service users are encouraged to use an on-site gym and sports 
hall. Weight gain remains one of the most damaging side-effects of many 
psychotropic medications, leading both to physical ailments and reduced 
self-esteem.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6994d79769f71d10a9497ae65a0e08cfcf15bcab%2F0_0_6720_4480%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK's%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK%27s%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6994d79769f71d10a9497ae65a0e08cfcf15bcab%2F0_0_6720_4480%2F6720.jpg>
 The horticulture polytunnel at Guild Lodge. Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
for the Guardian 
Guild Lodge is also relatively unusual in that its administrators have won a 
battle to permit computer use for service users. Access to technology brings 
out the most risk-averse tendencies of lawmakers, who fear that vulnerable 
patients may be drawn to the darkest fringes of the internet. (Mobile phones 
are also strictly forbidden.) But a lack of even rudimentary IT skills may be 
damaging to a patient’s prospects of reintegrating to the job market on 
release. Service users can suffer an extreme sense of isolation, as though they 
are separate from the community in which they hope to reintegrate. Any further 
barriers, such as a lack of basic skills, only compound anxiety issues 
surrounding discharge.

One low-secure service user named Janet, who was not at Guild Lodge and who 
met me in a coffee shop in London, described a scenario where she was required 
to go online to arrange her own onward housing in order to be discharged from a 
hospital, but was not permitted access to the internet before she left.

“In the five years I’ve been in hospital, the world has moved a lot,” Janet 
says. “One of the people I live with has been in hospital for 16 years. She is 
about to be discharged and she has got no concept of how to use the internet. 
None at all.”

She adds: “No matter how confident you are as an individual, your confidence 
just plummets. Even the most arrogant individuals in hospital – it’s quite 
interesting watching them go out into the community, all that arrogance and 
bravado seems to quite quickly crumble. It’s fearful. We have a bridge at the 
front of the hospital. It’s called ‘life beyond the bridge’. Patients fear 
crossing that bridge.”

In recent years, studies into the effectiveness of treatments for mental 
illness, including schizophrenia, have centred on involving patients themselves 
in planning their own recovery. Research has shown that patients respond better 
to treatment when they are engaged in it and given more control over the 
direction of their own care.

In the secure environment, attempts to empower patients in this way can be 
seen to run counter to the demands of security, but initiatives are now in 
place that focus on service-user involvement and are aimed at hastening 
recovery and expediting discharge. “These things are related,” says Ian 
Callaghan, a former service user, with experience of both low- and 
medium-secure hospitals, who now works forRethink Mental Illness 
<https://www.rethink.org/>. “As soon as a person’s mental health is stabilised, 
things should change. Stabilising mental health and managing risk go 
hand-in-hand.”

Callaghan is the national service user lead for a Department of Health 
initiative named My Shared Pathway – a programme followed throughout a 
patient’s stay in hospital. My Shared Pathway is tailored to an individual’s 
specific needs and defines closely their shared relationships with the 
clinicians, support workers, other service users and eventually the community 
they hope to return to. Meanwhile, a scheme launched by Rethink Mental Illness’
Innovation Network 
<https://www.rethink.org/about-us/the-schizophrenia-commission/innovation-network>
 is aiming to involve service users in planning their futures in a far more 
detailed way than has been the norm.

These initiatives aren’t to everyone’s taste. One 57-year-old service user, 
who had spent many years in Ashworth high-secure hospital before transferring 
to Guild Lodge seven years ago, said: “They have meetings about when to 
organise meetings.” The same service user was also not a supporter of the 
smoking prohibition, and said fellow patients squirrelled cigarettes just 
outside the fence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9548411f2b639b8a589601377cacc8aa418fcf4%2F0_448_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK's%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Better%20than%20prison%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20UK%27s%20secure%20hospitals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbetter-than-prison-secure-hospitals-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9548411f2b639b8a589601377cacc8aa418fcf4%2F0_448_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 A crafts session at Guild Lodge. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
Nevertheless, initial feedback from staff and patients has mainly been good, 
and further trials are also currently under way to enhance the role of 
peer-support workers in secure hospitals. The idea is that experienced service 
users can volunteer their support and advice to other patients, building on 
informal relationships on some wards and broadening networks of trusted 
individuals. Service users are known to respond well to people who have been 
through the secure-care system and have successfully returned to the community. 
Janet says: “It does sometimes take somebody who has recovered to let you see 
the light a little bit.”

Service users and staff both told me that it can be detrimental to recovery 
if, after being cleared for discharge by a clinician, a patient is denied 
release either by the Ministry of Justice, or by a lack of onward accommodation 
provision. After the taskforce recommendations, NHS England is trialling a 
reorganisation of budgets to allow local administrators to manage pathways out 
of hospital and into community mental health care teams. The aim is that 
medium-secure services be used only to address the most pressing clinical 
needs, rather than by patients for whom there is simply nowhere else to go.

How easy is it to get help for a mental health problem? Five different stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/help-mental-health-problem-five-stories>
Gavin says that the severity of his illness did not allow him to understand 
the benefit of his treatment during previous admissions to secure hospital. He 
returned to the prison system and stopped taking medication, leading to a 
deterioration in his condition. (Prisoners can reject medication, but some 
sections of the MentalHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Act, 
under which service users will be in hospital, allow for doctors to administer 
it without consent.) Eventually, after returning again to secure care, a course 
of therapy helped him manage his illness and turn over a new leaf.

“You get to a certain point where [you think], ‘What’s been going on? What 
have I been doing with my life?’” he says. “I just want to leave now. I don’t 
smoke anymore, I’ve not done drugs, I’ve not drunk alcohol and I don’t intend 
to. I don’t want to go back to that life.”
 