
Beyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> earned nine Grammy 
nominations on Tuesday, including best rock performance, but the singer’s 
twangy song Daddy Lessons was rejected by the Recording Academy’s country music 
committee.

A person familiar with the Grammy nomination process said on Wednesday that 
Beyoncé submitted Daddy Lessons from her album Lemonade to the country 
category. The person, who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not 
allowed to speak publicly about the topic, said the country music committee 
rejected the song.

Grammy nominations 2017: Beyoncé and R&B artists shine while rock suffers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/06/grammy-awards-2017-nominations-drake-rihanna-beyonce-adele>
If Beyoncé’s song had made it through, it would have been eligible for honours 
such as best country song and country solo performance.

Representatives for Beyoncé and the Grammys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/grammys> didn’t immediately reply to emails 
seeking comment.

Daddy Lessons highlights the Houston native’s Southern music roots, 
incorporating horns, acoustic guitar and hand claps as Beyonce sings about 
lessons she learned from her father and former manager. The lyrics include 
references to the second amendment, the Bible and shooting guns.

Beyonce performed the track at last month’s Country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/country> Music Association awards alongside 
the Dixie Chicks, and later released a version of the song featuring the 
country trio.

Earlier in the year, the ‘Chicks covered the song on their tour, and others in 
the country genre welcomed the tune, including Blake Shelton, who defended the 
song from critics who say it’s not country.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpL8-TOgBO0Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpL8-TOgBO0Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpL8-TOgBO0Q&media=>
Country star Dierks Bentley said, “There is just something intangible about it 
that it feels like a country song.”

Karen Fairchild of Little Big Town said, Beyoncé “has some stories to tell, 
that’s clear on Lemonade. And that’s what makes country music great.”

Beyoncé impressed the music world by earning Grammy nominations in the rock, 
pop, R&B and rap categories, becoming the first artist to earn nominations in 
those fields in the same year. Paul McCartney and Janet Jackson have also 
received Grammy nominations in pop, rock, R&B and rap, but not in the same year.

Beyoncé’s nine nominations include the big three: album of the year for 
Lemonade and song, and record of the year for Formation. She is also competing 
for best rock performance (Don’t Hurt Yourself with Jack White), pop solo 
performance (Hold Up), rap/sung performance (Freedom with Kendrick Lamar) and 
urban contemporary album (Lemonade). She has won 20 Grammy Awards and is the 
most nominated woman in Grammy history, with 62 nominations. Beyoncé is also 
competing for best music film with Lemonade and music video with Formation.
 