
The film: Ghostbusters 

If there is one film that holds a political key to understanding 2016, it is 
Ghostbusters <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters>: that funny, 
good-natured, easygoing female remake of the 1980s original. The movie, and the 
way it was received and viciously attacked online, told us something vital 
about the hive mind of the US’s reactionary right. It starredKristen Wiig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-wiig>, Melissa McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/melissa-mccarthy>, Kate McKinnon and Leslie 
Jones. Wiig and McCarthy were already well known; McKinnon was the upcoming SNL 
superstar who was later in the year to become famous for her Hillary Clinton
impersonation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YoBXJPQmAcc> – but it was the 
African-American comic Jones who became the particular object of unpleasant 
abuse, reminiscent of #gamergate vitriol, naturally with a racist slant, though 
everyone was attacked, and all for daring to remake and allegedly “spoil” the 
original with a gender switch.

The film itself appeared to anticipate some kind of criticism with its own 
“trolling” jokes – but in retrospect the gentle nature of this material showed 
how unexpected the venom was. The attackers’ manifest inferiority to Jones et 
al in terms of intelligence or comedy was of no account.Social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> changed the rules and 
contesting the trolls was like trying to fence with someone who is allowed to 
spray sulphuric acid from a high-pressure hose, though that notorious troll, 
Milo Yiannopoulos was barred from Twitter for orchestrating poisonous abuse 
towards Jones. At first I was baffled, along with many others. Why on earth was 
there so much hate, real hate, directed at a comedy film? The answer is that 
this was a pop-culture proxy war against Clinton, a dummy run. The trolls 
didn’t want a female remake ofGhostbusters, or the US presidency. The 
Ghostbusters hate campaign was John the Baptist to Trump’s non-Jesus. Only men 
belong inGhostbusters; or the White House. Peter Bradshaw
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25cdb565a59444f6469fa0254741cdc7059c3ef5%2F110_530_4385_2633%2F4385.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25cdb565a59444f6469fa0254741cdc7059c3ef5%2F110_530_4385_2633%2F4385.jpg>
 From left: Linda Bassett (Mrs Jarrett), Deborah Findlay (Sally), Kika Markham 
(Lena) and June Watson (Vi) inEscaped Alone by Caryl Churchil Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The play: Escaped Alone, by Caryl Churchill

Caryl Churchill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/sep/07/caryl-churchill-landmark-theatre>
’sEscaped Alone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/31/escaped-alone-caryl-churchill-review-royal-court>
, first seen at the Royal Court in January, perfectly caught the mood of the 
time. Set in a sunlit suburban garden, it showed four septuagenarian women 
talking about their lives. But behind the elliptical banalities of daily life 
lay a world of private pain which expanded, through a series of monologues, 
into a vision of impending apocalypse. In a year when women dramatists made all 
the running, Churchill’s play anticipated Lucy Kirkwood’sThe Children, also 
directed at the Court by James Macdonald and also featuring Deborah Findlay, in 
its extraordinary mix of the diurnal and the dystopian.


From the seemingly random gossip, it emerged that Sally had an aversion to 
cats, Lena was a depressive agoraphobe and Vi was a hairdresser who had 
murdered her husband. But it was their nosy neighbour, Mrs Jarrett, who stepped 
out of the frame and who, through her solo speeches, suggested that present-day 
angst would be echoed and monstrously magnified by a coming catastrophe. 
Churchill inFar Away (2000) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/16/far-away-review-samantha-colley-caryl-churchill>
 had already prophesied chaos in the natural world. But in retrospect the 
seismic shocks of 2016, both political and environmental, lent greater urgency 
to her nightmare vision. Linda Bassett as Mrs Jarrett described a world of 
fire, flood, and famine. Gas masks would be available on the NHS. Starving 
commuters would watch on their iPlayer as TV performers ate breakfast. Villages 
would vanish and whole cities relocated to their rooftops. Planes with sick 
passengers would be diverted to Antarctica.

Audiences laughed nervously at the exaggerated absurdity of it all. Yet, in a 
world of vanishing species, melting ice caps and uncontrolled population 
explosion, Churchill’s hour-long play tapped into our hidden fears. While we 
take tea in the garden and chat about our daily lives, our planet seems poised 
between survival and destruction.Michael Billington

The song: ‘Formation’, by Beyoncé

Back in January, who knew that by the year’s end those tense, ominous, flexing 
guitar riffs that open Beyoncé’s Black Lives Matter battle manifesto 
“Formation” would become so indelibly linked to tenacious resistance in the 
face of full-scale authoritarianism? Those powerful images ofBeyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> and a dancing black child in a 
hoodie facing off with the police in the video, and her insouciant 
resuscitation of Hillary Clinton’s most maligned statement in the 1990s (“I 
suppose I could’ve stayed home and baked cookies …”) as a closing kiss-off at 
one of Clinton’s rallies undergirded the spirit of this surprising and 
eccentric anthem.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ZDEX2ggvao&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ZDEX2ggvao>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ZDEX2ggvao&media=>
 Watch the video for Beyoncé’s Formation 
Somehow all that highbrow-lowbrow, mega-icon meets just another round-the-way 
girl, coupled with hardcore, get-my-freak-on, female sexual satisfaction added 
up toa rallying call that had the global pop masses swooning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/27/beyonce-star-formation-destinys-child-queen-bey-tour>
. The brilliance of the single’s sonic arc is one that is rooted in euphoric 
release, as it tracks the tension in Beyoncé’s restrained, raspy, near-whisper 
vocals that quickly explode at the moment of her black pride celebration of 
“afros” and “negro noses,” “grind hard” ambition, capitalist actualization, and 
jubilant solidarity. For the first nine months of the year, “Formation” was the 
feminist accompaniment to Kendrick Lamar’s “Alright”. Fast forward to December 
on a cold Saturday night off-Broadway, where director Lileana Blain-Cruz has 
staged a bold new production ofSuzan-Lori Parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/21/suzan-lori-parks-interview-royal-court-father-comes-home-from-the-wars-obama>
’s avant-garde play,The Death of the Last Black Man in the Whole Entire World, 
and you hear Beyoncé’s taut opening notes on a chilling loop.

Here on stage at the end of the year, at the end of the Obama era, at the end 
of another historical phase of freedom- struggle progress, “Formation” remains 
the soundtrack for a black revolution still under way but shifting gears. It is 
a song elastic enough to stay with us while changing with the times.Daphne A 
Brooks

The TV show: Black Mirror

Does Black Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/16/black-mirror-first-look-review-charlie-brooker>
 still work? Part of the point ofCharlie Brooker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/14/charlie-brooker-black-mirror-tinder-pokemon-go>
’s anthology of dystopian satire has always been that it presents an 
alternative world only a couple of turns away from this one. Most of the time, 
it imagined the worst that a technological innovation might reveal in us, 
allying fears only with the unspoken point that at least we hadn’t got there 
yet. In 2016, that gap is less secure. Tiresomely, everyone keeps saying that 
everything is like aBlack Mirror episode (we have to go back to Lord Ashcroft 
and Isobel Oakeshott’s biography ofDavid Cameron last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/27/david-cameron-denies-lord-ashcroft-allegations-call-me-dave-dead-pig>
 for the porcine indignity that lies behind that dreary meme); with its 
audience thus inured, the series has less space to make you see things 
differently. In the opening episode, “Nosedive”, a woman whose chances of a 
better life rest on the plausible curation of her social media feed is driven 
nearly to madness; when one of her colleagues is locked out of the office 
because he can’t garner enough likes, it feels a little on the nose.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ed0172308ac612b2cd24d43707008b7cebb54c0%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ed0172308ac612b2cd24d43707008b7cebb54c0%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Black Mirror: what’s the worst that can happen? Photograph: Giles Keyte 
By and large, though, Black Mirror is still brilliant, above all for the way 
it combines fantasy with specificity. Brooker has always understood that his 
nearly-lands are only as plausible as their most jarring detail. His commitment 
to imagining things thoroughly has endured even as Netflix’s vast budgets and 
transatlantic grandeur have offered more opportunities to paper over any cracks.

This is not only a matter of set-dressing. In the show’s best moments – see 
“San Junipero” with its giddy, romantic meditation on eternal youth – that 
meticulousness governs the characters’ inner worlds as much as it does the 
worlds around them. Conversely, its only really weak episode is “Shut Up and 
Dance”, a flatly horrible tour of the internet’s capacity for gleeful evil with 
correspondingly two-dimensional characters. Watching that one, I never really 
believed that Brooker’s heart was in it, not least because its miseries feel as 
if they have already happened.

I don’t know if it’s evidence that Black Mirror’s auteur has mellowed or that 
the times demand a diagnosis that retains hope, but this is a striking change 
from previous series, whose most memorable and satisfying moments have always 
been shot through with nihilism. In 2016, maybe by necessity, they are blessed 
with a kind of sly humanity instead.Archie Bland

The art: Walhalla, by Anselm Kiefer 

It says something about 2016 that the work of art to sum it up best was an 
apocalyptic installation that recreated a grotesque version of Hitler’s bunker 
decorated with premonitions of the end of the world.Anselm Kiefer’s Walhalla  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/21/anselm-kiefer-review-walhalla-white-cube-bermondsey>
was so laden with images of modern history’s most nightmarish moments that it 
was perversely thrilling, even sardonically gleeful at the spectacle of 
everything coming to a catastrophic climax.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0ea8894a033081025988cfd1b103f7e7b4e5f44%2F109_117_3228_2146%2F3228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0ea8894a033081025988cfd1b103f7e7b4e5f44%2F109_117_3228_2146%2F3228.jpg>
 A canvas from Anselm Kiefer’s installationWalhalla. Photograph: © Anselm 
Kiefer/White Cube 
Kiefer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/sep/12/anselm-kiefer-royal-academy-retrospective-german-painter-sculptor>
was born in 1945, in the ruins of the Third Reich.Walhalla was, among other 
things, his pungent way of brooding on the passing of the years as he goes on 
working with colossal energy in his 70s. Ever since he was photographed as a 
young artist making a Nazi salute while posed as the romantic wanderer from the 
sublime early 19th century paintings of Caspar David Friedrich, Kiefer has 
resurrected romanticism, expressionism (and every other excessive, 
self-dramatising, ripely symbolical art style going) to create work that flouts 
good taste to make us see the grandeur of life, its beauty and horror.

Walhalla is his uncompromising vision of mortality, inspired by the same 
Viking and Germanic myths of gods and heroes that Wagner dramatised in the Ring 
Cycle and Hitler identified with in his hellish twilight of the gods. The scary 
thing about north European pagan myth is that it says the gods themselves must 
die. Walhalla, their palace, will fall into the void. Taking over the spacious 
White Cube gallery in London’s Bermondsey, Kiefer made that final fall happen. 
He transfigured every available space, turning a corridor into a hall of fallen 
heroes, amassing spectacular works of art from a rusty spiral staircase hung 
with empty clothes to an eagle with a body of immovable rock among rows of 
stretchers and beds that seemed to have been found in some forgotten military 
hospital.

The timeliness of Kiefer’s vision of history as an unhinged opera headed for 
its monstrous final act was eerie and unavoidable.Walhalla opened in the 
closing months of a year that had seen an MP murdered, immigrants menaced and 
demagogues ruling the day – and that was just in Britain. Elsewhere, strong men 
bombed cities or lied their way into office. Far right parties ripped up 
Europe’s liberal consensus. Kiefer’sWalhalla released the demons 2016 seeded 
and let them create a world, as if in a grisly Frankensteinian experiment. You 
want to see where the rule of unreason, prejudice and savagery leads? It takes 
you here, to a wasteland where the valkyries have abandoned their rusty 
bicycles as they flee a storm rolling across vast painted plains, straight 
towards us.Jonahan Jones

The comedy: Monkey See Monkey Do, by Richard Gadd
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fd2266cf0fd97428f49d5b15101497a3a42b1d7%2F1586_624_2428_3035%2F2428.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fd2266cf0fd97428f49d5b15101497a3a42b1d7%2F1586_624_2428_3035%2F2428.jpg>
 Richard Gadd, performingMonkey See Monkey Do in Edinburgh. Photograph: Murdo 
MacLeod for the Guardian 
Something extraordinary happened in live comedy on the Edinburgh fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/10/edinburgh-festival-2016-comedy-shows>
 this year: funny got knocked off its perch by emotionally significant. For 
years, purist standups had complained about “dead dad” shows on the fringe, 
sob-story comedy sets supposedly pandering to arty audiences. But in 2016 – 
just as TV submitted to the rise of the so-called “sadcom” (Phoebe 
Waller-Bridge’s Fleabag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/fleabag-a-hilarious-sitcom-about-terrible-people-and-broken-lives>
; Will Sharpe’sFlowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/26/flowers-review-gloriously-dark-sitcom-depression-rage>
) – so live standups took intimacy to the next level, with a striking array of 
shows addressing depression and anxiety, brain haemorrhages and Aids diagnoses, 
bereavement and break-ups.


None was more intimate than winner of this year’s Edinburgh comedy award, 
Scottish comic Richard Gadd’s extraordinaryMonkey See Monkey Do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/12/richard-gadd-review-banshee-labyrinth-edinburgh>
. Gadd made a name for himself with schlocky multimedia shows about sex, drugs 
and ultraviolence. This year, he drew back the cartoonish veil to reveal “the 
real Richard Gadd” – pounding on a treadmill throughout the show, failing to 
outrun the monkey on his back or the anxious voices in his head. Flitting 
neurotically between audio and video, past and present, Gadd staged both his 
breakdown and re-assembly, as – spoiler alert – he spoke publicly for the first 
time about being sexually assaulted four years ago.

At times this summer – not least at Gadd’s tear-stained curtain call, when he 
addressed audiences frankly about his difficulties in bringing this story to 
the stage – it felt as if we were witnessing the Oprahfication of comedy. 
Sometimes, the rawness felt too much; more often, it felt essential, as an 
artform cast off glibness, and helped break the conspiracy of silence (and 
solemnity) surrounding mental health. And, in Gadd’s case, masculinity: 
alongside the personal healing,Monkey See Monkey Do insisted on a broader 
definition of manliness. With this courageous comedy set, Gadd added his voice 
to an ever-louder chorus (think GraysonPerry’s All Man, Chris Goode’s Men in 
the Cities, RashDash theatre company’s Two Man Show) interrogating masculinity 
and reconsidering what it means to be a man.Brian Logan

The fiction: Autumn, by Ali Smith


It’s rare for a novel to be explicitly addressed to the precise historical 
moment in which it appears. Yet that’s whatAli Smith has done in Autumn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/12/autumn-ali-smith-review>, the 
first in a planned quartet structured around the seasons, which accelerated the 
publishing process to bring us a portrait of the UK in the wake of the Brexit 
vote, where the news feels “like a flock of speeded-up sheep running off the 
side of a cliff”.


Her central character is Elisabeth, an art history lecturer, struggling to 
acclimatise to a Britain in which “All across the country, people felt they’d 
really lost. All across the country, people felt they’d really won.” An 
atmosphere of shame, defiance and unease pervades her mother’s village, where 
she’s staying to visit Daniel, an elderly friend who is near death in a care 
home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc239c8fe55faefd1e9800676f9724e67b02948ff%2F176_391_1776_1775%2F1776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc239c8fe55faefd1e9800676f9724e67b02948ff%2F176_391_1776_1775%2F1776.jpg>
 Pauline Boty, the 1960s artist, also acted on television and the stage. 
Photograph: FremantleMedia Ltd/Rex Features 
Smith is known for her playful and profound investigations of art, gender and 
identity.Autumn addresses current social reality – job insecurity, toxic social 
media, the murder of Jo Cox, the privatisation of public space – as well as the 
violence of contemporary public discourse. “‘Your time’s over. Democracy. You 
lost.’ It is like democracy is a bottle someone can threaten to smash and do a 
bit of damage with.” But it also engages with this turbulent year in a deeper 
way. Dreams, visions and stories permeate the book, as it jumps around to other 
times and out of time.

But perhaps the main engine of the book is empathy: the ability to see, or not 
to see, through someone else’s eyes. It contains two impossible love stories, 
as Daniel and Elisabeth both fall in love with another person’s way of seeing – 
in Daniel’s case, withPauline Boty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/22/ali-smith-the-prime-of-pauline-boty>
, the neglected 60s pop artist. Boty was passionately engaged, like Smith in 
this novel, with the present moment, andAutumn brings her vibrant canvases and 
exuberant life force back to our attention. In a year when many people’s heroes 
died,Autumn celebrates charisma and the way even unrequited love can illuminate 
a whole life.

All Smith’s books deal in the risk and reward of human connection, often 
exploring the arrival of the stranger, and how the community reacts and is 
changed. With Brexit dramatising Britain’s great divide, and with global 
migration ever growing – and fear of “the other” hardening, this theme comes 
into urgent focus.Autumn examines it aesthetically rather than didactically, 
through riffs on fairytale and fable, with Daniel showing Elisabeth how to tell 
“hospitable” stories that welcome in possibility rather than closing down other 
points of view. At the end of a bleak year, this is a novel that feels 
colourful and nourishing as well as clear-sighted about the state of the world. 
Even as winter bites, “there are roses, there are still roses”. Justine Jordan

The word: populism 

The word of the year in Europe and the US is surely “populism” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/birth-of-populism-donald-trump>
, to which liberal commentators have gravely attributed the surprising 
resurgence of far-right politics. But what exactly is wrong with populism? Why 
is it a bad thing, when being popular, like Taylor Swift, isn’t?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dd7ae4b2f54c0988916f3116edce6b69ccd26bf%2F0_3_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dd7ae4b2f54c0988916f3116edce6b69ccd26bf%2F0_3_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
 Trump supporters at a victory rally in Mobile, Alabama. Photograph: Evan 
Vucci/AP 
As the name suggests, populism was originally a word for a kind of politics 
that sought to represent the interests of (ordinary) people against those of 
the rich and powerful. In that sense the Democrats and the Labour party are (or 
should be) populists. And yet now the word’s connotations are exclusively 
negative.

The seeds of this were present at the beginning, for the earliest politicians 
who used the word were hardly angels. The US Populist party of the late 19th 
century attributed workers’ ills to Jewish control of the banking system, as 
did the Russian Populists who advocated agricultural collectivism around the 
same time. Perhaps the only innocent use of “populism” was to describe a group 
of French novelists in the 1920s and 30s who, according to the OED, “emphasised 
observation of and sympathy with ordinary people”. Yet the wordpopulisme in 
French had itself come about as a translation of the GermanVolkspartei 
(“people’s party”), which is of course irredeemably tainted by history.

So “populism” is now overwhelmingly used as a euphemism for a style of 
politics that plays on xenophobia and hatred of expertise. It has changed 
meaning in the same way as “demagogue”, which once meant a people’s champion 
and now means, at best, “a successful politician with whom I disagree”. In the 
journey of these terms to the semantic dark side we may perceive all the 
problems of our political moment. For if “the people” to whom populism appeals 
really are racist and ignorant, doesn’t a dedication to democracy entail that 
their governments should be as well?Steven Poole

The meme: Pepe the frog

Going by the numbers, Pepe the Frog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/pepe-the-frog-alt-right-mascot-racist-anti-semitic>
, a melancholic stoner amphibian who debuted as an innocuous MySpace comic book 
character back when MySpace was still a thing, was last year’s meme-du-jour. 
This cartoon character, whose droopy eyelids and laconic smile became the go-to 
reaction image for tens of thousands of wags in online comment threads, was 
reportedly the most shared character on Tumblr in 2015. Such was his ubiquity 
that Nicki Minaj felt moved to post a twerking Pepe on social media with the 
caption “Me on Instagram for the next few weeks trying to get my followers back 
up.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72e341d431283af6abc8e6c27ac840289bafe38f%2F0_0_723_480%2F723.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72e341d431283af6abc8e6c27ac840289bafe38f%2F0_0_723_480%2F723.jpg>
 Pepe the Frog Photograph: Matt Furie 
Pepe has maintained his position of meme dominance into 2016 not through 
doggedness but through transformation. In May, an article declared Pepe the 
mascot of the so-called “alt-right”, a conclusion reached after the frog’s 
image was co-opted by elements of president-elect Donald Trump’s troll 
demographic. Hillary Clinton’s campaign soon issued a statement describing Pepe 
as a “white nationalist symbol”. Pepe became a self-perpetuating whirlwind, as, 
goaded by media reports, trolls created new images adorned with symbols of 
antisemitism and white supremacy. Earnestly hateful or glibly anarchic, by the 
time Pepe was transformed into an avatar for Trump, complete with roomy suit 
and feathery blonde hairdo, the Anti-Defamation League had labelled the frog an 
“online hate symbol”.

Matt Furie, the frog’s inventor and a Clinton supporter, was first bewildered 
by the misappropriation, and then infuriated. He launched an online campaign to 
reclaim Pepe, urging people to post non-hateful depictions of the frog using 
the hashtag #SavePepe. If this all sounds like a storm in an online teacup, 
note that from swastikas to brass eagles, the appropriation of popular symbols 
for hateful causes has historical precedents. “I would like to get the frog off 
the hate database,” Furie said, in perhaps the most mournful quotation of the 
year. “It means a lot to me as he’s an extension of myself.”Simon Parkin

The photograph: Baton Rouge, Jonathan Bachman

“She just stood there and made her stand,” said Jonathan Bachman of the young 
woman who, in a year in which America seemed at war with itself, became an icon 
of peaceful resistance. In this dramatic photograph she stands still as two 
policemen in futuristic body armour close in on her. Bachman’s image of Iesha L 
Evans was taken on a street in Baton Rouge in July as Black Lives Matter 
protests gathered momentum following yetanother killing of a young black man by 
police <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alton-sterling-shooting> officers. 
It went viral within hours.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0935511fe341a9e621efa2c2bf6015395bb59971%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0935511fe341a9e621efa2c2bf6015395bb59971%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 Iesha L Evans protests against the shooting of Alton Sterling near the 
headquarters of the Baton Rouge police department in Louisiana in July. 
Photograph: Jonathan Bachman/Reuters 
There are several reasons why this photograph resonates. In many ways, it is a 
resolutely old-fashioned image: a moment of traditional photojournalism that 
harks back to the radical 1960s, in an age of smartphone citizen journalism, 
echoingMarc Riboud’s shot of a young hippy woman 
<https://static01.nyt.com/images/2016/08/31/business/20160901riboud-obituary-slide-R3LQ/20160901riboud-obituary-slide-R3LQ-superJumbo-v2.jpg>
 presenting a flower to a line of bayonet-wielding soldiers during an 
anti-Vietnam war demonstration at the Pentagon in 1967.

Back then, Riboud’s image carried all the hope, idealism and unbound optimism 
of the times. Fifty years on, hope, idealism and optimism are in short supply. 
And yet there is something profoundly powerful about this stilled moment: the 
sense of calmness, peace and even spirituality that emanates from Evans, a 
silent, unafraid, black woman faced with the full force of overwhelmingly white 
militarised police. As the Trump protests across American cities have shown, 
defiance may be all the liberal left has at the moment, in the face of a new 
and ominous shift in global, corporate driven-politics. As this serenely 
powerful image shows, activism comes at a cost, but if this year has taught us 
anything, it’s that the alternative – doing nothing and hoping that this is a 
nightmare that will somehow end soon – is no longer an option.Sean O’Hagan

The non-fiction: Democracy – A Life, by Paul Cartledge

Questions that go to the very heart of political theory have been raised by 
the tumultuous and unsettling events of the past 12 months. What should be the 
proper relationship of direct to representative democracy? How are tensions 
between the popular will and the rule of law best resolved? Why, when a man 
with Donald Trump’s scorn for the proprieties of the US constitution can be 
elected president, should we assume that democracy – even in its American 
heartland – is necessarily for ever?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ecf2b80fc1dcf0b945c193fb25c798971c3d240%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%20to%20Black%20Mirror%3B%20the%20culture%20that%20defines%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fculture-that-defines-2016-critics-choose-art-literature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ecf2b80fc1dcf0b945c193fb25c798971c3d240%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Paul Cartledge’sDemocracy: A Life takes the long view. Photograph: Murdo 
MacLeod for the Guardian 
No book published this year holds up a more fascinating mirror to these 
questions than Paul Cartledge’s Democracy: A Life. As befits a study written by 
one of the pre-eminent scholars of ancient Greece, it takes the long view. 
Today, democracies draw sustenance from the past, from knowing that “government 
of the people, by the people, for the people” can be made to work; but 
Cartledge, by taking us back to a time when this was not the case. Without ever 
indulging in sentimentality, he pays due respect to Cleisthenes, who in 507 BC 
served as midwife to the revolution that brought the demos to power in Athens, 
and to the ideals that then sustained it for almost 200 years. Cartledge’s feat 
is to bring home just how astonishing it was, in a world dominated by 
monarchies and tyrannies, that the vote of a peasant should ever have ranked 
equal to that of an aristocrat.

Yet the Athenian democracy, which functioned by holding the equivalent of a 
referendum every nine days, was quite as capable of taking disastrous wrong 
turns as its modern counterparts. It is a notorious paradox that those 
contemporary accounts of it which have survived are almost all profoundly 
critical. No one could be as merciless towards Athenian democracy as an 
Athenian intellectual. Today – in the wake ofBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> and Trump’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/electoral-college-votes-donald-trump-electors>
 – the counterparts of Plato, who detested the notion that the ignorant and 
poor should sway the well-educated and refined, are alive and well. The contest 
within a democracy between “experts” and those who decry them has a pedigree 
which reaches back 2,500 years. The huge value of Cartledge’s book is the 
reminder that 2016 is merely a way-stop on a very long journey indeed.Tom 
Holland
 