
The co-author of a parliamentary report into the demise of BHS has called on 
theSerious Fraud Office <https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office> 
to launch a formal inquiry into the actions of the department store chain’s 
former owners.

Iain Wright: the MP leading the fight against BHS and Sports Direct
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/27/iain-wright-bhs-sports-direct-mike-ashley-philip-green>
MP Frank Field, the chair of the work and pensions committee, has written to 
the head of the SFO asking the organisation to initiate an inquiry into whether 
Sir Philip Green orDominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell> had broken the law.

His letter comes after a joint report published on Monday by Field’s committee 
and the business innovation and skills select committeeconcluded that Green had 
“systematically extracted hundreds of millions of pounds from BHS” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
.

All remaining BHS stores are expected to close by the end of August with the 
loss of 11,000 jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/23/all-bhs-stores-to-shut-down-by-20-august>
 after the business went into administration in April, 13 months after Green 
sold it to the former bankrupt Chappell for £1. The retirement savings of 
22,000 current and former workers have also been hit as the firm’s pension fund 
was left with a deficit of £571m.

Regulator must chase Philip Green for BHS pension cash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/25/regulator-must-chase-philip-green-for-bhs-pension-cash>
In his letter to the SFO’s director, David Green, Field wrote that “in the 
light of the extraordinary evidence” received by both committees, the 
investigatory body should examine whether money was “moved in such a way as to 
attempt to mislead people into believing Mr Chappell was a credible buyer for 
BHS”.

The SFO has previously confirmed receipt of material relating to BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> which it is reviewing. It has not 
yet decided whether to launch a formal investigation.

A SFO spokesperson said: “If the director considers there are reasonable 
grounds to suspect serious or complex fraud which meets his criteria, he will 
open a criminal investigation.”


The SFO is a specialist prosecuting authority that only tackles the top level 
of serious or complex fraud, bribery and corruption. When deciding whether to 
launch an inquiry, it considers whether any apparent criminal action 
“undermines UK PLC commercial or financial interests in general and in the City 
of London in particular”.

In weighing up whether to launch a formal investigation, it will also consider 
whether there is a public interest dimension and whether economic harm might be 
caused.

MPs found that Chappell’s Retail Acquisitions failed a number of tests set by 
Green’s retail business to determine his credibility. Nonetheless, Green 
arranged £25m in financial assistance for Retail Acquisitions to help smooth 
through the deal.

He also helped Retail Acquisitions with a £10m contribution linked to a 
property deal, according to the parliamentary report. MPs concluded: “Sir 
Philip attempted to make good Retail Acquisitions’ financial inadequacies to 
facilitate the sale. He was both sides of the deal.”

Field told the Guardian that it was not clear why Green had gone to such 
lengths to assist Chappell. He said the SFO should carry out a thorough 
investigation to reassure the public that “no stone had been left unturned and 
nothing improper found” in relation to BHS.

Green declined to comment on Field’s letter, but has previously said he 
believed the MPs’ report wasthe “predetermined and inaccurate output of a 
biased and unfair process” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/philip-green-threatens-to-sue-frank-field>
.

Chappell told the Guardian: “I’m sure if the SFO had concerns they would be 
looking into it. I am totally of the belief that everything we did was accurate 
and correct.”

The former BHS boss said he was meeting his lawyers and planned a full 
response to the MPs’ report, but that it might take “a few weeks.”

Field’s letter comes after Green threatened legal action against him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/philip-green-threatens-to-sue-frank-field>
 over his comments to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that the retail tycoon was 
the principal character in the collapse of BHS and “worse than Robert Maxwell”.

Green’s legal representatives say the MP’s statements, which refer to the 
former publisher of the Daily Mirror who had plundered the company’s pension 
fund, are defamatory and false.

Green is also threatening legal action against Chappell and the other members 
of Retail Acquisitions. The billionaire, who controls a string of high street 
chains including Topshop and Dorothy Perkins, alleges that Retail Acquisitions 
misused BHS funds and that Chappell falsely represented his business 
credentials.

The report by MPs has fuelled calls for Green to be stripped of his 
knighthood. It found the former owner of the chain had “systematically 
extracted hundreds of millions of pounds from BHS, paying very little tax and 
fantastically enriching himself and his family, leaving the company and its 
pension fund weakened to the point of the inevitable collapse of both”.
 