
Campaigners have launched legal action to exhume the body of former Philippine 
dictator Ferdinand Marcos, just three days afterhis burial in a national 
heroes’ cemetery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/philippine-dictator-ferdinand-marcos-given-controversial-heros-burial>
 triggered street protests.

He was finally laid to rest on Friday in a secretive ceremony at the “Cemetery 
of Heroes” with military honours almost three decades after his death, angering 
critics who said he was responsible for massive corruption and human rights 
abuses.

Relatives of victims of his rule asked the supreme court on Monday to dig up 
his remains, claiming they had not been given enough time to appeal against the 
ruling allowing his burial in the cemetery.


Philippine dictator Ferdinand Marcos given controversial hero's burial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/philippine-dictator-ferdinand-marcos-given-controversial-heros-burial>
“How can a plunderer and despot and violator of human rights be given that 
honour of being buried in the memorial of good men?” said Edcel Lagman, a 
congressmen and brother of an abducted anti-Marcos dissident who was never seen 
again.

Two weeks ago, the supreme court endorsed a decision by President Rodrigo 
Duterte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/philippines-president-ferdinand-marcos-granted-heros-burial-manila>
 to bury the dictator at the heroes’ cemetery.

The Marcos family and government moved quickly after the verdict, secretly 
flying the embalmed body from their home town in the northernPhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> to the cemetery in Manila on 
Friday and interring him.

But Lagman, an opposition member of the house of representatives, filed a 
“motion for exhumation” on Monday, arguing that the court ruling was not final 
because opponents had not been given 15 days to appeal.

“If you exhume that body, you disinter Marcos, then the motions for 
reconsideration” can be heard by the court, Lagman told ABS-CBN television.


Another group representing victims of his martial law have asked the supreme 
court to cite the Marcos family and the military for contempt for organising 
the burial.

Battle over Marcos: Philippine citizens react to 'hero's burial'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/18/marcos-philippine-president-citizens-react-heros-burial-manila-dictator-duterte>
Opponents also announced a major street protest for Friday.

Millions of Filipinos took to the streets in 1986 in a famous “People Power” 
revolution to oust the then dictator.

Marcos died in exile in Hawaii three years later, and his body was put on 
public display in his northern home town until earlier this year because 
previous presidents had refused to allow the dictator to be buried at the 
heroes’ cemetery.

The former leader, his wife Imelda, 87, and their cronies plundered up to 
$10bn from state coffers and plunged the Philippines into crippling debt during 
his rule, according to government investigators and historians.

The dictator also suppressed dissent, with thousands killed and tortured, 
previous Philippine governments said.

But his wife and children won public office following a political 
rehabilitation. Their comeback culminated in the election this year of Duterte, 
a long-time ally of the family.

Duterte has defended the burial, saying laws entitled Marcos to be buried at 
the heroes’ cemetery as a former president and soldier.

Over the weekend, an emotional Imelda said her husband was “at peace” there. 
“I know Marcos stood for the truth and if you are on the side of truth, God is 
on your side,” she told supporters at a memorial mass at her late husband’s 
grave.
 