
Linking low-income communities to the supply chains of large corporations - 
so-called inclusive business - has been a major trend over the past decade.

In food and agriculture, this means including poor farmers in the supply 
chains of food manufacturers and retailers, rather than a traditional trade via 
middlemen. There’s strong logic, given that there are more thanhalf a billion 
<https://www.ifad.org/documents/10180/ca86ab2d-74f0-42a5-b4b6-5e476d321619> 
small farm households around the developing world. Farmers get access to higher 
value markets. Food businesses get access to new sources of supply. Donors and 
governments get a better development bang from trade and investment.

But despite a huge and growing portfolio of successful pilot projects, there 
is evidence that under many circumstances inclusive business may struggle to 
get to scale. It can be a poor match to the realities of both farmers as 
suppliers and the businesses as buyers.

First, the farming realities. There is growing competition for what farmers 
produce. Sub-SaharanAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> in 
particular is in the middle of a fundamental reorientation of its agriculture, 
away from global exports and towards supplying its own burgeoning urban 
populations.

A recent report 
<http://oecdinsights.org/2016/07/11/economic-activity-west-africa-feeding-population/?utm_source=newsletter&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=whatsnew>
 from the OECD reveals that in the case of west Africa, where 42% of the 
population is already urban, agriculture has shifted from 50% dependent on 
exports to the global market in 1961, to only 12% in 2010. Food supply networks 
are stretching from urban areas deeper into the countryside, via small towns 
that have cropped up across rural sub-Saharan Africa.

The market has moved closer to the farm, providing farmers with more choice of 
what to produce and where to market. Contract farming and exports to the global 
market are no longer the only games in town.

Brands in Africa: laying the foundations for sustainable business at the outset
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/africa-global-brands-sustainable-business-foundation>
Unilever’s onions were too cheap

Cash is an important part of the story. Most smallholder households are 
severely cash strapped. The retreat by many governments from universal 
provision of health and education means that households must find money for 
school fees, placing a huge burden on poor households. Cash crops are grown to 
cover fees, and food crops for the family become cash crops in emergencies.

Small wonder then if farmers are more inclined to sell to traders for cash 
than stick with a scheme that involves contracts, membership of a producer 
groups, delayed payments and strict compliance with standards for quality.

I found this when researching <http://pubs.iied.org/16563IIED.html> a contract 
farming initiative in Uganda that linked very poor farmers with a food 
manufacturer -Mukawno <http://www.mukwano.com> - based in the country but with 
sales across east Africa. Presented as an inclusive business success story, the 
initiative was in fact struggling to compete with growing informal cash-based 
trade with local processors or traders from neighbouring Kenya.

In Tanzania, a planned inclusive business project  
<http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/project-sunrise-final-report-338731>
to link onion farmers to Unilever was abandoned when it was realised that the 
local fresh market paid far more than the global commodity price.

We don’t hear about the failures


Then there’s the buyer’s perspective. Food manufacturers and retailers want 
what they have ordered. Small farmers’ reliability to fulfil orders will always 
fluctuate, as they have to manage risk in the face of climate variability and 
creaky infrastructure. The goodwill of a progressive company will stretch to a 
few failed consignments, but it is unreasonable to expect them to adjust to the 
vagaries of smallholder agriculture. There is a fundamental issue of business 
compatibility.

I saw this in the case of a small innovative Kenyan company that linked 
hundreds of smallholders to the Dutch flower auction. The company wanted to 
expand into higher value markets and sell directly to supermarkets. With the 
help of a donor, an interested supermarket, and supply chain experts, the 
concept was piloted with some success.

But over the years it became increasingly clear that this company and its 
suppliers were better off trading with the auction rather than with 
supermarkets, because the auction takes what the company and its smallholder 
growers supplied. Prices may on average be somewhat lower, but once all the 
costs are factored in, overall value to the farmers is higher.

These issues of business incompatibility crop up across multiple projects. 
Successes may look distinctly shaky once donor funds and NGO support are 
withdrawn. But little gets written up, so what gets cemented into the business 
and development literature is almost entirely positive. Scratch the surface, 
however, and there is evidence from Nicaragua to Nairobi of dynamic informal 
markets trumping inclusive business.

Five charts that explain who gets hit hardest by food price rises
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/15/five-charts-food-prices-rises-africa-asia-hit-hardest>
Inclusive business needs informal sector


There is much to be gained from engaging agrifood businesses in development. 
Improving the welfare of workers, reducing environmental impact, and making 
trade fairer in their own operations and those of their suppliers is as 
pertinent as ever. But including more smallholders into supply chains can be a 
distraction from this core corporate agenda.

If we are to combine inclusion and business in a more grounded and scalable 
way, driven less by wishful thinking and more by evidence, we need to look 
beyond big business. The irony is that inclusive business needs to be 
approached more inclusively.

In many countries, the informal economy 
<http://www.iied.org/informal-economy-green-growth-conference-pinpoints-need-for-new-policy-agenda>
 dominates food trading, processing and vending. But those actors may be 
subject to harassment and downright hostility from officials who see them as 
illegal, unhygienic, tax avoiding and anti-progress.

There is tremendous scope for improving the economic, social and environmental 
performance of theinformal economy <http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/17365IIED.pdf> at 
scale, without pushing people out of jobs. If the post-2015 development agenda 
– across jobs, food security and inclusive growth - is to succeed, governments 
should be focusing resources into understanding and improving the informal 
economy.
 