
Amsterdam’s new cycling mayor, Anna Luten, barely slows as she nears a 
junction by one of the city’s central canals. Cyclists are approaching fast 
from six directions – bells tinging, hair flowing stylishly in the light breeze 
(no one here wears a helmet). As I catch up the crisscross of bikes almost 
looks synchronised, as if local riders navigating the narrow, winding streets 
of the historic centre have an innate understanding of their complex flows and 
patterns.

Cycling is something the capital has become world famous for over the past 40 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/amsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord>
 and a whole generation of Amsterdammers have grown up so used to cycling that 
they have learned the skills necessary to effortlessly go with the flow – to be 
hyper-aware of their surroundings yet appear natural, says Anna. Like most 
Dutch children she cycled to school every day, helmet-free, and hasn’t looked 
back since her stabilisers came off.

But while Amsterdam is synonymous with bikes and the ubiquitous Omafiets 
step-through roadster, it is less of a cycling nirvana than smaller Dutch 
cities likeUtrecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/28/utrecht-cycling-lessons-refugees-riding-bike-feel-dutch>
 andGroningen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/29/how-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world>
. We are touring the city in the middle of the day when the traffic is light. 
Come back in rush hour – or at a location popular with tourists unfamiliar with 
the city’sunwritten cycling rules <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sEON08d76oE> 
– and it doesn’t work so well, she says.

There are so many bikes – an estimated 1 million for a population of 1.1 
million – that rush-hour bike jams frequently force cyclists to stop at every 
junction on major routes into the centre. “For Amsterdammers it’s frustrating,” 
says Anna. “Some parts of the city are just too busy – there are too many 
bikes, too many scooters, too many cars, too many pedestrians. There’s no 
space. It is a big source of conflict.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F156530125&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F156530125>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F156530125&media=>
 The complex flows of cycling and pedestrians near the IJ waterfront behind 
Central Station 
Indeed, while bikes account for an estimated 68% of journeys made in the city 
centre, they are allocated just 11% of infrastructure space, with cars getting 
44%. There are further flashpoints around the relative lack of cycle parking 
(“Tourists love taking photos of bikes chained to canal bridges but the council 
hates it,” says Anna) and the use of bike lanes by scooters, which are heavier, 
wider and faster than bicycles. Moves to ban scooters from cycle paths 
nationally are currently going through parliament in the Hague – but just as 
that issue nears a possible conclusion, the introduction of electric bikes 
which can reach speeds of 30mph is threatening to create new problems.

Many parents think cycling is dangerous, and when those kids hit 16 they get 
scooters, not bicycles
Maud de Vries 
Smoothing out these conflicts by improving communication between cycling 
groups, the council, city planners and other residents is where the new bicycle 
mayor comes in. The idea grew out of aCycle Hack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/16/cycle-hackers-world-glasgow-global-movement-cyclehack>
 proposal by advocacy groupCycleSpace <http://cyclespace.nl/> to build on the 
success of the city’snight mayor Mirik Milan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/21/night-mayor-amsterdam-holland-mirik-milan-night-time-commission>
, who has won plaudits for navigating the tricky path between the city’s 
ever-expanding night economy and the residents and officials who would 
sometimes rather it didn’t exist. After 17 video applications and a public vote 
to narrow the field, a jury of city officials and bike advocates last month 
chose Anna as his cycling counterpart. Unlike other cities which may have 
bicycle commissioners, chief bicycle officers or cycle tsars, Amsterdam’s 
‘bicycle mayor’ – although unelected – is independent.


But how difficult can it really be to sell cycling in the world’s busiest 
biking capital? “It is harder than it sounds,” laughs Anna, who juggles her 
voluntary mayoral responsibilities with those of her day job as a brand manager 
forGiant’s LIV range <https://www.giant-bicycles.com/en-GB/livgiant/> for 
female cyclists. “Cycling is so normal for us that it becomes boring and we 
forget about it, we neglect it. It’s not an identity like it is in other 
countries and cities – it’s just the way people get around – so, while we are 
ahead of a lot of other cities we still have to work at cycling to maintain our 
position, and to improve for future generations. At the moment, many people in 
Amsterdam think ‘because we ride a bike we own the roads’. We like to think we 
go with the flow, but sometimes we are actually quite rude. There are almost 
too many cyclists and bikes. If it goes on like this people will stop cycling 
because it won’t be safe.”

Anna takes me to Kinkerstraat, a shopping street to the west of the centre 
where local retailers are up in arms over work to ban cars and introduce a 
wider cycle lane. “Even in Amsterdam, shopkeepers think their customers come by 
car but that’s not true,” says Anna. “It’s stuck in their minds and we need to 
change that.”

Then it’s on to Mahlerplein, a state-of-the-art cycle parking facility in the 
southern financial district complete with a travelator and space for 3,000 
bikes. Cycle parking is such an issue that the city is building facilities for 
in excess of 30,000 bikes near the central station by 2030, including 
underwater parking beneath the IJ waterfront and more on floating manmade 
islands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fcycling-amsterdam-bike-jams-bicycle-mayor-anna-luten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b55bc8425932ec6cfa0c3f29e7efb56f74bc5c7%2F0_133_3556_2134%2F3556.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bike%20jams%20and%20unwritten%20rules%3A%20a%20day%20with%20Amsterdam's%20new%20'bicycle%20mayor'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fcycling-amsterdam-bike-jams-bicycle-mayor-anna-luten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bike%20jams%20and%20unwritten%20rules%3A%20a%20day%20with%20Amsterdam%27s%20new%20%27bicycle%20mayor%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fcycling-amsterdam-bike-jams-bicycle-mayor-anna-luten%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b55bc8425932ec6cfa0c3f29e7efb56f74bc5c7%2F0_133_3556_2134%2F3556.jpg>
 Much of Amsterdam’s road and parking space remains allocated to cars. 
Photograph: Timothy Clary/AFP/Getty Images 
The issue of how to get cyclists from central Amsterdam – across the IJ – to 
the fast-developing suburbs to the north is another potential source of 
conflict. Unless they want to detour a few miles east via the 
Schellingwouderbrug crossings, the only way across the water for cyclists is by 
ferry – free and picturesque maybe, but time consuming for commuters. A new 
tunnel looks too expensive given the city’s marshy soil, whiletalk of a new 
bridge 
<http://www.citymetric.com/transport/why-are-there-almost-no-bridges-across-amsterdam-s-largest-river-1998>
 has angered harbour operators who fear the lucrative cruise industry could 
lose out.

And not everyone in Amsterdam shares Anna’s lifelong connection with the 
bicycle. Increasing numbers of people living out in the city’s suburbs or in 
areas likeNieuw West 
<http://www.mobycon.com/action/news/item/953/increasing-cycling-in-amsterdam-nieuw-west.html>
 with high immigrant populations do not have a history of cycling and often 
drive their children to school. “Many of these parents think cycling is 
dangerous, and when those kids hit 16 they get scooters, not bicycles,” says 
Maud de Vries, co-founder of the CycleSpace group which runs the Cycle Mayor 
programme. “Cycling gives children such a sense of freedom – and of course it’s 
great for health and happiness and stress – but it is not seen as cool in some 
areas and we need to work on that.”

How Amsterdam became the bicycle capital of the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/amsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord>
“These are big problems,” says Anna. “At other times it’s minor – like the new 
trend for fat wheels means they don’t fit in old bike racks. Normally, if you 
want to get something changed it is hard to be heard as an individual, but now 
people are coming to me with problems and I have the ears of those in power. I 
don’t have an opinion or a solution for everything, but it is about 
communication and city hall have been very receptive. We need to keep 
innovating or we’ll fall behind.” That innovation may take the form of covered 
bike lanes allowing business people to cycle to work in the rain without 
ruining their suits, or new signs to show tourists where to find safe cycling 
streets. “The willingness to experiment is key,” she adds.


Next CycleSpace plans to export the concept of an independent bicycle mayor to 
25 cities around the world – with interest so far from Johannesburg, Cape Town, 
Beijing, Chicago and Warsaw – and a congress planned in theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> for 2017 to share ideas and 
knowledge.

“I don’t know if we’re still number one, or if Copenhagen is ahead 
<http://copenhagenize.eu/index/>, but to me that rivalry isn’t important so 
long as each city is a good place to cycle,” adds Anna. “Cycling has the power 
to transform. I dream and hope that in 20 or 50 years from now there could be 
more cities like Amsterdam, where cycling is so normal and accepted that we’re 
not really aware of it.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 