
Last March, Billy Bragg and US singer-songwriter Joe Henry spent five days 
travelling by train from Chicago to Los Angeles. Along the way they recorded 
their albumShine a Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/22/billy-bragg-joe-henry-shine-a-light-album-review>
: Field Recordings from the Great American Railroad, with sessions held in 
waiting rooms, hotels or on platforms. They covered folk and country standards, 
songs made famous byJimmie Rodgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/08/jimmie-rodgers-reborn-and-remastered-review>
,Hank Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/20/hank-williams-country-music-radio>
 andWoody Guthrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/02/woody-guthrie-songs-fighting-donald-trump-from-beyond-the-grave>
. As Henry explained, “our patron saint wasLead Belly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/19/lead-belly-smithsonian-folkways-collection-review>
”. It was an inspired idea, and it was clearly enormous fun.

But since then, the political scene has changed dramatically, especially in 
the US. “It may seem strange to be singing railroad songs with what’s been 
going on – but I didn’t see Brexit, or Trump, coming,” says Bragg. But it was 
the tension between the romance of American railroad history and the 
realisation that Trump is now hurtling down the tracks that made this such an 
intriguing concert.

Related: Laying down tracks: Billy Bragg and Joe Henry take a railroad trip to 
the blues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/21/laying-down-tracks-billy-bragg-joe-henry-us-railroad-trip-interview>

The two opened with material from the album, and an unexpectedly thoughtful 
treatment ofRailroad Bill, popularised by Lonnie Donegan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AQDI8wTvRv0> during the British skiffle boom. 
Jean Ritchie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j6nARSpM-0s>’s exquisite lament 
for a struggling mining community,the L&N Don’t Stop Here Anymore 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GtlXwj80OWM>, was a reminder of ongoing 
American rural hardship. With their immaculate harmony vocals and guitar work, 
the duo’s new versions of these great songs proved that they are still relevant 
– particularly in a pained treatment of Waiting for a Train. And, as Bragg 
pointed out before introducing the Guthrie favouriteHobo’s Lullaby 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xxHQk9-zZWw>, a hobo is a romantic term for an 
economic migrant.

Breaking off from the railroad duets midway through the concert, the mood 
switched to one of anger. “This is where we are, not who we are,” said Henry, 
of his homeland, and followed his compositionOur Song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cflReZ1nZDA> (“this was my country, this 
frightful and this angry land”), with a heartfelt treatment of Allen 
Toussaint’s Freedom for the Stallion. Bragg’s solo spot was even more powerful. 
After paying tribute to songwriterGreg Trooper 
<http://gregtrooper.com/biography>, who died at the weekend, he premiered a new 
song, currently titled Sleep of Reason. A slow, powerful piece that warns of 
complacency and the destruction of truth leading to “monsters”, it was followed 
by Anaïs Mitchell’s Why We Build the Wall, from herHadestown folk opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/14/anais-mitchell-hadestown-show-donald-trump-orpheus>
. The answer being “because we have, and they have not”.

Then it was back to the railroads and skiffle favourites, with a 
call-and-response treatment ofRock Island Line 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K_aIQ1_sAVg>. The duo were joined by Chas and 
Dave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/mar/31/chas-and-dave-live-chat>
 for a cheerful Midnight Special, before the mood changed yet again withGentle 
on My Mind <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-mJnOX6fbvo>, once an easy 
listening hit for Glen Campbell. This wildly varied set was far more than an 
exercise in railroad nostalgia.

 * At St George’s, Bristol, 17 January 
<http://www.stgeorgesbristol.co.uk/event/billy-bragg-joe-henry/>. (Box office: 
0845-402 4001.)Then touring until 30 January 
<http://shinealight-joehenry.billybragg.co.uk/>.  