

There aren’t many architects you would believe could hold back seas and save 
the world from being drowned by Biblical floods. But when you meet Bjarke 
Ingels, anything seems eminently possible.

At the age of 40, a mere teenager in architectural terms, the sprightly Danish 
architect has built a career on making unlikely feats appear effortlessly 
doable, and madcap schemes look perfectly logical. He has summoned
mountain-shaped apartment blocks 
<http://www.archdaily.com/15022/mountain-dwellings-big/> from the suburban 
flatlands of Copenhagen, designed a waste-to-energy plant down whosesloping 
rooftop you will be able to ski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/jul/03/bjarke-ingels-incinerator-ski-slope>
 and proposed acage-free zoo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/aug/05/denmark-cage-free-zoo-will-put-humans-in-captivity>
 in which visitors will be held captive while the animals roam free. He’s even 
convinced Google to build apastoral utopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/27/googles-new-headquarters-upgradable-futuristic-greenhouse>
 beneath an enormous glass tent.

A few blocks from his New York office he is building a giant pyramid 
<http://www.archdaily.com/329984/bigs-west-57th-pyramid-wins-final-approval/> 
of apartments, wrenched askew to limbo beneath the neighbours’ viewing 
corridors, with a big courtyard scooped out of the middle. Now at its full 
height,rearing up <https://instagram.com/p/yvArKZRDx1/?modal=true> beside the 
West Side Highway, it is one of the most arresting buildings Manhattan’s 
regimented grid has ever seen, as well as one of the most commercially 
illogical: it tapers up to a tiny point, leaving only a handful of flats at the 
most lucrative upper levels. The architects can barely believe they found 
someone brave (or mad) enough to pay for it. Yet once again the cartoonish 
diagram, of the wilful form generated by the forces acting on the site, has 
come true.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425901448538%2Fde1ba1f9-b124-4da8-bda4-78b8474ba914-1020x639.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20'We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20%27We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425901448538%2Fde1ba1f9-b124-4da8-bda4-78b8474ba914-1020x639.jpeg>
 A rendering of Bjarke Ingels’ West 57 ‘giant pyramid’ building in New York. 
Photograph: BIG 
In the hands of his practice BIG <http://www.big.dk/> (the Bjarke Ingels 
Group), which now numbers 220 people between Copenhagen and New York, even 
chimneys can be turned into wellsprings of creative possibility. In London they 
want to install a gigantic Tesla coil between the smokestacks of Battersea 
Power Station, so that an electric bolt may strike on occasion, sending a 
streak of lightning fizzing across the sky. Back in Denmark, the chimney of 
their power plant will be the coolest flue around: it is designed to blow smoke 
rings, puffing 30-metre wide halos towards the heavens. So what’s the trick to 
selling these harebrained comic-book dreams? There must be more to it than 
Bjarke’s boyish charm alone.

“I call it bigamy,” says Ingels, sitting in his New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> office, where two floors of 
architects are busy twisting new typologies into shape, while a widescreen TV 
streams activity of his Copenhagen office doing the same some 4,000 miles away. 
“Why have one when you can have both? We find that seemingly contradictory 
things are not always mutually exclusive.”

On a quick dash through the office we see a pair of twirling towers 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2012/12/17/the-grove-at-grand-bay-by-big/> under 
construction in Miami, a whirlwind of awatch museum 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2014/06/13/big-bjarke-ingels-museum-swiss-watchmaker-audemars-piguet/>
 planned for Switzerland, ahoneycomb block 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2014/01/27/big-bjark-ingels-honeycomb-housing-bahamas/> 
of seaside apartments for the Bahamas, with a swimming pool lapping up to the 
balustrade of each balcony, and a model of something alarmingly tall in the 
corner of the office – from which my gaze is quickly averted. “If a factory has 
to exhaust gas,” says Ingels, distracting me with avideo 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2015/02/25/video-trial-smoke-ring-chimney-big-amager-bakke-power-plant-copenhagen/>
 of the power-plant chimney test-run on his phone, like a child showing off his 
latest app, “then why not transform its emissions into a thing of beauty? If 
you’re going to do something anyway, then you might as well give it a public 
benefit as well.”

BIG’s latest conjuring trick awaits in the next room. Hanging on the wall is a 
plan of Manhattan with a thick green line running around the island’s tip. It 
gets fatter and thinner as it traces around the coastline, swelling out into an 
occasional bulge, like a snake curled up after a meal. Then comes the bigamist 
proposition, told with the seductive spiel of a TED talk. If New York has to 
build 10 miles of flood defences to protect the city from anotherHurricane Sandy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hurricane-sandy>, why not conceive the 
barrier as a brand new waterfront park? Climate security as leisure amenity. 
You can almost hear the standing ovation and all-American whooping in the 
background.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F117303273&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F117303273>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F117303273&media=>
 The Dryline. 
In the city that transformed a rusting railway track into the elysian High Line
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/08/high-line-park-new-york>, and 
which is planning to turn an underground trolley-bus terminal into the
atmospheric Lowline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/26/new-york-lowline-underground-park-high-line>
, now comes the latest snappily named linear park: meet theDryline 
<https://vimeo.com/117303273>.

It is a vision as ingenious as it is elementary, a 
why-didn’t-they-do-it-already no-brainer of a plan. An animation produced by 
London studioSquint Opera 
<http://www.squintopera.com/projects/all-work/the-dry-line/> shows the 10-mile 
long strategy being unrolled like a magic carpet along the waterfront, leaving 
safe leisure-loving citizens in its wake. With a sprinkling of fairy-dust, the 
shoreline becomes furnished with undulating berms and protective planting, 
flip-down baffles and defensive kiosks, promenades and bike paths, bringing 
pedestrian life worthy of Lisbon or Barcelona to the gritty banks of Manhattan.

“We like to think of it as the love-child of Robert Moses and Jane Jacobs,” 
says Ingels. It is a project that is at once tyrannical and touchy-feely, as if 
the bullish highway builder and the people’s urban activist had sat down to 
draw up a plan over tea: an uncompromising seawall that also wants to give you 
a hug. “I think they would have agreed on a lot of things if only they had 
worked together,” Ingels adds cheerfully. “Our project must have Moses’ scale 
of ambition, but be able to work at the fine-grain scale of the neighbourhoods. 
It shouldn’t be about the city turning its back on the water, but embracing it 
and encouraging access. By taking it one conversation at a time, with the 
principle that everyone can get their fantasy realised, you end up getting 
there.”

The sea-level rise calculated is to the 2050s. What about the 2080s? You just 
postpone the problem
Klaus Jacob 
It is the most ambitious product of Rebuild by Design 
<http://www.rebuildbydesign.org/>, a $1bn federally-funded programme to restore 
the northeastern seaboard following the devastation caused by Hurricane Sandy 
in 2012, introducing new infrastructure to guard against future inundations. 
Ten schemes were selected to be taken forward from an international 
competition, addressing everything from new breakwaters along Staten Island’s 
South Shore, to flood prevention and drainage in Hoboken, New Jersey. BIG was 
the only team to look at Manhattan itself. “It was a bit like going to a big 
dance,” says Ingels. “No one picks the prettiest girl because they’re too shy.” 
His office evidently suffers from no such impediment. Its website is namedbig.dk
 <http://big.dk/> after all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425901562565%2Fcf2705b5-ab0f-4b7c-b69e-edfc9a0ac54e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20'We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20%27We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425901562565%2Fcf2705b5-ab0f-4b7c-b69e-edfc9a0ac54e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The harbour baths, part of the proposed New York Dryline flood defences. 
Photograph: BIG 
Originally called the BIG-U, but recently rebranded so as not to promote one 
office alone (the team includes 10 other consultants, from engineering to 
landscape), the Dryline imagines a landscaped buffer stretching all the way 
from West 57th Street, looping down to the Battery and back up to East 42nd 
Street, bestowing Manhattan with a protective green cushion. Hurricane Sandy 
shocked New York into facing up to quite how vulnerable it is – and opened the 
city’s eyes to the realities of climate change. It provided violent and 
tangible evidence, if ever it were needed, that extreme weather is here, sea 
levels are on the rise and that cities must adapt more urgently than ever 
before. It also changed locals’ perception of the city’s physical geography 
overnight.

“The storm really made people aware of the geological map of Manhattan,” says 
Kai-Uwe Bergmann, BIG’s partner in charge of the Dryline project, when we meet 
across town at the East River Park where basketball courts and soccer pitches 
lie under a deep layer of ice. To the north, the chimneys of the Con Edison 
power plant chug wispy white tendrils into the frozen blue sky, from the very 
plant thatexploded during the superstorm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/30/sandy-superstorm-flooding-power-cuts>
, plunging lower Manhattan into darkness and leaving 750,000 residents without 
power.

Will New York’s billion dollar design contest prevent future flooding?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/09/will-new-yorks-billion-dollar-design-contest-prevent-future-flooding>
“It returned to water everything that had originally been water,” says 
Bergmann. “Canal St became a canal again and all the reclaimed land was totally 
submerged, essentially taking the city back to its 1640 coastline.”

The hurricane caused $19bn of damage and saw 305,000 homes harmed or 
destroyed, many of which were here in the vulnerable Lower East Side, a 
low-lying, low-income district where rows of public housing blocks sit as 
modernist “towers in the park”. Only it’s the kind of park that actually means 
car parking, and swathes of tarmac and concrete did little to alleviate the 
floodwaters.

As the most vulnerable area – and the district least likely to attract private 
investment, mostly consisting of New York City Housing Authority blocks – this 
first section of the Dryline has received $335m from the US Department of 
Housing and Urban Development to go ahead. The two-mile long stretch focuses on 
building a “bridging berm”, a snaking green mound that will rise to 15 feet 
(4.57m), the once-in-a-hundred-years flood level which Sandy almost reached, 
and provide a landing point for footbridges across the FDR Drive, the roaring 
six-lane highway that effectively severs residents of the Lower East Side from 
the waterfront. The existing bridges, which are narrow and intimidatingly 
caged, will be replaced with open landscaped bridges three times the width, 
bringing people across to the top of the sloping berm, which will also seclude 
the new park from traffic noise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425902287567%2Fb037e621-230a-4ef1-8e14-56b46cf85a66-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20'We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20%27We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425902287567%2Fb037e621-230a-4ef1-8e14-56b46cf85a66-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A rendering of the New York Dryline flood defences. Photograph: BIG 
As the berm weaves its way along the highway, it will take on the character of 
different areas, curving around existing sports pitches, morphing into 
grandstand seating and providing a level at which the road might be permanently 
covered over in future. There are plans for fishing piers as well as wild 
swimming pools in the spirit ofCopenhagen’s harbour baths 
<http://www.archdaily.com/11216/copenhagen-harbour-bath-plot/>, which came out 
of one of the first consultation meetings, when an enthusiastic group of East 
River swimmers turned up.

Further south, beyond the first funded compartment, the Dryline adapts to 
bring existing infrastructure into action against the rising waters. Between 
the Brooklyn and Manhattan bridges, it’s proposed that the underside of the 
elevated highway is kitted out with flip-down panels to form a defensive wall 
in the event of a storm warning, while providing a decorative soffit above a 
new public space the rest of the time. A stepped 4ft-high bench snakes its way 
alongside skate park structures and tai-chi platforms, catering to the large 
elderly Chinese community. As Ingels puts it: “The beauty of the High Line is 
that it’s a piece of decommissioned infrastructure that is now enjoyable – but 
why wait?”

In the third compartment, at the lower tip of Manhattan, a series of 
pill-shaped pavilions have been designed with sturdy central flood walls and 
doors that slide out to plug the gaps, forming a continuous vertical barrier, 
while retaining views through to the river the rest of the time. As the Dryline 
meets Battery Park, the berm is planned to return, forming a series of grassy 
knolls that slope down to a potential new multi-fingered waterfront building, 
like a blocky claw extended to baffle the tides. It is imagined – with a dash 
of implacable BIG optimism – as a new Maritime Museum, featuring a spectacular 
“reverse aquarium” from where visitors might observe the rising waters beneath 
dangling whale skeletons.

We don’t want you to come to us at the 11th hour. We need to be involved in 
the planning process
Community spokeswoman Damaris Reyes 
As ever with BIG’s bold visions, it can all seem too good to be true, too glib 
to withstand the battering from both the elements and the public sector 
bureaucracy now charged with building it. Revisiting their most substantial 
completed landscape project to date, two years on, brings mixed feelings. The
Superkilen park 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2012/10/24/superkilen-park-by-big-topotek1-and-superflex/>
, which weaves its way through one of the most deprived parts of Copenhagen, is 
still a joyful, well-used strip of surreal undulating mounds, with furniture 
and play equipment sourced from around the world to reflect the ethnic 
diversity of the area. But it requires a huge amount of maintenance that the 
local authority is in no position to keep up, now a scene of flaking paint, 
broken equipment and the forlorn air of an Expo site left to rot. Whatever gets 
made in Manhattan will have to be built of sturdier stuff.

Others fear the Dryline will give New Yorkers a false sense of protection, 
leading the city to become blasé behind its new defences. “The city should be 
proud of the project,”says Klaus Jacob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/05/climate-scientist-klaus-jacob-warning-new-york-city-hurricane-sandy>
, an esteemed climate scientist at Columbia University, who predicted the 
impact of a major storm just a year before Sandy arrived. “Except it has a 
fixed height. As the sea level rises, you need ever smaller storms to overcome 
it. It’s exactly New Orleans’ problem during Katrina. People think, ‘We have 
this Big U, we’re safe.’ But you’re building up risk behind the U until it 
becomes dysfunctional.”

“I’m not saying it will leak during the first 10 years,” he adds, “but the 
sea-level rise calculated is out to the 2050s. What about the 2080s? 2100? You 
just postpone the problem for future generations.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425901942078%2Ff5d34a88-6df2-4d4d-9563-ab66d86f5732-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20'We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20%27We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425901942078%2Ff5d34a88-6df2-4d4d-9563-ab66d86f5732-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A section of the Dryline’s bridging berm. Photograph: BIG 
The arrival of a new green leisure magnet has also sparked fears of 
gentrification among Lower East Side residents, having seen what effect the 
High Line has had on the meat-packing district the other side of town. A real 
estate gold mine wrought in gravel and shrubbery, the planted walkway has 
attracted over $2bn in private investment since it opened in 2009, seeing local 
property prices more than double. “It would be terrible if people were against 
their own interests from this kind of gentrifying fear,” says Ingels, assuring 
the area in question is protected from such forces, given its designation as 
New York City public housing.

But concerns have also been raised about detailed development happening behind 
closed doors, now the general ambition for the Dryline has been accepted and 
handed over to the city to deliver – with BIG’s team subcontracted to corporate 
engineering consultancy, AKRF. At a public meeting last autumn, community 
spokeswoman Damaris Reyesdescribed it as 
<http://www.thelodownny.com/leslog/2014/10/citys-outreach-on-east-river-berm-project-called-lacking-slap-in-the-face.html>
 a “slap in the face” that local residents “are not even part of the 
discussions beyond this public setting”. “We don’t want you to come to us at 
the 11th hour,” she added. “We need to be involved in the planning process.” A 
task force has since been set up, says the mayor’s office, to ensure that “all 
of the appropriate people are at the table”.

The bigger question remains how the rest of the 10-mile green necklace will be 
funded, and quite what form it will take. Like many of New York’s major parks, 
it will likely have torely heavily on 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/01/opinion/the-billionaires-park.html?_r=0> 
private investment. Seventy-five percent of Central Park’s annual operating 
budget is now covered by private money through the Central Park Conservancy, a 
privately bankrolled non-profit that, along with the likes of the Battery Park 
Conservancy and the Friends of Hudson River Park, now does the work of the 
hollowed-out public sector.

Meanwhile some philanthropists are splashing out on entirely new parks of 
their own, of a very different kind. Media mogul Barry Diller and his fashion 
designer wife Diane von Furstenberg, both major donors to the High Line, have 
recently unveiled their scheme for a magical “pier park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/nov/18/thomas-heatherwick-miracle-hovering-island-new-york>
” nearby, planned to sprout from the Hudson River atop great toadstool columns. 
Designed by miracle mushroom maker Thomas Heatherwick, it will cost $170m – 
compared to the $130m that mayor Bill de Blasio has committed to spend on 
upgrading 35 parks in poor neighbourhoods across the entire city. Critics 
suggest the project will be just another playground for tourists and those who 
can afford lunch in the Meatpacking district.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425902389329%2F2b91cf8d-336a-4dc1-bafa-0760ad8165b1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20'We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bjarke%20Ingels%20on%20the%20New%20York%20Dryline%3A%20%27We%20think%20of%20it%20as%20the%20love-child%20of%20Robert%20Moses%20and%20Jane%20Jacobs%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbjarke-ingels-new-york-dryline-park-flood-hurricane-sandy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425902389329%2F2b91cf8d-336a-4dc1-bafa-0760ad8165b1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Part of the New York Dryline at Battery Park, featuring a school and ‘reverse 
aquarium’. Photograph: BIG 
Henk Ovink, the Dutch water management expert who has headed up the Rebuild by 
Design effort for the last two years, says potential private donors were 
approached for the first stages of the Dryline in the Lower East Side, with 
little success.

“We tried to see if they might be interested to help on a more supportive 
level,” he says. “But they’re not. Simply because there’s no return on 
investment. There’s a total prohibition on private development in that area.”

For the forthcoming stages, where the Dryline runs into the well-heeled 
districts along the prow of Manhattan, up to Tribeca and the West Village, BIG 
is starting to look at what is known, in the US philanthropy trade, as 
“plaque-able entities”, ie things you can slap a funder’s name on. There are 
early sketches for artist-designed barriers along the highway’s central 
reservation and suggestions of what aJeppe Hein <http://www.jeppehein.net/> 
flood wall might look like. There’s a danger that these things are merely more 
baubles for Diller and Furstenberg’s big-hearted chums, but the ambition seems 
genuine, in the architects’ eyes at least, while mindful of needing to play the 
American funding game. Perhaps the billionaire benefactors will be persuaded to 
stump up cash for useful infrastructure after all. Barry’s Berm has a certain 
ring to it.

But for now, all efforts are focused on making the first publicly funded 
stretch as good as possible to set the bar high. “We’re trying to make the 
initial phase as adventurous a manifestation of the fundamental idea,” says 
Ingels. “We will have failed if, in the end, it’s just a good-looking green 
slope.”

 