
British involvement in controversial and clandestine rendition operations 
provoked an unprecedented row between the UK’s domestic and foreign 
intelligence services, MI5 and MI6, at the height of the “war on terror”, the 
Guardian can reveal.

The head of MI5, Eliza Manningham-Buller, was so incensed when she discovered 
the role played by MI6 in abductions that led to suspected extremists being 
tortured, she threw out a number of her sister agency’s staff and banned them 
from working at MI5’s headquarters, Thames House.


According to Whitehall sources, she also wrote to the then prime minister, 
Tony Blair, to complain about the conduct of MI6 officers, saying their actions 
had threatened Britain’s intelligence gathering and may have compromised the 
security and safety of MI5 officers and their informants.


The letter caused a serious and prolonged breakdown of trust between Britain’s 
domestic and foreign spy agencies provoked by the Blair government’s support 
for rendition.


The letter was discovered by investigators examining whether British 
intelligence officers should face criminal charges over the rendition of an 
exiled Libyan opposition leader, Abdul Hakim Belhaj.


A critic of Muammar Gaddafi, the former Libyan dictator, Belhaj was seized in 
Bangkok in March, 2004 in a joint UK-US operation, and handed over to the CIA. 
He alleges the CIA tortured him and injected him with “truth serum” before 
flying him and his family to Tripoli to be interrogated.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frevealed-britain-rendition-policy-rift-between-spy-agencies-mi6-mi5%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b73fde452a08e601a54bbc57daccca7dc0f0c89%2F0_37_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blair%20government's%20rendition%20policy%20led%20to%20rift%20between%20UK%20spy%20agencies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frevealed-britain-rendition-policy-rift-between-spy-agencies-mi6-mi5%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blair%20government%27s%20rendition%20policy%20led%20to%20rift%20between%20UK%20spy%20agencies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Frevealed-britain-rendition-policy-rift-between-spy-agencies-mi6-mi5%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b73fde452a08e601a54bbc57daccca7dc0f0c89%2F0_37_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Abdul Hakim Belhaj, centre, speaks during a press conference in Tripoli in 
2012. Photograph: Mahmud Turkia/AFP/Getty Images 
According to documents found in Tripoli, five days before he was secretly 
flown to the Libyan capital, MI6 gave Gaddafi’s intelligence agency the French 
and Moroccan aliases used by Belhaj.


MI6 also provided the Libyans with the intelligence that allowed the CIA to 
kidnap him and take him to Tripoli.


Belhaj told the Guardian that British intelligence officers were among the 
first to interrogate him in Tripoli. He said he was “very surprised that the 
British got involved in what was a very painful period in my life”.


“I wasn’t allowed a bath for three years and I didn’t see the sun for one 
year,” he told the Guardian. “They hung me from the wall and kept me in an 
isolation cell. I was regularly tortured.”


The secret role played by MI6 was revealed after the fall of Gaddafi, when 
documents were found in ransacked offices of his intelligence chief, Moussa 
Koussa.


One, dated 18 March 2004 was a note from Sir Mark Allen, then head of 
counter-terrorism at MI6, to Moussa Koussa. It said: “I congratulate you on the 
safe arrival of Abu Abd Allah Sadiq [Abdul-Hakim Belhaj]. This was the least we 
could do for you and for Libya to demonstrate the remarkable relationship we 
have built over the years. I am so glad. I was grateful to you for helping the 
officer we sent out last week.”


Allen added: “[Belhaj’s] information on the situation in this country is of 
urgent importance to us. Amusingly, we got a request from the Americans to 
channel requests for information from [Belhaj] through the Americans. I have no 
intention of doing any such thing. The intelligence on [Belhaj] was British. I 
know I did not pay for the air cargo [Belhaj]. But I feel I have the right to 
deal with you direct on this and am very grateful for the help you are giving 
us.”


Scotland Yard has concluded its investigation into the alleged involvement of 
intelligence officers and officials in Libyan rendition operations and an 
announcement about whether or not to prosecute is imminent.


Whitehall sources have told the Guardian that police and prosecutors have been 
reviewing the issue for months. They say investigators have been frustrated by 
the way potentially key witnesses have said they were unable to recall who had 
authorised British involvement in the rendition programme, who else knew about 
it, and who knew the precise details of the Belhaj abduction.

“This is an extremely difficult area for police and prosecutors,” said one 
source. “The problem is, the CPS cannot bring a charge against a government 
policy.”


The letter to Blair sent by Manningham-Buller, who was director general of MI5 
from 2002 to 2007, reflected deep divisions within Britain’s intelligence 
agencies over the methods being used to gather information after the 9/11 
attacks on the US.


Though MI5 has been criticised about some of the tactics used, the letter 
suggests Britain’s security service had serious misgivings about rendition 
operations and the torture of suspects.


The Guardian has been told the MI5 chief was “shocked and appalled” by the 
treatment of Belhaj and vented her anger at MI6, which was then run by Sir 
Richard Dearlove.


“When EMB [Manningham-Buller] found out what had gone on in Libya, she was 
evidently furious. I have never seen a letter quite like it. There was a 
serious rift between MI5 and MI6 at the time.”


She has since said the aim of engaging with Gaddafi to persuade him to abandon 
his chemical and nuclear weapons programme was not “wrong in principle”.


However, she added: “There are clearly questions to be answered about the 
various relationships that developed afterwards and whether the UK supped with 
a sufficiently long spoon.”


The police files with the CPS are understood to describe how Belhaj, his 
pregnant wife, Fatima Bouchar, and children, and Sami al-Saadi and his family 
were abducted from the far east to Gaddafi’s interrogation and torture cells in 
Tripoli in 2004.

The British government paid £2.2m to settle a damages claim brought by 
al-Saadi and his family. Belhaj has refused to settle unless he receives an 
apology.


Jack Straw, who as foreign secretary was responsible for MI6, and Allen have 
always denied wrongdoing.


UK government 'seeking to avoid responsibility' for renditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/09/uk-government-seeking-to-avoid-responsibility-for-renditions-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
In December 2005, when the first evidence emerged that Britain was colluding 
in CIA rendition operations, Straw told MPs: “There is simply no truth in the 
claims that the United Kingdom has been involved in rendition full stop.”


When the Libyan renditions came to light, Straw said: “No foreign secretary 
can know all the details of what its intelligence agencies are doing at any one 
time.”


He has been interviewed by the police but only as a potential witness. 
Government officials, insisting on anonymity, said MI6 was following 
“ministerially authorised government policy”.


Blair said he did not have “any recollection at all” of the Belhaj rendition.


The Blair and Straw denials appeared to be contradicted by Dearlove.


He has said: “It was a political decision, having very significantly disarmed 
Libya, for the government to cooperate with Libya on Islamist terrorism. The 
whole relationship was one of serious calculation about where the overall 
balance of our national interests stood.”


Neither MI5 nor MI6, nor Manningham-Buller, wanted to make any public comment. 
Whitehall sources insist the relationship between MI5 and MI6 has now been 
repaired after a difficult period.


Belhaj is demanding an apology and an acceptance of British guilt. He has 
taken his case to the supreme court, which has yet to hand down a judgment.


Last year, the court was confronted with the prospect of Straw and British 
intelligence officers deploying the “foreign act of state doctrine” – that is 
to say, the courts here cannot rule on the case since agents from foreign 
countries, notably the US and Libya, were involved, and they are granted 
immunity.


Section 7 of the 1994 Intelligence Services Act, sometimes described as the 
“James Bond clause”, protects MI6 officers from prosecution for actions 
anywhere in the world that would otherwise be illegal. They would be protected 
as long as their actions were authorised in writing by the secretary of state.


However, lawyers for Belhaj say many cases involving deportation or asylum 
seekers, for example, relate to actions of foreign states and that, in any 
case, torture overrides all legal loopholes.


An inquiry under Sir Peter Gibson, a retired senior judge, into earlier 
rendition programmes in which British intelligence was involved, was abandoned 
because of the new and dramatic evidence about Belhaj’s abduction.


 After insisting that the issues were so serious that it needed a judge-led 
inquiry rather than one carried out by the parliamentary intelligence and 
security committee, David Cameron reversed his position. After the Gibson 
inquiry was dropped, he said the issues should be taken up by the committee 
after all.


Dominic Grieve, the former attorney general and now chair of the committee, 
said shortly after he was appointed last October: “Our longer-term priority is 
the substantial inquiry into the role of the UK government and security and 
intelligence agencies in relation to detainee treatment and rendition, where 
there are still unanswered questions.”


The Gibson inquiry published a damning interim report before it folded. It 
concluded that the British government and its intelligence agencies had been 
involved in rendition operations, in which detainees were kidnapped and flown 
around the globe, and had interrogated detainees who they knew were being 
mistreated.

It said MI6 officers were informed they were under no obligation to report 
breaches of the Geneva conventions; intelligence officers appear to have taken 
advantage of the abuse of detainees; and Straw, as foreign secretary, had 
suggested that the law might be amended to allow suspects to be rendered to the 
UK.

It raised 27 questions they said would need to be answered if the full truth 
about the way in which Britain waged its “war on terror” was to be established.


The questions include:


• Did UK intelligence officers turn a blind eye to “specific, inappropriate 
techniques or threats” used by others and use this to their advantage in 
interrogations?


• If so, was there “a deliberate or agreed policy” between UK officers and 
overseas intelligence officers?


• Did the government and its agencies become “inappropriately involved in some 
renditions”?


• Was there a willingness, “at least at some levels within the agencies, to 
condone, encourage or take advantage of a rendition operation”?
 