
In 1996, San Francisco’s department of parking and traffic published a draft 
of what was to be the city’s first bicycle-specific transport plan. Almost 
immediately, cyclists in the city noticed something amiss: there were no bike 
lanes planned for Valencia Street, a popular route through the largely Latino 
Mission neighbourhood. Opposition to the plan grew so intense that the 
following year, a crackdown against pro-cycling protestersended in a riot 
<http://www.sfchronicle.com/bayarea/nevius/article/Critical-Mass-is-dying-of-self-inflicted-wounds-6481511.php>
.


Two decades on, Valencia Street is one of San Francisco’s more desirable 
addresses. Luxury apartments and fashionable bare-brick cafes sit cheek by jowl 
with colourful political murals and tiny bodegas.

And Valencia is now a cycling hub too. Indeed, the street became the first in 
the city to replace car lanes with bicycle paths.

Rightly or wrongly, gentrification is often seen as a process that arrives on 
two wheels. From Red Hook in Brooklyn to London Fields, fixed-gear 
bike-wielding young professionals have flocked to former industrial lots and 
waterfronts.


But does cycling really contribute to gentrification? John Stehlin, a 
geographer at the University of California, Berkeley who has studied San 
Francisco’s cycling politics, says the relationship is complex. “Cycling feeds 
into wider urban changes, including gentrification, but it does notcause 
gentrification. A bicycle lane gets put on a street that is already undergoing 
change.”


Cycling feeds into wider urban changes including gentrification, but it does 
not cause gentrification
John Stehlin 
When it comes to cycling, our cities are certainly changing. The numbers 
cycling to work in London more than doubled 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/census/2011-census-analysis/cycling-to-work/2011-census-analysis---cycling-to-work.html>
 from 77,000 in 2001 to 155,000 in 2011, according to census data. Brighton, 
Bristol and Manchester all registered big increases, too. In the US, the number 
of people cycling in the previous 12 months increased from just over 47 million 
in 2008 tomore than 66 million in 2015 
<https://www.statista.com/statistics/227415/number-of-cyclists-and-bike-riders-usa/>
.

Gentrifying districts are often those most suited to cycling. Closer to the 
inner city, they were often built during the age of slow-moving, horse-drawn 
carts. In the 10th arrondissement of Paris, for example, where on-street 
parking is scarce, the bike is often a far more rational choice than the car 
for newcomers.

But the growth of city cycling is not purely utilitarian. Among what urban 
theorist Richard Florida calls “the creative class”, the bicycle is a potent 
symbol of identity and status. And more bikes, it seems, means more well-paid 
knowledge economy jobs. “Cycling to work is positively associated with the 
share of creative-class jobs and negatively associated with working-class jobs,”
Florida wrote in 2011 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2011/06/americas-top-cities-for-bike-commuting-happier-too/240265/>
.

Consequently, local hostility to cycling infrastructure has often been a proxy 
for wider anger at gentrification. In Portland, Oregon in 2011, a proposed bike 
lane through a historic African American neighbourhood led to opposition from 
local residents. In 2013, aprominent church opposed a similar scheme 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/mike-debonis/wp/2013/08/15/how-a-downtown-bike-lane-has-become-a-political-headache/>
 in downtown Washington DC.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fblame-bike-cycling-contribute-city-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F729c4efe5a9b0c4e3d401db0b8ee1cac029ba67c%2F0_338_5099_3061%2F5099.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blame%20it%20on%20the%20bike%3A%20does%20cycling%20contribute%20to%20a%20city's%20gentrification%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fblame-bike-cycling-contribute-city-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blame%20it%20on%20the%20bike%3A%20does%20cycling%20contribute%20to%20a%20city%27s%20gentrification%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fblame-bike-cycling-contribute-city-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F729c4efe5a9b0c4e3d401db0b8ee1cac029ba67c%2F0_338_5099_3061%2F5099.jpg>
 The gentrification of the old industrial waterfront of Red Hook, Brooklyn has 
divided the community. Photograph: Alamy 
But this “cycling segregation” is a product of city planners prioritising the 
demands of real estate developers, says Samuel Stein, a graduate student at the 
City University of New York who has researched the city’s cycling 
infrastructure. Rather than build bike lanes to connect marginalised 
communities with public transport, cycle paths are often used to encourage 
investment in gentrifying neighbourhoods.

Cycling to work is positively associated with creative-class jobs, and 
negatively associated with working-class jobs
Richard Florida 
“Bike lanes are often introduced in areas that are gentrifying,” says Stein. 
“The people who produce gentrification – landlords and developers – want this 
because it makes a neighbourhood more desirable and increases their property 
prices.” City planners often “use cycling infrastructure as a way to facilitate 
development. So where gentrification goes cycling infrastructure follows, but 
that is a problem of planning, not cycling.”

In the US, where just 0.62% of the population bike to work, there is a stark 
racial divide between who cycles and who doesn’t. In Boston, just 1% of those 
who use the city’s bike-share scheme are black, even though black people make 
up more than 20% of the city’s population. Even inAmsterdam, where almost 40% 
of journeys are made by bike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/05/amsterdam-bicycle-capital-world-transport-cycling-kindermoord>
, Moroccan and Turkish immigrants are less likely to ride.


Minorities are just as likely to cycle but often live in areas that lack bike 
infrastructure, says Stein. “We need to prioritise those with the most need by 
putting bike lanes into more working-class and immigrant neighbourhoods.”

Before taking his PhD at Berkeley, Stehlin worked in a bicycle shop in 
Philadelphia for four years. “There was a disconnect between what you heard in 
the press about bicycling being this young, white hip thing, and the people 
actually coming into the shop. Our shop served a lot of low income immigrants 
who didn’t speak English,” he recalls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fblame-bike-cycling-contribute-city-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1ab6d0bc7799857c3abcb0c44eed24284bc7c4e%2F0_252_4672_2804%2F4672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blame%20it%20on%20the%20bike%3A%20does%20cycling%20contribute%20to%20a%20city's%20gentrification%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fblame-bike-cycling-contribute-city-gentrification%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blame%20it%20on%20the%20bike%3A%20does%20cycling%20contribute%20to%20a%20city%27s%20gentrification%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fblame-bike-cycling-contribute-city-gentrification%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1ab6d0bc7799857c3abcb0c44eed24284bc7c4e%2F0_252_4672_2804%2F4672.jpg>
 Cyclists can bike all the way up to the 10th floor in the 8 House building in 
Copenhagen. Photograph: Martin Darley/Alamy 
Stehlin says cycling and social disruption do not have to go hand in hand. In 
the late 1990s, long-term residents of West Street, a working-class 
neighbourhood in Oakland, California were concerned about speeding cars near 
their homes. Consequently a bike lane – one of the first in the city – was laid 
down. The presence of cycling infrastructure encouraged more people on West 
Street to cycle, but it “didn’t cause gentrification” there. The lesson? City 
planners need to make bike-share schemes affordable and spread cycling 
infrastructure more equitably across the city.

Simon Munk of the London Cycling Campaign, who lives in Waltham Forest – one 
of three cycling-friendly “Mini Hollands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/05/bike-lane-blues-london-local-businesses-cycle-enfield-green-lanes>
” established in London – says bikes are far from being the sole preserve of 
young, white professionals in the UK. “Black and minority ethnic cycling is 
very much on a par with the general population. Historically that hasn’t been 
the case,” he says. Hackney has the highest rate of cycling in London – a 
reflection of its changing demographics but also its diverse population and, 
until recently, a lack of alternative transport.

Improved cycling facilities have given poorer residents greater access to 
transport, says Munk. “Some 60% of residents have no access to a car.”

But the Australian architect Steven Fleming has a more radical, bike-based 
solution to the problem of mobility and inequality in our cities. Fleming, who 
splits his time between Amsterdam and Australia, wants to see new housing built 
beside bike lanes, with easy access from homes right on to cycle paths. His 
vision even has a name: “bikeitecture”.

The last battle for Brooklyn, America's most unaffordable place to buy a home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/03/last-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home>
“We should take a bike-centric view of things,” he suggests. “It really is 
transport, it’s not just supplementary. We have been indoctrinated by the 
machine age to think that we should only have machinery as transport.” The 
alternative, Fleming says, is to develop brownfield sites around cycling, not 
driving.

One example of bikeitecture is 8 House 
<http://www.archdaily.com/83307/8-house-big> in Copenhagen. This apartment 
complex was designed around a series of inter-connected ramps that allow 
residents to ride directly from their front door, regardless of what floor they 
live on.

Fleming envisages a future in which the older, gentrifying neighbourhoods of 
today become completely car-free, with all new developments fully cycling 
integrated. The alternative, he says, is cities that are slower, more 
gridlocked and even more unequal.

“It’s important we find a new way because anywhere in the world where cities 
are expanding, the first line on paper is the new freeway,” Fleming says. “If 
technophiles win we will have cities dominated by driverless cars. But the 
rational choice for the public good, and the good of the city, is bicycling.”

Are you experiencing or resisting gentrification in your city? Share your 
stories in the comments below,through our dedicated callout 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/cities/2016/sep/19/city-resist-gentrification-displacement>
, or on Twitter using #GlobalGentrification
 