
Bo Jackson has revealed that his legendary dual-sport career would never have 
got off the ground if he’d known 30 years ago about football’s risk of 
concussion.

San Diego refused to be bullied by the NFL and billionaire owners | Les 
Carpenter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/12/san-diego-chargers-los-angeles-move-nfl-owners>
Jackson, one of America’s greatest ever athletes and the only man to be named 
an all-star in football and baseball,told USA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/sports/mlb/columnist/bob-nightengale/2017/01/12/bo-jackson-football-cte-mlb/96492338/>
 that he was ignorant of football’s safety risks when he was a player, and 
would have concentrated on baseball if he had known better.

The former Raiders running back said: “If I knew back then what I know now, I 
would have never played football. Never. I wish I had known about all of those 
head injuries, but no one knew that. And the people that did know that, they 
wouldn’t tell anybody.

“The game has gotten so violent, so rough. We’re so much more educated on this 
CTE stuff, there’s no way I would ever allow my kids to play football today.”

The NFL estimates that 6,000 former players, or nearly three in 10, could 
develop Alzheimer’s disease or moderate dementia caused by head trauma. Last 
year, the league paid $1bn to settle thousands of concussion lawsuits filed by 
former players who have been diagnosed with brain injuries linked to repeated 
concussions.NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> greats Junior Seau, 
Dave Duerson and Ken Stabler were just some former players to have been 
diagnosed with CTE after their deaths.

Jackson, now 54, said his experience in the NFL meant football was off-limits 
to his children. “Even though I love the sport, I’d smack them in the mouth if 
they said they wanted to play football,” Jackson said. “I’d tell them: ‘Play 
baseball, basketball, soccer, golf, just anything but football.’”

Jackson won the Heisman Trophy at Auburn in 1985 and was drafted by the 
Raiders in 1987 after rejecting an offer from the Buccaneers. He trampled over 
Brian Bosworth in a memorable Raiders-Seahawks game in his rookie year and went 
to the Pro Bowl in 1990, but was forced out of football in 1991 after suffering 
a debilitating hip injury.

He played eight seasons in Major League Baseball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> with the Royals, White Sox and 
Angels, and finished with a career batting average of .250 with 141 home runs 
and 415 RBIs. He retired from professional sport in 1994.
 