
Bob Dylan <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bobdylan> admitted he was stunned 
and surprised when he was told he had won a Nobel prize because he had never 
stopped to consider whether his songs were literature.

Dylan, whose speech 
<https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/2016/dylan-speech.html>
 was read out by the US ambassador to Sweden at the annual awards dinner, said 
the prize was “something I never could have imagined or seen coming”.

He said from an early age he had read and absorbed the works of past winners 
and giants of literature such as Kipling, Shaw, Thomas Mann, Pearl Buck, Albert 
Camus and Hemingway. But said it was “truly beyond words” that he was joining 
those names on the winners list. “If someone had ever told me that I had the 
slightest chance of winning the Nobel prize, I would have to think that I’d 
have about the same odds as standing on the moon,” he wrote.

The announcement that Dylan had won the literature prize caused controversy 
with critics arguing his lyrics were not literature. On learning he had been 
awarded the literature prize Dylan said he thought of Shakespeare. “When he was 
writing Hamlet, I’m sure he was thinking about a lot of different things: 
‘Who’re the right actors for these roles? How should this be staged? Do I 
really want to set this in Denmark?’

“His creative vision and ambitions were no doubt at the forefront of his mind, 
but there were also more mundane matters to consider and deal with. ‘Is the 
financing in place? Are there enough good seats for my patrons? Where am I 
going to get a human skull?’ I would bet that the farthest thing from 
Shakespeare’s mind was the question: ‘Is this literature?’

“Like Shakespeare, I too am often occupied with the pursuit of my creative 
endeavours and dealing with all aspects of life’s mundane matters. ‘Who are the 
best musicians for these songs? Am I recording in the right studio? Is this 
song in the right key?’ Some things never change, even in 400 years. Not once 
have I ever had the time to ask myself ‘are my songs literature?’ So, I do 
thank the Swedish academy, both for taking the time to consider that very 
question and ultimately, for providing such a wonderful answer.”

Patti Smith struggles through Stockholm tribute to absent Bob Dylan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/10/patti-smith-falters-in-stockholm-tribute-to-an-absent-bob-dylan>
Earlier during the awards ceremony a nervous Patti Smith stumbled through Bob 
Dylan’s A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/10/patti-smith-falters-in-stockholm-tribute-to-an-absent-bob-dylan>
 in a performance given to mark the handing over of the absent Dylan’s Nobel 
prize for literature.

Formally presenting the award Horace Engdahl, a Swedish literary critic and 
member of the Swedish academy behind the prize, responded to international 
criticism of the choice of a popular lyricist as recipient. In defence of the 
decision, Engdahl said that when Dylan’s songs were heard first in the 1960s: 
“All of a sudden, much of the bookish poetry in our world felt anaemic.”

The academy’s choice of Dylan, Engdahl added, speaking in Swedish, “seemed 
daring only beforehand and already seems obvious”.

And it was an unconventional prize-giving night in more ways than one. Dylan’s 
failure to attend the august gathering in Stockholm meant that Smith, the 
American singer famous for her 1975 album Horses and the hit song Because the 
Night, was attending as his proxy. The occasion proved too much for the singer, 
69, who faltered after a few verses.

Forgetting the lyric “I saw a black branch with blood that kept drippin’,” she 
apologised quietly but profusely to the jewel-bedecked audience and asked if 
she could start that section of the song again. “I am so nervous,” she 
explained. Smith was encouraged by applause from the gathered dignitaries and 
members of the Swedish royal family.

Her performance followed Engdahl’s justificatory speech, which opened with the 
question: “What brings about the great shifts in the world of literature? Often 
it is when someone seizes upon a simple, overlooked form, discounted as art in 
the high sense, and makes it mutate.”

In this way, Engdahl argued, the novel had once emerged from anecdote and 
letters, while drama had eventually derived from games and performance. “In the 
distant past, all poetry was sung or tunefully recited,” he said. Dylan had 
dedicated himself to music played for ordinary people and tried to copy it.

“But when he started to write songs, they came out differently,” Engdahl said. 
“He panned poetry gold, whether on purpose or by accident is irrelevant … He 
gave back to poetry its elevated style, lost since the romantics.”
 