
The Invisible - Life’s Dancers (Floating Points mix) 

Three of my favourite things collide here. The Invisible remixed by Floating 
Points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/29/floating-points-dj-sam-shepherd-elaenia-album-interview>
 on Ninja Tune. And not for the first time, either. The last time it happened 
was on Wings from the Invisible’s 2012 album Rispah. Floating Points tastefully 
lends his well-balanced touch to the boards on both occasions.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA2RYDJRa7Q4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA2RYDJRa7Q4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA2RYDJRa7Q4&media=>
Pional – The Way That You Like 

I’ve been a fan of Pional since the mid-2000s and his earlier output on Hivern 
Discs and Young Turks. On The Way That You Like he delves into more poppy 
territory while maintaining his understated sense of tension. The real magic of 
this is how he builds the linear elements over the course of the track, with 
each element giving more gravity to the beautifully low-key vocal line from
Empress Of <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/17/empress-of-me-review>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdjesmIpccac&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdjesmIpccac>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdjesmIpccac&media=>
Dexter Story – Wejebe Aola

On the ever-excellent Soundway Records, Dexter Story teams up with Kamasi 
Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/28/kamasi-washington-review-jazz-the-epic-tour>
 and LA-Ethio funk players such as Todd Simon for this cover of Wejene Aola. LA 
feels like it’s having a moment for these great collaborative projects right 
now.

Yussef Kamaal – Yo Chavez 

One of the highlights of my Outlier party in London last March was the Yussef 
Kamaal trio. Yo Chavez is taken from the incredibly strong Lowrider EP. 
Together with Henry Wu, this is one of the most engaging acts you’ll see live.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRkIn4bHp6Pc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRkIn4bHp6Pc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRkIn4bHp6Pc&media=>
Christian Löffler – Myiami 

I’m such a huge fan of the approach of creating electronic music from 
non-electronic sources. It’s a similar palette I’ve always drawn from, and 
Löffler nails it in everything he does. Drawing melodies from the digital 
manipulation of bells and other found sounds, triggered by sequencers, creates 
a third aesthetic.

 * Bonobo plays The Hydra <https://www.residentadvisor.net/event.aspx?863011>, 
Studio Spaces, London, on Friday 4 November.  