
Gambling firms that fail to tackle problem gambling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/13/problem-gambling-gambleaware-ippr>
 and money laundering face heftier fines and a higher risk of losing their 
operating licence under a tougher regime to be unveiled by the industry’s 
regulator.

The Gambling Commission will lay out its new enforcement strategy this month, 
detailing how bookmakers, casinos and online gaming companies who are deemed to 
have breached regulations will be punished. The new stance follows a year in 
whichseveral major bookmakers reached voluntary settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/29/paddy-power-encouraged-gambler-lost-home-jobs-family-gambling-commission-report>
 for failing to prevent money laundering or problem gambling.

The big gamble: the dangerous world of British betting shops – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2017/jan/06/the-big-gamble-the-dangerous-world-of-british-betting-shops-podcast>
The regulator has yet to publish the details of its harsher regime but chief 
executive Sarah Harrison recently warned gambling firms to expect tougher 
policing to ensure they were not used for money laundering and “terrorist 
financing”. In a speech to senior figures in the industry, Harrison said the 
regulator’s recent work had uncovered “a lack of curiosity, and at worst, a 
leadership culture which puts commercial gain over compliance”.

She said the commission would abandon the “blanket approach” of reaching 
settlements with firms that transgress and would be more likely to review their 
licence to operate in the UK.

“We will put all access to all tools, including licence review [...] on an 
equal footing. Parliament gave us a wide range of regulatory tools for a 
reason,” she said, adding that sanctions were likely to include “higher 
penalties”, particularly when a company was guilty of “repeated failings”.

Harrison, who took over as the commission’s chief executive in 2015, has 
repeatedly signalled her intention to run a stricter regime than predecessors. 
She called on companies to “raise your ambitions and your sights higher”, 
urging them to “step up the pace of change” before the publication of the new 
enforcement strategy.

She said that the regulator would not allow companies to spend months 
negotiating settlement deals, where they agreed to a voluntary payment when 
they misbehaved. Last year, the commission arranged voluntary settlements with 
bookmakers such as Paddy Power, whichagreed to pay £280,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/29/paddy-power-encouraged-gambler-lost-home-jobs-family-gambling-commission-report>
 after it was found to have encouraged a problem gambler until he lost five 
jobs, his home and access to his children.

Betfred reached an £800,000 settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/14/gambling-commission-orders-betfred-to-pay-800000-pounds>
 in June after admitting it had failed to implement proper anti-money 
laundering controls in accepting stolen cash from a “VIP” custom. In a similar 
case, the regulator announced an£880,000 settlement with Coral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/27/gala-coral-fined-over-gambler-who-stole-850000-to-feed-habit>
 in April, after the bookmaker took hundreds of thousands of pounds from a 
“VIP” problem gambler who was using the proceeds of theft to feed his habit.

Harrison told gambling firms that the process of agreeing these voluntary 
payments was too “drawn out”. “To create better incentives for early 
settlement, we will also be consulting on introducing time-limited 
settlements,” she said.

This would mean firms who drag their feet in reaching a settlement with the 
regulator will have to pay more than if they agree an immediate payout. The 
industry’s trade body, the Association of British Bookmakers, said it welcomed 
any efforts to uphold high standards of integrity.

“As a sector, we are always ready to work with the commission to raise 
standards and adhere not just to the regulatory and legal frameworks in place, 
but to the commitments in our responsible gambling code which go beyond that. 
Clearly if there are failures that continue or are not addressed then it is 
right to take action,” said the ABB.

Labour MP Carolyn Harris, who chairs a cross-party group of MPs looking into 
the impact of fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs) <http://www.fobt-appg.com/> 
applauded the tighter regime, but said the regulator should throw its weight 
behind curbs on the controversial machines, which allow gamblers to stake up to 
£100 every 20 seconds.

“I welcome this action from the Gambling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gambling> Commission, but I implore the 
commission and the government to take immediate action to properly address the 
harm being done in communities across the country by the high stakes being 
waged on fixed odds betting terminals. Only by substantially reducing the 
maximum stake will we stop the harm being caused by these machines which have 
been called the ‘crack cocaine’ of gambling.”

The group of MPs, whose financial backers 
<http://www.fobt-appg.com/associate-memberhip/> include casinos, the trade body 
for amusement arcades and pubs firm JD Wetherspoon, is due to publish a final 
report on FOBTs at the end of this month.

In an interim report published in December, the group urged the government to 
limit the maximum stake on the machines to £2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/08/cut-fixed-odds-betting-stakes-to-2-mps-urge>
.
 