
Period poverty campaigners have welcomed the news that Boots is to support the 
drive to help women and girls struggling to pay for basic sanitary products.

Britain’s biggest pharmacy chain will trial an in-store donation point to 
allow customers to gift desperately needed sanitary products for distribution 
to a local food bank, as well as contributing as a company. If it proves 
successful, Boots will consider rolling out the scheme across the country.

Boots made the announcement following a meeting with the shadow minister for 
women and equalities, Paula Sherriff, on Wednesday and will pilot the scheme in 
her Dewsbury constituency.

Theresa May says she’s a feminist. Let’s ask her to eradicate period poverty | 
Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/theresa-may-feminist-bloddy-difficult-woman-period-poverty-afford-tampons>
Una Kent, director of communications and CSR for Boots UK, told the Guardian: 
“Boots UK has always understood that access to basic hygiene items is hugely 
important for personal health and wellbeing, indeed the first non-pharmacy 
product we sold over a hundred years ago was a soap and sponge. Supporting the 
essential hygiene needs of people is as vital today as it was then and it’s 
these items that are often most needed by food banks.”


 Sherriff is one of a cross-party group of MPs that has been raising the issue 
of period poverty - when women and girls struggle to pay for basic sanitary 
products on a monthly basis, with significant impact on their hygiene, health 
and wellbeing - which washighlighted by the Guardian on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/period-poverty-call-to-tackle-the-hidden-side-of-inequality>
.

Lobbying in the Commons has been led by the tampon tax champion Laura Coryton, 
who successfully persuaded the government to scrap VAT on sanitary products in 
2015, to highlightthe Homeless Period 
<https://www.change.org/p/procter-gamble-support-the-homeless-on-their-period-period-homelessperiod>
 project, which aims to increase the donation of sanitary products to homeless 
shelters. It follows a similarcampaign in the Scottish parliament lead by 
Scottish Labour’s inequalities spokesperson, Monica Lennon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/27/msps-debate-giving-free-sanitary-products-to-women-on-benefits>
.

Following Monday’s article, Proctor and Gamble - one of the companies 
specifically targeted by the Homeless Period - contacted Coryton to put her in 
touch withIn Kind Direct, <https://www.inkinddirect.org/> an organisation which 
redistributes product donations to charities and gave away around 10,000 packs 
of sanitary products from P&G last year. Coryton now hopes to work alongside 
P&G to encourage similar companies to do the same.

While the demand for women’s sanitary products has been evident to food banks 
and homeless shelters for some time, the recent focus on the humiliating 
consequences of period poverty in the Ken Loach filmI, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/i-daniel-blake-review-ken-loach-film-benefits-system>
 brought menstrual inequality into the mainstream for the first time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fboots-support-campaign-end-period-poverty-paula-sherriff-tampons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cec15f022916429097b6652972142c73e70fa40%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boots%20to%20support%20campaign%20to%20end%20'period%20poverty'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fboots-support-campaign-end-period-poverty-paula-sherriff-tampons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boots%20to%20support%20campaign%20to%20end%20%27period%20poverty%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fboots-support-campaign-end-period-poverty-paula-sherriff-tampons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cec15f022916429097b6652972142c73e70fa40%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Paula Sherriff has been leading campaigns against the taxes on women’s hygiene 
products. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Sherriff told the Guardian that she hoped the move by Boots, whose market is 
predominantly women of menstruating age, would encourage other companies to 
take corporate social responsibility seriously. But she said there was a wider 
need to consider whether women should be paying for sanitary products at all 
when items like condoms and prescriptions are free to those on lower incomes.

The Dewsbury MP added that there was also a need to look particularly at the 
female experience of poverty. “We often talk about people in poverty, but the 
latest research from the House of Commons library shows that women are 
disproportionately affected by the government’s tax and benefit changes by 86%.”

Supporting the Homeless Period campaign in the Commons chamber on Tuesday, 
Sherriff highlighted the fact that public attitudes towards menstruation 
continued to hinder attempts to raise awareness: “When I startedcampaigning in 
this House on the tampon tax, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/mps-plan-budget-rebellion-against-tampon-tax>
 some honerable members recoiled, while others did not even want to talk about 
periods or tampons, as if the words themselves were obscene. I do not regret 
providing such a culture shock to this place – quite the opposite – but that 
reaction exemplifies why the issue of homeless women’s access to sanitary care 
is so widespread and terribly underestimated.”

 