
 Mount Pleasant, a gentle rise between Kings Cross and Farringdon in north 
London, has always been something of a misnomer. From the 16th to the 19th 
century, it was home to astinking heap of rubbish and human excrement 
<http://postalheritage.org.uk/uploads/View_near_Banigge_Wells_179.jpg>. The 
great dump was finally cleared in 1794 to make way for an imposing brick 
prison, the notoriousClerkenwell Gaol 
<http://postalheritage.org.uk/page/mountpleasant-early>, where inmates were 
forced to grind treadmills and pick oakum amid overflowing sewers. It was 
cleared again in the 1880s for a gargantuan postal sorting office, the largest 
in the world at the time, which has stood as a majestic shed ever since.

 The three-hectare site next to the sorting office is now subject to a 
planning application for 700 mostly private flats, to be erected in a series of 
hefty blocks rising up to 15 storeys, which will frame narrow canyons of 
“public” space in their shadow. Architects should usually be praised for being 
contextual, but it seems they might have taken the rubbish-dump-prison analogy 
too far.

 “It's like a fortress,” says Edward Denison of the Mount Pleasant Forum 
<http://mountpleasantforum.wordpress.com/>, the local residents' association 
that has been battling this oversized scheme for the past few months. “It's an 
exclusive development that completely turns its back on the surrounding area, 
essentially sticking two fingers up at those that live around it. It's the 
profoundly cynical result of trying to cram as many units on to the site as 
possible.”

The application, submitted by the recently privatised Royal Mail Group to 
Islington and Camden councils, whose boundary the site spans, has garnered an 
increasing amount of hostility, with designer and local residentThomas 
Heatherwick <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/thomas-heatherwick> now 
joining the calls to see it halted.



“This proposal is downright lazy – cheap, bland, generic and misconceived,” he 
wrote to the council this month 
<http://mountpleasantforum.files.wordpress.com/2014/01/thomas-heatherwick-letter.jpg>
. “The developer is going to make a vast amount of money from this project, but 
what is being offered in return is empty, cynical and vacuous.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1jj87umpZpY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1jj87umpZpY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1jj87umpZpY&media=>
 Animation prepared by theMount Pleasant Forum 
<http://mountpleasantforum.wordpress.com/>, illustrating their concerns. 
The saga took a surprise turn last week when London mayor Boris Johnson 
weighed into the wrangle and called the scheme in to be determined by his own 
planning team at the Greater London Authority, taking it out of the local 
councils' hands – who were set to refuse the application next month. Royal Mail 
have since slashed their quota of “affordable” housing from 20% to around 12%, 
though both boroughs have a target of 50%. As a result, this prime plot – the 
last major housing site left in Islington – will probably offer less than 50 
social rented homes, in a scheme that willlikely fetch around £4bn in private 
sales 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/mount-unpleasant-how-the-royal-mail-group-will-make-a-fortune-from-selling-flats-to-private-investors-9080865.html>
.

“It's outrageous to drop the affordable housing quota as soon as they know 
it's going out of the local authorities' hands,” says Denison. “But they insist 
it's the only way to make it 'viable'. If Royal Mail can't make a profit on 
three hectares of prime real estate in centralLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, when the land has essentially been 
given to them by the public for free, something is seriously wrong.”

Both councils have reacted with fury, declaring the mayor's move a 
circumvention of the planning process 
<http://www.camdennewjournal.com/news/2014/jan/boris-johnson-accused-bypassing-democracy-he-takes-control-mount-pleasant-site-decisio>
 and accusing him of making a mockery of local democracy, especially given the 
scheme had only been submitted in June last year and was due to be determined 
in the next couple of months.

“London is growing at an unprecedented rate and it is absolutely vital that we 
get on with the important work of building thousands of new homes as quickly as 
we can,” responded Johnson, his usual stock rhetoric ignoring precisely what 
kind of homes are being built in the rush to fulfil his targets. “By taking 
over this application it should be possible to speed up the decision-making 
process.” It is an intriguing line of argument, given the last scheme he 
determined – the 41-storey wedge of Eileen House in Elephant and Castle, 
granted permission in December – took him more than two years to decide.

While the Mount Pleasant case might be dismissed as the usual cast of nimbys 
set against the inevitable steamroller of market forces, it in fact reveals 
some disturbing truths about how the mayor's planning machine is actively 
working to make the city a more divided, exclusive place.



“It is hardly surprising that the mayor has called this in,” says Duncan Bowie 
<http://www.westminster.ac.uk/?a=68611>, lecturer in planning at the University 
of Westminster, who worked in the GLA's planning department under former mayor 
Ken Livingstone. “The mayoral planning process is based entirely on achieving 
the maximum number of housing units on any given site, aimed at selling to an 
international market. The London-wide target of building 42,000 new units per 
year is predicated on a lot of very high density developments that don't even 
comply with the mayor's own policies on density.”
 Unreasonable and unwarranted? … Proposals for Convoys Wharf in Deptford. 
Image: Hutchinson Whampoa 
Such a development might be found in Convoys Wharf 
<http://www.convoyswharf.com/>, a £1bn proposal for 3,500 units in the form of 
three towers rising up to 40 storeys, planned for the historic site of Henry 
VIII's naval dockyard in Deptford. Johnson called in the scheme in October 
after the developer, Hutchinson Whampoa, wrote a blustering letter accusing the 
local authority, Lewisham, of making “unreasonable and unwarranted” demands and 
pushing the scheme's viability “to its limits”. The move has alarmed local 
activists, who rightly fear the vast quantity of development is in danger of 
destroying the area's character. But do such schemes even follow the mayor's 
own guidance? And does that guidance even matter?

The GLA's Annual Monitoring Report 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/planning/research-reports/monitoring-london-plan>
, which measures the implementation of the London Plan – the master document 
that guides spatial development across the city – reveals that almost 
two-thirds of all development has breached the mayor's density guidelines. 
Johnson is setting the rules, only to break them with reckless abandon, 
rendering his plan utterly meaningless. But the real poison is in his approach 
to housing.

“Islington and Camden have acute housing need and desperately want lower 
rented housing on the Mount Pleasant site,” says Bowie. “The question is: 
should the mayor be using his strategic planning powers to actively prevent 
councils from providing low-rented housing where there is urgent local need?”

Under Livingstone, there was an ambition – rarely achieved – for 50% 
affordable housing on new developments (the reality was more like 37%). The 
idea of a percentage has since been replaced by a numerical target, as has the 
definition of “affordable”, which now stands at 80% of market rent. Johnson 
also deleted the idea of social rented housing from the London Plan last year, 
preventing boroughs from supporting low-rented accommodation – an act for which 
they are nowtaking him to judicial review 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-24002244>.

“The mayor is driven by entirely the wrong sort of housing targets,” says 
Michael Edwards <http://michaeledwards.org.uk/>, teaching fellow at UCL's 
Bartlett school of planning. “There is enormous pressure to get the maximum 
number of units and forget about the affordability. In Mount Pleasant, 
'affordable' would be totally out of reach of more than half the population – 
it makes no contribution to meeting the desperate housing need.”



Obsessed with box-ticking and quota-filling, it is becoming increasingly 
evident thatthe mayor's planning team is a dangerous force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/jan/26/boris-johnson-soft-touch-for-property-developers>
. They have presided over a wealth of misconceived, mean-minded schemes that 
are destroying the social and physical fabric of London, lubricating the path 
for private enclaves of oversized, poorly designed mega-blocks, to be sold to 
overseas investors with little care for creating decent places to live.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F29%2Fboris-johnsons-abuse-of-planning-power-is-an-assault-on-democracy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F28%2F1390935492878%2F3f49a887-d8e3-4dc7-bd01-12ec60a5765f-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson's%20abuse%20of%20planning%20power%20is%20an%20assault%20on%20democracy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F29%2Fboris-johnsons-abuse-of-planning-power-is-an-assault-on-democracy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Johnson%27s%20abuse%20of%20planning%20power%20is%20an%20assault%20on%20democracy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Farchitecture-design-blog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F29%2Fboris-johnsons-abuse-of-planning-power-is-an-assault-on-democracy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F1%2F28%2F1390935492878%2F3f49a887-d8e3-4dc7-bd01-12ec60a5765f-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Teetering towers … the Spirit of Stratford rises to 42 storeys on the edge of 
the Olympic site. Photograph: Martin Godwin 
A look further east reveals quite what disastrous results the GLA's eager 
target-filling frenzy can have, where agauntlet of teetering towers now 
stretches down Stratford High Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/21/london-2012-olympics-architecture-legacy>
 in a steroidal vision of Dubai-on-Lea. Each dressed in a cheap costume of 
colourful cladding panels, the towers blare the hollow klaxon of Olympic 
regeneration, but contain an exclusive world of mostly private one-bed flats 
behind their gaudy facades and gated podiums.

The GLA planners' reports from the time dutifully note that the schemes far 
exceed the recommended density for the area, but all this is pardoned for the 
buildings' “palette of innovative modern materials” and the “active street 
frontages” – which have remained boarded up ever since.

Similarly, the GLA's initial report on the Mount Pleasant scheme betrays a 
woeful misunderstanding of the site, ignoring such things as the two adjacent 
schools and praising part of the site that isn't even within the scheme. A 
source close to the mayor's planning team reveals that the officers rarely make 
site visits, instead judging the context from the submitted plans – sometimes 
aided by a quick look on Google Street View.

“Boris's habit of calling schemes in is setting a worrying precedent,” says 
the source. “Developers now think they can go straight to the mayor and bypass 
local planning entirely. The boroughs are scared to dig their heels in, as they 
know they can be overridden.”

As it stands, the system is not only a benefit for the mayor. By having 
schemes taken over by Johnson, local councillors can also happily avoid the 
stigma of being seen to support a scheme that local people are railing against, 
a particular concern at election time. “The current two-tier planning structure 
is basically configured to benefit everyone,” adds the source, “except the very 
residents of London that it should be there for.”
 