
Speaking at the Conservative party conference last month Boris Johnson, the 
foreign secretary, set out a vision of Britain as a “soft power superpower”, 
projecting values through influence, ideas and the power of persuasion. If ever 
there were a time and a place for exercising our national soft power, that time 
is now – andthe place is Mosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/mosul-attack-kurdish-forces-launch-large-scale-operation-against-isis-in-iraq>
.

Mosul civilians brace for assault as Iraq forces bid to retake Isis stronghold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/15/mosul-civilians-brace-assault-iraq-retake-isis-stronghold>
The Iraqi government has launched its long-anticipated assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/battle-for-mosul-day-two-isis-iraqi-kurdish>
 to reclaim the city from Islamic State with backing from the US, the UK and an 
international alliance. The symbolic importance of the battle can hardly be 
over-stated. It was from Mosul that Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the Isis leader,
declared his caliphate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/05/islamic-state-leader-muslims-caliphate-video-abu-bakr-baghdadi>
.

But how the battle for Mosul <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul> is won 
will also matter. Military victory is all but assured. The danger is that it 
will be secured at the price of mass civilian casualties and an avoidable 
humanitarian catastrophe – and that is where judicious use of the UK’s soft 
power could make a difference.

The early warning signs are already visible. As the advance on Mosul has 
gathered pace, the flow of displaced civilians has mounted. Save the Children 
staff near Hawija, another battle front some 100 miles south of Mosul, are 
dealing with young children arriving on the verge of starvation. Many have 
escaped Hawija, evaded Isis checkpoints and trekked for 36 hours on perilous 
mountain paths across terrain laced with improvised landmines. The humanitarian 
response has been hampered by a chronically under-funded appeal that has left 
reception centres desperately short of food, water and medicines.

Far worse could be in store. Much of the civilian population is now 
concentrated in the old city on the eastern bank of the Tigris. This is the 
poorest part of Mosul. If Iraqi forces mount an artillery barrage or unleash 
irregular militias, the scenes from Mosul could mirror thehorror of eastern 
Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/aleppo-must-be-cleaned-declares-assad-amid-outcry-over-bloody-siege>
. The600,000 children living in the city 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/2016-10/impending-mosul-assault-puts-600000-children-line-fire>
 will inevitably figure prominently in the body count.

Escaping Mosul is not easy. Civilians are understandably loth to negotiate 
Isis roadblocks, and fearful of what may lie on the other side. But once the 
fighting starts in earnest, people will move. The UN estimates that more than 1 
million people could flee the city.

This is a predictable humanitarian emergency that could have been planned for 
in advance. Yet only half of theUN’s $284m emergency appeal 
<http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=54506#.WAjTyTYrKuo> has been 
funded – and thesix camps that have been established 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/iraqi-forces-advance-toward-isis-held-mosul-1476702688>
 are currently equipped to accommodate fewer than 60,000 people. For the 
purposes of comparison, try imagining the entire population of Birmingham on 
the move and a humanitarian effort to cater for a population half the size of 
Sutton Coldfield.

So how can the UK exercise soft power in defence of fundamental values such as 
the protection of children in conflict, upholding humanitarian law and 
minimising civilian casualties?

In marked contrast to the situation in Aleppo, the UK has both direct and 
indirect influence in Iraq

In marked contrast to the situation in Aleppo, the UK has both direct and 
indirect influence inIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. Along with 
other coalition partners, the UK is extensively involved in training local 
forces: more than 18,000 Iraqi security forces and peshmerga have been trained 
to date. Britain’s armed forces are on the ground around Mosul, along with 
American counterparts, providing advice on tactics – and the UK is part of an 
alliance that carries weight with the Iraqi government.

Soft-power engagement should start with the clear message that Iraqi 
commanders on the ground must protect civilians. The mistakes, including the 
indiscriminate artillery bombardments that led to mass civilian casualties in 
cities such as Falluja and Ramadi must not be repeated.

It is already clear that insufficient preparation has been made for civilian 
protection. Military commanders have used radio broadcasts to instruct families 
and children trapped in Mosul to stay inside and put white flags on their 
homes. At best this will be ineffective. At worst it will turn civilians into 
identifiable human shields. This is downright unacceptable.

One of the most urgent priorities now is for military commanders to identify, 
open and maintain safe humanitarian routes in and out of Mosul as troops 
advance. Both regular military and irregular forces need to understand that 
failure to protect humanitarian access is a violation of the Geneva conventions 
– and a war crime.

But facilitating safe exit is just part of the equation. The UK should now 
launch a major international initiative aimed at closing the financing gap for 
humanitarian provision. My colleagues in Save the Children will be 
administering one of the camps. But our preparations, like those of other 
humanitarian agencies, have been hampered by chronic funding deficits. Make no 
mistake: failure to close these deficits will hurt children who have suffered 
enough and surely have the right to expect our best effort.

Mosul is more than a test of military strength. In a region where the bottom 
line of what is acceptable in armed conflict has been lowered to the point of 
disappearance, it is a chance to reassert international human rights. And for 
the UK, Mosul is an opportunity to demonstrate that soft power can be 
effectively deployed in the defence of children whose lives are on the line. If 
there is a better cause, I cannot think of one.
 