
ONE PEP BEYOND

The blank stare. The slump in the chair. The sense of the most powerful ennui 
positively pulsing from his being. On Sunday at Everton, Pep Guardiola looked 
like a man who was gradually realising he’d made a huge mistake. Or 
contemplating a long look in the mirror. Possibly both.

Manchester City humbled while West Brom are blown away – Football Weekly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2017/jan/16/manchester-city-spanked-while-the-baggies-are-blown-away-football-weekly>
Things aren’t going well for ol’ Pepples at City, who if they break his spirit 
will surely rank it among their finest achievements. But in some respects he’s 
a little like a chef called upon to cook a delicious banquet for 300 people, 
asked to rustle up the finest tasting menu that the culinary world could 
possibly imagine, but has been handed a Pot Noodle, some squirty cheese and a 
microwave to do it. Sort of like Ready Steady Cook, but instead of Ainsley 
Harriott mugging for the camera, chopping herbs and egging him on, he had a 
couple of thousand Mancunians wondering if they’ve been sold a pup, and 35,000 
Scousers singing ‘You’re getting sacked in the morning.’ No wonder he had a 
face like a slapped bottom and eyes blacker than night.

After the game, rather than just staring through hacks and refusing to say a 
single word, like Travis in the first bit of chinstrokers’ favourite ‘Paris, 
Texas’, or bellowing ‘WHAT THE EFFING EFF DO YOU EXPECT ME TO DO WITH THAT LOT? 
HAVE YOU SEEN THAT CEE OTAMENDI? HE SHOULD BE HAWKING ARTISAN EFFING COFFEE IN 
THE EFFING NORTHERN QUARTER, NOT TRYING TO STOP ROMELU EFFING LUKAKU. AND DON’T 
GET ME STARTED ON EFFING JOHN EFFING STONES,’ Guardiola merely meekly conceded 
that the league title is beyond him and his merry band, for the moment.

“The first one is a 10-point gap and that is a lot,” he sulked. “The second 
one is three points, so we have to see. I spoke with the players for the last 
three weeks to forget about the table, focus on the next game and do our best.” 
Presumably those present restrained themselves from saying “That went well, 
then,” lest he burn out their soul with his most withering stare.

Not that it isn’t Guardiola’s fault too. For a start, it was his call to bring 
in Claudio Bravo, a man whose commitment to disproving the notion of nominative 
determinism should almost be applauded. Not by him, mind: he’s been so bad with 
his hands that (... wait for it …) if he tried to clap (... it’s coming …) he’d 
probably (... nothing you can do to stop it now …) miss! Ho! Take that, 
Claudio! Take that Pep! You have been lampooned!

It wasn’t all gloom at Goodison on Sunday, mind. The child Tom Davies, born 
roughly 20 minutes before taking the field (or thereabouts), produced a 
performance to bring joy to all but those with the blackest (or reddest) of 
hearts: all wild, Scot Gemmill-esque hair and lanky limbs, socks halfway down 
his shins and his a style of play marvellously natural and unspoiled.

“It is unbelievable,” he giggled after the game, in which he scored a goal of 
uncommon delicacy and poise. “I got a chance and managed to take it,” he 
continued, joyously, while standing next to another of Everton’s goalscorers, 
Ademola Lookman, who somehow manages to look even younger than Davies. Good 
lord how youthful they’d look next to the Fiver’s Purple Tin-withered mug. It 
was quite a contrast between his gleeful face, so young and innocent and yet to 
be scarred by the disappointments of life, and Guardiola’s grim fizzog, 
contemplating what cruel God has dumped him where he is.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“There are kids who have never seen me play and today they get excited and cry 
for a photo with me. Every day I feel the affection and love the Neapolitan 
people have for me. The father has transmitted it to his son, who has then 
transmitted it to his and this will never end. After 30 years the same love 
continues, like the first woman you have in your life” – it’s just one 
ego-massage for Diego Maradona as he returns to Naples to take part in an opera 
about how much he is loved, even by tax-knack officials who are said to be 
close to dropping a long-running case against him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fborn-roughly-20-minutes-before-taking-the-field%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F959b39750740ce4ec9e423b6ef5473481dfe6c38%2F0_100_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Born%20roughly%2020%20minutes%20before%20taking%20the%20field&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fborn-roughly-20-minutes-before-taking-the-field%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Born%20roughly%2020%20minutes%20before%20taking%20the%20field&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fborn-roughly-20-minutes-before-taking-the-field%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F959b39750740ce4ec9e423b6ef5473481dfe6c38%2F0_100_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 A whole lotta’ love. Photograph: Cesare Abbate/EPA 
FIVER LETTERS

“I suspect that Bill Iliffe’s issues may be deeper rooted (Friday’s letters). 
To be still wearing a hated kit a full ‘20 years later’ points to some clearly 
unresolved baggage” – John Pitre.

“Re Nick Cox’s letter (on the theme of inane commentary), it’s not exactly a 
rush to buy Dali’s work, but apparently an entire town in China is being built 
to match Dali’s home town in Catalonia,according to Big Website 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/aug/10/salvador-dali-town-recreated-china>
. This actually does seem surreal” – Christopher Smith.


“‘Well, Martin, he was never going to beat him in a foot-race … ’ If it was a 
hot-air balloon race, however” – Steve Horrigan.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is … John Pitre.


RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join AC Jimbo and co for the latest thrilling instalment of Football Weekly.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/footballweekly>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fborn-roughly-20-minutes-before-taking-the-field%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8f6c963d8961297225fb75cb38309fe3c862230%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Born%20roughly%2020%20minutes%20before%20taking%20the%20field&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fborn-roughly-20-minutes-before-taking-the-field%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Born%20roughly%2020%20minutes%20before%20taking%20the%20field&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fborn-roughly-20-minutes-before-taking-the-field%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8f6c963d8961297225fb75cb38309fe3c862230%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Podtastic! 
SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/uk?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

NEWS, BITS AND BOBS

The former football coach Barry Bennell has pleaded not guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/former-football-coach-barry-bennell-pleads-not-gulity-sexual-assault-charges>
 to eight sexual assault charges at Chester Crown Court.

Jürgen Klopp has jabbed his finger in the direction of the dormant volcano 
that serves as Fifa’s lair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/liverpool-football-jurgen-klopp-joel-matip-fifa-cameroon-manchester-united>
 in an attempt to make their admin bods decide one way or the other if Joel 
Matip – who says he is retired as a Cameroon international – can play for 
Liverpool while the Africa Cup of Nations is ongoing.

Chinese Super League suits have brought forward rules that will limit foreign 
players in teams to three – as well as other measures – to help prevent clubs 
fromKLF-ing their cash <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i6q4n5TQnpA> on 
career-burning mercenaries.


Middlesbrough are hoping to party like it’s 2014-15 all over again by signing 
Patrick Bamford from Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/patrick-bamford-joining-middlesbrough-from-chelsea-transfer-window>
.

And good news for trendy Amsterdam nightspots. Nightclub Patrick’s son, 
Justin, has made his Ajax debut aged just 17. “Words can’t describe how proud I 
am,” sobbed his pops.

STILL WANT MORE

Donald McRae gets his chat on with USA! USA!! USA!!! soccerball star Alex 
Morgan, who takes aim at Fifa andlays out her hopes for the future after her 
move to Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/alex-morgan-us-soccer-football-fifa-lyon-women-equality>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fborn-roughly-20-minutes-before-taking-the-field%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e3ed793265a004ba4b210b92753a9d3d1afc18d%2F0_122_4538_2723%2F4538.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Born%20roughly%2020%20minutes%20before%20taking%20the%20field&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fborn-roughly-20-minutes-before-taking-the-field%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Born%20roughly%2020%20minutes%20before%20taking%20the%20field&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fborn-roughly-20-minutes-before-taking-the-field%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e3ed793265a004ba4b210b92753a9d3d1afc18d%2F0_122_4538_2723%2F4538.jpg>
 Alex Morgan, earlier. Photograph: Harry How/Getty Images 
Ten talking points! Ten talking points! Ten talking points! Ten talking 
points! Ten talking points from the Premier League this weekend!Go on, count 
them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/16/premier-league-10-talking-points-southampton-manchester-city>
.

Sid Lowe on that Sergio Ramos own goal that brought Madrid’s unbeaten run 
shuddering to a halt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/16/sevilla-end-real-madrids-run-as-sergio-ramos-shows-sense-of-theatre-again>
.


What do footballers do while recovering from long-term injuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-agony-and-the-ecstasy/2017/jan/16/footballers-long-term-injuries-gundogan-manchester-city>
, asks Richard Foster, inviting trouble.

Mr Bojan goes? Erm, that and other transfer rumours in this here Mill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/football-transfer-rumours-gerard-pique-to-arsenal-or-chelsea>
.

Paulo Sousa silenced the hunchback taunts by putting Juventus in a 
straightjacket,roars Paolo Bandini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/16/paulo-sousa-hunchback-taunts-juventus-fiorentina-dans>
.

Milutin Sredojevic has taken Uganda to their first Cup of Nations in 40 years 
and their first match, against Ghana, is a steamy repeat of the 1978 final,
writes Ed Aarons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-uganda-ghana-micho>
.

How does Alexis Sánchez cope with the grind of the big city? By finding 
comfort in the positive vibrations of his labradors,reveals Simon Burnton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/16/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-pet-labradors>
, obviously.

Jürgen Klopp’s diamond surprise sounds like a special pudding when in fact it 
was a crafty tactical plan used in the 1-1 draw between Man Utd and Liverpool. 
Here’sMichael Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp-manchester-united-liverpool-tactics>
.


The Dozen, for all your snazzy football photo needs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2017/jan/15/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-premier-league-photos>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>!


WHAT HAPPENS WHEN GROUNDSTAFF GET COCKY 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bi2VfekdlYM>
 