
Eddie Howe has admitted Bournemouth’s record signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/14/bournemouth-sign-liverpool-winger-jordon-ibe-club-record>
 Jordon Ibe has been “a disappointment” and blamed the large number of summer 
arrivals for his side’sfailure to progress in the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/millwall-bournemouth-fa-cup-match-report>
.

Bournemouth comprehensively lost their third-round tie at League One Millwall 
3-0 on Saturday after making 11 changes to the team that played theprevious 
league fixture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/bournemouth-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
. Afterwards Howe said he had been “excited” by the line-up he selected, but 
admitted they had failed to perform.

The match also provided a rare start for the £15m Ibe, but the former 
Liverpool winger failed to make a mark. “He hasn’t been a regular in the team 
and that will be a disappointment for him and for us.” Howe said of the 
Bermondsey-born forward. “I still feel there’s a lot of potential in there, but 
obviously he’s got to fulfil that when he gets chances like today.

“We picked players that we haven’t seen regularly in the Premier League, we 
gave them an opportunity to express themselves‚” he went on. “Individually they 
are very good players so I was excited to see it. Obviously the reality proved 
different.”

Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> have now been 
knocked out of both domestic cup competitions after making wholesale 
alterations, losing 3-2 at home to Preston of the Championship in the EFL Cup 
this season. Howe insisted that the changes themselves had not been the cause 
of defeat, but rather a lack of familiarity between the players. Four of the 
starting XI at Millwall joined the club last summer.

“Last season and the season before we were very good in the cups,” Howe said. 
“We made wholesale changes and went on some really good runs. So it’s a 
surprise that this year it hasn’t been the same. But I think the reason for 
that would be the number of summer signings we’ve made and put together in the 
team. They haven’t quite gelled. I expected that early in the season, but you 
get to this point and you’d have expected better cohesion from the team today.”

Howe returns to the Premier League now facing defensive problems. Nathan Aké 
has beenrecalled to Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/nathan-ake-recalled-bournemouth-chelsea>
 from his loan period, Marc Wilson, a summer signing from Stoke, hobbled off in 
the dying minutes of the Millwall match and Simon Francis is serving a 
suspension after being sent off against Arsenal, a decision Bournemouth failed 
to have overturned on appeal.

One consolation for Howe, who admitted he may have to enter the transfer 
market to find replacements, was the return to the side of Tyrone Mings. The 
former Ipswich man, a former record signing for the south coast club, made only 
his second start for the team againstMillwall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/millwall>, having ruptured a cruciate 
ligament only six minutes into his debut for the team at the start of last 
season. “I thought Tyrone gave his all in the game,” Howe said. “But as I say, 
it’s difficult to sit here and speak glowingly about people on the back of that 
performance.”

A final member of Saturday’s FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> side, the 22-year-old USA 
international Emerson Hyndman, looks set to leave on loan and join up with 
Rangers for the rest of the season.

Millwall thoroughly deserved their victory – courtesy of goals from Steve 
Morison, Shaun Cummings and Shane Ferguson – and go into Monday night’s draw 
with the knowledge that they are capable of beating sides from the top flight.
 