
Bovis Homes <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bovishomesgroup>, one of 
Britain’s biggest housebuilders, has issued a profit warning, sending shivers 
through the sector.

Bovis said it would complete about 180 fewer homes than expected 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/bovis-homes-group--bvs-/rns/pre-close-update/201612280700147955S/>
 this year, blaming operational issues. It expects between 3,950 and 4,000 
completions, rather than the 4,170 forecast by the City, a fall that will 
affect profits.

Bovis now expects pre-tax profit for 2016 of £160m-£170m, compared with 
analysts’ forecasts of about £183m. Revenues are expected to total 
£1.04-£1.06bn.

 “We have experienced slower-than-expected build production across the group’s 
sites during December, resulting in approximately 180 largely built and sold 
private homes that were expected to complete in 2016 being deferred into early 
2017,” it said.

The unscheduled stock market announcement, which followed a prediction of 
record annual revenues in November, took investors by surprise. Shares in Bovis 
dropped by 5.3% to 811p, making it the biggest faller on the FTSE 250. Other 
housebuilders were also hit, including Persimmon, Barratt, Crest Nicholson and 
Berkeley Group.

Russ Mould, investment director at the stockbroker AJ Bell, said: “A profit 
warning from FTSE 250 firm Bovis is another crack in the wall when it comes to 
the housebuilders sector.”

Bovis insisted there was no impact from the Brexit vote in June. A spokesman 
said there had been delays in getting the final sign-off for 180 houses before 
the end of the year, so people had not moved in yet – a logistical issue rather 
than a fundamental problem, he said. The production delays mean that instead of 
5% growth in house completions this year, there will be growth of 0% to 2%.

Mould said the numbers implied that completions in the second half fell by 
1%-2% year on year, “raising questions as to whether the market is slowing down 
in a post-Brexit [vote] world after all”.

Bovis said its average sale price was up by about 10% this year to £255,000. 
Mould said this implied a “marked second-half deceleration, as prices rose 14% 
to an average of £254,500 in the first six months of this year”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbovis-profit-warning-investors-surprise-housebuilder-shares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdea34513674bcdc672eed0ce9acc6c24d8d715d%2F18_11_751_451%2F751.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bovis%20profit%20warning%20takes%20investors%20by%20surprise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbovis-profit-warning-investors-surprise-housebuilder-shares%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bovis%20profit%20warning%20takes%20investors%20by%20surprise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbovis-profit-warning-investors-surprise-housebuilder-shares%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdea34513674bcdc672eed0ce9acc6c24d8d715d%2F18_11_751_451%2F751.jpg>
 Photograph: Company accounts/AJ Bell 
 The housebroker Numis cut its 2016 profit forecast by 11% to £165m, but left 
its 2017 estimate unchanged at £196m.

The Numis analyst Chris Millington said: “Obviously it is disappointing to 
reduce forecasts again and in our view this reflects company-specific factors, 
with the fundamentals of the new-build market remaining robust [although with 
flatter house price inflation and some cost inflation] due to the help-to-buy 
scheme and low mortgage rates.”

The coming year is set to be the first since the financial crash of 2008 in 
which the UK builds 200,000 homes, the housebuilder Redrow predicted on 
Wednesday.

The government has set a target of building 1m homes by 2020 and a £2.3bn 
housing infrastructure fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/24/housing-gets-4bn-boost-to-increase-number-of-new-homes>
 was unveiled in the autumn statement last month, which was welcomed by the 
industry.Shortly before the EU referendum, a group of 17 UK housebuilders – 
including Berkeley, Barratt and Crest Nicholson, but not Bovis – warned that a 
vote to leave the EU would make itharder and more expensive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/11/brexit-will-mean-fewer-new-homes-being-built-major-housebuilders-say>
 to build homes.

The property market slowed straight after the Brexit vote but has held up 
better than expected along with the rest of the economy in the months since 
June.

However, analysts expect the economy and house price growth to slow sharply 
next year. Savills, the upmarket estate agent, is forecasting thathouse prices 
will flatline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/04/end-property-boom-uk-house-prices-flatline-savills-forecast>
 next year after five years of increases, while Britain’s biggest mortgage 
lender, Halifax, is predicting growth ofbetween 1% and 4% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/28/uk-house-prices-to-rise-marginally-in-2017-says-halifax>
 for the UK and price falls in London.
 