
Brad Barritt wants Saracens’ European campaign to reach another level this 
season after recent near-misses in the northern hemisphere’s flagship club 
competition.

Saracens, European runners-up in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/24/toulon-saracens-heineken-cup-final-match-report>
,Champions Cup semi-finalists last term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/18/clermont-auvergne-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-report>
 and last-four contenders in 2013, face an immediate test of their credentials 
when the French heavyweights Toulouse arrive at Allianz Park on Saturday.

Wasps were the last English club to be crowned European champions eight years 
ago, since when the tournament has been a tale of Irish and French dominance.

“We have gone very close to it,” said the England centre Barritt, who will 
captain aSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> team shorn of 
their key flanker Jacques Burger due to suspension. “We’ve been in the final 
and semi-finals over the past three years, and this is our year to take it to 
another level.

“It is definitely time we had an English winner. The Premiership is getting 
more competitive every year, and it’s now time for us to show that a few 
English teams can get through. In the past couple of years we’ve been the only 
ones, but I am pretty certain that the others will go a bit further this year, 
too.”

Saracens and Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> are joined 
in Pool One by the French newcomers Oyonnax and 1999 European champions Ulster, 
with the group winners guaranteed a quarter-final place.

Saracens’ rugby director, Mark McCall, said: “The lesson that all the teams 
have learned, really, is that you have to pick up every point you can when it 
is available. Last season, we qualified for the quarter-finals as the 
eighth-placed team, but we got that by virtue of a losing bonus point that we 
got away from home, and you have just got to fight for every point in the 
competition.

“Toulouse are a great European team with a great European pedigree, but they 
are also playing very well this season. They have won six games out of seven in 
the Top 14 already this season, and they beat Montpellier in Montpellier, so 
that shows you they can win away from home as well.”

For Toulouse, Saturday’s game will be their first European fixture without the 
new France coach Guy Novès at the helm, but they appear as powerful as ever, 
with Les Bleus captain Thierry Dusautoir leading a team to Hertfordshire that 
also includes Maxime Médard, Gaël Fickou, Luke McAlister and Louis Picamoles.

“It has been an easy transition,” the full-back Médard said. “We have a lot of 
the same players as last season, and we have not changed the Toulouse game 
plan. We are playing as we have done for a long time. We put the fundamentals 
in place and build from there.”

George Ford: Being dropped by England will always drive me on. It really hurt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/13/george-ford-england-rugby-world-cup-bath-stuart-lancaster-sam-burgess>
Northampton, after an indifferent start to their Premiership campaign, host 
Pool Three opponents Scarlets on Saturday knowing that they cannot afford to 
come unstuck, given a tough group which also includes Glasgow and Racing 92, 
who meet in Paris. The Wales wing George North will line up for the Saints 
against his former team, and Scarlets will arrive in the east Midlands after 
winning six out of seven Pro12 games this season.

“We are going in with an open mind,” the Scarlets head coach, Wayne Pivac, 
said. “We have got everything to gain and nothing to lose. We’re probably 
seeded last in the pool on last year’s results but we are going to take it game 
by game. We will look at each opposition in its own right, and each will be a 
huge challenge in different ways.”

Three English clubs will be in Champions Cup action on Sunday, highlighted by 
Bath facing a demanding opening Pool Five assignment away against the European 
title holders Toulon. After a European buildup dominated by the Sam Burgess 
saga and hisreturn to rugby league in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/05/sam-burgess-bath-rugby-union-league>
, Bath can get back to business, with the South Africa World Cup flanker 
Francois Louw captaining a team in which he will pack down alongside back-row 
colleagues Matt Garvey and Leroy Houston.

In the same pool, Wasps will be without the England flanker James Haskell, who 
has a knee injury, for a Dublin appointment with Leinster. Exeter visit the 
Ospreys in Pool Two, minus the services of Thomas Waldrom, Geoff Parling, Ben 
Moon and Phil Dollman, but the England backs Jack Nowell and Henry Slade both 
start.
 