
According to the latest figures, 12.6 million UK adults lack basic digital 
skills and 5.3 million have never been online. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/uk-adults-computer-basic-digital-knowhow>
Only two thirds of disabled people have internet access, compared to 88% of the 
UK population as a whole, anda quarter of disabled adults 
<https://www.onlinecentresnetwork.org/sites/default/files/resource/files/disability_handbook-with_links-final.pdf>
 have never been online.Research <http://www.clickawaypound.com> published this 
month also found that nearly three quarters of people with disabilities 
experience problems accessing many websites. The question is whether the 
government’s long-awaited digital strategy will address these issues.

Yet digital technology can also provide the means for people with disabilities 
or physical and mental health conditions to lead more independent, fuller lives 
and participate in activities that would otherwise not be possible. More than a 
quarter of the entries to this year’sNominet Trust 100 
<http://socialtech.org.uk/> use technology to promote inclusion. This annual 
list identifies the most inspiring examples across the globe of technology used 
for social good, and is published on 14 December.

Several entrants focus on using communication to boost inclusion. The Open 
Voice Factory <http://www.theopenvoicefactory.org/>, for example, is the first 
open-source software providing communication aids. According to Joe Reddington, 
one of its co-founders,more than 30,000 people 
<http://www.communicationmatters.org.uk/sites/default/files/downloads/projects/aac_evidence_base/2013_Shining_a_Light_on_AAC.pdf>
 in the UK need a device to help them speak but at £2,000 cannot afford 
standard aids. “We produce a free web app that can be put on a much cheaper 
tablet that you might already have at home,” he says. The software – in the 
final stages of testing – allows family or carers to customise it with personal 
vocabulary, stories and in-jokes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftechnology-changes-lives-disabled-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71adab48bb8bcc70a26b8a0844b19fbcb4aba31b%2F0_20_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Braille%20smartwatches%2C%20bespoke%20wheelchairs...%20technology%20that%20matters%20%7C%20Anna%20Bawden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftechnology-changes-lives-disabled-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Braille%20smartwatches%2C%20bespoke%20wheelchairs...%20technology%20that%20matters%20%7C%20Anna%20Bawden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftechnology-changes-lives-disabled-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71adab48bb8bcc70a26b8a0844b19fbcb4aba31b%2F0_20_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Nightscout enables people with type 1 diabetes to share glucose levels. 
Photograph: Sriram Bala 
Hand Talk <http://www.handtalk.me/> is an app that instantly translates text 
or audio into sign language with the help of a virtual interpreter, Hugo, so 
that deaf people can communicate in real time with anyone, anywhere.EVA Park 
<http://smcse.city.ac.uk/eva/>, developed by the Stroke Association-funded EVA 
project at City University, London, creates a virtual reality environment that 
helps people with aphasia to communicate again.Disrupt Disability 
<http://disruptdisability.org/> has also created an open-source platform. This 
allows wheelchairs to be tailor-made, using an online library of free designs 
for different components; many elements will be suitable for digital 
production, including 3D printing. Its founder, Rachael Wallach, who has 
impaired mobility, explains the thinking behind it: “My wheelchair has over 30 
different elements that have been tailored to me,” she says. “But it cost 
£3,000. In a country like Laos, that’s six times the average annual salary, so 
it’s just not affordable.” The World Health Organisation estimates that more 
than65 million people 
<http://www.who.int/disabilities/publications/technology/wheelchairguidelines/en/>
 need a wheelchair, yet 80% – some 52 million – cannot afford a wheelchair or 
one customised to their needs.
 Dot Watch, the first braille smartwatch 
Not all the Nominet Trust 100 entries are designed to make products more 
affordable.Dot Watch <http://fingerson.strikingly.com/>, described as the first 
braille smartwatch, provides social media, news and messages, and is due to go 
on sale in the UK next year with a price tag of around £2,500.

Pips 
<http://www.nominet.uk/researchblog/how-to-build-your-own-smart-iot-buttons/> 
are bluetooth-enabled, palm-sized buttons attached to walls and furniture. They 
emit beeps when pressed, to turn walking into a game, thereby helping children 
with no or partial sight to learn to walk confidently. Another movement entrant,
Walk With Path <http://www.walkwithpath.com/products>, has developed two shoe 
products that reduce the risk of falls in vulnerable people. The first,Path Feel
 <http://www.walkwithpath.com/?lightbox=dataItem-ihwagisj>, is an insole that 
helps wearers with sensory deficit on the bottom of their feet, such as people 
with diabetes or multiple sclerosis, to feel the floor better by enhancing 
sensory perception of the environment, allowing them more confident movement. 
The second, Path Finder, is specially designed for Parkinson’s patients who 
suffer from freezing of gait, where they feel as if their feet suddenly become 
glued to the floor. A small device is attached to the shoe to prevent this 
sensation. Both products will be available in 2017.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftechnology-changes-lives-disabled-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34851f307519a94a681c553997b9b69661e277d5%2F0_57_3936_2362%2F3936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Braille%20smartwatches%2C%20bespoke%20wheelchairs...%20technology%20that%20matters%20%7C%20Anna%20Bawden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftechnology-changes-lives-disabled-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Braille%20smartwatches%2C%20bespoke%20wheelchairs...%20technology%20that%20matters%20%7C%20Anna%20Bawden&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Ftechnology-changes-lives-disabled-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34851f307519a94a681c553997b9b69661e277d5%2F0_57_3936_2362%2F3936.jpg>
 Walk With Path and Path Finder help people to walk confidently 
Seven projects that make the top 100 focus on safety. They include Tootoot 
<https://tootoot.co.uk/>, a safeguarding app to allow pupils to report bullying 
anonymously and teachers to act on it more quickly. Health projects also 
feature prominently.Nightscout <http://www.nightscout.info/> helps patients 
with type 1 diabetes to share glucose levels, while three products (MyBivy, 
<https://www.facebook.com/MyBivy/> Bravemind 
<http://medvr.ict.usc.edu/projects/bravemind/> and SimSensei 
<http://ict.usc.edu/prototypes/simsensei/>) focus on helping people with 
post-traumatic stress disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/post-traumatic-stress-disorder>.

Perhaps the most unusual entrant is the South West Open Youth Orchestra 
<http://openupmusic.org/swoyo/>, the UK’s only disabled-led regional youth 
orchestra. Its founders, OpenUp Music in Bristol, have developed a range of 
digital instruments that can be played with any part of the body, including the 
eyes. “Being part of an orchestra is new to me. I love it, and feel a kind of 
freedom and belonging,” says Bradley Warwick, 21, who plays the clarion (which 
sounds like a digital organ) with his eyes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXQ9V96NQPg4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXQ9V96NQPg4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXQ9V96NQPg4&media=>
 The South West Open Youth Orchestra in action 
“Disability should never be a barrier to enjoying music and getting 
involved.”The government says it is still working with industry on its digital 
strategy, which includes improving access to technology. “We are working hard 
to help people who can’t use online services independently get the support they 
need,” says Matt Hancock, the minister of state for digital and culture. “We 
have also announced plans to make training in basic digital skills free for 
adults in England who need it, and have set up the Council for Digital 
Inclusion which brings together leaders from business, charities and government 
to come up with innovative ways to help everyone get online.” But for now, too 
many barriers remain.

• A full list of the Nominet Trust 100 can be found at socialtech.org.uk 
<http://socialtech.org.uk/nominet-trust-100/>
 