
Working on the theory that the best way to get what you want is to look like 
you don’t want it very much,Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> began her Brexit negotiations 
as she means to go on: with a very continental shrug of the shoulders.

Related: Theresa May's Brexit speech: 'No deal for Britain is better than a 
bad deal' - Politics live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-pound-steadies-ahead-of-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-politics-live>

Great Britain, insisted the prime minister, had been held back from its global 
destiny by aEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> that 
threatened to crush the individuality of its members in a “vice-like grip”. If 
it punished us for daring to leave, this would be a “calamitous act of 
self-harm” not by Britain – as most foreigners believe – but by the EU, which 
exports £290bn to the UK.

It would be a mistake, however, to assume this confident show of bravado means 
Downing Street is as ready to walk away from a “bad” exit deal as many will 
take this speech to imply.

The first clue to the prime minister’s ongoing need for more cordial relations 
with Europe in privateis her announcement of a second vote in parliament at the 
end of the process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
.

The pound rose on news of this commitment, after several days in which 
sterling was perhaps falsely depressed by talk of May promising “clean Brexit”. 
Asking MPs to sign off on the terms of the exit deal is a sign not only that 
the government still hopes there will be a deal to vote on, but that it may yet 
be rejected by parliament, leading instead to the messiest of departures.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Key points from Theresa May’s Brexit speech - video analysis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis>
This was not the only contradiction lurking behind the podium at Lancaster 
House. Despite appearing to blame EU membership for Britain’s lacklustre 
international trade performance, May also made clear she wished to maintain as 
much access to the single market and customs union as Europe would allow 
without demanding too much in return.

Industry-specific deals for nervous carmakers and bankers were dangled as a 
possibility. Not only one but several transitional arrangements would be sought 
so that nothing happened too abruptly.

A bespoke customs union was possible, she claimed, in which Britain may 
continue to benefit from “frictionless” supply chains while being free to 
negotiate its own tariff arrangements with non-EU countries. “We do not seek 
membership [of the single market],” she said. “Instead we seek the greatest 
possible access to it.”

What the European Union’s interest is in agreeing to these seemingly 
contradictory things was rather less clear, beyond the general assertion that 
trade was not a “zero-sum deal”.

To those who might wonder what the point of membership would be if Britain 
gets all this for nothing, the prime minister asserted: “We do not wish to 
undermine the single market,” insisting she still believed it was good for 
Europe, while simultaneously outlining her reasons for leaving.

May also had an answer for those who question her confident assertion that 
things will be fine. “Those who urge us to reveal more, the blow-by-blow 
details … will not be acting in the national interest,” she said. “Every stray 
word and hyped-up media report will make it harder to get the right deal for 
Britain.”

Sounding at times like a wartime leader warning that loose lips sink ships, 
the prime minister said it was “vital to maintain discipline” by not giving 
away any detail on how she planned to achieve the dozen ambitious objectives 
outlined on Tuesday.

In recent weeks, critics have suggested the lack of such explanations was a 
sign that the government lacked a clear strategy or, worse, perhaps evidence of 
“control freakery” inside No 10.

But May’s lengthy address will go a long way to reassuring observers that she 
has given the matter plenty of thought. The strong focus on a rosy future for 
Britain outside the EU was particularly well received by those who once worried 
her heart was still not really in Brexit.

The former Ukip leader Nigel Farage said he could “hardly believe that the PM 
is now using the phrases and words that I’ve been mocked for using for years. 
Real progress.”

Instead, the clearest indication of May’s negotiating strategy was her lack of 
tactical disclosure. This will be a stoic and stiff-lipped response to the 
referendum result – one she said that even those voted remain had a patriotic 
duty to adopt too.

The more we believe that Britain is relaxed if the continent is cut off by fog 
in the Channel rather than the other way around, the more likely the fog will 
eventually clear. Yet the fundamental tensions about Britain’s place off the 
coast remain.

Twenty-eight years ago, Margaret Thatcher launched her campaign for business 
to embrace the single market in the same venue, Lancaster House. “How we meet 
the challenge of the single market will be a major factor, possibly the major 
factor, in our competitive position in European and world markets into the 
twenty-first century,” said the last Tory woman to lead the country.

It could easily have been a line slipped into this week’s speech, too.
 