
As the disturbances in Birmingham showed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/18/birmingham-prison-riot-government-was-warned-two-months-earlier>
, our prison system is in urgent need of improvement. The justice secretary is 
surely right to emphasise the need both to restore stability and deliver reform.
The recruitment of 2,500 extra prison officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/04/liz-truss-to-launch-recruitment-drive-for-ex-forces-prison-officers>
will help make prisons the secure places expected by the public – and deliver 
the stability we need if reform is to become a reality.

With almost half of all prisoners currently returning to prison within a year 
of release 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Bromley%20Briefings/summer%202016%20briefing.pdf>
, after committing more crimes and creating yet more victims, we need to do 
much more to break the destructive cycles of reoffending. Truss understands 
this. She is a radical reformer. The justice secretary, like her predecessor 
Michael Gove, understands that while prison reform may not be a shortcut to 
political popularity, simply locking people up and throwing away the key is not 
the answer. Our prisons are at capacity. Our prison governors and their staff 
are working with limited resources. Successive governments have hinted at 
reform. Truss is now determined to deliver action, not just words.

Ian Acheson: ‘If you don’t have safety and control in prisons, you have 
nothing’ | Erwin James
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/20/hmp-birmingham-prison-riot-more-prison-staff>
The work of prison officers is central to effective rehabilitation, and to 
changing prison culture. If a prison truly has rehabilitation at its core then 
it needs to have a consistent focus on it, on the wings and landings as well as 
in the workshops and classrooms.

Yet when most people think of prison officers, they don’t think of the officer 
in HMP Belmarsh teaching illiterate prisoners the basics of how to write a 
letter so they can start to learn; nor the officer in a women’s prison who 
recently persuaded a prisoner to reconnect with her estranged mother so that 
her children could live with their grandmother, rather than be taken into care; 
nor the officer in HMP Wandsworth who talked an offender down from suicide and 
then helped him formulate a plan to turn his life around.

Prison officers are no mere “turn-keys”, or glorified bouncers. They are the 
unsung heroes of public service work. Effective prison officers manage, protect 
and rehabilitate some extremely challenging individuals, people who teachers 
and social workers have often been unable to help.

The job of a prison officer is challenging and complex, and those who do the 
job well act as mentors, counsellors, and educators to some of the most 
difficult and vulnerable people in society. Turning around the life of an 
offender not only prevents future victims, it can also prevent 
intergenerational offending. Currently, 65% of boys with a convicted father go 
on to offend themselves 
<http://www.barnardos.org.uk/what_we_do/our_work/children_of_prisoners.htm>.

Over the past decade, the prestigious scheme Teach First has encouraged many 
of our top graduates to start their careers in teaching. There are similar 
programmes for police, social workers, and adult mental health. Today, we are 
launching an ambitious programme to recruit some of Britain’s best graduates to 
work in our prisons – to help make a reality of rehabilitation.

Unlocked <http://www.unlockedgrads.org.uk/> is a two-year graduate scheme that 
recognises the importance of the prison officer role, and will create a network 
of leaders to support a rehabilitation agenda. Our participants will have both 
impressive academic credentials and the personal attributes to be successful, 
such as interpersonal skills, resilience, and leadership potential. The 
programme will include initial training, as well as tailored additional 
on-the-job mentoring by existing prison officers. Throughout the two years, 
participants will also be studying for a master’s degree.

Our graduates will learn skills that no university can teach, and develop 
unique insight into how to help resolve some of society’s most challenging 
social issues. The programme will demand grit, strategic thinking, and the 
ability to handle extremely difficult situations. Our participants will be 
filling actual prison officer vacancies. They will develop expertise in 
communication, decision making, and complex problem solving. They will have the 
option to remain in the prison service, either as officers or as future senior 
leaders, or they may take up top posts elsewhere in the public or private 
sector.

Some will ask whether this is the right time to launch such a scheme. In our 
view it undoubtedly is. Truss is right that stability and reform must be 
delivered in tandem. Rehabilitation is not possible without stability. But only 
rehabilitation can break the cycle of crime.

 * You can comment on this article and others on our Your Opinions thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/your-opinions-an-exceptionally-joyless-brexit-and-hope-for-our-prisons>
, which opens every Wednesday at 10am  