
When a thick cloud of air pollution settled in over London last week, experts 
warned those with health problems to avoid strenuous exercise. Theadvice to 
Londoners 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/health/parents-warned-over-taking-babies-outside-in-london-as-air-pollution-levels-soar-a3409616.html>
 essentially boiled down to this: breathe less.


 Meanwhile, as Paris suffered a similar pollution episode – its worst in a 
decade – officials swung into action,waiving charges for public transport and 
restricting the number of cars 
<http://www.france24.com/en/20161207-paris-winter-air-pollution-worst-10-years> 
allowed on roads, alternately barring those with odd and even licence plates.

At the same time Paris mayor Anne Hidalgo joined officials from Madrid, Athens 
and Mexico City in announcing plans to get alldiesel vehicles off the roads by 
2025 
<http://www.c40.org/press_releases/daring-cities-make-bold-air-quality-commitment-to-remove-all-diesel-vehicles-by-2025>
. Diesel is highly polluting, emitting far greater amounts of dangerous 
nitrogen dioxide and tiny pollution particles than petrol, and cancause cancer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-18415532> to heart attacks.


Where is the world's most polluted city?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/02/where-world-most-polluted-city-air-pollution>
Despite the health damage it wreaks, governments across Europe, including 
Britain’s, have offered motorists tax incentives that effectively encourage the 
use of diesel, on the assumption – now being questioned – that it producesless 
planet-warming carbon dioxide than petrol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/11/call-for-pollution-tax-on-sales-of-new-diesel-cars-in-britain>
.

Doctors Against Diesel, a group formed last week to urge tougher action, says 
both the national government andLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
mayor Sadiq Khan must move quickly to protect Britons’ health.

 “If you’re going to design something that would effectively deliver a toxic 
substance into the lungs, you couldn’t do better than the diesel soot 
particle,” says Jonathan Grigg, a consultant paediatrician at the Royal London 
Hospital and professor researching pollution’s effects on children at Queen 
Mary University of London. “We need to get the current polluting, toxic diesel 
fleet off our roads as soon as possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbreathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cf80373da52a591fbfbf395d7a5855cd37c571e%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breathe%20less%20%E2%80%A6%20or%20ban%20cars%3A%20cities%20have%20radically%20different%20responses%20to%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbreathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breathe%20less%20%E2%80%A6%20or%20ban%20cars%3A%20cities%20have%20radically%20different%20responses%20to%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbreathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cf80373da52a591fbfbf395d7a5855cd37c571e%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 In 2008 German authorities established strict emission zones in Berlin, 
Hanover and Cologne. Photograph: Sean Gallup/Getty Images 
Last week, Khan rolled out a new system of air quality alerts at bus stops, 
Tube stations and roadsides, warning those who experience symptoms from air 
pollution to reduce strenuous activity. TheLondon Air Quality Network 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=London+Air+Quality+Network&oq=London+Air+Quality+Network&aqs=chrome..69i57j0l5.558j0j9&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8>
, based at King’s College University, said vulnerable people, such as those 
with heart or lung problems, should consider limiting activity too.

The mayor also announced a doubling of funding for reducing pollution. He 
plans measures including charges for the dirtiest diesel cars entering central 
London from 2017, an acceleration and expansion of the Ultra Low Emission Zone, 
tighter standards for heavy vehicles and a cleanup of buses.

But he does not have the legal authority to institute a ban, and has demanded 
the government take urgent action, including a diesel scrappage scheme.

Cities around the world are confronting problems similar to London’s. Some 
have been more aggressive than others, but overall, their experience shows that 
concerted steps to improve air quality do work, and they save lives.

Berlin is a notable exception to the story of the diesel disaster gripping 
much of westernEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. It has 
cleaned up its own fleet, installing pollution filters on buses and garbage 
trucks, and imposed tough rules on heavy goods vehicles. A strict emission zone 
bars older diesel vehicles, and rates of car use, which are already among the 
lowest in Germany, have dropped even further in recent years. Public transport 
is efficient and easy to use, with a two-hour pass costing just €2.70 (£2.25).

As a result, levels of the tiniest, most dangerous particles, known as 
ultrafines, fell 70% in just three years, says Axel Friedrich, former head of 
transport and noise at the federal environmental agency, and an adviser to 
government and advocacy groups. Next, environmentalists are pushing for a plan, 
now under court review, to require diesel cars to meet even stricter standards 
to enter Berlin and other German cities, he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbreathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F479b4199f4c185aef11de6fcaaec0b123f2a27fe%2F0_94_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breathe%20less%20%E2%80%A6%20or%20ban%20cars%3A%20cities%20have%20radically%20different%20responses%20to%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbreathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breathe%20less%20%E2%80%A6%20or%20ban%20cars%3A%20cities%20have%20radically%20different%20responses%20to%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbreathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F479b4199f4c185aef11de6fcaaec0b123f2a27fe%2F0_94_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 In November New Delhi experienced dangerously polluted air. Photograph: Rajat 
Gupta/EPA 
Kraków has the worst air in Poland – one of Europe’s most polluted countries 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2015/06/25/polands-smog-crisis-europes-most-polluted-country-in-trouble-with-the-eu-but-wont-cut-coal-emissions/>
. Every winter, heavy smoke wafts out of chimneys and blankets the city as 
residents burn coal in low-tech stoves to keep their homes warm.

After a long legal fight 
<http://www.clientearth.org/clientearth-win-air-pollution-case-in-krakow/>, the 
city is now moving forward with a ban on burning coal for home heating, to take 
effect in September 2019.

New York has also targeted heating systems. After an analysis found that 1% of 
buildings burning the dirtiest kinds of fuel oil were producing more soot than 
all the city’s traffic,officials made plans to gradually ban their use and to 
help landlords convert 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/27/nyregion/new-yorks-air-is-cleanest-in-50-years-survey-finds.html>
.

The changeover is already credited with saving hundreds of lives each year. 
It’s just one piece of New York’s air quality strategy, which also aims at 
slashing greenhouse gas emissions 80% from 2005 levels by 2050, says Mark 
Chambers, director of the mayor’s Office of Sustainability.

“Air quality is one of those things, you have to address it systemically,” he 
says. “You have to really be thoughtful and intentional about looking at all 
sources for pollution and addressing them with whatever means you can.”

Los Angeles, the city where American car culture reached its zenith, has also 
pushed hard to clean up its air. While it is still among the country’s worst, 
the smogs that once tightened Angelenos’ chests and made their eyes water are a 
thing of the past.

“We’ve made incredible progress, we can see the mountains in Los Angeles, when 
those of us who grew up here never could when we were young,” says Joe Lyou, 
president of California’s Coalition for Clean Air. Back then, in the 1960s and 
70s, “you couldn’t go outside, you couldn’t breathe”, on the worst days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbreathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f1ba2d8f3bdfd52601a37597741321b66587393%2F0_0_3001_2349%2F3001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breathe%20less%20%E2%80%A6%20or%20ban%20cars%3A%20cities%20have%20radically%20different%20responses%20to%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbreathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breathe%20less%20%E2%80%A6%20or%20ban%20cars%3A%20cities%20have%20radically%20different%20responses%20to%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fbreathe-less-ban-cars-cities-make-radically-different-responses-to-pollution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f1ba2d8f3bdfd52601a37597741321b66587393%2F0_0_3001_2349%2F3001.jpg>
 Los Angeles on one of its frequent smoggy days in 1958. Photograph: AP 
The dramatic improvement is the result of the most stringent air quality 
regulation in America. Inspectors even check the shelves of DIY stores for 
paints that are banned because the chemicals that drift off them contribute to 
smog. A statewide crackdown on dirty diesel lorries and a push to expand use of 
zero-emission vehicles are also a big part of the story.

In addition to the decades of regulation that have made American cars 99% 
cleaner than they were 40 years ago, cities like New York and LA have 
benefitted from American motorists’ distaste for diesel, which accounts for 
only about 2% of cars in the US.

Even China, whose atrocious air the World Health Organisation says killed more 
than a million people in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/27/more-than-million-died-due-air-pollution-china-one-year>
, has begun to confront its crisis. Beijing has used licence plate restrictions 
to limit the number of cars and set out plans to keep the oldest and most 
polluting vehicles off roads when air is especially bad. More importantly, the 
government has harnessed public anger over pollution to ploughbillions of 
dollars into wind and solar power 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-renewables-investment-idUKKCN0WQ1IU>, 
becoming the world’s biggest investor in renewable energy. Officials have even 
begun cancelling plans fornew coal-fired power stations 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-coal-powerstation-idUSKCN11T0ZQ> – a 
move with repercussions for the health of those living in Chinese cities, and 
for the planet.

India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, with air that is perhaps even 
worse, has been less aggressive. Prime minister Narendra Modi’s government 
blames the Congress party that preceded him for letting pollution fester. But 
despite promises to clean up, the official response has been ineffectual.

What's air pollution like where you are? Share your experiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/17/whats-air-pollution-like-where-you-are-share-your-experiences>
Last month, Delhi’s 20 million people suffered through the worst smog episode 
in 17 years, according to the Centre for Science and Environment. Officials 
temporarily shuttered a coal-fired power plant, halted all construction and 
demolition work and shut down many diesel power generators.

In a sign that Delhi has begun to acknowledge the problem – if not to solve it 
– officials also closed 1,800 schools for three days, asparticulate levels 
soared to 28 times the recommended maximums 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/world/asia/india-delhi-pollution.html?_r=0>. 

Tehran did the same when officials said a heavy blanket of smog had killed 412 
people in 23 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/tehran-shuts-schools-thick-smog-kills-hundreds-people-iran>
. In fact, Iran is home to the city that currentlytops the WHO’s most polluted 
list for PM2.5s: Zabol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/which-are-the-worlds-two-most-polluted-cities-and-why>
, near the border with Afghanistan.

So what does it feel like to live in a city where the air doesn’t make you 
sick? “It’s nice,” Berlin’s Friedrich said with a laugh, adding that his 
neighbourhood in the south-western quarter is one of the cleanest. “My air 
quality is like the countryside.”

Beth Gardiner’s book on air pollution will be published by Portobello Books 
and the University of Chicago Press in 2018.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 