
Brendan Benson has played down the possibility of a third Raconteurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/raconteurs> album, revealing that although 
most of the band members live in Nashville, they never get together. Six years 
after their last album and four since their last gig, a follow-up to Consolers 
of the Lonely is “kind of off the table”.

“It could very well happen, or not,” Benson said in an interview with Billboard
 
<http://www.billboard.com/articles/events/sxsw/5937566/sxsw-brendan-benson-comfy-as-label-head-says-raconteurs-comebacks-off>
 (via NME <http://www.nme.com/news/the-raconteurs/76154>). 


While the Raconteurs never announced that they were parting ways, the band’s 
frontman suggested their current hiatus is more like a split. “We never planned 
anything,” he said. “We never planned a breakup. It always felt spontaneous. I 
liked that about it, too.”

Both Raconteurs albums debuted in the UK’s top 10 and both were awarded gold 
sales certificates. But since taking the Raconteurs to festivals such as 
Glastonbury, where they played in 2008, Benson and bandmateJack White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/jack-white> have turned their attention to 
other projects.

 Benson released new solo LPs in 2009, 2012 and 2013, and White made a host of 
recordsincluding Rome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/06/danger-mouse-album-film>, the 
Dead Weather’s Sea of Cowards, and his own solo debut. In recent months, White 
has been focused on a string ofDead Weather singles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/03/dead-weather-release-new-singles>
, his own new album, and a collaboration withNeil Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/13/neil-young-jack-white-a-letter-home-album>
.

Benson, meanwhile, is concentrating on his label imprint Readymade Records. 
“Since I started the label, I have been going through this transition, and it’s 
almost like an identity crisis – like leaving my solo career a bit,” he told 
Billboard. “I’m still going to make records, but not at the intensity at which 
I was doing it … I fed my ego enough with my solo career that now it’s cooler 
to be more behind the scenes and helping other bands.”
 