
The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
 president, Jean-Claude Juncker, has blamed Brexit on 40 years of “lies” 
turning UK voters against the EU.


Juncker said the referendum result in June showed that “something was wrong in 
Britain”, as well as that something was wrong with the European project.

He said it was not surprising that large numbers of Britons had voted to leave 
the EU after years of being told the organisation was “stupid”.

The commission president was speaking in a YouTube interview in which he was 
presented with questions from Twitter users.

Brexit vote was rejection of economic status quo, says Jeremy Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/15/brexit-vote-was-rejection-of-economic-status-quo-says-jeremy-corbyn>
Asked why he believed British voters had decided to back Brexit, Juncker said: 
“This is a simple and easy question, asking for thousands of answers. Of course 
Brexit means that something is wrong inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. But Brexit means also that 
something was wrong in Britain.

“If, over 40 years, you are explaining to your general public that European 
Union is stupid, that there is nothing worth, that you have to leave, that the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> membership is not 
bringing any advantages to your populations, you can’t be surprised that the 
day you ask people: ‘Do you want to stay or do you want to leave?’ that a too 
high number of British – in the case we are discussing – are expressing the 
view that it is better to leave.

“On Europe there are so many lies, so many half-truths which are circulated 
around, that one cannot be surprised. But I am not giving to the British vote 
only that explanation. I do think there was a European message in this too.”

Asked about Juncker’s comments, a Downing Street spokesman said: “The language 
expressed by the president is a matter for him. Clearly, the country voted for 
Brexit for a number of reasons. Those were thrashed out during the referendum 
campaign.

“What is important now is that the government goes forward, acknowledges the 
will of the people as expressed in that referendum, and goes about the business 
of getting the best possible deal for the British people going forward.”
 