
Welcome to the Guardian’s weekly Brexit briefing, a summary of developments as 
Britain edges towards the EU exit. If you’d like to receive it as a weekly 
email, please sign uphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
 (and check your spam folder if you don’t see it in your inbox).

The second episode of Brexit Means…, our new Brexit podcast, is out now; 
Jolyon Maugham QC, professor of EU law Philip Syrpis and the Guardian’s Owen 
Bowcott and Jennifer Rankin join me to discuss the legal challenges to the 
government’s use of Article 50, and what happens when it’s triggered.You can 
listen to that here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2016/dec/20/deciphering-article-50-brexit-means-podcast>
.

Producing the Guardian’s independent, in-depth journalism takes a lot of time 
and money. But we do it because we believe our perspective matters – and it 
might well be your perspective too. If you value our Brexit coverage,become a 
Guardian Supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_Brexitbriefing_copy>
 and help make our future more secure. Thank you.

The big picture

This is the last Guardian weekly Brexit briefing of the year (we’ll be back in 
the first week of January). It’s almost six months since the referendum. And 
still no one knows what “Brexit means Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/22/brexit-means-brexit-when-is-big-question>
” will actually mean.

Appearing before the Commons’ new Brexit select committee last week, David 
Davis said there were still “quite a few decisions to be made” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/brexit-plan-will-not-be-published-until-february-says-davis>
 about the government plan, which would be published as soon as possible but 
“certainly not next month”.

The Brexit secretary said he was supremely confident the talks, which he 
apparently hopes will combine the article 50 negotiations and discussion of a 
future trade deal, could be wrapped up in 18 months.

That’s despite the fact that, by his own admission, pretty much “everything is 
negotiable” except Britain taking full control of immigration:in or out of the 
customs union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/18/theresa-may-given-stark-warning-about-leaving-customs-union>
 (there are four broad options),transitional deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/nov/21/what-is-a-transitional-brexit-deal-and-what-would-it-involve-theresa-may>
 (only if necessary and once the future relationship is clear),payment for 
market access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-secretary-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access>
 (maybe).

(Theresa May, reporting back to the Commons on her brief trip to Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/19/theresa-may-statement-brexit-eu-will-not-allow-uk-partial-membership-of-customs-union-trade-expert-warns-politics-live?page=with:block-5857fdd8e4b06683cdf1f212#block-5857fdd8e4b06683cdf1f212>
 last week – of which more below – said even less, if that’s possible, although 
she did repeat her wish that adeal guaranteeing the rights of EU nationals 
living in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/theresa-may-defends-refusal-guarantee-eu-citizens-rights-uk>
 and vice versa be agreed “early on”).

Meanwhile, the House of Lords released half a dozen reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords-brexit-reports>, some highlighting 
potentially alarming consequences of Brexit – and of the government’s 
continuing uncertainty about what it means.

The peers said an interim deal on single market access was urgently needed to 
prevent the loss of tens of thousands of City jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/urgent-brexit-deal-needed-to-avert-banking-job-losses-peers-to-warn>
, and warned new immigration laws couldcost London its lead in financial 
services and start-up technologies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/brexit-migration-rules-could-harm-citys-lead-in-financial-services-technology>
.

They added that the government had also underestimated the shortcomings in its 
expertise and the relative weakness of its negotiating position, and wasfrankly 
naive to expect a “free lunch” in trade negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/uk-naive-to-expect-easy-ride-in-trade-talks-says-lords-report>
:

The notion that a country can have complete regulatory sovereignty while 
engaging in comprehensive free trade with partners is based on a 
misunderstanding of the nature of free trade.

Helena Kennedy, the chair of the Lords’ subcommittee looking into acquired 
rights,warned of “deep anxiety” among EU citizens in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/eu-citizens-collect-proof-of-living-in-uk-helena-kenney-qc-lords-brexit-reports>
 and British nationals living on the continent – and called for a unilateral 
British undertaking to immediately guarantee the rights of the former.

The government will presumably now get a brief respite for the Christmas 
break. But the calls for greater clarity – and for a few fundamental decisions 
to be taken – will return, louder and more urgent, in the New Year.

With Theresa May saying she is determined to trigger article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
 before the end of March, the first three months of 2017 won’t be comfortable.


The view from Europe

The view from Europe was perhaps never clearer than in a rather sad video from 
last week’s Brussels summit in which EU 27 leaders laughed, chatted and 
embraced, while May appearedalone, friendless and with no one to talk to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/lonely-theresa-may-video-at-eu-summit-is-brexit-in-a-nutshell>
.

The image showed once more that the EU 27 have other things on their mind 
besides Brexit, which featured so high up their agenda that they devotedall of 
20 minutes to discussing it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/theresa-may-returns-to-uk-as-eu-leaders-prepare-for-brexit-battle>
 at an evening dinner to which May was not invited.

To be fair, that’s partly because there’s not a lot they can discuss until 
article 50 is triggered and the UK says what it wants. Once that happens, many 
of them reckon –according to the UK’s ambassador to Brussels, Sir Ivan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/eu-politicians-believe-trade-deal-could-take-decade-no-10-is-warned>
 – that a final EU-UK trade deal could take a decade or more to negotiate, and 
still fail.

An influential German official, meanwhile, said it was “a little bit naive” 
and “very ambitious” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/16/uk-naive-to-expect-eu-trade-deal-in-two-years-germany-says>
 to expect, as some in the government appear to do, that a trade deal can be 
concluded within two years.

 Meanwhile, back in Westminster

As so often, Westminster’s Brexit week consisted largely of Labour gradually 
shuffling towards a coherent strategy while government ministers tried to 
explain as little as possible.

David Davis’s appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/brexit-plan-will-not-be-published-until-february-says-davis>
 before the Brexit select committee (see above) was a fine example of the 
latter. On the former, the main Labour contribution came a few miles to the 
east, where his shadow minister Keir Starmer chose the London HQ of Bloomberg – 
scene ofDavid Cameron’s 2013 announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/22/eu-referendum-2017-david-cameron>
 that he would hold an EU referendum – tooutline his party’s position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/labour-must-fight-battle-of-our-times-over-hard-brexit-says-keir-starmer>
.

It was a tough brief. Labour’s stance on free movement is, to say the least, a 
broad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/16/andy-burnham-labour-wrong-to-put-single-market-ahead-of-immigration>
church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/26/labour-will-not-win-a-general-election-as-ukip-lite-says-diane-abbott>
, and the best previous explanation of how the party planned to hold the 
government’s feet to the fire while simultaneously promising to back an article 
50 vote whatever happenedwas by applying “moral pressure” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/15/mcdonnell-urges-government-to-adopt-labours-pro-investment-fiscal-rules-politics-live?page=with:block-582b0769e4b05c05c52f53d6#block-582b0769e4b05c05c52f53d6>
.

But, as you might expect from a former barrister and director of public 
prosecutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2009/sep/21/keir-starmer-director-public-prosecutions>
, Starmer gave it a good go. Labour had to be the party offering a consensus 
way between thegovernment’s push towards a hard Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/tory-eurosceptics-push-for-hard-brexit-eu-single-market>
 and theLib Dems’ appeal to disaffected remainers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/23/liberal-democrats-remain-voters-witney-surge-byelection-liz-leffman>
, he insisted.

This was, he said, “the battle of our times”, and Labour had to do its best to 
shape Brexit policy using “real opposition in real time”. There are still 
flaws, but it was the best explanation of the party’s policy yet. Just in time 
for Christmas, too.

You should also know:

 * The British Chambers of Commerce and the TUC made an unprecedented joint 
demand to Theresa May toguarantee the rights of EU nationals in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/17/theresa-may-urged-to-act-on-eu-migrant-rights>
. 
 * The Brexit vote was fuelled by poorer voters feeling they had little 
control over immigration and general mistrust of politicians and officials,
research found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/poorer-voters-worries-immigration-fuelled-brexit-vote-study-finds>
. 
 * Parliament’s joint committee on human rights said EU nationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/brexit-uk-deport-millions-of-eu-nationals-report-jchr-human-rights>
 in the UK should not be “bargaining chips” and mass deportations would be 
impossible.

 * Another study found 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/17/socially-isolated-voters-more-likely-to-favour-brexit-finds-thinktank>
 people who have little contact with those from outside their own 
neighbourhoods were much more likely to have voted Leave. 
 * Scottish ministers say they will call a second independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/18/nicola-sturgeon-seeks-more-powers-scotland-brexit-plan>
 if their concerns about single market membership are brushed aside. 
 * On a visit to Japan, the chancellor, Philip Hammond, said the country’s 
banks were “concerned” about Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/philip-hammond-japanese-banks-concerned-brexit>
. 
 * Promises made to the UK fishing industry about its chances of cutting the 
catch sizes of foreign fleets after Brexit were unrealistic,the Lords said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/17/fishing-communities-brexit-hopes-may-be-too-high-peers-say>
.

 * Former Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg said a transitional deal is “completely 
inevitable” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/brexit-transitional-deal-is-an-obvious-inevitability-says-nick-clegg>
 to avoid losing access to vital European intelligence databases. 
 * Lego will raise its UK prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/lego-to-raise-its-prices-in-uk-from-january-sterling>
 by 5% next year as it becomes the latest firm to respond to the plunging pound 
after the UK voted to leave the EU. 
 * Gus O’Donnell, the former cabinet secretary, would have advised the 
government against forming two new Brexit departments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/18/liam-fox-transitional-brexit-deal-must-be-break-with-status-quo>
. 
Read these:

In the Observer, Nick Cohen has an eloquent go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/brexit-leavers-fear-their-lies-will-haunt-them>
 at the anger and aggressiveness of some Leavers, the “sore winners... They 
have the victory, the field is theirs, but still they scream bitter abuse” at 
Remainers:

Why are the Leave campaigners so angry? Because they fear the demagogic rage 
and charlatan tricks they have used against others will one day be used against 
them.

Andrew Rawnsley reckons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/half-in-half-out-deal-with-eu-best-serve-50-50-britain>
 a long-drawn-out exit – a “half-in, half-out deal” – would probably suit 
Britain best, but no one can yet bring themselves to admit it:

It would be devilishly difficult to negotiate, but it wouldn’t be inconsistent 
with the will of a people almost evenly divided by the referendum ...Theresa May
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> probably intuits already 
that is where she will end up. She just doesn’t dare say so yet.

And Aditya Chakrabortty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/brexit-leave-voters-theresa-may-promise>
 says a “Brexit betrayal” is coming and asks what Leave voters will do when 
“the broken promises of Brexit” start to pile up. He points to “a multitude of 
frustrations, pushed through a binary vote” and wonders:

What happens when [Leave] voters realise that their vote for change – however 
loosely defined – means more of the same? When that call to take back control 
ends up with them playing the same old captive market, there to be ripped off 
by multinational capital. Who will take the blame then?

Tweet of the week:

Happy Christmas, one and all, courtesy of Nick Brown MP. See you next year... 
Diana Johnson (@DianaJohnsonMP) 
Another hilarious card this year from Nick Brown MP. pic.twitter.com/dsQJ2Y6qn3
 <https://t.co/dsQJ2Y6qn3>
 <https://twitter.com/DianaJohnsonMP/status/809770196714094592> December 16, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/DianaJohnsonMP/status/809770196714094592>  