
Britain will not have a Brexit plan until February but should be able to 
complete talks within 18 months and then go through a transitional phase of 
leaving the EU if necessary,David Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> has said. 


The Brexit secretary gave the clearest indications so far of the government’s 
thinking on how to leave the bloc, including that it will refuse to allow the 
EU any control over the UK’s immigration policy, as he appeared before the 
House of Commons committee on exiting theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

He said triggering article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/may-says-she-will-reveal-brexit-plan-before-triggering-article-50>
 before the end of March would set Britain on a straight path towards Brexit 
that would be “very, very difficult to revoke” but he also acknowledged the 
possibility of reversing the decision.


Government lawyers have argued that the article 50 process is irreversible and 
the UK would be legally bound to leave after that point. However, Davis 
suggested it could be feasible, though the chance is remote.

David Davis says government's Brexit plan will not be published until February 
- Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/14/pmqs-may-corbyn-brexit-david-davis-and-jeremy-corbyn-prepare-for-last-pmqs-of-2016-politics-live>
“There is a viewpoint, I think, which is only really fading, among some 
Europeans, that we can’t really mean this, that we can be persuaded to change 
our minds,” he said. “One of the virtues of the article 50 process [once it is 
started], it’s very difficult seeing it being revoked. We don’t intend to 
revoke it.” He added: “It may not be revocable – I don’t know.”

After Theresa May relented to Labour and backbench Tory pressure to publish a 
plan for Brexit, Davis said it would be released as soon as possible but there 
were “quite a few decisions still to be made” about the way Downing Street 
wants to leave the EU, including the impact on business sectors, justice and 
home affairs.


“It certainly won’t be next month,” he told MPs.

Despite the lack of a firm plan, Davis gave a series of hints about the 
direction of travel and argued that “everything is negotiable” within a year 
and a half of the formal article 50 notification in March. The deal would then 
take about six months to be agreed by European leaders, the European parliament 
and the British parliament.

His tone was slightly different from that of Philip Hammond, the chancellor, 
who saidearlier this week that all “thoughtful politicians” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
 were clearly in favour of striking a transitional deal with the EU to cushion 
companies from the possible consequences of Brexit.

There have been growing calls from business groups such as the CBI and the 
banks for a transitional period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/transitional-deal-would-reduce-brexits-risks-to-financial-stability-bank-of-england>
 to smooth the Brexit process but Downing Street has so far refused to confirm 
it will seek this from the EU.

Davis’s comments on immigration came as the prime minister prepared to travel 
to Brussels for an EU summit on Thursday at which she was expected to use the 
UK’s influence to shape EU migration policy while Britain remains a member of 
the bloc. A Downing Street official said: “There is a while yet while we will 
still be at the table [at the EU] and we think there are things we can be doing 
now to... reduce the numbers coming toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.”

Speaking at the hearing, Davis said the UK was not opposed to transitional 
arrangements if they amounted to a Brexit “implementation phase” but only if it 
was really necessary and after the deal had been nailed down.

“Whatever the transitional arrangement is, we need to know where we’re going 
before we decide on the transition,” he said. “It seems to me that it will be 
perfectly possible to know what the endgame will be in two years.”

In terms of the UK’s demands, Davis said he was looking at different models 
for customs arrangements but taking control of immigration would be 
non-negotiable in talks, so the EU would have no say over whether its citizens 
have preferential access.

“What we have to bear in mind is that we have to pay respects to the outcome 
of the referendum, and therefore it’s got to be clear control by this 
parliament,” he said.

Asked if he thought discussion of issues like preferential, skills-based 
migration for EU citizens would feature in the negotiations, Davis said: “No, I 
don’t. I think that the operation of that decision after we have left the EU 
will be in the national interest and that will affect all levels of skill – the 
judgment that the government comes to as to what’s necessary for universities, 
what’s necessary for business, and what’s necessary for fruit picking.”

Davis ran through four possibilities on the UK’s membership of the customs 
union: being fully in, fully out, a partially inside Turkish model of being 
inside the customs union but outside the single market, and aSwiss model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/04/brexit-norwegian-swiss-model-uk-sovereignty>
 of being outside the customs union but with customs arrangements.


He revealed the government was looking at the Norway-Sweden border as a 
possible model for how the border could workbetween Ireland and Northern Ireland
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/26/northern-ireland-republic-peace-brexit-border>
.

Pressed by MPs about whether the UK could really pay for access to the single 
market after the end of transitional arrangements, he said he wanted to keep 
his options open.

Davis made clear that the UK would seek a trade deal at the same time as 
negotiations over exiting under article 50, but that preventing non-tariff 
barriers to services was probably more important than stopping the imposition 
of tariffs to goods.

At a separate hearing of the Commons business committee, Greg Clark, the 
business secretary, told MPs that the governmentpersuaded Nissan to commit to 
its Sunderland plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/28/no-10-must-have-promised-nissan-something-say-former-business-ministers-anna-soubry-vince-cable-car>
 by reassuring the Japanese carmaker that it would try to secure tariff-free 
access to the single market for its UK operations.

It comes as May hosted rebel Tory MPs pushing for the UK to stay as close as 
possible to the single market, whose group has gained the nickname the “new 
bastards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/theresa-may-meet-tory-new-bastards-opposed-to-hard-brexit>
” after the anti-European MPs who caused trouble for John Major in the 1990s.

 They are calling for the prime minister to set out her strategy for Brexit in 
a white paper, but Davis told the hearing on Wednesday that the format and 
degree of detail had not yet been decided.


Responding to his appearance, the Tory MP Neil Carmichael, a supporter of Open 
Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/open-britain-mps-condemn-silencing-of-pro-eu-arguments-tony-blair>
, said:“The government should bring forward their substantive plans in a white 
paper, which David Davis himself suggested before he joined the cabinet.

“There is a mandate to leave the EU but there is no mandate for a hard, 
destructive Brexit. The terms on which we leave should be subject to rigorous 
debate and scrutiny – in parliament and the country.”

The government could publish the letter it sent to Nissan reassuring them 
about Brexit once concerns about commercial sensitivity had passed, Clark told 
MPs. The letter contains confidential information that could be used by the 
carmakers’ rivals, he said.
 