
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> warned European 
leaders that the UK is prepared to crash out of the EU if she cannot negotiate 
a reasonable exit deal in a speech where her tough talking rhetoric prompted 
key figures in Brussels to say that the country was on track for a “hard 
Brexit”.

Related: Theresa May's Brexit speech: 'No deal for Britain is better than a 
bad deal' - Politics live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-pound-steadies-ahead-of-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-politics-live>

The prime minister told EU counterparts that any attempt to inflict a punitive 
outcome on the UK would be an “act of calamitous self-harm” because it would 
then slash taxes to attract companies from across the world, in a one-hour 
address intended to spell out the country’s negotiating strategy.

Although May said that the UK could be the EU’s “best friend” if the article 
50 divorce talks went well, she also said she was prepared to walk away. “And 
while I am confident that this scenario need never arise – while I am sure a 
positive agreement can be reached – I am equally clear that no deal for Britain 
is better than a bad deal for Britain,” she said.

Eurosceptic ministers and backbenchers were quick to praise May, but her 
remarks also triggered a backlash from lead European parliament negotiator on 
Brexit, Guy Verhofstadt. “Britain has chosen a hard Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/hard-brexit-will-hurt-uk-more-say-eu-diplomats-and-business-leaders>
. May’s clarity is welcome – but the days of UK cherry-picking and Europe a la 
cart [sic] are over,” he said.

Related: May can think big all she likes. Britain’s about to find out just how 
small it is | Rafael Behr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-britain-prime-minister-speech>

Verhofstadt also delivered a tough response to May’s point about business. 
“Threatening to turn the UK into a deregulated tax heaven will not only hurt 
British people – it is a counterproductive negotiating tactic,” he tweeted, 
urging May to consider the concerns of 48% who voted remain.

Speaking at Lancaster House, London, the prime minister also committed to give 
both houses of parliament a vote on the final Brexit deal – prompting the pound 
to soar – although Downing Street was clear that the alternative to a 
negotiated exit would be defaulting onto thehigher tariffs of World Trade 
Organisation rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/uk-business-leaders-cbi-train-crash-brexit>
.

Setting out her government’s 12 priorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>
 for crunch negotiations with the EU 27, May made it clear that the UK would:

 * Take back control of borders, arguing that record levels of migration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/01/immigration-to-uk-hit-record-levels-in-run-up-to-brexit-vote-latest-figures-show>
 had “put pressure on public services” 
 * No longer be under the jurisdiction of the European court of justice, 
because “we will not have truly left the European Union if we are not in 
control of our own laws” 
 * “Explicitly rule out membership of the EU’s single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/theresa-may-to-confirm-uk-exit-from-eu-single-market-speech>
” because that is incompatible with migration controls 
 * Not stay in the customs union, but try to strike a separate deal as an 
“associate member” to make trading as “frictionless as possible” 
 * Not be required to “contribute huge sums to the EU budget” but simply pay 
towards specific programmes 
 * But would seek a “new, comprehensive, bold and ambitious free trade 
agreement” with the EU, and build trading relationships with countries beyond 
Europe as part of a “global Britain” strategy 
Related: Key points from May's Brexit speech: what have we learned? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>

Prominent Brexit supporters said the speech represented a clean break from the 
EU. Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, who led the Leave campaign, praised a 
“fantastic speech” on Facebook. He has been keen for the prime minister to make 
a clean break with the EU, rather than seeking to remain inside the single 
market.

The former Ukip leader Nigel Farage said: “I can hardly believe that the PM is 
now using the phrases and words that I’ve been mocked for using for years. Real 
progress.”

However, remain supporters in the Conservative party insisted the plan for 
Britain’s future economic relationship with the EU amounted to “single market 
lite”. Anna Soubry, who is a key remain supporter, welcomed the “language and 
tone” of the speech.


“What I am agitated about is that I believe that immigration benefits British 
business and I think we are making a serious and grave mistake by thinking we 
can cut the number of migrant workers without damaging our economy,” she added.

This position was echoed by Labour’s Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/tory-backbenchers-white-paper-theresa-may-brexit-priorities>
, who argued that May was right to attempt to replicate the “attributes of the 
single market” in a trade deal.

Starmer said May had committed to something that would mimic full membership. 
“The ball is in her court to deliver. We will hold her to that,” he said. 
However, he and Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn were deeply critical of the threat 
to slash taxes, which Corbyn said would turn Britain into a “bargain basement 
tax haven on the shores of Europe”.

The prime minister said she also wanted to secure the rights of the 3 
million-plus EU citizens who live in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/what-does-brexit-mean-for-eu-citizens-in-britain-and-brits-in-europe>
, suggesting that “one or two” countries, thought to include Germany, had 
refused to negotiate an early agreement over the issue.

May said she would accept a phased process of implementation of the Brexit 
agreement after 2019 but not anunlimited transitional deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-treasury-social-care-considering-lettting-councils-raise-council-tax-to-fund-social-care-politics-live?page=with:block-584ec363e4b0e02f2b16b5a7>
 that could plunge Britain into “permanent political purgatory”.

She also called on leave and remain campaigners to put the divisions of the 
hard-fought referendum behind them. “The victors have the responsibility to act 
magnanimously. The losers have the responsibility to respect the legitimacy of 
the outcome,” she said, claiming that business, MPs and the public wanted to 
“get on with it”.

Calling for unity in the UK, May said: “Because this is not a game or a time 
for opposition for opposition’s sake. It is a crucial and sensitive negotiation 
that will define the interests and the success of our country for many years to 
come. And it is vital that we maintain our discipline.”

The prime minister attempted to strike a conciliatory tone with the EU by 
promising to be a “best friend” to the bloc after Brexit. But she also claimed 
the EU had been too unbending in respecting the needs of a diverse set of 
nations, and too inflexible for British voters. She urged European leaders to 
learn from Brexit by not “tightening a vice-like grip that ends up crushing 
into tiny pieces the very things you want to protect”.

After delivering her speech, May spoke to Jean-Claude Juncker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jean-claude-juncker> and Donald Tusk, the 
presidents of the European commission and council, as well as to the German 
chancellor, Angela Merkel, and French president, Francois Hollande. A Downing 
Street spokesperson said she had told them that she understood Britain could 
not remain in the single market but wanted a deal in everyone’s interests, and 
said they had welcomed clarity and that Tusk was looking forward to 
“negotiating in a spirit of goodwill”.

Tusk also said it marked the start of a “sad process” but said that at least 
May was now being realistic.

Other European figures who reacted to the speech included the Czech Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> minister, Tomáš Prouza, who 
tweeted: “UK’s plan seems a bit ambitious. Trade as free as possible, full 
control on immigration... where is the give for all the take?”

The Italian newspaper, La Repubblica, added that Britain was not just leaving 
the EU but also the common market and “everything”. “It appears that Theresa 
May’s intention through negotiations with the EU at the end of March is ‘a hard 
Brexit’ – a very hard Brexit indeed.”

One of the biggest challenges for May will be the Irish question. A statement 
from the Irish government welcomed May’s commitment to retain close relations 
with the EU, saying it was an ambition they shared. It said it was ready to 
“intensify” engagement with other EU countries, adding: “Ireland will negotiate 
from a position of strength, as one of the 27 member states firmly in, and 
committed to, theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.”


Sterling was up nearly 3% to around 1.238 US dollars following May’s speech, 
although it dipped back to $1.234 in Asian trading overnight. It also rose 2% 
against the euro at 1.158.

Some Labour backbenchers were despairing about their party’s response, with 
one passionate remainer describing it as “shambolic”. Others were more 
constructive.


The former shadow chancellor, Chris Leslie, said Labour couldn’t provide May 
with an “alibi” for her hard Brexit plan.

“We should be trying to salvage membership of the single market but to throw 
in the towel and not even try to stay a member of the single market is 
sacrificing Britain’s economic future,” he said, arguing that some EU countries 
might accept reforms towards managed migration.

“Italy, Greece, Germany might think about amending that fourth pillar – and 
not to even attempt to ask them is waving the white flag. This is a massively 
important market – we need a bit of fight.”

He is planning to lay down an amendment calling for a better deal if the 
government is forced by the Supreme court topublish an act of parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/government-brexit-supreme-court-theresa-may-article-50>
 before triggering article 50.

Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, said it was wrong that there would be no 
referendum on the final deal. “The people voted for departure, they should be 
given a vote on the destination. This is a theft of democracy.”

Downing Street sources said the prime minister had discussed the speech with 
both the leaders of the Scottish and Welsh administrations on Tuesday morning. 
But despite these conversations, May received an immediate rebuke fromNicola 
Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/scottish-independence-vote-uk-single-market-exit-nicola-sturgeon-scotland>
 who warned the plan could be “economically catastrophic”.

Claiming that May was being driven by the “obsessions of the hard right of the 
Tory party”, Sturgeon argued that her demands for a special deal for Scotland 
were not being listened to.
 