
They’re still at it out there. “Sadiq Khan getting elected as mayor tells you 
all you need to know about London!” declares a self-described royalist and
Rangers <https://rangers.co.uk/> fan on Twitter: “[it’s] Becoming a 
muslim/immigrant shit*****e!”. Here’s someone calling themselves Deadpool 
commenting at the Daily Mail: “How in hell did this guy get voted as London 
mayor. Ooh I forgot, no English living in London nowadays”. And meet a woman 
from Yorkshire, keen on opera, plants and reincarnation: “I’ve been warning 
what imho is #Londonmayor’s intention – London caliphate”.

Nearly eight months on from his election triumph in May, the London-born 
London bus-driver’s son, “proud feminist 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/mayor/sadiq-khan-its-unacceptable-that-pay-and-career-prospects-can-still-be-defined-by-gender-a3292671.html>
” andgay marriage backer 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2279703/Death-threats-UKs-Muslim-MP-voted-gay-marriage.html>
 continues to be accused of coming from another land bent on placing the 
capital under sharia law. Never mind that Khan’s swearing in as mayor was
conducted at Southwark Cathedral 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-36235828> and presided over by a 
Church of England cleric, or that his first official function as mayor was 
attending aholocaust memorial event in Hendon 
<http://www.times-series.co.uk/news/14480446.Sadiq_Khan_attends_poignant_Holocaust_memorial_ceremony_in_Hendon/?ref=mr&lp=15>
. And so what if he returned to the historic English cathedral the other day to 
celebrate Christmas “and our way of life here in this great city”? In the view 
of a “proud Briton” tweeting from Norfolk, his real plan for Christmas was to 
cancel it.

And another thing. Khan has vowed to “DEFY Brexit” by working on proposals for 
London-only work visas, not because he and the city’s business leaders believe 
this would help buttress its economy in the uncertain years ahead, but simply 
in order to “maintain the number of migrants entering London”. That was not the 
view of a social media crank but theDaily Express 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/715172/Sadiq-Khan-defy-Brexit-London-open-visas-migrants-mayor-theresa-may-boris-johnson-trade>
. The article crossed the Atlantic. On arrival at the website of theco-founder 
<http://pamelageller.com/2016/09/london-is-open-muslim-mayor-sadiq-khan-vows-to-defy-brexit-and-offer-city-visas-to-muslim-migrants.html/>
 of something called the American Freedom Defense Initiative it was 
re-published beneath a headline in which the migrants it referred to were all 
Muslim, complete with a claim that Khan was eager to sustain their inflow 
because he has “close ties” to “jihadis, Islamic supremacists and Islamic 
Jew-haters”.

Bats in the belfry. The suggestion that London’s mayor, who for years has been 
an energetic champion of interfaith understanding and at the forefront of 
urging his fellow British Muslims to follow his example byparticipating in 
mainstream politics 
<https://www.fabians.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/FairnessNotFavours.pdf>, 
is engaged in a secret plan to fill the British capital with foreign jihadists 
is poisonous, imbecilic drivel. But as 2016 has taught us, ignorant fantasists, 
loudmouth bigots and dirty propagandists anywhere in the western world can no 
longer be just laughed at and dismissed.

They get rewarded with newspaper columns and radio shows, because the 
conflicts they stir up are good for business. They influence elections. They 
even win them. In the UK, they and their opportunist fellow travellers 
prevailed in the EU referendum. As the year’s end approaches, they are crowing,
smearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/nigel-farage-accuses-jo-cox-widower-brendan-cox-of-supporting-extremism>
, jeering and gleefully anticipating a 2017 in which their triumphs will 
continue across the West. They are hell bent on wrenching Britain out of the EU 
as quickly and completely as possible and the bees in their bonnets buzz that 
leaving will be just the start of a glorious restoration, a cathartic national 
purging of all that they recoil from as unnatural and unclean.

That is the new mood encircling remain-voting London with its 300 languages, 
its ethnic and cultural “super-diversity 
<https://www.ft.com/content/71d04768-63af-11e5-9846-de406ccb37f2>” and its 
Muslim mayor, the son of migrants from Pakistan. On bad days the capital can 
feel, more than ever, like an island of social and economic liberalism, not to 
mention Labour Party strength, in a blue Home Counties sea and, since 23 June, 
amid a wider national ocean that is swelling with resentment and rage.

The referendum outcome cannot be explained by geography alone: both Birkbeck 
professorEric Kaufmann 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/personal-values-brexit-vote/> and the 
British Election Survey 
<http://www.britishelectionstudy.com/bes-resources/brexit-britain-british-election-study-insights-from-the-post-eu-referendum-wave-of-the-bes-internet-panel/#.WGQH77aLQnc>
 team have shown how values, nostalgia and social psychology cut across spatial 
categories and those of income too; Scotland’sblanket “in” vote 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-36599102> shows the 
limitations of any town-versus-country characterisation of the EU result, as 
does the fact that some of England’s other big cities voted strongly to remain 
(Manchester, Liverpool, Bristol) while others opted narrowly to leave 
(Birmingham, Sheffield, Nottingham). But British voters in no English big city
region as a whole wanted to stay in the EU as heartily as London, which voted 
60% to remain. Look at the leave margins in Bolton (64%), Oldham (61%) and 
Wigan (64%) and grasp why Andy Burnham, Labour’s candidate to become Greater 
Manchester’s first directly elected “metro mayor” next year, has beenspeaking up
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/take-back-control-immigration-debate-labour>
 about doorstep concerns over free movement of workers.

Burnham’s stance and that of Khan, who says he voted for Burnham to become 
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader in 2015, could 
hardly contrast more sharply, reflecting a highly fragmented UK. The “London is 
Open” campaign Khan launched the month after the EU vote was the start of a 
sustained drive to maintain the city’s status as a magnet for international 
visitors, labour, investment and trade. It underlines the differences in 
attitudes between the millions of Britons in the London metropolis and the 
majority of their compatriots.

In so doing, it also underlines how the capital and its Labour mayor represent 
so much of what Brexit Britain resents and fears. It is the city the then 
British National Party leader Nick Griffin ludicrouslydescribed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/23/bnp-nick-griffin-question-time>
 in 2009 as “no longer British” and as “ethnically cleansed” of British people. 
It is the London Nigel Faragedisparaged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/feb/28/nigel-farage-ukip-immigration-speech>
 in 2014 as being like “a foreign land” because he heard languages other than 
English being spoken on a train from Charing Cross. What an irony it is that 
the UK whose independence from the EU the erstwhile Ukip leader so fervently 
craves is now likely to become even more reliant on “foreign” London, with its 
teeming immigrants, its “metropolitan elite” and that Muslim mayor, than it 
already is.

Dependency culture

Bear with me while I strap some armour on. I agree with Philip Hammond’s 
autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/24/london-and-the-chancellors-2016-autumn-statement>
 remark that “for too long economic growth in our country has been too 
concentrated in London and the south east”. I’ve no quarrel with the government 
protesting that it’s time to narrow the north-south divide. When people from 
elsewhere complain that “London gets everything” I, a dedicated Londoner since 
migrating to the capital from a very different part of England 37 years ago, 
can see what they mean. I am uneasy about the capital inhaling ambitious young 
people from all corners of the land and only breathing them out when they 
retire to Surrey. So it is not with any cavalier, Big Smoke sneer that I break 
it gently to Leave Nation that Remain City is going to go on giving it an awful 
lot of what it needs.

Here’s something else the chancellor said: “London is one of the highest 
productivity cities in the world and we should celebrate that fact”. He went on 
to note that no other economically big league nation has such a massive output 
gap between its first city and the rest. He could have rubbed some noses in the 
detail: London contributes a massive 23% of the UK’s annual economic output; 
London has been growing half as fast again as the UK’s nations and regions as a 
whole; thinktank Centre for Cities has calculated that London contributes 30% 
of all UK taxes that are dependent on growth - such as on income, land and 
property – which is as much tax altogether as the next 37 largest UK cities 
combined; a report compiled for Brexit poster boy Boris Johnson when he was
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayor found that the equivalent 
of £2,500 per Londoner is exported to the rest of the UK every year.

So, even as things stand, the rest of Britain gets a hefty subsidy from the 
capital. Roads and bus services in Barnsley (68% leave), schools in Boston (76% 
leave) and health services in Blaenau Gwent (62% leave) are all helped by the 
contributions of a workforce that speaks 300 languages and around 40% of which 
was born abroad. Most especially, they are helped by London’s financial sector, 
habitat of “the bankers” whose industry and employees continue, like it or not, 
to do a lot to keep the UK and its people afloat.

It’s hard to see that dependency decreasing. London’s economy has proved more 
resilient than that of the UK as a whole to economic shocks in the recent past. 
It came through the last recession relatively unscathed, its business 
organisations arestoutly upbeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/oct/18/london-business-chief-we-will-find-a-way-through-brexit-but-government-must-help>
 and Hammond has at least done some of the things, notably on affordable 
housing, the capital needs him to do if it’s to keep on propping up the rest of 
the country. Business rate revaluation, which will sees increases in the 
capital and the opposite elsewhere, have been criticised by Khan and the London 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry, yet may end up looking like the start of a 
national rescue operation. In the words of the Institute for Fiscal Studies: 
“It will contribute to the ongoing trend of the UK government becoming more and 
more dependent on revenue from London to fund services across the whole”.

But what if, as some detect, the capital’s power is already fading? Other 
European cities -Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/dublin-exploits-brexit-uncertainty-to-lure-firms-from-london>
, Paris, Frankfurt, Berlin, Amsterdam and more – have been making overtures to 
international City firms. Reports suggest that tens of thousands of Square Mile 
jobs could disappear if passporting rights – a mechanism enabling London 
companies to operate freely across the EU nations – are lost under the Brexit 
terms, an outcome thought increasingly likely as the prime minister makes 
immigration curbs her top priority. Companies in other sectors are putting 
investment decisions on hold until the departure deal becomes clearer. 
Construction haspicked up 
<https://www.ft.com/content/cb0e61fc-8a0f-11e6-8aa5-f79f5696c731>, but it’s an 
industry heavily staffed by non-British EU workers. Whatever its hopes of sunny 
uplands ahead, the country cannot afford to let its capital decline. So while 
it might gratify some to metaphorically slaughter the London cash cow, the 
Brexit Britain is going to have to keep on feeding and milking it.

Khan’s capital

When he crushed Tory Brexiter Zac Goldsmith to become mayor in May, Sadiq Khan 
did not expect to be spending much of the rest of 2016 and beyond coping with 
the consequences of leaving the EU. Having deployed his pro-EU views during the 
mayoral fight as part of depicting Goldsmith as a backwoods toff, he then 
played a prominent part in the remain campaign. This included keeping a promise 
toshare a platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/30/david-cameron-sadiq-khan-eu-remain>
 with David Cameron, despite the then prime minister havingdisgracefully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/apr/20/london-mayor-cleric-cameron-said-supports-is-confirms-he-backed-conservatives>
 joined in with the attempts to smear him as an apologist for Islamist 
fanatics. There was more to this than sticking to his word. Khan needed a 
working relationship with the then Conservative premier. He needed London to 
stay in the EU. The referendum outcome changed everything.


It had always been Khan’s intention to lobby national government for greater 
powers and resources, as his predecessors Johnson and Ken Livingstone had done 
– that’s par for the mayoral course. But Brexit has added urgency to that 
mission and with it some theoretical extra leverage. The Khan administration’s 
early dealings with Cameron’s ministers wereencouraging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/aug/01/sadiq-khan-bangs-the-london-drum-next-to-ministers-listening-ears>
: they seemed to get the point that London is different and that the country 
needs it to stay strong. Then came the dramas of the Tory leadership succession 
and a new government line-up under the mutely pro-remain Theresa May. Khan’s 
purchase with these has been variable, perhaps reflecting the new prime 
minister’s eagerness to break with the perception of Cameron and his coterie as 
London trendies, perhaps a lack of policy coherence on her part, perhaps her 
attitude to the London mayor himself.

As home secretary, May made her own small contribution 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3532474/Sadiq-Khan-isn-t-fit-Mayor-London-links-extremists-declares-Theresa-Tories-turn-heat-Labour-candidate.html>
 to Goldsmith and the Tory media’s dishonest “extremist links” attacks. Of more 
relevance now are stories of herannoyance with her chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/dec/14/is-the-government-truly-on-londons-side>
 for meeting Khan prior to the autumn statement without her say so. Would a 
prime minister sure of her ground have reacted so strongly? Would one firmly 
committed to giving London more autonomy in the national interest have allowed 
her transport secretary, Brexiter Chris Grayling, to dump an agreement made 
between his predecessor and Khan’s to devolve control of suburban rail services 
to Transport for London, seemingly for reasons ofpolitics and personal dislike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/sep/14/is-chris-grayling-really-sold-on-london-suburban-rail-devolution>
?

On the other hand, Khan and his housing team are pleased with that autumn 
statement deal on affordable homes brokered with housing minister Gavin Barwell 
(who is also minister for London and a London MP). Maybe in time Khan will 
extract more. The autumn statement promised to eventually devolve the adult 
education and work and health programme budgets to London government, so that 
provision can be designed and precious resources used to best local effect. The 
wheels of Whitehall are moving very slowly, though. Khan would also like London 
to run its own post-16 skills training and, ideally, secure much more direct 
freedom to spend taxes, especially property taxes,raised from the capital 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/gla_migrate_files_destination/Raising%20the%20capital_0.pdf>
in the capital in ways that he and the London boroughs see fit, although the 
latter in particular still seems a long way off.

He is, though, pressing on with developing the proposals that so inflamed the 
Express, for a London-only work visa which would enable London employers to 
continue to recruit workers from EU countries with ease. It’s not an outlandish 
idea: such “asymmetric” migration arrangements have been made in other 
countries, notably Canada. Khan is pleased to besitting down 
<https://twitter.com/MayorofLondon/status/758325834394599425> once a month with 
Brexit secretary David Davis, with whom he apparently gets on well. They have 
things in common: a Tooting council estate upbringing is the most obvious; past 
concerns about controversial extradition treaties is another.

Meanwhile, he’s getting on with the business of exercising the uneven spread 
of powers he currently has. As he says himself, he’s onlyjust getting started 
<https://social.shorthand.com/MayorofLondon/ngSvhNGApP/2016> in a job where it 
takes a long time to get big things done. He’ll come under heavy opposition 
pressure from the first working day of the New Year, especially over the 
ambiguous phrasing of his fares freeze pledge and the detail of his first 
budget. London Assembly Tories think he’s better at politics than 
administration and will eventually come unstuck. Tactically, he’s been quite 
defensive, sharply so at times, determined to give nothing away. His question 
time performances have been bus parking exercises, executed rigidly. To extend 
the football metaphor, he’s been more of a Mourinho than a Klopp.

In some policy areas Khan could and could maybe afford to be bolder. In time, 
he might do well to become more expansive about the city of opportunity he 
wants to build, and a more complete advocate for those many Londoners 
struggling to make ends meet. That said, he and his team have been pleasingly 
workmanlike so far. Their know-how and industry come as a relief after 
Johnson’s showy but complacent and sometimes slapdash eight years. Just as he 
weighed up and defeated his rivals to become his party’s mayoral candidate and 
then did the same to Goldsmith to punishing effect, Khan has sized up the job 
of bossing City Hall from a starting point on the practical Labour left and 
proceeded with focus and energy. It’s a task for a pragmatist, an 
alliance-builder and a persuader. He’s addressing it with application and 
energy.

His election win and his efforts in post so far should not be undervalued by 
the progressive left (whatever that is these days). It may seem small 
consolation for being battered by Brexit, terrified by Trump and depressed by 
the consolidation of Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader. But it already serves as 
an example being adapted by Labour politicians seeking to become “metro mayor” 
leaders of other English big city regions next spring.

Burnham’s immigration intervention puts a clear distance on the issue between 
himself and his party leader. Meanwhile,Steve Rotheram 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-merseyside-37024072>, Labour’s candidate 
for the Liverpool city region and Corbyn’s parliamentary private secretary, has 
echoed a Khan election campaign slogan by saying he would want to be “the most 
business-friendly metro mayor possible 
<https://twitter.com/Steve4LCRmayor/status/804430663927492608>”. Big city 
mayors may represent Labour’s best chance of surviving as a plausible party of 
national government.

As for everyone else, they will view Khan’s mayoralty much as they view London 
- with everything from delight to dislike, with some of the latter of the 
vicious variety triggered by places and people wrongly deemed irredeemably 
alien. Alas for those so afflicted, the country needs a thriving London. Its 
mayor can help that to happen, which is why, in 2017, Brexit Britain needs more 
success forSadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>.

Dave Hill’s book Zac versus Sadiq: the Fight to Become London Mayor can be 
purchased from theGuardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/zac-versus-sadiq.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 ordirectly from the author 
<http://davehill.typepad.com/double_q_books/2016/08/one.html>. 

• This article was amended on 3 January 2017 to recognise that voters in the 
area covered by the government’sLiverpool City Region devolution agreement of 
November 2015 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/liverpool-devolution-deal> voted 
narrowly to remain.
 