
We are entering a second dark age. But the light that flickers on the screens 
of our iPhones, from a five-second clip of a dog sliding on some ice, is 
blinding us to the encroaching blackness.

Our civilisation teeters at the abyss. We are 8th-century Lindisfarne monks, 
spotting black Viking sails on the horizon and hurrying to hide our illuminated 
manuscripts, before shaving our hair into tonsures to look less desirable to 
frustrated seafarers.

But barbarians come in many guises. Having farmed out the act of examining 
children to independent companies, plans are now in place tostop offering 
A-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/18/the-guardian-view-on-a-level-changes-loss-of-civilisation>
 in art history and archaeology to a relatively small customer base, or 
schoolchildren, as they used to be called.

The canary in the mine of British cultural life just expired. But who were 
these so-called “canaries” anyway, with their elitist lungs, presuming to warn 
of us of supposedly dangerous gas?

Where will tomorrow’s archaeologists come from? Who will carry out all the 
investigations needed as trophy infrastructure projects pulverise our buried 
history, destroying it for ever?

Planet of the Apes is based on the satire La Planète des singes, written by a 
Frenchman and so now inadmissible

Brexit Britain doesn’t care. Historians and archaeologists are just more 
“experts”, slowing down our thrilling progress towards the cliff, with their 
cumbersome facts and obstructive understanding.

Surely some ideas are inherently valuable in and of themselves. There could be 
no clearer example of the extent to which we have lost our way than the 
abandonment of art history and archaeology. Unless perhaps the new education 
secretary, Justine Greening, were to go on a long symbolic quest to seek the 
mythical holy grail and, having found the talismanic object, ancient vessel of 
incalculable wisdom and understanding, shat in it.

The downward spiral continues. Beneath its calculatedly contentious opinion 
pieces, the online version of theDaily Telegraph offers its digi-consumers the 
opportunity to agree with one of three off-the-peg notions. There are few more 
reliable indicators of the rapidly escalating banality of the world. The 
clouds descend.

Asked “Was the Norman conquest a good thing?”, seven-and-a-half thousand of the
Daily Telegraph’s purple-faced readers thought it worth clicking either “Yes. 
It made us what we are today”, “No! Throw off the Norman yoke”, or “Who knows? 
It happened. That’s all there is to say”. The last option, a presumably 
deliberate literary irony, economically expresses the fatalistic worldview 
common to Anglo-Saxon poetry, which the Norman conquest subsequently supplanted 
with its dry Gallic insouciance.

The question in question related to a humorous thinkpiece by the Brexit 
cheerleader andDaily Telegraph blogger Dan “Dan” Hannananananan, who was named 
“10th most influential person on the centre-right in the United Kingdom” by the
Daily Telegraph in 2009.

This genuine chart, which really exists, found Dan “Dan” Hannananananan only 
nine positions away from the coveted “most influential person on the 
centre-right in the United Kingdom” trophy, a small mirror on a stick that can 
be slid into the public’s brains through their ears to reflect what people are 
really thinking but dare not say, because of political correctness gone mad and 
Gary Lineker’s leftwing thought police.

But by 2011, Dan “Dan” Hannananananan had fallen 28 places to be merely the 
38th most influential person on the centre-right in the United Kingdom, like 
some kind of Enoch Powell-admiring elevator tumbling down the broken lift shaft 
of centre-right influence.

Nevertheless, Dan “Dan” Hannananananan’s role in delivering the pro-Brexit 
result in the recent national anti-immigration referendum will surely see him 
zoom up to the top of the “most influential person on the centre-right in the 
United Kingdom” chart this year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fbrexit-britain-genesis-myth-stewart-lee-history-archaeology-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71880bf2dc61db9a938057ce2ff32805fde204f8%2F0_0_1884_2665%2F1884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20Britain%20is%20desperate%20for%20a%20decent%20genesis%20myth%20%7C%20Stewart%20Lee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fbrexit-britain-genesis-myth-stewart-lee-history-archaeology-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20Britain%20is%20desperate%20for%20a%20decent%20genesis%20myth%20%7C%20Stewart%20Lee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F30%2Fbrexit-britain-genesis-myth-stewart-lee-history-archaeology-education%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71880bf2dc61db9a938057ce2ff32805fde204f8%2F0_0_1884_2665%2F1884.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
Most awards ceremonies are interminable, but the “most influential person on 
the centre-right in the United Kingdom” event is one I’d love to attend, if 
only to see Dan “Dan” Hannananananan navigate the complexities of the finger 
buffet with the same decorum with which he steered a course through the 
national anti-immigration referendum and£350m-a-week NHS funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/10/brexit-camp-abandons-350-million-pound-nhs-pledge>
 vote.

Dan “Dan” Hannananananan’s Daily Telegraph column of earlier this month, 
entitled“The Norman Conquest Was a Disaster for England. We Should Celebrate 
Naseby, Not Hastings” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/14/the-norman-conquest-was-a-disaster-for-england-we-should-celebra/>
, argued that the Norman conquest of 1066 was a disaster for England and 
suggested we should celebrate the battle of Naseby and not the battle of 
Hastings.

Dan “Dan” Hannananananan, who studied history at Oxford, sees pre-Norman 
conquest England as an idyllic utopia, which then became “clenched in a mailed 
fist. Men were required by law to work on their lord’s estates and forbidden to 
leave without his permission”. Dan “Dan” Hannananananan could almost be 
describing the plans his co-Brexiter Jeremy Hunt has for junior doctors.

I wonder if it made much difference to the 11th-century English serf whether 
his face was being ground into the dirt by a sturdy Anglo-Saxon boot or slapped 
humiliatingly with a decadent French slipper.

To be fair to Dan “Dan” Hannananananan, who is a very intelligent man, I don’t 
think his essay was entirely serious, although I agree with him that it’s time 
the 11th-century Normans were given a good kicking. Like his co-BrexiterBoris 
Johnson’s leaked pro-EuropeDaily Telegraph column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/16/secret-boris-johnson-column-favoured-uk-remaining-in-eu>
, the piece reads on some level like a deliberate satire of clanking propaganda.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Funited-by-the-clacking-of-bowling-balls-alan-partridge-on-britishness-post-brexit-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='United%20by%20the%20clacking%20of%20bowling%20balls'%3A%20Alan%20Partridge%20on%20Britishness%20post-Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Funited-by-the-clacking-of-bowling-balls-alan-partridge-on-britishness-post-brexit-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27United%20by%20the%20clacking%20of%20bowling%20balls%27%3A%20Alan%20Partridge%20on%20Britishness%20post-Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Funited-by-the-clacking-of-bowling-balls-alan-partridge-on-britishness-post-brexit-audio&media=>
‘United by the clacking of bowling balls’: Alan Partridge on Britishness 
post-Brexit – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/oct/27/united-by-the-clacking-of-bowling-balls-alan-partridge-on-britishness-post-brexit-audio>
All cultures need genesis myths. Odin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Odin> and 
his brothers made the first men from trees. TheHaida raven 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haida_mythology#Raven> cracked humanity out of a 
clamshell. But Brexit Britain, birthed in still-steaming divisions, does not 
have one. Dan “Dan” Hannananananan is reaching back to find a serviceable 
national story.

In 1136, Geoffrey of Monmouth wrote his History of the Kings of Britain 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Historia_Regum_Britanniae>, which disinterred 
the King Arthur tales as if they were fact and sent the barely existent monarch 
on foreign military excursions, invented to provide precedents for the policies 
of the recently deceased Henry I and to bind the country with a potent national 
myth.

The movie Planet of the Apes is based on the satire La Planète des singes, 
which was written by a Frenchman, Pierre Boulle, and so is now inadmissible. In 
it, history is rewritten to erase human civilisation by a despotic orangutan, 
like a Brexiter, but sharing more human DNA. Underneaththe shattered Statue of 
Liberty <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XvuM3DjvYf0>, Charlton Heston finds a 
human doll that says “Mama”. “Would an ape make a human doll that talks?” he 
asks, through gritted teeth.

It is the year 2040. I stand on a Scottish island, having fled my much changed 
homeland. In the museum, my granddaughter finds a toy of a Tower of London 
guard. “Beefeater!” she says, “Beef! Beef!” And I think about etymology, and 
the history Dan “Dan” Hannananananan cannot quite rewrite.

Stewart Lee’s Comedy Vehicle (Series 4) is out now on DVD and the new live 
show, Content Provider, is in London and touring; seestewartlee.co.uk 
<http://www.stewartlee.co.uk>
 