
Welcome to the Guardian’s weekly Brexit briefing, a summary of developments as 
Britain moves – ever more purposefully – towards the EU exit. If you’d like to 
receive it as a weekly email, do please sign uphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-morning-briefing-sign-up>
.


Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism is expensive – but 
supporting us isn’t. If you value our Brexit coverage, pleasebecome a Guardian 
supporter <https://membership.theguardian.com/supporter?CMP=ema-3377> and help 
make our future more secure. Thank you.

The big picture


The pushback has begun. As the PM headed off to Denmark and the Netherlands 
(for talks, not negotiations) to try to persuade two traditional EU allies of 
the virtues of a hard Brexit, resistance is starting to stir at home.

First to open fire after the Conservative party conference, at which Theresa 
May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> gave the firm impression 
she will prioritise sovereignty and immigration controls over single market 
membership, was Britain’s business community.

In an open letter to the prime minister, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/business-leaders-urge-theresa-may-to-avoid-hard-brexit>
 the heads of four major business groups, including the Confederation of 
British Industry, said any Brexit model that denied UK firms full access to the 
single market should be ruled out immediately:

Leaving the EU without any preferential trade arrangement and defaulting to 
standard WTO rules would … do serious and lasting damage to the UK economy. The 
UK voted to leave the EU but not to cause living standards to decline. We want 
a Brexit that safeguards future prosperity for everyone across the UK.

Next came parliament – the body Brexit was supposed to make more sovereign. 
Now an unprecedented cross-party alliance of MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/08/mps-demand-vote-hard-brexit-single-market>
 – Tory, Lib Dem, Labour, SNP and Greens – has formed to demand that May give 
parliament a vote on the government’s Brexit stance before negotiations start.

They point out that while 52% of British voters chose to leave the EU, they 
did not also choose to leave the market with which Britain does 44% of its 
trade, and that parliament cannot legitimately be bypassed on such a momentous 
decision.

The PM authorised a statement saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/09/theresa-may-rules-out-commons-vote-on-single-market-exit>
 this was nothing more than “an attempt to thwart the will of the British 
people”, and in parliament theBrexit minister, David Davis, also dismissed calls
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/10/jeremy-corbyn-labour-rehsuffle-continues-labour-reshuffle-politics-live?page=with:block-57fbcfdce4b015d5d43fb6c8#block-57fbcfdce4b015d5d43fb6c8>
 for a parliamentary vote from the likes of the former Labour leader Ed 
Miliband and former Lib Dem deputy prime minister Nick Clegg, who argued:

On the basis of what constitutional principle do you believe that the prime 
minister can now arrogate to herself the exclusive right to interpret what 
Brexit means, impose it upon the country, rather than protect the rightful role 
of scrutiny and approval of this house?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4996a65285ff4bf50be0817f4395a931b3a7015%2F0_367_5469_3281%2F5469.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20pushback%20against%20hard%20exit%20begins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20pushback%20against%20hard%20exit%20begins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4996a65285ff4bf50be0817f4395a931b3a7015%2F0_367_5469_3281%2F5469.jpg>
 The pound fell to a 31-year low against the dollar early in October. 
Photograph: Xinhua/Barcroft Images 
France offers help to banks considering Paris move after Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/france-helps-banks-consider-moving-to-paris-after-brexit-vote>
Davis said those arguing for the Commons to decide negotiating terms “cannot 
tell the difference between accountability and micromanagement” and promised 
MPs would get plenty of chances to debate the issue. (Mind you, he also said 
there was “no downside to Brexit, only considerable upside”, and the 
negotiating cards were “incredibly stacked our way”, so you may believe what 
you like. Other than that, it wasbasically what he’s said before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/05/david-davis-vows-to-build-national-consensus-on-brexit>
.)

Also last week, sterling plunged to a 31-year low – featuring an alarming 
“flash crash” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/theories-emerge-for-pounds-flash-crash-against-dollar>
 – amid mounting fears among currency traders of the longer-term economic 
impact of an eventual hard Brexit. The soft-Brexit chancellor,Philip Hammond, 
was forced to reassure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/hammond-acts-to-reassure-city-and-wall-street-on-brexit>
 not only the City but also Wall Street, which were alarmed by both the 
anti-immigrant tone of the Tory conference and the possible loss of EU 
“passporting” rights if the UK leaves the single market.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F720d43c8f70c1c56bccb1a1411ac911c336d1fa2%2F0_0_5644_3763%2F5644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20pushback%20against%20hard%20exit%20begins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20pushback%20against%20hard%20exit%20begins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F720d43c8f70c1c56bccb1a1411ac911c336d1fa2%2F0_0_5644_3763%2F5644.jpg>
 Home secretary Amber Rudd backtracked on proposals for companies to publish 
data on foreign-born workers. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Hammond said the home secretary Amber Rudd’s remarks that migrants should not 
“take the jobs that British people should do” – along with a proposal (since 
withdrawn) to force firms to publish how many foreign workers they employed – 
were not aimed at the financial sector, adding:

I can reassure people in the financial services sector, in all parts of it, 
that we are listening to what they’re saying and we’re understanding the 
positions that different subsectors have about their needs. The government is a 
pro-business government, strongly supportive of open markets, free markets, 
open economies, free trade.

The view from Europe

European leaders queued up last week to ramp up their Brexit rhetoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/08/eu-leaders-line-up-to-insist-uk-will-pay-a-high-price-for-brexit-stance>
 after the PM’s apparent determination to head for a hard Brexit. Here is a 
sample of their choicest declarations, beginning with the French president, 
François Hollande, who said that if the UK were allowed to stay in the single 
market while curbing EU migration:

The fundamental principles of the EU will be threatened … Other countries 
would want to leave to get the supposed advantages without the obligations … 
There must be a threat, there must be a risk, there must be a price.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94f5e13784e0c67deea7bc274a9258f4745c51ac%2F344_69_3608_2165%2F3608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20pushback%20against%20hard%20exit%20begins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20pushback%20against%20hard%20exit%20begins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94f5e13784e0c67deea7bc274a9258f4745c51ac%2F344_69_3608_2165%2F3608.jpg>
 François Hollande said the UK staying in the single market with curbs on 
migration would undermine the EU’s principles. Photograph: Thibault 
Vandermersch/AFP/Getty Images 
The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and the European commission president, 
Jean-Claude Juncker <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jean-claude-juncker>, 
underlined the point, with Merkel saying in Berlin:

If we don’t insist that full access to the single market is tied to complete 
acceptance of the four basic freedoms, then a process will spread acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> whereby everyone does and is 
allowed what they want.


What matters to the EU 27 now is its institutional integrity, upholding the 
four basic freedoms (movement of goods, services, capital and labour) and 
displaying single market solidarity. Whatever deal Britain gets cannot be seen 
to jeopardise that.

Meanwhile, back in Westminster

Whatever Davis said, hard-boiled Brexit is difficult to swallow in SW1, even 
among pro-leave Tory MPs. Pro-Brexit MPStephen Phillips has applied for an 
urgent debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/tory-mp-anna-soubry-concerned-rush-hard-brexit>
 in an attempt to prevent the government from negotiating the terms for 
Britain’s EU exit without consulting parliament, calling any move to bypass MPs 
“fundamentally undemocratic and unconstitutional”.

Anna Soubry, practically the only Tory MP still carrying the torch for remain, 
is backing him, and has met Miliband to discuss concerns about “a rush to hard 
Brexit, and the voice of members of parliament being completely lost in that 
rush”.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fed-miliband-mps-parliamentary-vote-brexit-terms-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20MPs%20should%20vote%20on%20Brexit%20terms%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fed-miliband-mps-parliamentary-vote-brexit-terms-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Miliband%3A%20MPs%20should%20vote%20on%20Brexit%20terms%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fed-miliband-mps-parliamentary-vote-brexit-terms-video&media=>
Ed Miliband: MPs should vote on Brexit terms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/10/ed-miliband-mps-parliamentary-vote-brexit-terms-video>
There was gentle mutiny on the airwaves too. Dominic Grieve, the former 
Conservative attorney general, said MPs should be given the chance to vote on 
triggering article 50. And Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP and chair of the 
Treasury committee, told the same programme he also thought MPs should debate 
the government’s negotiating position:


It seems to me British interests will be best served by an early and full and 
detailed explanation from the government of what its negotiating position is 
before it embarks on those discussions … What has never been discussed in any 
depth is what we arrive at. I think there’s a majority in parliament for doing 
that.

Across the green benches, one of the most notable appointments in Jeremy 
Corbyn’s lengthy reshuffle was the shadow Brexit secretary,Keir Starmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/keir-starmer>, a former director of public 
prosecutions. Starmer, touted as a future Labour leader, said his first 
priority would be to push for more parliamentary scrutiny of Brexit:

There has to be democratic grip of the process. At the moment, the PM is 
trying to manoeuvre without any scrutiny. That is why the terms on which we are 
going to negotiate absolutely have to be put to a vote in the house.

He also put some clear water between his own views on immigration and those of 
the Labour leadership, which has refused to put a cap on numbers:

It should be reduced by making sure we have the skills in this country that 
are needed for the jobs that need to be done. We have to be open to adjustments 
of the freedom of movement rules and how they apply to this country. We have to 
be shrewd and careful.

You should also know that:

 * Concerned at the possible introduction of a post-Brexit “hard border” 
between Northern Ireland and the Republic,Britain is seeking to shift the 
frontline of immigration controls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/09/britain-to-push-post-brexit-uk-immigration-controls-back-to-irish-border>
 to Ireland’s ports and airports.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b46f48124675284fc005d13567e05546ecd3dae%2F0_16_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20pushback%20against%20hard%20exit%20begins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20weekly%20briefing%3A%20pushback%20against%20hard%20exit%20begins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fbrexit-weekly-briefing-pushback-against-hard-exit-begins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b46f48124675284fc005d13567e05546ecd3dae%2F0_16_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Dublin airport passport control, which could become part of the frontline in 
combating post-Brexit illegal immigration, according to a report. Photograph: 
Niall Carson/PA 
 * The retail industry warned prices of consumer staples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/prices-will-shoot-up-if-uk-fails-to-get-eu-single-market-access-retailers-warn>
 such as food and clothes will shoot up if the UK government fails to negotiate 
a good trading deal with the EU. 
 * The government has dropped a highly controversial proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/09/plan-to-force-firms-to-reveal-foreign-staff-numbers-abandoned>
 first mentioned by Rudd to force businesses to reveal how many foreign staff 
they employ. 
 * The London School of Economics said it had been told clearly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/lse-brexit-non-uk-experts-foreign-academics>
 by the Foreign Office that non-British academics would not be asked to advise 
the government on Brexit; the FCO said this is not the case. 
 * Homophobic attacks in the UK rose 147% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/08/homophobic-attacks-double-after-brexit-vote>
 in the three months after the Brexit referendum vote. 
 * The government will argue that parliament should not be allowed to vote on 
article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/brexit-court-case-government-to-dismiss-claim-that-parliament-must-vote-on-article-50>
 – implementing Brexit – because that would mean ministers would be prevented 
from “giving effect to the will of the people”, according to legal arguments 
lodged in a case to be heard at the high court this week.

Read this

In the Guardian, Stockholm-based journalist Ylva Elvis Nilsson explains very 
clearly why Britain will not get 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/09/brits-punished-brexit-we-want-fairness>
 both full single market access and controls over immigration (and it’s not 
about punishment):

The other EU countries believe it is in their national interest to safeguard 
the single market. Why? Because of jobs. Millions of jobs have been created 
because European companies have been able to buy and sell freely to the richest 
consumers in the world, in the largest market in the world. Creating the single 
market was a painful process … A lot of politicians had to return home to their 
voters and admit that things would have to change. Allowing one country today 
to dictate its own conditions while being part of this market would probably 
lead to the unravelling of the whole package of hard-won compromises. And that 
is not going to happen.

In the New Statesman, George Eaton argues that Brexit began as a libertarian 
project 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/10/brexit-was-libertarian-dream-it-has-become-statist-one>
, “born on the Conservatives’ fringes … Its proponents were economic liberals 
and fiscal conservatives”. Now, says Eaton, it has, under Theresa May’s 
government, become a statist one:

For the prime minister, the leave vote was not merely a mandate to exit from 
the EU but to reshape domestic policy ... The UK will now acquire the control 
that Thatcher craved. But Brussels’ social frontiers will be reimposed 
domestically. Free marketeers can lament their failure. But they know the tide 
of ideas is against them. The referendum would never have been won on a 
platform of open markets and open borders. May’s government is intent on 
controlling both.

Back in the Guardian, Jonathan Freedland asks who is going to speak for the 48%
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/marching-mad-brexit-someone-speak-48-per-cent>
 who voted remain, now that Britain seems to be hurtling towards “extreme 
Brexit”:


They – we – are not looking for a champion who will pretend that the 
referendum never happened, but one who will fight for a Brexit that does not 
deprive us of all we cherished in our relationship with Europe. It means 
arguing for a sane, practical deal that serves, rather than harms, our national 
interest.

And for anyone coming to this whole Brexit thing rather late, the Economist 
has a spectacularly complete survey 
<http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21708264-theresa-may-fires-starting-gun-what-looks-likely-be-hard-brexit-taking-britain-out>
 of pretty much where things stand.


Tweet of the week

The redoubtable Ian Dunt, the editor of politics.co.uk, on David Davis: 
Ian Dunt (@IanDunt) 
Tory MP says Europe need us more than we need them, on tariffs. They are still 
saying this godawful nonsense as if it means something.
 <https://twitter.com/IanDunt/status/785519451672305665> October 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/IanDunt/status/785519451672305665>  