
Chris Hughton spoke of his players’ desire to win promotion after Brighton & 
Hove Albion leapfrogged Newcastle United at the top of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> with a 3-0 home victory 
against 10-man Queens Park Rangers.

Sam Baldock and Anthony Knockaert struck either side of a Glenn Murray penalty 
as Brighton made it 17 league games unbeaten and moved two points above 
Newcastle. Brighton missed out on automatic promotion last seasonon goal 
difference to Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/may/07/middlesbrough-v-brighton-championship-promotion-decider-live-boro-albion>
 beforefailing in the play-offs for the third time in four campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/16/brighton-sheffield-wednesday-championship-play-off-second-leg>
, and Hughton says there is a hunger not to slip up this time.

Brighton and Hove Albion v QPR: Championship – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/27/brighton-and-hove-albion-v-queens-park-rangers-championship-live>
“No doubt there is a determination,” the Brighton manager said. “There has 
been a difference in the team but not a dramatic one. I was delighted with what 
I saw from the team last season and we have now turned draws into wins. We 
recruited well in the summer and there is a determination among the players to 
get promoted. They want to be at the top end of the table and to be the best 
team we can.”

While Brighton are happy to hit top spot at the halfway point, Hughton warned 
of tougher challenges to come. “Overall at halfway we are delighted but the 
second half of the season won’t be any easier, it will be possibly harder. 
Looking at the results of the teams around us, they are all winning.”

Hughton expects Brighton to do only limited business in next month’s transfer 
window after building a squad in the summer to mount another promotion 
challenge. “We are in a healthy position and I will do what I feel is right for 
the club and the team. Anything I do in January will be minimal.”

Ian Holloway felt QPR <https://www.theguardian.com/football/qpr> were harshly 
punished for the dismissal of their captain, Nedum Onuoha, shortly after the 
interval. The defender was shown a straight red card by the referee, Keith 
Stroud, for bringing down the on-rushing Baldock.

The QPR manager said: “It was far too soft, it was ridiculous. It was a 
goal-scoring opportunity and when the whistle was blown I feared the worst. How 
harsh is that? It has to be crystal clear. I try to be unbiased but it’s about 
as harsh as it can be. In the first half, Idrissa Sylla was pushed in the back 
by Shane Duffy but we didn’t get a free-kick.”

Glenn Loovens shocks Newcastle in Sheffield Wednesday bruising
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/newcastle-united-sheffield-wednesday-championship-match-report>
QPR have lost their last six games, failing to score in five, and Holloway is 
considering bringing in players in January. “With Nedum suspended I haven’t got 
a back four. I’ve got a list of names and I can dream all I like but I have got 
to be clever, resourceful and lucky. It will also be about who I have to move 
out.

“If I was around in the summer at QPR, I would have driven to Bournemouth and 
dragged Glenn Murray to our training ground. Then I would have put a hood over 
his head and never let him out until he signed a contract. At the minute we are 
not cutting it at this level. Even today we have had some half decent stats but 
that is no good at this level. You need results and we have to look at the 
goalscorers.”
 