
Chris Hughton admits Brighton were fortunate to secure the 2-1 victory at 
Fulham that moved them back to the top of theChampionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. His side extended their 
unbeaten run to 18 league games after two goals in two second-half minutes – 
the first a Tomer Hemed penalty, followed by Lewis Dunk’s header – overturned 
Lucas Piazon’s 55th-minute opener.

Hughton, who was grateful for David Stockdale’s penalty save from Stefan 
Johansen that ensured Brighton reached half-time on level terms, said: “We 
probably didn’t deserve the win but we showed enough. There were periods in the 
game whereFulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> looked very 
good. It is very difficult when you are playing a team as expansive as these 
are. You have to make sure you don’t allow them opportunities to play.

“We found it difficult but we came away with the best chance in the first half 
but we needed a goalkeeper who was very good today and sometimes those 
ingredients win you games.”

Albion took advantage of Newcastle’s shock defeat at Blackburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/blackburn-rovers-newcastle-united-championship-match-report>
 to move two points clear. “The challenge for the players is to stay at the 
top,” Hughton added.

“We have stressed to the players the second half of the season will be harder 
because everyone is pushing harder, expectation levels rise and we have to 
manage that. We have not done anything yet. There is still too much of the 
season to go. I hope the experience of last season will help, but we won’t know 
until the end of the season.”

Charlie Mulgrew strikes to hand Blackburn victory against Newcastle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/blackburn-rovers-newcastle-united-championship-match-report>
Fulham’s manager, Slavisa Jokanovic, again insisted Chris Martin will not be 
allowed to end his season-long loan from Derby and return to his parent club. 
Martin had made himself unavailable for last Friday’s game with Reading and 
Jokanovic admitted the player had insisted he was not fit to face Brighton.

The manager said: “We signed the contract, all three sides – Derby, Fulham and 
Chris Martin – and there is no option for a recall. This is nice because they 
offer him more money and more years, but this solution does not exist. He was 
going to stay until the end of the season. That is my position and Fulham’s 
position. And that’s it.

“He is still trying to explain that he is injured but my medical department 
did not find any problem at the moment. I am not doctor here, and we are going 
to try and find where this problem is.

“When we played Derby three or four weeks ago [Derby’s manager] Steve McClaren 
asked me about Chris Martin because he explained he likes this player. And I 
explained he is under contract, I want to keep him and recommended that he look 
in the market for another option. But he must not have understood my English.”
 