
Pigs in blankets might have to be rationed round the Christmas dinner table 
next month after the price of pork hit a two-year high.

Analysts are reporting an 18% increase in the wholesale price of pork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/brexit-vote-pushes-up-price-bacon-china-british-pork>
, with the surge expected to have a knock-on effect on the price of bacon and 
sausages in supermarkets in the coming weeks.

“Pork prices in the UK have risen very fast,” said Rabobank analyst Albert 
Vernooij. “Setting [shop] prices is up to the retailers but at a certain point 
you would expect higher [wholesale] prices will be passed on to consumers. 
There is always a delay.” Vernooij said Britain only produces just over half of 
the pork it consumes.

Food manufacturers and retailers are facing multiple problems as they manage 
the impact of commodity price swings as well as the weakness of sterling 
following the Brexit vote. According toofficial figures 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/inflationandpriceindices/bulletins/producerpriceinflation/oct2016>
 the price of materials and fuels for manufacturers rose 12.2% in the year to 
October 2016. There is also evidence firms are passing the pain on to their 
customers with factory gate prices up 2.1% on the year.

The tough conditions are creating friction, with last month’s “Marmitegate” 
stand-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
 between Tesco and Unilever the first to spill into the public domain as the 
supermarket resisted the manufacturer’s attempt to push through price 
increases. Tescochief executive Dave Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/tescos-chief-warns-global-brands-weak-pound-marmitegate>
 said the retailer is already seeing inflation in certain food categories, 
particularly pork, but is only willing to tolerate pricing increases from 
suppliers faced with “legitimate” cost pressures.

Lighter way to enjoy Maltesers? Mars shrinks sharing bags by 15%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/lighter-way-to-enjoy-maltesers-mars-shrinks-sharing-bags-by-15>
According to consultancy Mintec, the price of “pig deadweight” – essentially 
the price farmers receive for slaughtered pigs – is 18% higher than a year ago, 
at around £150 per 100kg. “Low pork prices earlier in the year resulted in many 
UK farmers reducing the size of their herds,” said Mintec analyst Emma Smith. 
“As a result,slaughter levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/21/british-pig-farmers-china-pork-brexit>
 in the UK were down in September, at 910,500 head – 3% below the same period 
last year.”

The surge in the wholesale price will not affect the cost of British 
favourites such as bacon, sausages and sausage rolls in a uniform way, said 
Vernooij. Britons’ love of bacon means manufacturers have to import loin to 
satisfy demand, whereas there is sufficient domestic supply of the belly and 
shoulder cuts used to make sausages.

Last week, Premier Foods, the group behind brands such as Mr Kipling and 
Cadbury cakes, signalled price rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/cost-of-cake-set-to-rise-says-mr-kipling-maker>
 were on the horizon as the price of butter soared 80%, while wheat and edible 
oils were up 40% due to a combination of commodity price rises and currency 
exchange rate pressure. Its chief executive Gavin Darby said the price of sugar 
had also risen by 20% to 30%.
 