
Bristol face a 3-2-1 countdown in the coming Premiership rounds but the 
promoted club will have to improve onlast Sunday’s showing against Northampton  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/bristol-northampton-premiership-match-report>
at Ashton Gate if they are to achieve lift-off.

Bristol secured a bonus point in a narrow defeat by Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/harlequins-bristol-rugby-union-premiership-match-report>
 at Twickenham on the opening weekend of the season but they were punted, 
scrummaged and mauled into submission by the Saints. It will not get any easier 
for the Championship champions in the next three rounds. Sunday’s visit to 
Wasps, who finished third last season, is followed by home matches against 
Exeter, runners-up in the Premiership final, and the league and European 
champions, Saracens.

Dean Richards: ‘England showed an interest. I wouldn’t entertain it now’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/dean-richards-newcastle-england-world-cup-interview-rugby-union>
Andy Robinson, Bristol’s director of rugby, says: “We played well for 40 
minutes in the first match and 40 against Northampton but we have yet to 
deliver an 80-minute performance in thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership>.” Robinson has made seven 
changes for the visit to Wasps, with three players making their competitive 
debuts for the club. “Sunday is an important opportunity for guys who have been 
waiting for their chance this season to show what they can do.”

Bristol <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> are among the 
Premiership’s wealthiest clubs but they started the campaign without a marquee 
player because it was only in June that they knew they would be in the top 
flight. Last week, though, they signed the Hurricanes’ full-back Jason 
Woodward, who will arrive from the Super Rugby franchise at the beginning of 
November on a two-year deal.

The 26-year old also plays on the wing, starting there in the 20-3 victory 
over the Lions inlast month’s 2016 Super Rugby final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/hurricanes-claim-maiden-super-rugby-title-with-victory-over-lions>
. He studied at Hartpury College near Gloucester and is qualified to play for 
England. “We first looked to bring him over two years ago when he was at the 
Rebels but he went to the Hurricanes,” says Robinson. “He is a player of 
quality who finished the Super Rugby season strongly. He can play in two 
positions, he is really talented and he is qualified to play for England. He 
ticks all the boxes and it is great that he wants to join us. As a big lad who 
is strong in the air, he will suit the conditions here and the way the game is 
played in the Premiership.”

Woodward played at full-back for the Rebels against the Lions in 2013. The 
side was captained that day by the former Bath and Wales No8 Gareth Delve, who 
told Bristol not to waste any time in signing him. He will be part of a back 
division that includes the experienced internationals Gavin Henson and David 
Lemi, who both miss the trip toWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> through injury, Tom Varndell 
and Tusi Pisi.

“Winning the Super Rugby title was a fitting way to sign off with the 
Hurricanes and I am excited about testing myself in the top flight of England,” 
says Woodward. “I felt it was the right time to experience playing in a new 
environment and Bristol is the right fit for me, a great club with a big 
supporter base in a city that is passionate about rugby.”

Woodward’s first match is likely to be at Bath in the West Country derby on 18 
November. If anything Bristol pick up in the next three weeks will be regarded 
as a bonus, it will be different on 8 October when they travel to Newcastle 
who, along with Worcester, look like being involved in the relegation scrap.
 