
Bristol have suspended their director of rugby, Andy Robinson, less than six 
months after he signed a three-year contract followingthe club’s promotion from 
the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/25/bristol-doncaster-championship-final-second-leg-match-report>
. The Premiership’s bottom club announced the news a day after saying their 
priority was signing new players.

Bristol are using the two-week break from the Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> to conduct a performance review 
in which Mark Tainton has been appointed the acting head coach, with his 
immediate task to prepare for the opening two rounds of the Anglo-Welsh Cup.

Bristol’s next Premiership match is at Bath on 18 November, giving them time 
to conduct the review and close in on the replacement for the 52-year-old 
Robinson, whose four years at the club are drawing to an end having been put on 
gardening leave. All that has to be agreed with the former England and Scotland 
coach is the amount of his payoff.

The former South Africa coach Heyneke Meyer, who has Premiership experience, 
if brief, having spent the first half of the 2008-09 season at Leicester, has 
been linked with the club and Gary Gold, who has had stints with London Irish, 
Newcastle and Bath, is available after leaving the Sharks in South Africa last 
week.

“The club has taken the decision to suspend the director of rugby, Andy 
Robinson, from his role,” saidBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> in a statement. “The club will 
carry out an immediate review of their coaching needs and requirements. That 
review will be completed as quickly as possible.”

RFU wants fewer Tests but warns to do so will cause ‘economic hit’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/02/rfu-fewer-tests-player-welfare-england-economic-hit>
Robinson, who took training on Tuesday in preparation for Friday’s Anglo-Welsh 
Cup tie at Worcester, looked vulnerable afterSunday’s 31-13 defeat to Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/bristol-sale-gavin-henson-premiership-match-report-rugby-union>
 at Ashton Gate, opponents who had won only three of their previous 19 away 
matches in the Premiership. After eight league and European defeats in a row, 
it was seen an opportunity for a first win since being promoted but the crowd 
booed Bristol in the second half as they watched a bout of aimless kicking and 
a number had left the ground by the time David Lemi scored a late consolation 
try.

“I feel for the supporters,” said Robinson after the Sale defeat. We wanted to 
run the ball but our efficiency was not good enough so we reverted to tactical 
kicking but that was not good enough. We get slightly lost, and frustrated, in 
what we try to do. It is solvable and I am very confident we can achieve that.”

Bristol are understood to have been in talks with the South Africa second-row 
Eben Etzebeth, who on Thursday declined to talk about his future. “I am with 
South Africa for the Wembley game against the Barbarians and then the 
end-of-year tour: after that, nothing is pen on paper or certain,” he said. “I 
love being here in England and the weather is better than I thought. I am also 
off to the Arsenal on Sunday: I’m a big Arsenal fan so I am looking forward to 
the [north London] derby.”
 