
Sir Mark Allen, the former head of counter-terrorism at MI6 will not face 
prosecution for any involvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
 in extraordinary renditions, a verdict as disappointing in the circumstances 
as it is predictable. But the matter cannot rest there. For the decision must 
be the spur the prime minister needs to finally make good on his promise of a 
judge-led inquiry into a sordid lapse in Britain’s commitment to the ban on 
torture.

The absolute prohibition of torture is a cardinal principle of international 
law, and the UK has created specific offences that also cover complicity in 
torture, even when it happens abroad.

There is context. The UK was undoubtedly lured into crossing this most serious 
of lines in its rush to cooperate with the US and other security partners in 
the context of the so-called “war on terror”. Once it was crossed, the 
government’s commitment to the most fundamental international norms went into 
freefall – a consequence perhaps of the view expressed by Tony Blair, who 
warned after the 7/7 attacks that “the rules of the game are changing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/aug/05/july7.uksecurity5>”.

Now we know what happened next. For today’s Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) 
announcement confirms that Allen was involved in the horrific rendering to 
torture of two Libyan dissidents,Abdel Hakim Belhaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj> and Sami al-Saadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/rendition-islamists-mi6-torture-libya>
, and that he “sought political authority” for some of his actions, presumably 
from Jack Straw, the then foreign secretary.

Ex-MI6 officer will not face charges over Libyan renditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
But no charges can be pressed, says the CPS, because there is insufficient 
evidence to afford a realistic prospect of conviction. Thereason for that is a 
scandal in itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/rendition-islamists-mi6-torture-libya>
. The CPS emphasised that its investigations have been compromised by the 
passage of so much time – more than 10 years – since the events took place.

This is precisely why David Cameron cannot wait a moment longer to deliver the 
independent judge-led inquiry that, in 2010, he told parliament was necessary 
to “get to the bottom of what happened” and clear the“stain on our reputation 
as a country that believes in freedom, fairness and human rights” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2010/jul/06/cameron-torture-inquiry>.

His first attempt, the detainee inquiry <http://www.detaineeinquiry.org.uk/> 
headed by retired judge Sir Peter Gibson,collapsed in part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/06/gibson-inquiry-rendition-david-cameron-uk-torture>
 because the police had to investigate explosive evidence that emerged of M16 
involvement in the Libyan cases. As of today, these criminal inquiries appear 
to be at a dead end so it is time to try again.

Cameron will argue that he has passed the baton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/18/inquiry-rendition-torture-isc> 
to the intelligence and security committee (ISC), but as a creature of 
parliament that committee is widely considered structurally incapable of 
delivering the independent investigation required to discharge such serious 
international legal obligations. Cameron himself conceded as much by stating 
that even if the ISC were fortified (as it would be later), it would not 
command public confidence in this area and should not “be doing this work”.

The government has left open the possibility of another judge-led inquiry 
after the ISC concludes its business, but this move should be made now before 
memories fade further and it is too late to do it properly. The ISC itself 
describes this matter as a “longer term priority” and it has more than enough 
on its plate scrutinising more recent behaviour of the intelligence community.

The passing of time is also a torment for the survivors – not just Belhaj and 
Saadi but many others tortured as part of global counter-terrorism operations 
in which the UK was involved. They have been waiting years for the full truth 
of their ordeals to come out, and proof from the highest levels of government 
that lessons have been learned.

At my organisation, Freedom from Torture <https://www.freedomfromtorture.org/>
, we know from our therapeutic work with thousands of torture survivors every 
year that justice is vitally important for survivors working to rehabilitate 
from torture. For most of our clients, accountability for the torture they 
suffered is a far-off dream because they come from countries with no respect 
for the rule of law.

The UK should be different. Strengthening the rules-based international system 
is one of the Foreign Office’s new overarching foreign policy themes, but this 
cannot be just about standards we demand of other states. It must also be 
observable in the example we set by ensuring there is a reckoning for our own 
violations, when and wherever they occur, and especially when they involve the 
barbarity of torture.
 