
British Cycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/british-cycling> will be 
asked to explain the use of therapeutic use exemptions at a parliamentary 
hearing, which could also address wider issues in the sport.

British Cycling’s representative or representatives – expected to be president 
Bob Howden – will likely also be asked about the UK Anti-Doping investigation 
into allegations of wrongdoing in cycling.

Damian Collins, chairman of the culture, media and sport select committee, 
said: “Our initial enquiry is just to British Cycling to hear their views as 
the governing body. Our initial interest is in TUEs, the ethics of TUEs, the 
role of BritishCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> as the 
governing body, their relationships with other people involved in that process.

“This is part of our inquiry into doping in sport and we could call other 
witnesses as well. We can request anyone to come to give evidence to us. We’ve 
not taken a view on calling individual athletes at this moment in time.”

Asked specifically about the Ukad investigation, Collins said: “Any issue that 
is relevant to cycling is up for discussion.”

Ukad has not disclosed the details of its investigation but the Team Sky 
principal, Sir Dave Brailsford, has commented on the investigation,focusing on 
the contents of a package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/dave-brailsford-team-sky-bag-bradley-wiggins>
 delivered to the British road team at the June 2011 Critérium du Dauphiné 
stage race, then Sir Bradley Wiggins’s biggest win on the road.

Team Sky deny wrongdoing and, like British Cycling, are cooperating with the 
Ukad investigation, which Wiggins has welcomed.

Data stolen by the Russian hackers Fancy Bears after the Rio Olympics revealed 
Wiggins had received TUEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/26/bradley-wiggins-reputation-fancy-bears-leak-video-report>
 for triamcinolone – a substance which has a history of abuse in cycling and is 
otherwise banned – on the eve of the Tour de France in 2011 and the race in 
2012, which he won, and the 2013 Giro d’Italia.

Wiggins and Brailsford, the British Cycling performance director until April 
2014, have strenuously denied any wrongdoing, insisting each time the TUEs were 
medically necessary to deal with a pollen allergy that aggravates the cyclist’s 
long-standing asthma condition.

The TUEs also had the approval of the UCI, cycling’s world governing body, and 
there is no suggestion that Wiggins, who left Team Sky in April 2015, or the 
team have broken any rules.

It is understood that the proposed date for the parliamentary hearing is 
19 December.
 