
British police officers are flying out to two Spanish resorts to help the 
local force deal with UK nationals involved in crime.

Two officers from the West Midlands force will patrol alongside the Guardia 
Civil in Magaluf, on the island of Mallorca, and San Antonio, on Ibiza, to 
assist in investigations where British holidaymakers are offenders or victims.

Both of the resorts have a reputation for attracting young British 
holidaymakers who engage in binge drinking and casual sex.In 2011-12, 500 
Britons were arrested on Mallorca and Ibiza combined. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/18617024/arrests-of-british-tourists-up-6-says-foreign-office>
 Most arrests were for drunken behaviour, such as fighting or criminal damage, 
as well as drug-related crime.

Magaluf crackdown: Spanish authorities call time on drinking in the street
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/08/magaluf-crackdown-spanish-authorities-call-time-on-drinking-in-the-street>
The British ambassador to Spain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>, 
Simon Manley, said: “The presence of UK police officers will help to remind 
British holidaymakers of the importance of respecting local laws and customs, 
ensuring that everyone has a safe and enjoyable holiday, free from trouble and 
crime.”

The move comes as the Mallorcan authorities are trying to rebrand the resort 
nicknamed “Shagaluf” by introducing restrictions on pub crawls and drinking in 
the street. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/apr/18/vodka-sex-magaluf-tourists-spain-mallorca-shagaluf>
 Last year, Magaluf’s notoriety peaked when mobile phone footage emerged of an 
18-year-old woman from Northern Ireland giving oral sex to 24 men on a pub 
crawl, egged on by a DJ calling her a “slag”. In 2012 three British tourists 
died falling from hotel balconies in Magaluf, while reports of rapes and 
muggings have risen.

 The officers, who will be in full British uniform, will begin patrols on 
Monday, spending the first week in Magaluf before heading to San Antonio for 
another week in what is being described as a trial operation.


They will concentrate on areas frequented by large numbers of tourists 
including beaches, airport terminals and town centres.

Andy Marshall, National Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Chiefs’ 
Council lead on international policing, said: “Their presence will offer 
reassurance to both locals and UK citizens in areas that significantly increase 
in population during the busy summer holiday season and provide support to 
victims of crime during what can be a traumatic experience, especially when 
away from home.”

The deployment of British officers has been funded and planned in conjunction 
with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

 Police officers from France, Germany, Italy, Portugal and Morocco have all 
previously patrolled tourist hotspots with the Guardia Civil.



 