
British police have been criticised for refusing to release details of an 
international deal to train security officials fromBahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain>, a country accused of a litany of 
human rights abuses.

Human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights> campaigners have 
said the College of Policing (CoP), which sets standards for UK officers and 
offers worldwide training courses, should be compelled to explain their work in 
countries with poor records on civil liberties.

The concerns come less than two months after MPs criticised the “totally 
unacceptable” opacity around the college’s provision of training to Saudi 
Arabia.

Role of UK police in training Bahrain’s forces ‘ignores abuses’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/13/british-police-trainers-ignore-human-rights-abuses-bahrain>
The body was set up by the prime minister, Theresa May, during her time at the 
Home Office and provides the courses in accordance with Foreign Office guidance.

Last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/09/college-policing-report-opaque-training-deal-uk-police-overseas-states>
, members of the home affairs select committee said greater transparency was 
needed, and criticised the then foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, for avoiding 
the public scrutiny of deals with unsavoury regimes.


 “The Foreign Office should not hide behind any relationship with foreign 
governments under the guise of ‘commercial sensitivity’,” they said. However, 
human rights groups have now claimed the CoP continues to cite similar concerns 
in refusing to divulge details of its dealings with Bahrain.

In a recent response to a freedom of information request submitted by the 
campaign group Reprieve, the college gave a broad outline of the courses it had 
offered officials from the country’s interior ministry each year since 2013 and 
confirmed it had seconded staff to Bahrain in that time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fbritish-police-criticised-for-lack-of-transparency-in-bahrain-training-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9ed2f20397f6c04c27c8756919a7106582754b8%2F672_0_2333_2333%2F2333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20police%20criticised%20for%20lack%20of%20transparency%20in%20Bahrain%20training%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fbritish-police-criticised-for-lack-of-transparency-in-bahrain-training-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20police%20criticised%20for%20lack%20of%20transparency%20in%20Bahrain%20training%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fbritish-police-criticised-for-lack-of-transparency-in-bahrain-training-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9ed2f20397f6c04c27c8756919a7106582754b8%2F672_0_2333_2333%2F2333.jpg>
 Theresa May leaves after addressing the College of Policing conference near 
Hook in Hampshire. Photograph: Oli Scarff/PA 
But it refused to go into “details of the specific nature of [its] work” with 
the country, which has been accused of using torture to extort confessions from 
prisoners. The college cited concerns over “commercial interests”, 
“international relations” and “law enforcement” – all exemptions allowed for by 
freedom of information laws – as justification.

It also gave the top-line amounts of money it has received for providing 
training to foreign countries, confirming half of the £8.6m it made between 
2013 and 2015 came from countries in the Middle East and north Africa, but 
refused to offer a more specific breakdown.

The college refused to say which countries had paid which sums, citing fears 
around preserving international relations and commercial interests.

“The college’s culture of secrecy around international training must end now,” 
said Maya Foa, the director of Reprieve’s death penalty team.

“[It] must come clean about its business in Bahrain, where prisoners like 
Mohammed Ramadan face execution for ‘confessions’ obtained under torture, and 
the human rights situation gets worse by the day.”

Ramadan is an opponent of the government who was sentenced to death for his 
alleged part in the killing of a policeman. It has been claimed he was arrested 
without a warrant and made a confession after torture which he later retracted.

Foa added that Reprieve had found the CoP was “teaching CSI skills that it 
admits could lead to suspects being arrested and tortured” in Saudi Arabia.

UK ditches plan to bid for £5.9m Saudi Arabia prisons contract
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/uk-ditches-plan-to-bid-for-saudi-arabia-prisons-contract>
Reprieve’s criticisms were echoed by the campaign group Index on Censorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/censorship>, which said it was “extremely 
worried” about the secrecy surrounding the relationship with Bahrain.

Index’s deputy chief executive, Rachael Jolley, said the country’s “record on 
human rights and openness should be challenged by the UK government”.

She added: “Index agrees with the home affairs select committee’s recent 
recommendation that: ‘To ensure that there is proper transparency and 
accountability, the college must be open about the nature of the international 
work that it provides.’”

Jolley said the Foreign Office and CoP should be required to get a written 
guarantee that training will not aid operations “deemed unethical by the UK 
government”.

“Bahrain is a country that has previously ordered the 15-day detention of a 
poet, and which last year stripped 72 people of their citizenship – including 
journalists and bloggers – for simply voicing their criticism of the current 
regime,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fbritish-police-criticised-for-lack-of-transparency-in-bahrain-training-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F715f3c4a688c14d4633e645bcd09cd959d683af7%2F924_0_2084_2085%2F2084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20police%20criticised%20for%20lack%20of%20transparency%20in%20Bahrain%20training%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fbritish-police-criticised-for-lack-of-transparency-in-bahrain-training-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20police%20criticised%20for%20lack%20of%20transparency%20in%20Bahrain%20training%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fbritish-police-criticised-for-lack-of-transparency-in-bahrain-training-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F715f3c4a688c14d4633e645bcd09cd959d683af7%2F924_0_2084_2085%2F2084.jpg>
 At a march in A’ali, southwest of the capital of Manama, Bahraini 
anti-government protesters chant for democratic freedom. Photograph: Hasan 
Jamali/AP 
“Rajab is currently facing prison on charges of spreading ‘false or malicious 
news, statements, or rumours’, evidence of which includes a retweet of an Index 
tweet; ‘offending a foreign country’ through tweeted criticism of Saudi 
Arabia’s involvement in Yemen; and ‘offending a statutory body’ by condemning 
conditions in the country’s notorious Jau prison.”

Earlier this month, the Observer revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/13/british-police-trainers-ignore-human-rights-abuses-bahrain>
 that an agreement signed by the CoP and Bahrain’s interior ministry set out 
the commercial ground on which their relationship would be built but omitted 
any mention of human rights issues.

A Foreign Office spokesman repeated the statement given to the Observer, 
saying: “It is not good enough to merely criticise other countries from the 
sidelines. Only by working with Bahrain are we able to bring about the changes 
we would like to see in the country.

“The UK is working closely with the government of Bahrain to provide extensive 
reform assistance focused on strengthening human rights and the rule of law. We 
see this support as the most constructive way to achieve long-lasting and 
sustainable reform in Bahrain.”

The spokesman added: “While it will take time to see the full results of much 
of this work, the UK is having a direct impact on areas of concern.”


The college of policing said it submits all proposals for international work 
to a government body that considers human rights issues before giving the 
go-ahead.

“There are a number of reasons why we do not disclose details about overseas 
training or costs, where to do so could expose vulnerabilities that can be 
exploited by criminals or put at risk British citizens deployed overseas,” a 
spokesman said.

 * This article was amended on 31.08.16 to correct the account of Mohammed 
Ramadan’s arrest
 