
Shaker Aamer, the sole remaining British resident incarcerated and tortured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/04/shaker-aamer-fears-he-will-die-in-guantanamo-bay>
 inGuantánamo Bay <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>, has 
repeatedly said he was brutally tortured in Afghanistan even before he was 
flown to the US military prison in Cuba. Moreover, he has said officers from 
British intelligenceknew about his torture 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/shaker-aamer-last-uk-detainee-in-guantanamo-bay-says-britain-knew-about-torture-in-bagram-prison-a6679216.html>
 at the notorious US prison in Bagram, north of Kabul.

His lawyers say he has now been cleared for release by the US Department of 
Defense after 13 years detained without trial or charge. He says he is still 
being subjected to physical abuse and may not come out ofGuantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay> alive. He was seized in 
Afghanistan in 2001 after the 9/11 attacks, and was said to be close to Osama 
bin Laden. He denies this, saying he went to Afghanistan to work for a charity, 
but was kidnapped by villagers and sold to the Americans.

Shaker Aamer fears he will die in Guantánamo Bay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/04/shaker-aamer-fears-he-will-die-in-guantanamo-bay>
Clive Stafford Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/28/shaker-aamer-guantanamo> 
of Reprieve, the human rights group that has been fighting for his release, has 
accused MI6 of giving US courts false information and of “stabbing Shaker in 
the back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/24/guantanamo-bay-shaker-aamer-stafford-smith>
”. David Cameron and the Foreign Office insist they have repeatedly pressed 
Barack Obama to release him. Aamer has told Metropolitan police officers –
investigating reports of British complicity in torture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/19/police-claims-shaker-aamer-torture-mi5-complicit>
 and the rendition of other detainees accused of being involved in terrorism – 
about his experiences. Two years ago he passed on a 24,000-word statement to 
the police, a draft of which waspassed to the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3258996/They-don-t-want-sun-Shaker-Aamer-Briton-held-Guantanamo-Bay-gives-searing-account-14-year-ordeal.html>
.

He describes how he was held in a freezing aircraft hangar, and claims a 
British intelligence officer was present during interrogations when his head 
was repeatedly beaten into a wall by the Americans. He also says he was 
interrogated by two British intelligence officers about what he did in London, 
where he had married a British woman and worked as a translator.

Aamer also describes in his statement how he witnessed the torture in 
Afghanistan of a fellow prisoner,Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/may/13/ibn-al-sheikh-al-libi>
, who later claimed that Saddam Hussein had chemical and biological weapons and 
had supplied them to al-Qaida. Al-Libi was rendered from Afghanistan in a 
coffin to Egypt where he made the claims after being locked in a small cage for 
more than 80 hours.

What happened to Ibn al-Sheikh al-Libi? | Moazzam Begg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/libertycentral/2009/may/13/ibn-al-sheikh-al-libi>
Aamer says two British intelligence officers witnessed the abuse of al-Libi, 
whose “confession” was seized on by George Bush, and indirectly by Tony Blair, 
to help justify theinvasion of Iraq in 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/mar/19/iraq-war-saddam-bush-starts-2003>
 – even though MI6 knew al-Libi’s claims were not credible. MI6 officers 
privately insisted that any suggestion Saddam had links to al-Qaida was 
rubbish. What theChilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/26/chilcot-inquiry-fails-set-date-publication-iraq-war-report>
 says about this remains to be seen.

Aamer’s claims about British complicity in torture, and his impending release, 
come as the Crown Prosecution Service is considering a hefty Metropolitan 
police file on evidence of MI6 involvement in the rendition and torture of two 
prominent Libyan anti-Gaddafi dissidents and their families in 2004.MI6’s role 
in the rendition of Abdel Hakim Belhaj, and Sami al-Saadi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/18/straw-mi6-libyan-renditions-belhaj>
, and their families, and how they were abducted and rendered to Tripoli in a 
joint operation with the CIA, emerged in documents found in 2011 in the wake of 
Nato air strikes on the Libyan capital.

Jack Straw, then foreign secretary responsible for MI6, has said: “No foreign 
secretary can know all the details of what its intelligence agencies are doing 
at any one time.” Government officials, insisting on anonymity, say MI6 was 
following “ministerially authorised government policy”.Tony Blair said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/apr/11/tony-blair-libyan-dissident-rendition>
 he didn’t have “any recollection at all” of the Belhaj-Saadi renditions.

A civil suit bought by the Libyans will be heard by the supreme court next 
month. British government lawyers argue that no British court can rule on the 
case because agents of foreign powers, including the CIA, were involved in the 
operation. Aamer’s claims of British knowledge of his torture, and that of 
al-Libi, make a proper, open inquiry into Britain’s role, and into how much 
ministers knew about it, all the more urgent. Accumulating claims – and 
evidence – on such important matters should not be allowed to fester any 
longer. The kind of official denials given before are inadequate and 
unconvincing.
 