
More than 20 MPs from seven parties in the UK parliament have urged the 
British foreign secretary to echo US government calls for the release of the 
Bahraini human rights activist Nabeel Rajab.

Bahrain’s criminal court on Thursday postponed his trial to 28 December, when 
he is expected to be sentenced.

Rajab, who faces up to 15 years in jail for comments made on Twitter 
criticising the war in Yemen,has been held in pre-trial detention since June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/13/bahrain-detains-rights-activist-un-official-criticises-repression>
. He is also accused of “defaming the state” by publishing “false news .. and 
malicious rumours that undermine the prestige of the kingdom” in an opinion 
piece in the New York Times.

He was arrested on separate charges of “spreading false information and 
rumours with the aim of discrediting the state”.

Amnesty: UK 'utterly disingenuous' about human rights in Bahrain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/amnesty-uk-utterly-disingenuous-about-human-rights-in-bahrain>
In September, the US State Department spokesman Mark Toner said the government 
called for the immediate release of Rajab, but the UK has thus far refused to 
do likewise.

Amnesty International has called the charges a “barefaced assault on freedom 
of expression”. Human Rights Watch’s executive director, Ken Roth, named Rajab 
as one of two human rights activists currently imprisoned whom he thought most 
resembled “the next Nelson Mandela”.

In a letter to Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> 
ahead of the trial, which had been due to be held on Thursday, MPs from the 
Conservatives, Labour, the Scottish National party, the Democratic Unionist 
party, the Liberal Democrats, the Greens and the SDLP asked the Foreign Office 
to express its concern.

“We urge you [...] to make it clear to Bahraini officials that the United 
Kingdom wishes to see his unconditional release from prison, and for the 
charges brought against him, which are related to his right to freedom of 
expression and freedom of speech, to be dropped,” it reads.


MPs who have signed the letter include Labour’s Andy Slaughter and Ann Clywd, 
the Lib Dems’ Tom Brake and Alastair Carmichael, the Greens’ Caroline Lucas and 
the Conservatives’ Tania Mathias.

During Theresa May’s visit to Bahrain last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-calls-for-red-white-and-blue-brexit>
, her spokeswoman would not say if any specific cases had been raised in 
bilaterals, but said the UK did raise human rights cases as part of a wider 
engagement on Gulf reforms.

Rights campaigners in Bahrain have argued that, although the UK has been 
engaging closely with Bahraini authorities on judicial andpolice reform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/13/british-police-trainers-ignore-human-rights-abuses-bahrain>
 since 2012, its engagement has not prevented crackdowns on journalists and 
pro-democracy activists in the country.

Since 2011, Rajab has faced multiple prosecutions and prison sentences for his 
activism. He was banned from travelling in 2014 and has been unable to leave 
the country. His health is said to have deteriorated since being placed in 
detention earlier this year.

The SNP’s Margaret Ferrier, the chair of the all-party parliamentary group on 
democracy and human rights in the Gulf, who coordinated the letter, said: “This 
is a matter of freedom of speech and expression. Nabeel Rajab is highly 
regarded as a prominent human rights activist, and these charges are little 
more than an attempt by Bahraini authorities to silence a dissenting voice.

Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, the director of advocacy at the Bahrain Institute for 
Rights and Democracy, said: “We have seen how Theresa May lashed Boris Johnson 
overhis comments on Saudi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/saudi-arabia-row-boris-johnson-yemen-conflict>
. Nabeel Rajab criticised Saudi Arabia and Bahrain over their bombardment in 
Yemen and is facing prison for it.

“If May or her government fail to publicly call for his release, Bahrain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> will take it as a green light for 
their repression.”

 