
The British gap year tourist Eleanor Hawkins has pleaded guilty in a court in 
Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> after stripping on the 
country’s highest peak.

Arriving handcuffed at court in Kota Kinabalu for a second time, Hawkins and 
three other tourists had to battle through a throng of reporters to enter the 
building. The four pleaded guilty to committing obscene acts in a public place.

The charge, read out in court, was that at 6.45am on 30 May in the vicinity of 
Mount Kinabalu they carried out “obscene acts in a public place under 294 (a) 
of the penal code”. They were also accused of “excessive noise and ignoring the 
advice (of their guide)”.


All four avoided trial by pleading guilty. Their lawyer said they were willing 
to offer a public apology and called for them to be fined and deported.

The public prosecutor called for a sentence to deter others, and said the 
tourists’ behaviour had caused “annoyance to many Malaysians”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbritish-tourist-eleanor-hawkins-stripped-malaysian-mountain-court-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434103727653%2FKP_272204_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Briton%20who%20stripped%20on%20Malaysian%20mountain%20arrives%20at%20court%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbritish-tourist-eleanor-hawkins-stripped-malaysian-mountain-court-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Briton%20who%20stripped%20on%20Malaysian%20mountain%20arrives%20at%20court%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbritish-tourist-eleanor-hawkins-stripped-malaysian-mountain-court-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434103727653%2FKP_272204_crop_640x360.jpg>
 British tourist Eleanor Hawkins arrives at court in Kota Kinabalu 
He urged the judge to take into account the public sentiment, adding that 
“claiming to be young and innocent is not acceptable”.

Hawkins, 23, was first to stand in court to hear the charges. Asked if she 
pleaded guilty, she replied “I do”. She was handcuffed to the Canadian Danielle 
Peterson, 22, who also pleaded guilty.


The two men, Peterson’s brother, Lindsey, and Dutchman Dylan Snel, both 23, 
also pleaded guilty.


The hearing was adjourned for 10 minutes after the four disagreed with some of 
the facts that were presented to them by a court aid.

The four tourists, who had been remanded in jail, could be sentenced to up to 
three months in prison or fined, or both. Sentencing is expected shortly.

Before the court hearing Hawkins had told her father, Tim, by telephone that 
she expected to be charged. He told the Guardian: “She doesn’t want to 
second-guess what’s going to happen. So we are just waiting for the outcome. It 
could go either way. We have been up all night waiting.”

Are the naked backpackers being charged with causing an earthquake?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/reality-check/2015/jun/11/are-naked-backpackers-charged-with-causing-earthquake>
Earlier on Friday, the chief police officer investigating the case confirmed 
all four tourists would be charged but he refused to say what sentence the 
police were looking for.

Senior police officers from Kota Kinabalu have been in Malaysia’s capital, 
Kuala Lumpur, for meetings on how to proceed with a case that has caused 
controversy in the south-east Asian country.

Many residents believe Mount Kinabalu, where the offence is alleged to have 
taken place, holds the spirits of their ancestors and some have suggested the 
disrespectful act caused an earthquake that killed 18 people days later.

The tourists have also breached customary law in the Malaysian state of Sabah, 
the northern half of the island of Borneo, and could face an indigenous court. 
It is not clear what type of punishment they would receive from this court, 
which can order community work and fines for offences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbritish-tourist-who-stripped-naked-on-malaysian-mountain-to-be-charged%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F491683e9d7e554ab740259d867a65306c53c1649%2F0_30_912_547%2F912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20tourist%20who%20stripped%20on%20Malaysian%20mountain%20pleads%20guilty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbritish-tourist-who-stripped-naked-on-malaysian-mountain-to-be-charged%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20tourist%20who%20stripped%20on%20Malaysian%20mountain%20pleads%20guilty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F12%2Fbritish-tourist-who-stripped-naked-on-malaysian-mountain-to-be-charged%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F491683e9d7e554ab740259d867a65306c53c1649%2F0_30_912_547%2F912.jpg>
 The group of backpackers on top of the Malaysian mountain. Photograph: Rex 
Shutterstock 
Sabah’s chief tribal priest, Tindarama Aman Sirom Simbuna, told Malaysia’s 
Star newspaper that the tourists should be fined in line with local custom. It 
quoted him saying: “According to local beliefs, the spirit of the mountain is 
very angry. This fine, calledsogit in the native tongue, should be in the form 
of 10 male or female buffalo.”

Police sources have said that, based on previous convictions, the sentence in 
the civil court is likely to be small. “This is a small case. It will likely be 
a small fine with no jail time,” the source said. “We care more about drugs.”

Malaysia shouldn’t scapegoat the naked volcano tourists | Kate Ng
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/11/malaysia-scapegoat-volcano-tourists>
The four tourists had already appeared in purple outfits at Karamunsing police 
station in Kota Kinabalu, the main town near the mountain. Since then they have 
been held in the city jail, a two-storey building with 24-hour armed guards, 
surrounded by two four-metre-high (12ft) wire fences topped with barbed wire.


Police in Malaysia are looking for six other foreigners who are wanted for 
public indecency, a police officer involved in the case told the Guardian on 
Friday. “We think they are still in Sabah,” the officer revealed on condition 
of anonymity as he was not authorised to speak to media. “There is a 
possibility they have already left the country.”

He said Hawkins and her fellow detainees did not identify the others who were 
with them: “They said they didn’t know their full names, only nicknames.”

Another police source said border guards had been informed and were hoping to 
catch the others at airports.
 