
The six brokers found not guilty of helping Tom Hayes rig Libor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor> interest rates have said their 
trial was a sham and they were made scapegoats, in heavy criticism of the 
Serious Fraud Office’s handling of the investigation.

They spoke outside Southwark crown court after Darrell Read was found not 
guilty of the one outstanding count against the brokers, meaning they have all 
been cleared.

The jury returned a majority verdict of not guilty against Read, prompting 
cheers from the other five men, who were in court supporting him a day after 
they were cleared.

The other brokers were Danny Wilkinson and Colin Goodman, who worked at Icap 
with Read; Noel Cryan, formerly of Tullett Prebon; and Jim Gilmour and Terry 
Farr of RP Martin. They were accused of helping the former UBS and Citigroup 
trader Hayes, who isserving 11 years in prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/21/libor-trader-tom-hayes-loses-appeal-but-has-jail-sentence-cut-to-11-years>
, to rig Libor.

Cryan said: “It has turned our lives upside down. Realistically, we should 
never have been here. We feel we’ve been scapegoated. There are things to be 
answered but we are not the ones who should be answering them.”

Read said the case had been a sham and that the SFO “didn’t investigate it 
properly and didn’t listen”.The brokers celebrated the verdict by heading to 
the local pub. Their trial lasted four months but the jury was out for less 
than a day before announcing the verdicts.

The men, whose nicknames included “Lord Libor” and “Big Nose”, were accused of 
acting as go-betweens by passing around requests from traders and being paid 
extra commission by Hayes. Libor is the interest rate at which banks borrow 
from each other. It underpins trillions of pounds worth of contracts, from 
mortgages to corporate lending.

Nick Hayes, the father of Tom Hayes, applauded the verdict and said the SFO’s 
investigation had been a shambles. The verdict raises the prospect of Hayes 
appealing his sentence.

In a series of posts on Twitter, Nick Hayes said: “Today Tom Hayes stands 
tall. He refused to testify versus the Libor brokers and paid the price, while 
they’re back with the [sic] family. I’m proud of him.”

“In conspiracy to defraud prosecution must first prove ‘agreement’ between 
conspirators. Where now Tom Hayes, who must’ve agreed only with himself? I 
strongly believe fraudsters should be behind bars. Lets start with the SFO who 
defrauded the UK taxpayer of millions of pounds in the Libor shambles.” A 
spokesman for the SFO confirmed the agency will not appeal the verdicts.

David Green, the SFO director, said: “The key issue in this trial was whether 
these defendants were party to a dishonest agreement with Tom Hayes. By their 
verdicts the jury have said that they could not be sure that this was the case. 
Nobody could sensibly suggest that these charges should not have been brought 
and considered by a jury.”

A new Libor-related trial involving a group of former Barclays traders is 
scheduled to begin in February. The SFO is also pursuing six individuals for 
allegedly rigging Euribor, the European equivalent of Libor. The jurors were 
told by the judge only to convict the six brokers if evidence showed that they 
played a “significant” role in helping Hayes rig Libor.

“You would need to be satisfied that any involvement was not minimal or merely 
transitory, but something which establishes significant involvement in the 
continuing conspiracy,” Judge Nicholas Hamblen said.

Lawyers said that the SFO had been hindered in securing prosecutions because 
the British legal system meant it was difficult to pursue companies as opposed 
to individual employees.

Alison McHaffie, a partner with law firm CMS, said: “Apart from being acutely 
embarrassing to the SFO, these verdicts show how difficult it is to demonstrate 
criminal activity by individuals for this type of type of market misconduct.

“It is always easier to bring regulatory action rather than criminal 
prosecution against the firms themselves. In future, the regulator will find it 
easier to pursue disciplinary actions against individuals for wrongdoing.”

Matthew Frankland, the solicitor for Wilkinson, said: “Ultimately, there is a 
hypocrisy in charging brokers. Brokers do not work for banks, they play no part 
in the Libor submission process and are not and never were regulated by the BBA 
in relation to their Libor predictions.


“The case also further highlights that, yet again, most of the individuals 
prosecuted in the Libor cases are relatively junior within the different 
organisations, with more senior people not being held to account.”

David James, the solicitor for Goodman, who was known as Lord Libor, added: 
“We can only reiterate what his counsel told the jury, that the SFO case was a 
complete shambles and should never have been brought.”
 