
Elected officials representing the rapidly gentrifying Brooklyn neighborhood 
of Crown Heights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/03/last-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home>
 have waded into the growing fight over the redevelopment of the city-owned 
Bedford-Union Armory.

The last battle for Brooklyn, America's most unaffordable place to buy a home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/03/last-battle-brooklyn-new-york-americas-most-unaffordable-place-buy-home>
On Monday, the US congresswoman Yvette Clarke, state senator Jesse Hamilton, 
state assemblyman Walter Mosley and state assemblywoman Diana Richardson 
released a letter they had written to the president and CEO of theNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City economic development 
corporation (EDC) asking that “the community’s voice is both heard and acted 
upon” as the project progresses.

Currently, the developer selected by the EDC, BFC Partners, plans to redevelop 
the site with a 13-story building with 300 rental apartments and 24 
condominiums, along with a state-of-the-art recreational center that will be 
open to the community in some capacity. Of the 300 apartments, 18 will be 
reserved for households earning no more than 40% of average median income 
(AMI), which isdefined by the city 
<http://www.nychdc.com/pages/Income-Eligibility.html> as just over $36,000 for 
a family of four; another 49 will be set aside for households making no more 
than 50% of AMI ($45,000 for a family of four). The developer will reserve 99 
units for households making no more than 110% of AMI (about $100,000 for a 
family of four), and the remaining 164 units will go at market rates to those 
with the minimum income to qualify.

The elected officials representing the neighborhood say that’s not nearly 
enough in exchange for what is currently public land.

“At a time when gentrification threatens many longtime residents with 
displacement, we need a comprehensive approach that significantly and 
substantially addresses all of the community’s needs,” said Clarke in the 
statement.

In the letter, the elected officials called for the building to be comprised 
entirely of affordable housing units up to 130% of AMI (or just under $118,000 
for a family of four), and for income levels to be determined on the basis of 
the median income of the community, rather than the region at large. They’ve 
also asked the EDC to increase the number of units reserved for area residents 
from 50% to 80% of available units. (Those preferences are currently the 
subject ofa lawsuit 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/group-challenges-new-york-city-on-housing-allocations-1436310942>
 suggesting that the preferences perpetuate segregation. It was brought by 
several African American New Yorkers, who applied for affordable housing in 
mostly white neighborhoods and were denied because of the community preference 
requirements.)

Clarke, Hamilton, Mosley and Richardson additionally want the number of studio 
apartments and one-bedroom units reduced to 40% of the overall development, 
with the remaining units divided equally between two- and three-bedroom 
apartments, which would allow more space for family units than currently 
envisioned.

“We stand resolutely with our constituents who will not support this project 
until changes are made that act upon the above-mentioned concerns,” the 
officials wrote in their letter, which also mentioned concerns about union 
labor and how the community space would be allocated.

The development, which is one of the largest in Crown Heights, has become a 
focal point for many anti-gentrification activists in the neighborhood.

But the developer says its opponents’ misgivings are misplaced. “Revitalizing 
the Bedford-Union Armory will provide the Crown Heights community with 
much-needed affordable housing, affordable office space for non-profits and 
local organizations and free or low-cost recreational programming and 
facilities,” a spokesperson said in a statement. “We will build the housing 
component of this project without any city funds, which frees up the city’s 
resources to create even more affordable housing for low-income and homeless 
families in Crown Heights and across the city.”

The EDC did not respond to requests for comment.
 