
In the brief foreword to his autobiography, Bruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> writes that his aim is to “shed 
a little light on how and, more important, why” he forged his improbable career 
as the last great rock superstar. In truth, we already have the evidence in the 
18 albums he has released over 43 years. Do we need to know more? Music is a 
transcendental experience, and to explain its origins in cold print can rob the 
songs of their magic.

Born to Run by Bruce Springsteen – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/26/born-to-run-memoir-bruce-springsteen-review>
Practised in the difficult art of boiling complicated emotions down to 
memorable lines that fit neatly over a straightforward harmonic structure, rock 
and pop stars can tend to stretch their feelings thin during the course of 
their 300-page pieces of supposed memoir.

The juxtaposition of mesmerising songwriting and repellent prose is stark in 
Morrissey’s Autobiography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/20/autobiography-morrissey-digested-read>
. The author of some of the most original and exhilarating songs in rock 
history comes across as embarrassed by his back catalogue, contemptuous of 
every artist who crosses his path and convinced that the minutiae of legal 
wrangling over copyright is as absorbing to us as it is to him. In the wake of 
the Smiths’ breakup, he is – weirdly – offered roles in EastEnders and 
Emmerdale. Wisely, he declines: “Since I dare not be myself, I would surely be 
even worse as an actor,” he writes (and limited as a memoirist, we could add).

Elvis Costello is another first-class songwriter who disappoints when it comes 
to writing the story of his life.Unfaithful Music and Disappearing Ink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/19/elvis-costello-memoir-unfaithful-music-disappearing-ink-review-idiosyncratic>
 begins strongly with an evocative account of his father’s life as a crooner in 
1960s England. Costello’s unlikely ascent during the gob-drenched era of punk 
is also grittily relayed. But the book hits the skids as the singer finds 
success and the tales deteriorate into a succession of showbiz anecdotes.

I was summoned to the balcony after a show at the Capitol theatre in Passaic, 
New Jersey, and was introduced to an unassuming young man in a bandana who 
looked like he might have arrived directly from fixing his motorcycle. He 
laughed like steam escaping from a radiator. Bruce Springsteen and I circled 
each other with polite, shy questions, neither wanting to quite let on how much 
we cared about the other’s records.

Will this brief encounter make it into Springsteen’s new book? Oh, I hope not.

Costello is too respectful of musical heritage, while Keith Richards, in Life, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/oct/31/keith-richards-life-rolling-stones>
 works hard to give the impression that he has yet to cross paths with anyone 
who meets his match.Girl in a Band by Sonic Youth bassist Kim Gordon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/12/girl-in-a-band-kim-gordon-review-autobiography-sonic-youth>
, meanwhile, is perhaps too successful in portraying indie rock life as not too 
dissimilar to the humdrum demands of any middle-class profession.Alex James in 
A Bit of a Blur <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/03/blur.music> 
leaves you wondering how he ever found time to fit in a shift at the studio in 
between the bacchanalia. None feel fully satisfying.

In contrast to Richards and Costello, the number of first-class tunes written 
by John Lydon can be counted on one hand, but he has produced two fine accounts 
of his life and works.Rotten: No Irish, No Blacks, No Dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/feb/08/biography.features> is a 
scabrous, often hilarious, account of the brief and noisy progress of the Sex 
Pistols. The follow-up,Anger Is an Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/26/anger-is-an-energy-john-lydon-review-ripe-breathless-autobiography>
 reveals the secret of Lydon’s stability, as all around him succumbed to 
monstrous appetites: a firm adherence to working-class family values.

Viv Albertine, the Slits’ guitarist, shared the squat life with Lydon in 
punk’s formative years and has also written an engrossing book about it.
Clothes, Clothes, Clothes, Music, Music, Music, Boys, Boys, Boys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/28/clothes-music-boys-viv-albertine-review>
 would be worth reading even if the walk-on characters weren’t destined to 
become tabloid hate figures. It is an unabashed account of the dismal lodgings, 
awful food, and terrible smells that make up the day-to-day existence of any 
impecunious twentysomething.

But you have to look beyond the constraints of mainstream rock for a truly 
memorable account of what it means to make a musical life the purpose of 
existence. Charles Mingus, bassist, bandleader and badass, recorded some of the 
most innovative, urgent and essential music in any genre, and his autobiography,
Beneath the Underdog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/26/musicians-writers-choose-favourite-books-music-brian-eno-beck>
, is no less indispensable.

Mingus described himself as “a mongrel musician who plays beautiful, who plays 
ugly, who plays lovely, who plays masculine, who plays feminine, who plays 
music, who plays all sounds; loud, soft, unheard sounds. Sounds, sounds, 
sounds, solid sounds, sounds, sounds”. His autobiography is unsparing in the 
often harrowing experiences that produced those sounds.

Perhaps a jazz musician, alive to nuance, improvisation and contradiction in a 
way that few stadium-filling songwriters can be, is bound to provide a more 
authentic, or at least authentic-seeming, account of human experience. And 
Springsteen, in his favour, has always been a more thoughtful and contrarian 
spirit than his platinum-selling peers. I’ve devoured his records over the 
years and I look forward with no less enthusiasm to his account of how they got 
made.
 