
Springsteen is aware of his limitations

You might think someone who has headlined stadiums since 1984 would be 
convinced of his own musical abilities, but no. When he formed the Castiles, 50 
years ago, “I was considered toxic in front of a microphone,” he writes. And 
while he reckons he’s competent now, he doesn’t stretch much further than that: 
“I have a barman’s power, range and durability, but I don’t have a lot of tonal 
beauty or finesse … My voice gets the job done. But it’s a journeyman’s 
instrument and on its own, it’s never going to take you to higher ground. I 
need all my skills to get by and to communicate deeply … I am a sum of all my 
parts. I learned early that this is not something to fret about.” While this 
might not come as much of a surprise to those for whom Springsteen’s full-on 
mode – that wounded-bullock bellow of his biggest rock song – is a stumbling 
block, it is still shocking to hear one of rock’s most admired and longstanding 
stars, whose debt to soul and R&B is so transparent, admit it’s the case.

Born to Run by Bruce Springsteen review – inside the mind of the Boss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/21/born-to-run-by-bruce-springsteen-review>
Whatever his relationship with his dad, he was always looking for father 
figures

Springsteen’s troubled relationship with his father, eventually resolved long 
into adulthood, is an ongoing theme of Born to Run. In the absence of a father 
who supported him, he sought encouragement and advice from a series of men he 
admits were “surrogate father figures”, beginning in his teens with Tex Vinyard 
in his hometown of Freehold, New Jersey. Tex and his wife Marion let local teen 
bands practise in their home. “He was loving in his own twisted way,” 
Springsteen writes. “More important, he was accepting. He cherished and 
encouraged your talents, took you for who you were and put his time, muscles, 
money and big black Cadillac, hauling equipment, all in service of your 
dreams.” Those father figures crop up several times, until the most important 
of all arrives in Springsteen’s life – Jon Landau.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCYHGh6lmSbo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCYHGh6lmSbo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCYHGh6lmSbo&media=>
When the facts become legend, Springsteen prints the legend

One of the key moments in Springsteen’s career is one of the most 
misinterpreted. In May 1974, Landau – at that point a rock writer who’d had an 
unsuccessful bash at being a producer, and who was undergoing a crisis of faith 
in rock music, wondering if he had a place within it – reviewed a Springsteen 
show in Cambridge, across the River Charles from Boston. “Last Thursday, at the 
Harvard Square theater, I saw rock’n’roll past flash before my eyes,”Landau 
wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/12/bruce-springsteen-gig-review>. 
“And I saw something else: I saw rock and roll future and its name is Bruce 
Springsteen. And on a night when I needed to feel young, he made me feel like I 
was hearing music for the very first time.” Landau was writing not that he had 
seen the future course of music, but that he had seen he and rock had a future 
together. The quote was transformed, until Springsteen became the subtly 
different “the future of rock’n’roll”, a quote that followed him around and 
boosted his reputation. It was, as Springsteen writes in Born to Run, “one of 
the greatest lifesaving raves of all time”, and he acknowledges what Landau was 
really writing about and how “it has always been taken somewhat out of context, 
its lovely subtleties lost”. And yet, when he introduces the quote, he doesn’t 
cite the actual words, writing instead: “A man in Boston had ‘seen the future 
of rock’n’roll’, and it was …me.” A small thing, but given how crucial the 
quote was, an important thing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fbruce-springsteen-autobiography-born-to-run-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F030de6d689cae9e346eaab76c3a1c9b74b21be4e%2F0_499_1936_2419%2F1936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bruce%20Springsteen%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20his%20autobiography%2C%20Born%20to%20Run&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fbruce-springsteen-autobiography-born-to-run-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bruce%20Springsteen%20%E2%80%93%20five%20things%20we%20learned%20from%20his%20autobiography%2C%20Born%20to%20Run&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F25%2Fbruce-springsteen-autobiography-born-to-run-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F030de6d689cae9e346eaab76c3a1c9b74b21be4e%2F0_499_1936_2419%2F1936.jpg>
 ‘Rock and roll future’ … Bruce Springsteen. Photograph: Steve Granitz/WireImage
Springsteen often had problems with women


While he realised early on that music was a way to meet girls – that even a 
gawky kid could stir interest if he was willing to shake it up on the 
dancefloor, or hold a guitar on a stage – Springsteen was so consumed by his 
music that he didn’t have a lot of time for women. And when he did, he says, he 
didn’t behave well. He accepts he handled his separation from his first wife, 
Julianne Phillips, appallingly. But there’s more to it than that, and he traces 
it back to the personality traits he inherited from his father: “A misogyny 
grown from the fear of all the dangerous, beautiful, strong women in our lives 
crossed with the carrying of an underlying physical threat, a psychological 
bullying that is meant to frighten and communicate that the dark thing in you 
is barely restrained. You use it to intimidate those you love … I can’t lay it 
all at my pop’s feet; plenty of it is my own weakness and inability at this 
late date to put it all away.”

The E Street Band could never be simply a band of brothers

Of course, Springsteen was always the boss – as well as The Boss – but there’s 
more to it than that, and it lies in the complicated status ofClarence Clemons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/19/clarence-clemons-obituary>, 
saxophonist and onstage foil, the best-paid member of the band, and its beating 
heart. “He struggled living in the predominantly white world of our band,” 
Springsteen writes. “For a long time he was alone, and no matter how close we 
were, I was white. We had as deep a relationship as I can imagine, but we lived 
in the real world, where we’d experienced that nothing, not all the love in 
God’s heaven, obliterates race.” There’s a telling moment in Born to Run, when 
the E Street Band join the 1988 Human Rights Now tour promoting Amnesty 
International. One of the stops is in Cote D’Ivoire, where the band play to “an 
audience, astadium audience, of completely black faces! I finally knew how 
Clarence felt.”
 