
Bruce Springsteen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> on Friday 
cancelled an upcoming concert in North Carolina because of a controversial 
anti-LGBT law that critics say legalizes discrimination.

Springsteen was scheduled to perform on Sunday in Greensboro, but said he was 
cancelling the show because he and the E Street Band “want to show solidarity 
for those freedom fighters” protesting against the law.

“To my mind, it’s an attempt by people who cannot stand the progress our 
country has made in recognizing the human rights of all of our citizens to 
overturn that progress,” Springsteensaid in a statement. 
<http://brucespringsteen.net/> 

North Carolina’s Public Facilities Privacy and Security Act allows governments 
to discriminate against people based on sexual orientation and gender identity, 
and prevents municipal governments from creating local laws that would offer 
these groups protections. Under the law, all public institutions must post 
signs designating that bathrooms and locker rooms are to be used only based on 
biological sex.

Republican state legislators pushed the law through North Carolina’s general 
assembly and it was signed by the state’s governor, Pat McCrory,in just one day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/24/north-carolina-discrimination-law-lgbt-groups-pat-mccrory>
. Three people have fileda federal lawsuit against the act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/28/north-carolina-lgbt-discriminiation-law-lawsuit-constitutionality>
.

Major businesses including Bank of America and American Airlines, which are 
based in Charlotte,quickly condemned the law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/01/north-carolina-transgender-bathroom-law>
. This week,PayPal cancelled plans to open a new operation center 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/05/paypal-cancels-north-carolina-center-charlotte-law-lgbt-discrimination>
 in Charlotte, which would have employed more than 400 people.

“Right now, there are many groups, businesses, and individuals in North 
Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina> working to oppose 
and overcome these negative developments,” Springsteen said. “Taking all of 
this into account, I feel that this is a time for me and the band to show 
solidarity for those freedom fighters.”

Springsteen apologized for cancelling the show and said tickets will be 
refunded.

“Some things are more important than a rock show and this fight against 
prejudice and bigotry – which is happening as I write – is one of them,” 
Springsteen said. “It is the strongest means I have for raising my voice in 
opposition to those who continue to push us backwards instead of forwards.”
 