
1 The Castiles – Baby I <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I-3piB3bR7A>

(Recorded 2 May 1966, at Mr Music, Bricktown, NJ; written by Bruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> and George Theiss)

Bruce Springsteen: born to write
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/30/bruce-springsteen-born-to-run-memoirs-autumn-arts-preview-2016>
There’s a reason why juvenilia like this tends not to get released as part of 
artists’ official catalogues, instead becoming bootleg staples: precisely 
because it’s juvenilia. Springsteen was 16 when it was recorded. That said, 
Baby I is a pretty charming garage band rave-up, the kind that would fit snugly 
on to a compilation called something like High in the Garage: New Jersey Punk 
Vol IV. No marks for originality – the Castiles need your tender touch, they 
need your loving so much, and the central riff on the verse could have been 
taken straight from theThem <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Them_(band)> 
catalogue, but then that’s true of virtually all US garage bands across 1965 
and 1966. After recording this song and another Springsteen/Theiss original,
That’s What You Get <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_1ET0kehXbg>, Springsteen 
wouldn’t go into the studio again until February 1970. And listening to That’s 
What You Get – a slightly less competent piece of garage juvenilia, you can see 
why he chose Baby I for Chapter and Verse.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI-3piB3bR7A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI-3piB3bR7A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI-3piB3bR7A&media=>
2 The Castiles – You Can’t Judge a Book by the Cover 

(Recorded 16 September 1967, at The Left Foot, Freehold, NJ; written by Willie 
Dixon)

The Castiles’ show at The Left Foot – a teen club in the recreation centre of 
St Peter’s Episcopal Church – was recorded in its entirety by its priest, Rev 
Fred Coleman. And like the two studio tracks, it’s part of the Apocrypha of 
Springsteen. The Castiles were a hardworking group – before splitting in 1968 
they played the best part of 120 shows – and their bar band set was a selection 
of covers. The covers, though, weren’t just the hits of the day, but a melange 
of underground staples – versions of Moby Grape’s Omaha, Fire and Purple Haze 
by Jimi Hendrix, the Yardbirds’ Jeff’s Boogie, the Kinks’ See My Friends, and 
even Suzanne by Leonard Cohen. In all honesty,the full show 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OaalYbxRQIA> is every bit as uninteresting as 
you might expect a 50-year old, extremely lo-fi recording of teenagers playing 
cover versions to be. The version of You Can’t Judge a Book by the Cover, 
extensively cleaned up from the circulating recordings, is a good choice to 
represent the show, because the Willie Dixon song has been a staple of bar band 
sets since time immemorial. File under: you’ll listen once, but probably not 
twice.

3 Steel Mill – He’s Guilty <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xTFIw-NoDNQ> (The 
Judge Song)

(Recorded 22 February 1970, at Pacific Recording Studio, San Mateo, 
California; written by Bruce Springsteen)

Bruce Springsteen in pictures – to mark 30 years since Born in the USA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/oct/30/bruce-springsteen-born-in-the-usa-30-years-in-pictures>
The roots of the E Street Band lie in Steel Mill, which saw Springsteen 
teaming up with Vini Lopez,Danny Federici 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/apr/21/springsteen> and Steve Van Zandt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/feb/17/steve-van-zandt-bruce-springsteen>
, though the latter joined after this recording. You wouldn’t callHe’s Guilty 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xTFIw-NoDNQ> awfully sophisticated lyrically: 
it reads more like a local newspaper court report than one of the epic shaggy 
dog tales Springsteen would go on to write during the early 1970s. It’s hard to 
read it as a protest against The Man, given the accused was apparently 
“speeding, running down his mother / Stabbing his wife then strangling her 
lover”. It’s a fair cop, guv. But it’s a dynamic piece of hard rock, with a 
terrific organ solo from Federici prodded along by a twitchy, nervous guitar 
line, and a the kind of expertly arranged multipartite construction that would 
become familiar in later Springsteen songs. This was one of three songs Steel 
Mill recorded at the behest of legendary San Francisco promoter Bill Graham 
(along withGoin’ Back to Georgia <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eGUwaWHUmSs> 
andThe Train Song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UVKtvhnEJMU>), which led to 
him offering them a record deal with his new label. They turned him down.

4 The Bruce Springsteen Band – Ballad of Jesse James  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q2gxD_aR88I>

(Recorded 14 March 1972, at Challenger Eastern Surfboards, Highland, NJ; 
written by Bruce Springsteen)

The Bruce Springsteen Band was very much the E Street Band in embryo – though 
Federici had disappeared for a bit, Lopez and Van Zandt were in place, joined 
by Garry Tallent and David Sancious. It was a short-lived group, playing its 
first show in June 1971, and its last in June 1972, before the E Street Band 
made its debut in October 1972. Springsteen had tired of Steel Mill’s hard 
rock, and was listening toVan Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/01/van-morrison-10-of-the-best>
 andJoe Cocker <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/22/joe-cocker>’s Mad 
Dogs and Englishmen and wanted to create a rock and soul hybrid. Ballad of 
Jesse James tends towards the rock than the soul, but it’s pretty great: a 
loping, Stonesy riff, slide guitar colouring it, and Sancious’s piano giving 
the soul a distinctly E Street feel. Springsteen’s voice is now the one we 
would come to know from the rest of his career, a yearning holler, and if the 
lyric isn’t great, it’s functional, and the song opens up the exploration of 
American mythology that would be such a key part of his career.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq2gxD_aR88I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq2gxD_aR88I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq2gxD_aR88I&media=>
5 Bruce Springsteen – Henry Boy  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qWtJRm8c0Cw#t=1m1s>

(Recorded June 1972, at Mediasound Studios, New York; written by Bruce 
Springsteen)

Springsteen went on a writing jag in 1972, honing the voice that would he 
would introduce to the world on Greetings From Asbury Park, NJ and The Wild, 
The Innocent and the E Street Shuffle. He was in and out of studios demoing the 
songs – including the famous session with John Hammond in May that resulted in 
his CBS deal. A month after that he recordedHenry Boy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qWtJRm8c0Cw> which is, pretty clearly, a dry 
run forRosalita <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XXWVSussrt0>, with much of 
Springsteen’s topline vocal melody replicated for that early classic (it would 
be interesting to know if it predatedBlinded by the Light 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yjxbOe7p8C0>, because there are some elements 
from that present, too). Here, finally, we get the storytelling, wordy 
Springsteen of the first three albums, and his use of geography as an indicator 
of identity, something that would crop up again and again throughout his career 
(has any major writer used locations so often?): “Well the North side is for 
diamond-studded women subtly selling their wares / And the West side is for 
debutantes and would be millionaires / Oh the East side is for lost boys who 
know their moves too well / The South side is for gamblers, Henry, the train 
stops once for hell.” It’s minor compared to what would come later, but it’s 
the standout of these five tracks, nonetheless.
 