
Bruce Springsteen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> has again 
condemned Donald Trump, with less than a month before the US presidential 
election. Springsteen, who had previously called the Republican presidential 
candidate “a moron”, told an audience in London: “It’s a terrible thing that’s 
happening in the States. He’s undermining the entire democratic tradition.”

Born to Run by Bruce Springsteen review – inside the mind of the Boss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/21/born-to-run-by-bruce-springsteen-review>
Springsteen was speaking at an invitation-only event for European press at the 
Institute of Contemporary Arts in London to promote his autobiography, Born to 
Run. When asked by host Antoine de Caunes to explain to Europeans the appeal of 
Trump, Springsteen replied: “Nobody’s been able to explain that.”


Springsteen also paid further tribute to Bob Dylan, following the latter 
winning the Nobel prize in literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/13/bob-dylan-deserves-to-win-nobel-prize-literature>
. “Like a Rolling Stone was the first time I heard a version of my country that 
felt naggingly real,” he said. “Long after all of us are forgotten, Bob’s work 
is going to be ringing out loud and clear.” He contrasted Dylan’s writing 
favourably with his own work: “Bob’s certainly a poet. I’m a hardworking 
journeyman.”

Born to Run dealt extensively with Springsteen’s family, covering not just his 
relationship with his parents and grandparents, but also the changes parenthood 
had wrought on his own life. He said the final section of the book, “writing 
about everyone you know now”, was the hardest to write. “I showed my kids the 
things I wrote about them,” he said. “Patti [Scialfa, his wife] and I discussed 
that section of the book and she didn’t change anything, [though] she wasn’t 
necessarily comfortable with everything. There were some things I wasn’t 
comfortable with myself. But she gave me a lot of room to explore.”

Bruce Springsteen – five things we learned from his autobiography, Born to Run
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/25/bruce-springsteen-autobiography-born-to-run-book>
Discussing how his troubled relationship with his father had affected his own 
parenting, he spoke of how people honour their own parents by trying to steer 
away from the things they had difficulty with and by passing on the things they 
did well. “The difficult thing was not having a role model to pass on what it 
meant to be a good parent,” he said. That meant being a father “did not come 
naturally: the suspension of deep personal time; the giving over of yourself at 
any moment of the day. I was used to my work taking over my time. It was my 
sacred space. To have ‘Hey! I need a ride to Billy’s house,’ was something it 
took me a while to get used to. But I have a good relationship with my kids. I 
wouldn’t say I was perfect, but I did OK.”

He spoke, too, about how playing live had helped him cope with the depression 
that had struck him at intervals over the past 30 years. Playing such long sets 
– Springsteen routinely goes well past three hours when performing with the E 
Street Band – meant he would be “too tired to be depressed. To be depressed you 
need to have certain amount of energy, to go hunting through the weeds. There’s 
also a great centring element that wards off [the effects of depression]. It 
hardens your centre; that wards off self doubt and the unproductive questioning 
that comes with depression.”
 