
In a frame of reference where you might think of Elvis Presley as an idol and 
Little Richard as a hero,Buddy Holly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/buddy-holly> has to be considered as an 
influence.

Buddy Holly, the first rocker to actually go on stage wearing horn-rimmed 
spectacles, who died in an air crash on 3 February 1959, and who thereby 
created rock’s very first tragic legend, was much more than simply another 50s 
rock ‘n’ roll front man who got thrown into unnatural notoriety by his 
premature death.

In any final analysis of the contribution of the stars of the 50s to the 
general steam of rock and roll, Holly has to be singled out as the man who made 
possible a whole lot of what came later.

“And what’s that supposed to mean?” you ask. Precisely that Holly was the one 
who, above all others, convinced a large number of nondescript male children 
that maybe they too could be rock performers.

Most of the early rock’n’roll stars had so much going for them that they 
tended to overawe the average fan. Only the extremely talented or the extremely 
crass could attempt to seriously emulate Elvis Presley’s dramatic hoodlum good 
looks and wide local range, Little Richard’s maniac energy, or Gene Vincent’s 
delinquent meanness.

Holly was the really accessible early rock star. His high, rather, lightweight 
tenor could be copied by any spotty third former who posed in front of a mirror 
with a six-pound mail-order guitar, while with his capped teeth and myopic grim 
he was certainly no winner in the beauty stakes. He was the first star who made 
it clear that just about anyone, given a lot of application and the right 
breaks, could actually make it in the wonderful world of rock’n’roll.

Holly was the first star who made it clear that just about anyone could make 
it in rock‘n’roll

Among today’s superstars who fell under Holly’s persuasive spell was one Eric 
Clapton. In a number of interviews, Clapton has cited Holly as the artist who 
first inspired him to take up the guitar. Dylan also includes Buddy Holly in 
his list of early heroes, while John Lennon went to great pains to make the 
Peggy Sue cut on his Rock’n’Roll album a loving tribute to one of his first 
idols.

Holly may not have been over strong on charisma, but that didn’t mean that he 
was in any way short on talent. In terms of seminal creativity, Holly must rank 
close to Chuck Berry as one of the greatest innovators of the 50s. His songs 
had such lasting merit that more than half a dozen of them have earned a 
prominent place in the catalogue of all-time rock standards, and are still 
hitting the charts today in such grisly guises as Showaddywaddy’s Heartbeat.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WQiIMuOKIzY

Holly was born Charles Hardin Holley on 7 September 1936. He grew up in the 
small Texas town of Lubbock, close to the New Mexico border.

His first stumble into show business was made during his high school days. He 
teamed up with another local boy, Bob Montgomery, to form a country duo called 
Buddy and Bob. It seems that even at that early age he had an uncompromising 
faith that somewhere, somehow, there was career for him in music.

Buddy and Bob might have gone on playing supermarket openings, fairs, and 
local talent shows until they were old and grey. Things, however, were moving 
in the outside world that would change all that.

After the disruption of the Korean war, which interrupted cthe areers of many 
young country musicians, a situation was created where the old guard of country 
pickers, who had risen to fame in the 30s and 40s, had a very conservative 
stranglehold on the country music output. This grip was so strong that drum 
kits were actually banned from the stage of the Grand Ole Opry until the 
mid-50s.

Despite all this there was a group of younger musicians determined to break 
out of the restrictions created by this early 50s Nashville mafia. While Holly 
churned out country standards for the good people of Lubbock, they were already 
flirting with black R&B, a flirtation that would eventually create the fusion 
that would be rock’n’roll.

Even in the comparative isolation of Lubbock, Buddy Holly was becoming 
fascinated by the more lively music of people like Hank Ballard and John Lee 
Hooker. When Elvis Presley played Lubbock, Holly went backstage to meet the new 
singing sensation from Memphis, and it was soon after his meeting that Holly 
resolved to go after the big time as a rock’n’roll star.

After a good deal of hustling he was given a contract with Decca Records in 
Nashville. Presley’s contract had just been sold to RCA. Capitol had signed 
Gene Vincent after a nationwide talent search, and Decca felt strongly that 
they needed a similar performer. Decca might have wanted a rock star in 
principle, but they hardly went out of their way to accommodate or assist their 
new find.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fbuddy-holly-rocker-next-door-classic-profile-nme-1975%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2df961019bba426fa71ce495c93f3f0a425ca4ec%2F282_0_2281_3422%2F2281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buddy%20Holly%3A%20the%20rocker%20next%20door%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20profile%20by%20Mick%20Farren&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fbuddy-holly-rocker-next-door-classic-profile-nme-1975%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buddy%20Holly%3A%20the%20rocker%20next%20door%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20profile%20by%20Mick%20Farren&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fbuddy-holly-rocker-next-door-classic-profile-nme-1975%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2df961019bba426fa71ce495c93f3f0a425ca4ec%2F282_0_2281_3422%2F2281.jpg>
 Buddy Holly in1955. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
The total outcome of the relationship between Holly and Decca was the set of 
tracks later released in England on the That’ll Be The Day album. This material 
was recorded with Sonny Curtis on second guitar, Jerry Allison on drums and Joe 
Maudlin on bass. Maudlin and Allison were later, along with Holly, to form the 
nucleus of the Crickets.

Decca released two undistinguished singles, and then dropped Holly’s contract. 
Considerably sobered, Holly and his sidemen started a long grind of country 
roadshows. On these extravaganzas they usually opened with their own act, and 
then stepped back to accompany more established stars like Faron Young, Hank 
Thompson and Wanda Jackson. It might have been invaluable experience but it was 
somewhat crushing ordeal for a group of kids who wanted to be stars.

Their next try at recording was brought about by an individual called Norman 
Petty. Petty was the kind of 50s rock manager from the 
cut-corners-and-get-rich-quick school. He negotiated a deal between Holly and 
the band and Coral, ironically an independent subsidiary of Decca.

On the strength of this Norman Petty became their manager. One initial problem 
that Petty foresaw was the possibility that Decca might cause trouble about the 
release of the group’s first single That’ll Be the Day. Holly had already cut a 
version of the song for Decca, and they would have been well within their 
rights in stopping any other recording of the song by Holly that came out 
within five years of their release.

Coral were insistent that That’ll Be The Day should be the first single, so 
Petty decided that the song should go out under a collective group name rather 
than Holly’s. After some deliberation a name was chosen, and the Crickets were 
born.

There were other legal worries. Holly had previously signed a number of 
publishing contracts, and to prevent possible injunctions, Petty apparently 
began shuffling the writing credits on various songs, often removing Holly’s 
name and taking on his own or substituting it altogether for the real writers. 
This practice may have circumvented possible trouble, but obviously it created 
a rather cloudy financial situation to say the least.

Another scheme of Petty’s that actually made money for everyone was the 
concept of simultaneously releasing singles under both Holly’s name, and that 
of the Crickets. In this way the group was able to put out roughly double the 
product of the average artist or band.

The relationship with Coral was more than happy. From 1957 to Holly’s death in 
1959 there was a string of hits; the classic titles like Peggy Sue, Words of 
Love, Oh Boy, Rave On, Heartbeat and Maybe Baby.

Holly, Maudlin and Allison (Sonny Curtis had by this time left the band and 
been replaced by Niki Sullivan) began headlining the huge rock marathons that 
were the favourite method of presentation in the 50s. Eventually Niki Sullivan 
dropped out, finding that playing rhythm guitar behind Holly was redundant 
exercise. The Crickets toured Australia and England as a three-piece, where 
they baffled critics (including NME’s Keith Goodwin) with their ability to push 
out such a consistently solid sound.

Shortly after his return to the US, tragedy struck. Holly was killed in the 
plane crash.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fbuddy-holly-rocker-next-door-classic-profile-nme-1975%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38593345f6f94282aef5c84267a6ece13a18f75%2F135_98_1866_2796%2F1866.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buddy%20Holly%3A%20the%20rocker%20next%20door%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20profile%20by%20Mick%20Farren&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fbuddy-holly-rocker-next-door-classic-profile-nme-1975%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buddy%20Holly%3A%20the%20rocker%20next%20door%20%E2%80%93%20a%20classic%20profile%20by%20Mick%20Farren&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fbuddy-holly-rocker-next-door-classic-profile-nme-1975%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38593345f6f94282aef5c84267a6ece13a18f75%2F135_98_1866_2796%2F1866.jpg>
 Buddy Holly … Making it possible for any spotty third former to be a 
rock’n’roll star. Photograph: Michael Ochs Archives/Michael Ochs Archives/Getty 
Images 
Most contemporary reports on Holly the man seem to agree that he was no wild 
hellraiser. Gene Vincent and the Bluecaps may have set fire to motel cabins and 
kept one jump ahead of the irate fathers of teenage girls, but this doesn’t 
appear to have been Holly’s style. His public image of the shy, bespectacled 
grinning, clean-cut kid seems to have extended uniformly into his private life.

When he first came out of Texas, he was reputed to have been something of hick 
in loud suits and wire rimmed glasses. As he became successful, and rubbed 
shoulders with more sophisticated performers he developed an almost collegiate 
taste for heavy black frames and Ivy League suits.

One paradox that has always been noticeable in Holly’s attitudes is that of 
his marriage. In most respects he seems to have been the typical good ol’ Texas 
boy, but his marriage to Maria Elena Santiago (a Puerto Rican) goes totally 
against the redneck racism that was so typical of the area he came from.

It Doesn’t Matter Any More, the single that was released around the time of 
Holly’s death, marked a new departure in his music. At the instigation of 
Norman Petty, who seems to have been something of a frustrated Mantovani, Holly 
was moving towards a lusher, string-riddled sound. This may have been Petty’s 
answer to the Dick Clark-style pop music of Fabian and Bobby Vee that was 
slowly edging the rough and ready original rockers out of the money.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkVGM86XIilw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkVGM86XIilw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkVGM86XIilw&media=>
Whether or not this was Petty’s idea of keeping Buddy Holly up with the latest 
trends, it was a retrograde step in terms of the mainstream progress or rock. 
The strength of Holly’s contributions was never in his lyrics, or his romantic 
voice. Holly’s power lay in his guitar parts and his inventive arrangements. 
Petty did his best to wipe these out with those saccharine strings.

Buddy Holly left the world with a major legacy. From 1955 on he was a 
compulsive tape freak. Almost every idea for a song or arrangement was 
committed to tape. After his death there was sufficient material for Coral to 
go on releasing tracks, original Holly, until 1965. Some of these were 
completed tapes. Others, however, were simply guitar and voice demos. Norman 
Petty personally supervised the addition of backing tracks by either the Jack 
Hansen Combo or, later, by a group called the Fireballs.

Although he’s been dead for nearly sixteen years, Holly has hardly been 
forgotten. It looks as though it will be very long time before Buddy Holly will 
vanish altogether.
 