
A South Korean Buddhist monk was left in critical condition after setting 
himself on fire in Seoul to protest against the country’s settlement withJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> on compensation for wartime sex 
slaves.

The 64-year-old monk suffered third-degree burns across his body and serious 
damage to vital organs. He was unconscious and unable to breathe on his own, 
said an official from the Seoul National University Hospital.

The man set himself ablaze on Saturday, citing the deal between the countries 
over South Korean women who were forced into sexual slavery by Japan’s second 
world war military.

In his notebook, police said, the man called South Korea’s embattled 
president, Park Geun-hye, a “traitor” over the2015 agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/28/japan-to-say-sorry-to-south-korea-in-deal-to-end-dispute-over-wartime-sex-slaves>
.

The issue of comfort women was brought back to the fore on Friday when the 
Japanese government reacted angrily to the placing of abronze statue 
representing wartime sex slaves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/japan-says-recalling-envoy-to-skorea-over-new-comfort-woman-statue>
 in front of its consulate in the city of Busan, recalling its ambassador from 
South Korea and suspending economic talks.

Former sex slaves reject Japan and South Korea's 'comfort women' accord
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/former-sex-slaves-reject-japan-south-koreas-comfort-women-accord>
A similar statue in front of the Japanese embassy in Seoul has been at the 
centre of the controversial agreement under which Japan pledged to fund a 
Seoul-based foundation that was set up to help support the victims.South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea>, in exchange, vowed to refrain 
from criticising Japan over the issue and try to resolve Japanese grievance 
over the Seoul statue.

The agreement has so far come short of bringing a closure to the emotional 
issue. The deal continues to be criticised in South Korea because it was 
reached without approval from victims. Students have been holding sit-in 
protests next to the Seoul statue for more than a year over fears that the 
government might try to remove it.

At the time of the deal Seoul said there were 46 surviving South Korean 
“comfort women”.
 