
1. South London Boroughs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4kL_MHmMSQY>

The best way to begin a career is to set up an instant connection with the 
listener, and then do something else: create some sort of unique context for 
your music. Burial’s South London Boroughs, released on Hyperdub in 2005, did 
that effortlessly. It was a sonic painting of south London at night, crafted 
with spray-cans of a dark two-step beat, wonky synths and his signature bass. 
It was like a Banksy had suddenly appeared. Next to nothing was known about
Burial <https://www.theguardian.com/music/burial> except for where he came 
from, and he marked his territory by inviting us to ride through the dark 
streets of south London’s outer boroughs with beats alone.

2. Night Bus <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IV-Q3j9ngRs>

When Burial released his self-titled LP a year later, it was hailed as one of 
the most complete dubstep albums ever created. Although much of the album was 
brooding and harsh, it contained Burial’s first real ambient composition: Night 
Bus. It’s the sound of hopping on a near-empty bus in the early hours of the 
morning, weighed down by an aching comedown. The sounds used are minimal, but 
the track is profound; drizzling rain and haunting synth pads interlock to 
create something as introspective as it is beautiful.

The strange case of Burial, Four Tet and the identity conspiracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/jun/20/burial-four-tet-kieran-hebden>
3. Endorphin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EtVjv-1vJYo>

If Night Bus was Burial’s first slice of true ambience, Endorphin – from his 
second album, Untrue, is his greatest. It’s the sound of being haunted, by 
people who themselves feel haunted; ghostly voices materialise from crevices of 
deep bass and warped horn sounds, and the whole track is cloaked in a film of 
crackle and fuzz. It’s the epitome of Burial’s ability to make everything sound 
stunningly nostalgic and emulate a state of saudade through a sense of pining 
and loss, without ever coming across as sentimental.

4. Archangel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8k_f2QK77ew>

Archangel is sometimes overlooked in Burial’s catalogue, perhaps because of 
its accessibility. The fact that it’s his best known track shouldn’t stop it 
making this list: it somehow makes Ray J – an ex of Kim Kardashian and maker of 
the Kardashian-referencing track I Hit It First – sound magical. It’s driven by 
a simple two-step beat and echoes of warped vocals, and makes the perfect 
soundtrack for twilight walks through the city, played ultra-loud through a 
tinny set of earphones. It’s Burial at his poppiest, while retaining the future 
garage flair that colours all his work.

5. Raver <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QFO1kuq630w>

The final track on this list from Untrue, Raver is perhaps the best example of 
Burial’s wide-ranging but indefinable approach to music, with twisted snippets 
of vocals, rippling synths and a thumping two-step beat. It’s the kind of track 
that gets all Burialheads feverishly trying to decide what genre he is working 
in. Future garage? Post dubstep? Post future? Burial is not someone genre 
labels can be attached to easily; it’s probably just better to accept the music 
for what it is.

6. Paradise Circus (Massive Attack vs Burial) 
<https://soundcloud.com/thevinylfactory/massive-attack-vs-burial>

Following Untrue, Burial had been unmasked as William Bevan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/jun/20/burial-four-tet-kieran-hebden>
 after a campaign by the Sun’s Gordon Smart. Since then, he hasn’t released 
another full LP, but instead has worked on EPs and singles that are longer, 
multilayered epics. Arguably his finest work of all, Burial’s reworking of 
Paradise Circus turns it into something even more poignant and atmospheric. 
It’s a breathy, perfect moment of disassociation. There are so many parts to 
it, but best are the heavenly pitched-up vocals and triumphant synths in the 
closing minutes.

7. Nova ft Four Tet <https://soundcloud.com/four-tet/burial-four-tet-nova>

School reunions can be dire congregations of people trying to out-impress each 
other and remembering each other as the dicks they were in their teens. That 
might not be the case with Elliott School in Putney, which produced members of 
So Solid Crew, the Maccabees, DragonForce, the xx and Hot Chip, as well as 
Burial and Four Tet (though the former would definitely be a no-show). The two 
producers worked together a few years back on Moth/Wolf Club, but also joined 
forces in 2012 for Nova. Mixing Burial’s garage rhythms with Four Tet’s ear for 
delicate melodies, it’s a shuffling, delay-filled track. Rumour has it that 
Thom Yorke has joined forces with both to make some more tunes. They make for a 
fantastic duo, although conspiracy theorists will still argue they are one and 
the same.

Elusive dubstep star Burial gives a rare interview
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/oct/26/urban> 
8. Rough Sleeper <http://www.hyperdub.net/releases/view/207/HDB069>

Fizzing with frenetic energy, Rough Sleeper signalled a move towards longer, 
more upbeat compositions. It’s still got the same click beats and trapped 
voices, but feels somehow different. The highlight of the track is undoubtedly 
the electric-piano hook that dominates the middle section, winding its way 
through the vocals and fuzz. Although it is nearly 14 minutes long, it seems to 
finish in a flash – testament to how gripping it is.

9. Come Down to Us <http://www.hyperdub.net/releases/view/258/HDB080>

Burial’s most recent EP, Rival Dealer, was the closest thing so far to a third 
album. In a rare interview, Burial told BBC 6Music the release was centred 
around a motif of “anti-bullying tunes that could help someone to believe in 
themselves” and it features recurring samples from an interview with Nasa 
scientist Melissa Dawson Higgins. Come Down to Us is the pinnacle of the EP – 
Burial at his most experimental and positive. Cinematic, almost 
Christmas-sounding chimes make it a quasi-hymn, and it ends on a crackly, 
evocative recording of Lana Wachowski talking about the difficulty of coming 
out as transgender.

10. Sweetz (Zomby x Burial) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YMi8pXOaR9M>

Sweetz is far and away the most divisive tune Burial has worked on, with the 
critical gauge of the YouTube likes/dislikes bar highlighting that (868 likes 
and 246 dislikes at the time of writing). But it’s the fact that it is so 
deliciously polarising that contributes to it being the most interesting track 
Burial has released. Driven by a hyperactive “yeah, we fucked up” sample that 
constantly shifts in tone, stop-start bass rhythms and hypnotic synths that 
come and go as they damn well please, it’s Burial gone avant garde. It’s 
constantly threatening to shape-shift into something completely different, yet 
it somehow – just – sticks together as one piece. It’s a playful side to Burial 
that’s never been shown before and hints at a more off-the-wall approach to 
come in the future.

 