
In a huge city, it is a fairly common observation that the dwellers in a slum 
are almost a separate race of people with different values, aspirations and 
ways of being. One result of slum clearance is that a considerable movement of 
people takes place over long distances, with devastating effect on the social 
groupings built up over years. But one might argue that this is a good thing 
when we are dealing with people who have no initiative or civic pride. The task 
is surely to break up such groupings, even though the people seem to be 
satisfied with their miserable environment and seem to enjoy an extrovert 
social life in their locality.”

So wrote Newcastle’s city planning officer, Wilfrid Burns, in 1963. Working 
with infamouscouncil leader T Dan Smith 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/insideout/northeast/series2/tdansmith_newcastlepolitics.shtml>
, Burns planned to demolish a quarter of Newcastle’s housing stock. This was 
part of Smith’s grandiose vision for a “Brasilia of the north”, which collapsed 
when he ended up behind bars on corruption charges relating to thePoulson affair
 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/poulson-affair-pelicans-brief-that-stunned-a-country-1-1193245>
 housing scandal. But Byker – a tight-knit, 17,000-strong, working-class 
community of Victorian back-to-back terraces – was demolished. It made way for 
a wholesale redevelopment of the area, the centrepiece of which wasarchitect 
Ralph Erskine <http://architectuul.com/architect/ralph-erskine>’s Byker Wall 
estate.


Though it has been long since razed, the original Byker community lives on 
through the work ofSirkka-Liisa Konttinen, a Finnish photographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/aug/12/photography-sirkka-liisa-konttinen>
 and film-maker who moved into the old Byker in 1969. Over a 12-year period, she
catalogued the community <http://www.amber-online.com/exhibitions/byker> as it 
faced the wrecking ball, producing a valuable archive of social history, which 
includes an extraordinary film made by the Amber Film Collective, of which 
Konttinen is a founding member.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbyker-wall-newcastles-noble-failure-of-an-estate-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-41%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432142337297%2F23b6719a-b24d-412c-81bb-71b9c50c0c69-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Byker%20Wall%3A%20Newcastle's%20noble%20failure%20of%20an%20estate%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2041&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbyker-wall-newcastles-noble-failure-of-an-estate-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-41%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Byker%20Wall%3A%20Newcastle%27s%20noble%20failure%20of%20an%20estate%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2041&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbyker-wall-newcastles-noble-failure-of-an-estate-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-41%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432142337297%2F23b6719a-b24d-412c-81bb-71b9c50c0c69-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The original Byker neighbourhood was demolished in 1970s. Byker Wall was 
initially intended to rehouse the residents. Photograph: Peter Atkinson/Alamy 
Today, Byker is best known for Erskine’s Byker Wall, an 1,800-home estate of 
9,500 people, which is among the best regarded of Britain’s postwar council 
estates. It provides a mile-and-a-half-long barrier to North Sea winds, 
creating a microclimate within the estate while protecting it from the noise of 
major roads outside. The undoubtedly forbidding wall echoesPeter and Alison 
Smithson’s Robin Hood Gardens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/dec/05/robin-hood-gardens-east-london>
, with its 10ft-high acoustic wall, which also shields the East End London 
estate from the cacophony of traffic noise.


Unlike Robin Hood Gardens, which is to be knocked down imminently, English 
Heritage awarded Byker a Grade II listing in 2007, defending it from the swathe 
of council-estate demolitions currently devastating communities across Britain –
particularly in London 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/4129abaa-cf16-11e4-893d-00144feab7de.html#axzz3aftvaSMO>
, where more than a dozen estates, housing tens of thousands of people on low 
incomes, are being demolished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbyker-wall-newcastles-noble-failure-of-an-estate-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-41%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432121645008%2Fcd374d71-873e-434e-bb37-06e416bf20cf-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Byker%20Wall%3A%20Newcastle's%20noble%20failure%20of%20an%20estate%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2041&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbyker-wall-newcastles-noble-failure-of-an-estate-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-41%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Byker%20Wall%3A%20Newcastle%27s%20noble%20failure%20of%20an%20estate%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2041&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbyker-wall-newcastles-noble-failure-of-an-estate-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-41%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432121645008%2Fcd374d71-873e-434e-bb37-06e416bf20cf-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Despite public participation in the design, fewer than 20% of the original 
Byker residents were rehoused at Byker Wall. Photograph: Leslie Garland Picture 
Library/Alamy 
Giving its reasons for listing Byker Wall, English Heritage singled out the 
estate 
<http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/news/erskines-byker-wall-awarded-grade-ii-status-image/109958.article>
 both for its “groundbreaking design … influential across Europe”, and its 
“pioneering … approach to public participation”. And there is no doubt that
Erskine, a deeply committed socialist and Quaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2005/mar/22/housingpolicy.guardianobituaries>
 that was heavily influenced by Swedish social democracy, made very 
considerable efforts to involve the original Byker community in the design of 
the new development. Outlining his vision toNewcastle City Council in 1968, 
Erskine made clear <http://www.bbk.ac.uk/bisr/research/Glynn.pdf> that “the 
main concern will be for those who are already resident in Byker, and the need 
to rehouse them without breaking family ties and other valued associations or 
patterns of life”.


This was done through a pilot scheme involving 46 households working with 
architects in the design of their future homes and in the old Byker, where 
Erskine leased a former funeral parlour as an office and drop-in centre.


And yet, despite these considerable efforts to involve and retain the original 
community, once the Byker Wall estate was built, fewer than 20% of the original 
residents were rehoused there.Peter Malpass, commissioned by the Department of 
the Environment 
<http://www.architectsjournal.co.uk/archive/peter-malpass-on-byker-from-the-archive/5215878.article>
 to carry out a research study on the reregeneration, wrote: “Over 17,000 
people lived in Byker at the start of the redevelopment. Fewer than 20% of them 
were living in the New Byker in 1976. One is only left to speculate what would 
have happened had the policy not been to retain the community.”


In 2003, Konttinen returned 
<http://amber-online.com/exhibitions/byker-revisited> to make a new film, 
documenting the lives of Byker Wall residents over a period of six years. The 
contrast with her previous film is immediate, not least because Erskine’s 
estate, now characterised by security doors and intercoms, is so different from 
the narrow streets and back-to-backs of the old Byker. The biggest contrast, 
however, is not the architecture, but the sense of loneliness and dislocation 
faced by many residents. These include asylum seekers uprooted from their own 
communities, but the most poignant scenes record the love of an older resident, 
living alone, for her dog, and how devastated she is when he falls ill and dies.


Konttinen’s original film is not a sentimental account of a bygone age, nor 
does it shirk the poverty many residents of the old Byker endured. But it is 
the images of scores of kids playing in the streets, and the music and singing 
of people in the local pubs, which shines through and defines old Byker. In 
reality, Byker Wall was more a place of isolated individuals facing challenging 
circumstances in solitary flats.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbyker-wall-newcastles-noble-failure-of-an-estate-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-41%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432142475512%2Fab949de4-5cce-42cc-95bf-dd1c6c88ea01-2060x1319.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Byker%20Wall%3A%20Newcastle's%20noble%20failure%20of%20an%20estate%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2041&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbyker-wall-newcastles-noble-failure-of-an-estate-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-41%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Byker%20Wall%3A%20Newcastle%27s%20noble%20failure%20of%20an%20estate%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2041&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fbyker-wall-newcastles-noble-failure-of-an-estate-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-41%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432142475512%2Fab949de4-5cce-42cc-95bf-dd1c6c88ea01-2060x1319.jpeg>
 Children play on the site of demolished houses in Byker, Newcastle. 
Photograph: Trinity Mirror/Mirrorpix/Alamy 
Of course, the world has changed immeasurably since the late 1960s and early 
1970s, and the type of community immortalised so memorably by Konttinen no 
longer exists anywhere in Britain. For all its faults,Byker Wall was an exemplar
 <http://www.bbk.ac.uk/bisr/research/Glynn.pdf> of both design and an attempt 
to involve the community in the changes planned for them by those in power. 
That it failed in so many ways reveals that it is rarely in the interests of 
communities to demolish the homes they live in.


Following the condemnation of planners for postwar slum clearances, of which 
the old Byker is a part, politicians vowed not to repeat the mistakes of the 
past. Yet the desire to demolish people out of poverty appears to be 
irresistible. Today, the cycle of demolition and redevelopment has come full 
circle asso many of the estates contemporaneous to Byker are also slated for 
demolition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/04/is-demolition-ever-the-best-way-to-regenerate>
. What characterises all of these communities is the fierce resistance of the 
majority of residents, who desperately want to stay in their homes. That they 
are not represented and their wishes routinely ignored represents the abject 
failure of democracy, both then and now.


Anna Minton is the author of Ground Control 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Ground-Control-Fear-happiness-twenty-first-century/dp/0241960908>
, and reader inarchitecture at the University of East London 
<http://www.uel.ac.uk/research/profiles/ace/anna-minton/>. She will be one of 
the speakers at the Guardian MasterclassesHow to write about cities seminar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2015/mar/31/uncovering-the-city-urban-writing-seminar-with-bradley-l-garrett>
 on Saturday 23 May

 