
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> attorney general 
Kamala Harris said on Friday she was pursuing new pimping charges against the 
operators of Backpage.com – a website which advertises escort services and 
which she said operated “a hotbed of illicit and exploitative activity”.

The new charges came two weeks after a judge threw out an earlier case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/backpage-com-california-pimping-free-speech-kamala-harris>
.

Harris, an incoming US senator, said she had charged Backpage executives Carl 
Ferrer, Michael Lacey and James Larkin with 13 counts of pimping and conspiracy 
to commit pimping. They also are charged with 26 counts of money laundering.

Harris said the new charges were based on new evidence. A Sacramento County 
judge threw out pimping charges against the men on 9 December, citing federal 
free-speech laws.

In the latest case, filed in Sacramento County superior court, Harris claims 
Backpage illegally funnelled money through multiple companies and created 
various websites to get around banks that refused to process transactions.

She also alleged that the company used photos of women from Backpage on other 
sites without their permission in order to increase revenue and knowingly 
profited from the proceeds of prostitution.

“By creating an online brothel – a hotbed of illicit and exploitative activity 
– Carl Ferrer, Michael Lacey, and James Larkin preyed on vulnerable victims, 
including children, and profited from their exploitation,” Harris said in a 
statement.

Attorneys for the men did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbackpage-new-pimping-charge-kamala-harris-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69e5b3343a8c8ea79e1c53a622f9401fc3940f3d%2F0_345_2400_2400%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%20attorney%20general%20pursues%20new%20pimping%20charges%20against%20Backpage%20site&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbackpage-new-pimping-charge-kamala-harris-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%20attorney%20general%20pursues%20new%20pimping%20charges%20against%20Backpage%20site&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fbackpage-new-pimping-charge-kamala-harris-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69e5b3343a8c8ea79e1c53a622f9401fc3940f3d%2F0_345_2400_2400%2F2400.jpg>
 A photo provided by the Sacramento County sheriff’s office shows Carl Ferrer, 
CEO of Backpage. Photograph: Uncredited/AP 
Judge Michael Bowman sided with lawyers for the trio and the company in his 
ruling earlier this month, saying the website was engaged in free speech 
allowed under the federal Communications Decency Act, which protects companies 
from content posted by third parties.

In the earlier case, Ferrer, 55, Backpage’s chief executive, was charged with 
pimping a minor, pimping and conspiracy to commit pimping. Lacey, 68, and 
Larkin, 67, both from Arizona, were charged with conspiracy to commit pimping.

Lacey and Larkin, the website’s former owners, used to own alternative 
newspapers around the country, including the Village Voice in New York City.

Harris has alleged that more than 90% of Backpage’s revenue – millions of 
dollars each month – comes from adult escort ads that use coded language and 
nearly nude photos to offer sex for money.

She is doubling down on pimping charges in her final days before resigning to 
take her seat in the US Senate.

The Democrat was among 47 state attorneys general who asked Congress in 2013 
to help change a provision of the Communications Decency Act that they 
acknowledged protected Backpage from prosecution.
 