
Call Your Girlfriend <http://callyourgirlfriend.com/> bills itself as the 
podcast for long distance besties everywhere, but it’s also so much more. 
Started by tech expert Aminatou Sow 
<http://www.ofakind.com/stories/8192-the-insider-aminatou-sow> and journalist 
Ann Friedman <http://www.annfriedman.com/>, the podcast is simply a 
conversation between two friends (and some of their friends) on which anyone 
can eavesdrop – like a party line chat that covers politics, period feminism, 
the Great British Bake Off, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, and Drake, with everything 
from Benghazi to Bieber in between.

Why you should listen: Every great podcast has an origin story and for Call 
Your Girlfriend <http://callyourgirlfriend.com/>, it all began when Sow and 
Friedman were at a Gossip Girl viewing party in Washington, DC. They hit it off 
right away, but as their friendship grew, their peripatetic lives took them 
across the country from each other. With the encouragement of their 
friend-turned-producerGina Delvac <https://twitter.com/gdelvac>, the pair 
decided to turn their weekly catch-up phone calls – complete with planned 
agenda – into a show. “Almost a full year after Gina started bugging us about 
it, we got serious about actually doing it,” Sow says. “We haven’t looked 
back!” They record their conversations over Skype and Delvac edits them into 
the show that has developed adevoted following 
<http://t.umblr.com/redirect?z=http%253A%252F%252Fwww.ivankatrump.com%252Ffavorite-podcasts%252F%253Fcm_mmc%253DFacebook_Post-_-082415_podcasts-_-%2526utm_source%253DFacebook_Post%2526utm_medium%253Dsocial%2526utm_campaign%253D082415_podcasts%2526utm_content%253D&t=NTkzNDg0ZDhhNmMxNzk2NDJmY2MyYjliMjIwYTcyNTlmNzJhODI0NyxkSVozcGYzQw%253D%253D>
.

“We were also motivated when we noticed that podcasts were a pretty 
dude-dominated space. We were like, how hard can it be?” says Friedman. “We 
suffered from a perception problem, though. There were a lot of women and 
people of color podcasting before us, but they weren’t super prominent.”

To help promote podcasters they love or admire, they dedicated an entire 
episode 
<http://callyourgirlfriend.com/post/114785110414/episode-22-your-time-to-shine> 
on how to make a podcast with their producer and Sow and Friedman frequently 
highlight what they are listening to on the show, introducing their audience to 
new favorites that might be under the radar. “We are really committed to 
seeking out new people and giving a little bit of shine to the best shows that 
not everyone is talking to,” says Sow.

They also highlight the work of some of their impressive group of friends, who 
just so happen to be some of the sharpest minds around. Past guests have 
included a roster of women you wish you could call for life advice, like New 
York Times reporter Jenna Wortham, Ask Polly’sHeather Havrilesky 
<http://t.umblr.com/redirect?z=http%253A%252F%252Frss.acast.com%252Fcallyourgirlfriend%252Fepisode39-askpolly%252Fmedia.mp3&t=NzFiNGU1Y2YwYjY1ODNjMjJiZTI2YTgxMDY4YWY3YmZmNGExNjc1MSxibm1NNmVqSA%253D%253D>
, Rookie’sTavi Gevinson 
<http://t.umblr.com/redirect?z=http%253A%252F%252Frss.acast.com%252Fcallyourgirlfriend%252Fphone-a-friend-tavigevinson%252Fmedia.mp3&t=ZjlmOTg0OGU1Y2FlN2RmNWZhY2UwNjViNjhkMGIyMDk5ZWU1OGI5YyxQWkpmOFN6eg%253D%253D>
, and Brooklyn Nine Nine starStephanie Beatriz 
<http://t.umblr.com/redirect?z=http%253A%252F%252Frss.acast.com%252Fcallyourgirlfriend%252Fphone-a-friend-brooklynnine-ninesstephaniebeatriz%252Fmedia.mp3&t=YTkxYzQwOTU0YzI4NDZlZDk4ZGNlZDE1NDQ2MzcyZTgwNDZkM2FiZSx1WVZZb1JQVg%253D%253D>
.

While Friedman and Sow have now announced their plans for world domination, 
<http://callyourgirlfriend.com/post/139022882174/we-talked-to-the-fine-folks-at-hello-flo-about-our>
 when they started the show, they had no plans on becoming curators or 
spokeswomen. “We set out to have fun and work with each other and explore 
different medium,” says Sow.

Because they were both neophytes, they had a steep learning curve. “We have 
the best most amazing producer in the world. We’re the idiots,” says Sow, 
laughing. “Sometimes we drink wine when we record. There are many lost 
episodes.”

Friedman adds, “Due to the aforementioned wine drinking, it will be like, 
‘oops I wasn’t recording for 45 minutes, we need to re-do that.’ I would say 
it’s mostly user error.”

“If audio would get easier to do, there would be more people in podcasting,” 
says Sow.

Because they are rarely in the same place at the same time, they had to learn 
to work around technical difficulties eventually becoming so adept at talking 
via Skype that when they are recording together, it can actually be more 
difficult. “It’s different when I get to see her facial expressions. I have to 
use a different part of my brain,” says Sow.

Despite early technical difficulties, they grew an audience fairly quickly 
thanks to some early press – not that they felt they deserved the attention 
right away. “Our friends are just always looking for stuff to write about, 
truth be told,” says Friedman, laughing. “That was an unfair advantage that we 
had and I’m really happy that we’ve been able to use it to build a great 
audience.”

Each episode of the show plays like a phone call between two clever, funny, 
and current-events-savvy friends, because as Sow says, “We are real friends and 
we do enjoy each other. It doesn’t feel like work.”

“I’m actually laughing when Amina says something funny,” adds Friedman. “I’m 
laughing because she’s hilarious, not because the show needed a laugh at that 
moment.”

While their rapport is real, Friedman and Sow do admit that there are parts of 
their friendship that they keep private. “You won’t know what the hardest part 
of my week was from listening to the podcast. It’s not personal in that way,” 
says Friedman.

“I think two of the carryovers from real life into the podcast were that we 
have a set agenda and discussing current events,” says Sow. “That was something 
we’ve always done whether on the phone or email or frantic texts or g-chat 
exchanges. Especially things in the news that really annoy us.”

Despite the fact that their friendship is now a cultural phenomenon thanks to 
the podcast, Friedman and Sow don’t think their friendship has changed that 
much. “Amina always jokes that we’re business married now because we do have a 
Call Your Girlfriend LLC,” says Friedman. “We are business partners now and not 
just friends, that is new.”

Another side effect of the show is that Friedman’s and Sow’s show has inspired 
other friends to start their own podcasts – or to listen to Call Your 
Girlfriend together. “We love getting emails or tweets from people saying that 
they are long distance besties and they both listen and now when they talk to 
each other it’s a thing that they share,” says Friedman. “I love getting those 
emails.”

Where to start: The office candy dish 
<http://callyourgirlfriend.com/post/110913339954/episode-19-office-candy-dish>; 
phone a friend episodes;Thanksgiving Warriors 
<http://callyourgirlfriend.com/post/134065869269/episode-37-thanksgiving-warriors>
; anywhere; “the one withthe weird bellybuttons 
<http://callyourgirlfriend.com/post/128847898219/episode-34-sexy-bellybutton-feeling>
”.

Subscribe to Call Your Girlfriend on Acast 
<http://t.umblr.com/redirect?z=http%253A%252F%252Fwww.acast.com%252Fcallyourgirlfriend&t=MmJhZGNmZDYzZmU0OThiMTZiOGRmZTc0NWU4MDdmMGE0MmQ1Mjc1NixUbU4zdWpESg%253D%253D>
 oriTunes 
<http://t.umblr.com/redirect?z=https%253A%252F%252Fitunes.apple.com%252Fus%252Fpodcast%252Fcall-your-girlfriend%252Fid881487725%253Fmt%253D2%2526ign-mpt%253Duo%253D2&t=MWE4ZDYxNDlhYTY2ZjExMjYzYmUyMjAwYTRjNTE4NWUyNTBhNDJmNSxUbU4zdWpESg%253D%253D>
 