
Chances are that, although you are probably not from Dallas, Texas, you know a 
few things about it. You might know it’s hot. You might have heard the theme 
song from the eponymous 1980s television show. And you might even know that 
Dallas is built strictly for the car. You probably assume, for that matter, 
that Texans love cars. The fact is, however, that the love affair is more akin 
to Stockholm syndrome. Texans love cars because they simply have no other 
choice.

More than 30,000 Americans die each year in automobile accidents. A sane 
society might call that an epidemic. We call it freedom. Dallas shares with 
Detroit the honour of being one of the two most car-dependent major 
metropolitan areas in the US, by percentage of trips by car. Dallas has some of 
the biggest highways around its downtown of any city. These elevated 
expressways cut different parts of the city off from each other, constricting 
growth and investment. Pedestrians in Dallas are a rare breed.


Yet most cities around the world, particularly the beloved ones, lack such 
heavy automobile infrastructure in their core and still work just fine. Real 
estate value in even semi-walkable Dallas areas is shooting through the roof, 
suggesting severe pent-up demand for places where you can actually, you know, 
walk. Even here in Texas, the land of the free and the free to be run over, 
bike sharing systems have sprouted, and a new bullet train may be the first of 
its kind in the country.


So why not remove some of the elevated highways and start rebuilding what was 
once there – places to live, work, shop and play? Everything we wish to 
recreate without actually having to go to the difficult steps of reversing the 
inertia of sprawl and the infrastructure that allows it? According to US 
department of commerce census data, Dallas County has lost 266,000 jobs over a 
10-year span. Not all of Texas booms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F05%2Fdallas-addiction-cars-texas-city-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406911446203%2Fb85b2379-4d7b-4db1-b651-2a7aab3506a9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Dallas%20kick%20its%20addiction%20to%20cars%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F05%2Fdallas-addiction-cars-texas-city-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Dallas%20kick%20its%20addiction%20to%20cars%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F05%2Fdallas-addiction-cars-texas-city-walk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406911446203%2Fb85b2379-4d7b-4db1-b651-2a7aab3506a9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Dallas skyline from the Klyde Warren Park arts district. Photograph: Alamy 
A group of people, myself included, therefore proposed a project called 
anewdallas.com <http://anewdallas.com/>, to remove the oldest freeway bounding 
downtown Dallas, the technocratically named IH-345. This is the second most 
famous road in Dallas, behind one that doesn’t even exist: a proposed toll 
highway through the Trinity river floodplain, a patch of green we hope to 
someday be our central park.


You might have thought proposing to remove a 40-year-old hulking husk of 
infrastructure already crumbling on its own accord – a bad investment in the 
first place – would be easy. Not so. Having since been called everything from 
an egoist to a socialist to a greedy friend-of-developers communist, I know 
that reversing the grinding gears of inertia rarely is.


The change in political discourse, however, has been rapid. The Dallas Morning 
News posted about it nearly every day, twice putting it on the cover of the 
print edition; D Magazine made it the centrepiece of an issue. The Dallas 
Observer bumped it off the cover at the last minute in favour of an S&M 
convention. You win some, you lose some.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F05%2Fdallas-addiction-cars-texas-city-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406911621212%2F1514d9bb-7734-4b67-b44d-6940afdb176d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Dallas%20kick%20its%20addiction%20to%20cars%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F05%2Fdallas-addiction-cars-texas-city-walk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Dallas%20kick%20its%20addiction%20to%20cars%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F05%2Fdallas-addiction-cars-texas-city-walk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F1%2F1406911621212%2F1514d9bb-7734-4b67-b44d-6940afdb176d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Highways over people: is it time to fight back? Photograph: Alamy 
Our biggest problem, however, remains our lack of self-determination. We’ve 
empowered traffic engineers to make all of our most important decisions for us. 
How will the city look and operate? “Well, let’s consult the manual. Ah yes, 
this road must operate at level of service ‘A’.” What does that mean? “It means 
the road must be improved – widened.”

We are behind the learning curve. We are not yet fully aware of what walkable 
cities can do for us or what we can do for walkable cities. We need a real 
public discourse about what is the best way to apply our public dollars to 
maximise both public and private good. What is best for our city’s long-term 
health, wealth and resilience? At the very least, that dialogue has begun.


Highway and cities: people haven’t taken this much concern in such a tedious 
topic since the Cowboys’ last 8-8 season. They just needed to know they had a 
voice. If Dallas citizens were to be successful in killing off one proposed 
highway and removing a second, it would be a trueTexas miracle 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/03/07/texas_miracle_turns_out_to_involve_taxing_the_poor_to_help_the_rich_get_richer/>
 indeed.

Patrick Kennedy of Car Free in Big D 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/interactive/2014/jan/27/best-city-blogs-interactive>
 is an urban designer and planner who runs the campaignA New Dallas <>

• Helsinki’s ambitious plan to make car ownership pointless in 10 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/10/helsinki-shared-public-transport-plan-car-ownership-pointless>

• Welcome to Williston, North Dakota: America’s new gold rush city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/28/-sp-welcome-williston-north-dakota-america-new-gold-rush-city>


 <>
 