
Next month, after celebrating holidays with family and ringing in the new year 
with friends, Americans will watch a compulsive liaraccused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/list-of-donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations>
 of sexual misconduct take the highest office in the nation. ’Tis the season 
for never-ending despair!

Among those of us who didn’t vote for Trump, the post-election vibe is 
downright funereal. We’re confused and depressed, disgusted and heartsick. (In 
some cases, we’re literally sick – among a group of my feminist friends, many 
are suffering from some sort of stress-induced illness.) Michelle Obama 
articulated the moment perfectly when shetold Oprah this week 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/16/politics/michelle-obama-home-oprah-interview/>: 
“Now we’re feeling what not having hope feels like.”

It’s a feeling that stands in stark contrast to the lead-up to the election – 
a time marked by lefty self-assuredness and optimism. The energy coming out of 
the mainstream feminist movement, especially, was ebullient: We were “with 
her”. Our daughters were going to be able to see themselves reflected in the 
nation’s highest office, and love was going to trump hate.

Even when the horrific Access Hollywood tape was released of Donald Trump 
bragging about grabbing women “by the pussy”, the feminist response was 
defiantly confident: pussy was going tograb back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/donald-trump-pussy-grabs-back-meme-women-twitter>
!

That hope, of course, was sadly misguided: misogyny and racism won the day. As 
the writer Jamil Smithtweeted 
<https://twitter.com/JamilSmith/status/796204134487703552> on election night: 
“I knew my country hated me. But this much?”

Already, the progress made under Barack Obama is in danger; racists and 
sexists across the country are emboldened; and those who don’t fit into the 
GOP’s narrow definition of what a “real American” looks like fear for their 
safety even more than they did before the election.

Racial and gendered hatred has always been normalized in the United States, 
but now it’s blatant and unapologetic. This week, a man was apparentlykicked off
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/adam-saleh-delta-flight-arabic> 
a Delta flight for speaking Arabic, and a woman at JC Penny was berated by 
another customer telling her to“go back wherever the fuck you came from” 
<http://www.rawstory.com/2016/12/go-back-wherever-the-fck-you-come-from-racist-kentucky-woman-goes-on-tirade-at-hispanic-shoppers/>
. In both instances, hardly any bystanders spoke up for them. As the man who 
was forced to leave the plane did so, his footage of the moment shows several 
white passengers joyfully waving at and mocking him.

How can we find hope when a new story of malice and bigotry is around every 
corner? Maybe the truth is that we don’t need to be optimistic for the future 
in order to change it. Hope isn’t necessary for action.

No one has written about hope and politics better than the sociology professor 
Tressie McMillan Cottom 
<https://tressiemc.com/uncategorized/finding-hope-in-a-loveless-place/>. After 
the election, Cottom noted that the hopelessness new to some had long been a 
reality for others – black women, especially: “Everything from reversingRoe v 
Wade 
<http://www.motherjones.com/media/2016/10/true-stories-hard-choices-documentary-abortion-black-women>
 andpolice surveillance 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/12/technology/aclu-facebook-twitter-instagram-geofeedia.html>
 tomob rule in public discourse 
<http://adanewmedia.org/2015/04/issue7-mcmillancottom/> and delegitimized 
claims to citizenship 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2015/09/11/mike_huckabee_dred_scott_black_people_aren_t_fully_human_under_law_he_erroneously.html>
 have been true for us for a long time.”

“My hopelessness is faith in things yet seen and works yet done,” she writes. 
“Hopelessness is necessary for the hard work of resisting tyranny and fascism.”

The summer before the election, I wrote a book in which I argued that the 
danger of a feminism obsessed with silver linings and positivity is that it 
necessitates smiling through tremendous grief.Feminism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism> isn’t a Pinterest board, it’s a 
movement – and we don’t always need to be inspirational.

Still, I allowed myself to be carried away in optimism before 8 November. I 
forgot myself – in part because hope is a privilege, and in part because I 
needed to believe something non-horrible could happen for women.

It’s a mistake I won’t make again. But that doesn’t mean I’m done fighting for 
a future better than the one we’re fearing.
 