
“The question is no longer, ‘Where are all the women musicians?’” tweeted She 
Shreds <https://twitter.com/SheShredsMag/status/733349092974284800> a few 
months ago, “but rather, ‘Where in YOUR practice are you lacking the ability to 
see us?’” Though the latter question isn’t always applicable – particularly in 
areas of the music industry such as producing and managing that are still 
vastly male dominated – the female-orientated music magazine make a valid 
point. The sidelining of women in the music industry is proven bycold hard stats
 <http://www.thembj.org/2015/10/gender-inequality-in-the-music-industry/>: 
women make up only 14% of PRS for Music writers and performers; 86% of all 
performers at UK music festivals last year were men; at the2015 BBC Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms-2015>, only 10% of the pieces 
performed were composed by women.

Mothers of invention: the women who pioneered electronic music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/17/daphne-oram-synthesizer-deep-minimalism>
This summer, however, a series of events hope to inspire a new wave of female 
music figures; hopefully ensuring that festival organisers, venues, and music 
publications are unable to place theblame of underrepresentation on a simple 
lack of supply <http://www.nme.com/news/various-artists/83271>.

Girls Music Day <https://dice.fm/girls-music-day> hopes to tackle this with 
its event: taking place at Shoreditch’s Sonos Studios on 23 July, tickets are 
allocated, via ballot system, to girls and women aged 14-24. Its guest speakers 
range from musicians (Laura Marling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/laura-marling> and Metronomy drummer Anna 
Prior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/14/metronomy-electronic-music-production>
) to DJs (Jamz Supernova <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b05tqk1x>) and PR 
company founders (Totem’s Naomi Williams).


“There aren’t enough women headlining festivals, running record labels, or 
working mixing desks,” says BBC presenter andDICE <https://dice.fm/about> music 
editor Jen Long, the event’s organiser. “Complaining on social media won’t fix 
that. Instead we need positive action, and it’s a testament to our industry 
that so many brilliant women have offered up their time to help inspire the 
next generation.”

Bridging the Gap 
<https://www.richmix.org.uk/events/music/bridging-gap-women-music>, a one-day 
event at Rich Mix cinema on 29 July, has a similar motive. Curated by gal-dem 
<http://www.gal-dem.com/>, an online magazine written by women of colour, it 
aims to bring together industry professionals in London in the form of panel 
discussions, DJ sets, and live performances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fcan-female-focused-events-forge-the-future-of-the-music-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68fed74ef771dda3858ae5b2259948de5ab054e4%2F163_0_848_719%2F848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20female-focused%20events%20forge%20the%20future%20of%20the%20music%20industry%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fcan-female-focused-events-forge-the-future-of-the-music-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20female-focused%20events%20forge%20the%20future%20of%20the%20music%20industry%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fcan-female-focused-events-forge-the-future-of-the-music-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68fed74ef771dda3858ae5b2259948de5ab054e4%2F163_0_848_719%2F848.jpg>
 Antonia Odunlami, music editor of gal-dem Photograph: Liv Little 
It also aims to highlight the intersectional inequality at play in the music 
industry – an aspect all-too-often overlooked at events such as these. During a 
panel on gender equality at this year’sBrighton Music Conference 
<http://www.brightonmusicconference.co.uk/>, for example, Motive Unknown’s Lucy 
Blair recalled being one of only two female speakers in the whole of last 
year’s two-day programme – a telling oversight that she has since worked hard 
to rectify. But this year’s panel, though a step in the right direction, was 
made up entirely of white people. “The twofold layer of prejudice is so inbuilt 
in the underpinning of the [music] industry,” says Antonia Odunlami, the music 
editor of gal-dem. “The upshot means that [women of colour] ultimately will 
suffer more than anyone else in this sense - far more than white women.”

There are some for whom the idea of an all-female event or panel, aimed at an 
audience comprising mainly women, seems counterintuitive. They see the concept 
as an exercise in preaching to the converted, its “all-female” tag alienating 
men who hold the most power to enact change. Odunlami disagrees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fcan-female-focused-events-forge-the-future-of-the-music-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3ff58375bae050c86cc60285db45cd7fd49f3ba%2F0_0_2000_2880%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20female-focused%20events%20forge%20the%20future%20of%20the%20music%20industry%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fcan-female-focused-events-forge-the-future-of-the-music-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20female-focused%20events%20forge%20the%20future%20of%20the%20music%20industry%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fcan-female-focused-events-forge-the-future-of-the-music-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3ff58375bae050c86cc60285db45cd7fd49f3ba%2F0_0_2000_2880%2F2000.jpg>
 Anna Meredith performing at the ICA In London. Photograph: Maria 
Jefferis/Redferns 
“Women need a safe space to feel comfortable and or empowered among 
ourselves,” she says. “We spend so much time having to deal with living, 
working, breathing in a man’s world, being forced to pander to a male gaze. It 
gets tiring. Sometimes it’s not all about – or for – men and that’s the 
damaging perspective that a lot of these issues are based upon.”

Lauren Laverne’s Wonder Women series at Shakespeare’s Globe 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/wonderwomen> this summer certainly isn’t 
about, or for, men. Curated by the BBC 6 Music DJ, the event, featuring the 
likes ofRóisín Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2015/may/29/roisin-murphy-webchat-questions>
, Ibibio Sound Machine andGwenno <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CldPv3-VHmM>, 
it is billed as a platform for “some powerful and visionary women who are 
altering the complexion of popular music in the 21st century in ways both 
iconic and disruptive”.

For those musicians who aren’t quite Wonder Woman status yet, Anna Meredith’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/23/anna-meredith-on-classical-music-art-and-pop>
 Manchester residency is a good place to start. In collaboration with Brighter 
Sound and the Museum of Science and Industry, young and emerging female 
musicians will work with Meredith to create work inspired by theWonder 
Materials exhibition 
<http://www.msimanchester.org.uk/en/whats-on/exhibition/wonder-materials>.

A composer and performer who’s straddled the worlds of classical and pop 
music, Meredith says there are gender gaps in both sectors.

“While there’s some very strong female composers in my generation, there’s 
also a definite gap in younger, teenage female composers,” she explains.

“I imagine it would be easy to go all the way through early-stage music 
education and for women only to factor into syllabuses and lessons as singers 
from the 1960s onwards. Pop has a history ofstrong female singer-songwriters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jul/01/carole-king-tapestry-album-live-devotion>
, but I’m also keen to highlight and encourage female producers, and challenge 
the assumption there’s a man ‘doing the electronics’ behind the scenes.”

 It’s important for these events to show women the positive side of the 
industry – not just bemoan the inequalities – says Long. “There’s so much good 
in the music industry and the conversation about gender imbalance right now can 
paint music as a dark place to work if you’re a woman. How are we going to 
inspire a future generation of girls to pick up instruments or start a label if 
we keep filling their minds with negativity? That’s what Girls Music Day is 
about – giving a stage to some amazing women who can talk about how great their 
jobs are and motivate more girls to join us.”

Whether it’s behind the scenes or on stage, women in music are making their 
voices heard this summer – and they’re helping others find theirs in the 
process.

 * DICE’s Girl Music Day is at Sonos Studio, London, on 23 July 
<https://dice.fm/girls-music-day>; gal-dem’s Bridging the Gap is at Rich Mix, 
London, on 29 July 
<https://www.richmix.org.uk/events/music/bridging-gap-women-music>  