
It has been called the “ugliest building in Liverpool”: a towering brutalist 
slab with near-permanent scaffolding in a sea of parking, the RoyalLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> University Hospital has long needed 
a facelift.

“If you think of Liverpool 100 years ago,” says David Lewis from the project’s 
architects NBBJ, “you had the docks, and all these public and civic buildings. 
To the west, there was the university and beautiful residential squares. But 
when building the hospital, they took an urban block which had streets, schools 
and churches – and they flattened it to put in a 1970s hospital slab. It was 
detrimental to the city.”

Now, however, after more than a decade of delays, work has finally started on 
an ambitious £335m redevelopment of Merseyside’s largest hospital. And the 
ambition is not simply to tackle a building that has outstayed its usefulness; 
it is to make the whole city healthier and wealthier too.


The design is underpinned by the idea that nature and natural light will aid 
the healing process for patients, creating a hospital that is calmer and more 
pleasant for the city’s residents as well as its staff and patients.

While the hospital itself will be housed in a high-rise tower at one end of 
the space, its car park will be sunk underground, freeing up room for a “health 
campus” – a landscaped public square, green areas for patients, and room to 
develop facilities for research and life-science companies that will bring new 
jobs and investment to the city.

“We are trying to transform the whole feel of the area with beautiful 
landscaping,” says Helen Jackson from the Royal Liverpool and Broadgreen 
UniversityHospitals <https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> NHS Trust. 
“There will be quieter outside areas – for example, near the hospital’s 
bereavement counselling services – and also more sociable areas.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Froyal-liverpool-university-hospital-redevelopment-city-healthier-wealthier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0e41243c6fd24d344d223550089c3aec21f930%2F0_43_4912_3211%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Liverpool's%20new%20hospital%20make%20the%20whole%20city%20healthier%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wealthier%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Froyal-liverpool-university-hospital-redevelopment-city-healthier-wealthier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Liverpool%27s%20new%20hospital%20make%20the%20whole%20city%20healthier%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wealthier%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Froyal-liverpool-university-hospital-redevelopment-city-healthier-wealthier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec0e41243c6fd24d344d223550089c3aec21f930%2F0_43_4912_3211%2F4912.jpg>
 The new Royal Liverpool University Hospital under construction. Photograph: 
Pak Hung Chan/Alamy Stock Photo 
According to Brian Zeallear from NBBJ, the project will help reconnect the 
hospital with the city and its population. In place of the current “American 
suburban” model of a huge building and surrounding parking, it will return to a 
“European” model of a cluster of buildings with public spaces in between them, 
as well as tree-lined pedestrian paths through the site, to make it feel part 
of the city again. Most importantly, the new plan focuses on linking the 
hospital to Liverpool University – both through footpaths and through new 
research facilities being built on the site.

If it looks like a hospital, smells like a hospital and feels like a hospital, 
we will have failed
Brian Zeallear 
“Through creating smaller buildings around the periphery and having public 
roads and pedestrian corridors through the site, we can stitch back the 
existing city,” Zeallear says. “The centre will feel like a public square. The 
hospital is in a dense urban area but once the outdoor landscaping is done, 
when you step outside it should make you feel you are in nature through the 
manicured grass, trees and water features.”

Zeallear explains that the design of the hospital has been dictated by its 
function, resulting in an unusual shape. The focus on having single, en suite 
rooms rather than wards, and a desire to maximise daylight and views for 
patients and staff, led to its high-rise design. The result is rooms with 
external windows, and windows into the corridors, with blinds built in behind 
the glass to help with infection control and ensure privacy.

“We have put kinks in the corridors so there is always a view. This way you 
can feel part of the outside world – when it is dusk or raining, you will 
know,” says Zeallear. “We are trying everything we can do to make the public 
and clinical spaces as calming as possible. If it looks like a hospital, smells 
like a hospital and feels like a hospital, we will have failed.”

The height of the building should make it a landmark for anyone entering the 
city, and to ensure it stands out further, an abstract 217-sq-metre stained 
glass window for the West Derby street and Prescott street entrances has been 
commissioned byartist by Alexander Beleschenko <http://beleschenko.com/>. The 
building’s light-coloured stone cladding has been chosen to reflect the 
Portland stone of many of Liverpool’s most famous civic buildings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Froyal-liverpool-university-hospital-redevelopment-city-healthier-wealthier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2c1f2a04ca2fb75f3a1a30a2240fe4fe3ea36dc%2F0_0_3588_2706%2F3588.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Liverpool's%20new%20hospital%20make%20the%20whole%20city%20healthier%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wealthier%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Froyal-liverpool-university-hospital-redevelopment-city-healthier-wealthier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Liverpool%27s%20new%20hospital%20make%20the%20whole%20city%20healthier%20%E2%80%93%20and%20wealthier%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Froyal-liverpool-university-hospital-redevelopment-city-healthier-wealthier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2c1f2a04ca2fb75f3a1a30a2240fe4fe3ea36dc%2F0_0_3588_2706%2F3588.jpg>
 The new hospital will have single, en suite rooms rather than wards. 
Illustration: Nick Rochowski 
Perhaps surprisingly, given the pressure on modern hospitals, the new design 
actually includes fewer beds than the old one, although some rooms – for 
example, those set aside for administrative tasks – can be turned into spaces 
for extra beds should the need arise. This flexibility, says Jackson, means the 
building’s life span is lengthened, because it can adjust to changing needs or 
technologies.


If we can help the work status of everyone around here then that will help to 
make the population healthier
Helen Jackson 
Jackson also says the trust is working hard to reduce the length of time 
patients – especially older people – will stay in the hospital. In part by 
helping people to stay at home for longer and return home more quickly. 
“Gerontologists will tell you that a 60-year-old who spends 14 nights in 
hospital will age 10 years,” Jackson says. Speeding up the time it takes to 
generate results such as ultrasounds will also reduce the time all patients 
have to spend in the hospital.

But aside from aesthetics and planning, there is a striking focus on the local 
economy. While this may seem an unusual interest for the NHS, Jackson insists 
that the links between income and health means it makes perfect sense. “If we 
can help the work status of everyone around here then that will help to make 
the population healthier,” she explains, “and mean they are less likely to need 
our services.”


It’s not hard to see how much this is needed. Despite the city’s fortunes 
improving in recent years, Liverpool is still one of the most deprived areas of 
the country –fourth in a recent ranking of local authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/gallery/2015/oct/02/england-most-least-deprived-places-in-pictures>
. And in Kensington, a ward bordering the hospital, 98.2% of residents are in 
the most deprived 5% of people in the country. While it may share a name with 
the wealthy royal borough in London itsinhabitants have a life expectancy 13 
years shorter <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-merseyside-34882365>. Some 
houses in the borough are being sold off for £1 after a failed regeneration 
bid, while the average household income is £22,787 – £14,000lower than the 
national average <http://liverpool.gov.uk/media/120931/kensington.pdf> (pdf) – 
and four in 10 children live in low income households – more than double the 
national average.

In a bid to improve the situation the new hospital’s developers, Carillion, 
and the trust have agreed that out of the 750 jobs created during the 
construction of the new site, 60% must come from the local area – and 15% from 
priority wards such as Kensington. To this end there is a “job shop” on the 
development site, to make it easier for local people to find out what 
opportunities are on offer. While a hundred jobs may not solve the city’s 
problems, Carillion points out it has also agreed to create 100 apprenticeships 
in areas such as joinery and bricklaying, and has set up a £100,000 fund to 
help local community groups.

Toxteth, 1981: the summer Liverpool burned – by the rioter and economist on 
opposite sides
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/14/toxteth-riots-1981-summer-liverpool-burned-patrick-minford-jimi-jagne>
The new health campus, the trust hopes, will offer more permanent jobs in 
biosciences by attracting private life-science companies to the area. Using the 
expertise of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine (LSTM), for instance, 
there will be space for research into antibiotic resistance in thenew Liverpool 
Life Sciences Accelerator building 
<http://www.liverpoolhealthcampus.com/our-assets/bioinnovation-centre/> – which 
will have two floors of lab space to be used by the LSTM for research, and 
space for other labs and offices.

In total, the trust hopes the plans will create 5,000 new specialist jobs. To 
encourage more students into this area the trust is also working with a local 
school, Liverpool Life Sciences UTC, the first in the UK to focus on health and 
life sciences for students aged between 14 and 19 years old, helping to set up 
their curriculum.

It’s fair to say the city is eagerly awaiting the new hospital. Indeed, the 
Liverpool Royal Court theatre is planning to stage a comedy set on the opening 
day of the new hospital: as the first wrecking ball is set to swing into the 
old building, the last patient is found, sitting on a commode.

It might not be exactly be the publicity the trust and Carillion were hoping 
for, but it’s certainly one way to celebrate the end of the ugliest building in 
the city.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 