
The newly elected president of the Canary Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/canaryislands> has said the Spanish region 
needs to do a better job of encouraging tourists on all-inclusive package trips 
to “leave the hotel” and spend money to boost the local economy.

An estimated one in four of the 11.5 million tourists who came to the Canary 
Islands last year arrived as part of all-inclusive vacations rarely venturing 
out of their hotels. Fernando Clavijo said the result was a low rate of 
spending per head which did little to help growth.

“What we need to do is to get these clients ... to leave the hotel and consume 
outside, so that they inject more money into our economy,” he said.

Britons make up the largest group of tourists by nationality in the Canaries, 
where they seek out sun and sand on islands such as Tenerife, Lanzarote and 
Fuerteventura.

But many opt for the all-inclusive model. Unemployment in the Canary Islands 
remains high at nearly 31%, one of the highest in Europe. For those under 25 
years old, the unemployment rate is 56%.

“We’re seeing more and more tourists, but our objective is to increase the 
spending of these visitors,” said Clavijo, who stepped into his new position 
earlier in July.

He is not alone in thinking this. A record 68 million tourists are expected to 
visit Spain this year, driven by the strength of the pound and US dollar 
against the euro and the ongoing instability in northern Africa. But across the 
country, authorities have honed in on one particular figure that has been in 
decline since 2007: the amount being spent per tourist.

The drop was highlighted earlier this month by Exceltur, the industry 
association that includes Spain’s largest hotel chains and tour operators. 
“We’re worried about a tourism model that focuses on quantity, quantity, 
quantity,” said José Luis Zoreda of the organisation.

While Exceltur said some of the drop could be explained by the growing 
reliance on services such as Airbnb and the proliferation of low-cost airlines, 
they called on authorities in Spain’s tourism hotspots to come up with 
strategies to attract tourists with more spending power.

Clavijo has said that one of his priorities is to bring together government, 
industry leaders and unions to explore how to reconcile the distinct realities 
of the islands.

He said that everything was up for debate, from limiting the number of 
tourists who visit the islands in order to better protect their natural 
landscape to boosting the offer of luxury hotels.

“We have to talk about these considerations. How much employment can we create 
through tourism? And how can we make it so that this wealth is spread across 
various sectors?” said Clavijo.

He pointed to British tourists. “They’ve always been very loyal, they come 
time and again. We have to take care of them and spoil them. And then we need 
to ask how can we make it so that more Brits come, and that they spend more 
money,” he said.

His comments struck a nerve with many in the Canary Islands, who were quick to 
point out the vital role tourism plays in the region’s economy, with activity 
from the sector contributing about 30% of the region’s overall GDP.

“You can’t intervene in the market, limiting the number of tourists or whether 
they stay in an all-inclusive hotel or not,” said Fernando Fraile, who leads 
the Federation of Hospitality and Tourism Businesses in Gran Canaria, one of 
the region’s top industry groups. The focus, he argued, should be on ensuring 
that the Canary Islands maintains its lead in what is an increasingly 
competitive industry.

Clavijo said he simply wants to start a discussion. “We can’t stop offering 
all-inclusive hotels, because others will step in to take our place,” he said.

Now, as Spain begins to emerge from the economic crisis, is the time to start 
asking what tourism can bring to the islands, Clavijo insisted.

It is a sentiment being echoed across the country. In Palma de Mallorca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/palma>, the local People’s party 
politician, Álvaro Gijón, said the push was on to upgrade hotels to four-star 
hotels or higher. “It doesn’t make much sense that a tourist comes here because 
it’s cheap, pays for a cheap hotel, buys cheap alcohol and eats at cheap 
restaurants. That doesn’t generate activity or economic growth.”

In nearby Magaluf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/08/magaluf-crackdown-spanish-authorities-call-time-on-drinking-in-the-street>
, authorities said earlier this year they wanted to attract tourists with 
deeper pockets by redefining the resort as a “mature tourist zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/18/magaluf-mature-tourist-zone-crackdown>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcanary-islands-tourists-must-spend-money-outside-all-inclusive-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a0ca6d136f6715f0ab4a7c8f43afadd02ebef63%2F0_0_2758_1654%2F2758.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Canary%20Islands%20%E2%80%93%20tourists%20need%20to%20spend%20money%20outside%20all-inclusives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcanary-islands-tourists-must-spend-money-outside-all-inclusive-hotels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Canary%20Islands%20%E2%80%93%20tourists%20need%20to%20spend%20money%20outside%20all-inclusives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fcanary-islands-tourists-must-spend-money-outside-all-inclusive-hotels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a0ca6d136f6715f0ab4a7c8f43afadd02ebef63%2F0_0_2758_1654%2F2758.jpg>
 Barcelona mayor Ada Colau: ‘If the centre fills up with multinationals and big 
stores, it doesn’t work.’ Photograph: Albert Gea/Reuters 
 In Barcelona, where the number of tourists has grown fivefold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/28/will-people-barcelona-revolt-against-soaring-tourist-numbers>
 in the past 20 years, the new mayorAda Colau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/07/barcelona-mayor-ada-colau-feminised-democracy>
 has put a moratorium on licences for new hotels, as she and her team explore 
how best to handle the millions of tourists who annually pour into this city of 
1.6 million.

“Tourism is out of control,” Colau told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/13/ada-colau-barcelona-spain-mayor-targets-tourists>
 earlier this year, pointing to areas such as the historical centre that have 
become saturated with hotels and tourist apartments and where rising rents have 
driven away locals and small businesses.

Left unchecked, Colau argued, mass tourism in Barcelona could kill off the 
very essence of the city that attracted tourists in the first place. “More and 
more tourists are disappointed when they visit Barcelona because in the centre 
of Barcelona they find a theme park. Everyone wants to see the real city, but 
if the centre fills up with multinationals and big stores that you can find in 
any other city, it doesn’t work.”
 