
“I have planned a city not like any other city in the world. I have planned it 
not in a way that I expected any government authorities in the world would 
accept. I have planned an ideal city – a city that meets my ideal of the city 
of the future.”

Those were the words of Walter Burley Griffin, the young American architect 
who won a competition to design the new Australian capital city,Canberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra>, in 1912. The idealistic 
Griffin, along with his professional and life partner Marion Mahony, spent the 
next eight years tied in knots by politicians and bureaucrats determined to 
prevent his vision from becoming a reality.


Griffin resigned from the project in 1920 without having created a single 
building, and little of his plan was put into effect, aside from a few roads 
and a lake. Yet the influence of Griffin and Mahony’s work pervades Australia’s 
most significant public building, the Parliament House created by Romaldo 
Giurgola almost 70 years later.


Griffin and Mahony believed fervently in Australia’s potential as a young and 
bold democracy. Griffin declared that the new capital – to be located in 
bushland between Sydney andMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/06/the-royal-exhibition-building-of-marvellous-melbourne-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-10>
 – presented a unique opportunity for a totally planned city. He said, “This 
virgin city under unified control … is in a position to exact unity in plan and 
homogeneity in expression and harmony with the whole natural environment.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcanberras-parliament-house-a-symbol-of-national-identity-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-39%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F13%2F1431512948576%2F0fb164ab-9882-4944-b40c-5a76f527aa02-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Canberra's%20Parliament%20House%3A%20a%20'symbol%20of%20national%20identity'%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2039&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcanberras-parliament-house-a-symbol-of-national-identity-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-39%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Canberra%27s%20Parliament%20House%3A%20a%20%27symbol%20of%20national%20identity%27%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2039&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcanberras-parliament-house-a-symbol-of-national-identity-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-39%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F13%2F1431512948576%2F0fb164ab-9882-4944-b40c-5a76f527aa02-2060x1374.jpeg>
 View of Parliament House from a hot air balloon. The building is integrated 
within the hill in order to put ‘the people above the parliament’. Photograph: 
Lukas Coch/EPA 
Their design ingeniously mapped a geometric plan of key buildings and main 
avenues on to the existing topography of mountains, hills and the river. 
Although Griffin was officially hired by the Australian government as federal 
capital director of design and construction, he readily acknowledged Mahony as 
responsible for “much more than half” of the plan.

The opposition of bureaucrats and frequent changes of government didn’t help 
Griffin; nor did the first world war, which focussed the nation’s attention 
elsewhere. One of the revolving door of ministers, William Archibald, accused 
Griffin of “grand theorising, moonshine and dreaming”, and eventually Griffin 
quit in despair. A temporary Parliament House was built by the Commonwealth 
Department of Works and Housing – though not at the location Griffin had 
planned.


Nevertheless, Griffin and Mahony’s idea became known in architectural circles. 
One of those who admired it was a young Italian, Romaldo Giurgola, who saw an 
illustration of the Canberra plan on a classroom wall in Rome.


Fast-forward several decades, and the nation decided it was time to build a 
new Parliament House to mark thebicentenary of European settlement in 1988 
<http://www.australiaday.org.au/australia-day/history/1988-the-bicentenary/>, 
with Giurgola’s firm Mitchell-Giurgola Architects winning the design 
competition.

Like Griffin and Mahony, Giurgola believed that buildings must be in harmony 
with the natural environment. He saw Canberra as “a symbolic place, an art form 
which could survive only if harmoniously related with the configurations of the 
land”. Giurgola’s proposed Parliament House was not a monument imposed on the 
landscape and the citizens, but was integrated within a hill, thus putting the 
people above the parliament.

The building is packed with overt symbols of national identity. The huge 
forecourt mosaic –Possum and Wallaby Dreaming 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Visit_Parliament/Parliament_House_Art_Collection/Architectural_Commissions/Forecourt_mosaic>
 – was designed byPapunya artist Michael Nelson Jagamara 
<http://www.redrockgallery.net/pages/Michael-Minjina-Nelson-Tjakamarra.html>, 
and the building’s 23-hectare landscape includes an indigenous garden. Inside, 
there are more than 5,000 works by leading Australian artists and craftspeople. 
These are not simply additions to the building, but an integral part of it.

Like Griffin and Mahony, Giurgola has an optimistic view of the city. “I 
certainly cannot think of the Parliament House without Canberra,”he told an 
interviewer 
<http://www.naa.gov.au/collection/publications/papers-and-podcasts/designing-canberra/giurgola-guida-berg.aspx>
, in 2010. “It presented to me this notion of simplicity, order, relation with 
the natural environment … Canberra has been growing with this kind of principle 
all the time.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcanberras-parliament-house-a-symbol-of-national-identity-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-39%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431428969939%2F430fdac6-77a6-41db-b310-5873a2308ad2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Canberra's%20Parliament%20House%3A%20a%20'symbol%20of%20national%20identity'%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2039&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcanberras-parliament-house-a-symbol-of-national-identity-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-39%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Canberra%27s%20Parliament%20House%3A%20a%20%27symbol%20of%20national%20identity%27%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2039&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcanberras-parliament-house-a-symbol-of-national-identity-a-history-of-cities-in-50-buildings-day-39%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F12%2F1431428969939%2F430fdac6-77a6-41db-b310-5873a2308ad2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘The building is packed with overt symbols of national identity.’ Photograph: 
Auspic 
Nevertheless, Canberra today has an incoherent feel, with buildings scattered 
far apart in seemingly random places, lacking the unity that was originally 
proposed. On a more mundane level, the standard cliche is that Canberra is 
“boring”, with its endless quiet low-rise suburban streets, and its empty city 
thoroughfares. On the other hand, Canberrans speak fondly of how easy it is to 
get around – unlike the gridlock of Sydney and Melbourne.


“It was a utopia of sorts,” Eve, a friend who grew up in Canberra, tells me. 
“I lived in public housing and went to a state school with the children of 
cleaners and the children of diplomats all together. Everything felt 
accessible, not like the class system you get in Sydney and Melbourne. My mum 
was able to go to university and qualify as an economist while she was raising 
me by herself. I rode to school every day from the age of 10; there was no 
traffic and life was easy. But an outsider doesn’t see any of this, and they’re 
often blind to the social stratification and ghettoisation in their own cities.”

As for Parliament House, Eve remembers it as a place where she and her friends 
would, after nights out as teenagers, roll down the grassy slopes under the 
tolerant eye of a lone security guard. There aren’t too many parliament 
buildings in the world where you can roll on the roof, and it sounds like the 
kind of pursuit of which the building’s designer would certainly approve.

 * Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below  