
Vice-President Joe Biden’s Cancer Moonshot initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/07/cancer-moonshot-panel-research-joe-biden-national-database>
 to speed the development of cancer treatments has made some important strides 
such as increased information-sharing among researchers but still faces 
challenges in many areas, according to a report on Monday.

'Moonshot' initiative to fight cancer urged to include survivors' lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/09/moonshot-cancer-fight-survivors-initiative>
The White House is still seeking about $700m from Congress for the project. 
WithBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> leaving 
office in January, it is also unclear how much of the initiative will continue 
under a new administration.

 Microsoft and Amazon have committed to creating cloud storage for the effort, 
according tothe report <http://bit.ly/1TzXAkk>, which summarizes the work 
completed so far and outlines a path forward over the next five years.

 Ride-sharing services Uber and Lyft will help patients get to the doctor and 
to clinical trials.

 “I’m going to devote the rest of my life to working on this, and I think 
we’re perilously close to making some gigantic progress,” Biden told reporters.

 The $1bn moonshot project was announced by Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/12/obama-state-of-the-union-address-2016-cancer-cure-initiative>
 during his State of the Union address in January. Since then, Biden, whoseson 
Beau died last year at age 46 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/31/beau-biden-dies-of-brain-cancer>
 from brain cancer, has announced multiple investments and collaborations in 
support of the project.

The Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> Moonshot initiative 
has also spurred the defense department to use artificial intelligence to 
analyze its collection of tissue from tumors to look for patterns.

 The US Patent and Trademark Office has launched a pilot program to cut in 
half the time to review certain cancer therapy patent applications from an 
average of about two years to less than 12 months.

We could prevent millions of cancer deaths with knowledge we already have | 
David Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/prevent-millions-of-cancer-deaths-with-knowledge-already-have>
 Obama praised Biden for his leadership on the issue and said his 
administration was laying the groundwork for future presidents to continue the 
fight against cancer.

 “While we are going to be leaving soon, what I think we are going to be able 
to leave behind is an architecture and a framework” for advancing cancer 
research, Obama told reporters after his meeting with Biden.


 