
A car bomb has exploded outside a courthouse in western Turkey, killing two 
people and wounding at least five, less than a week aftera massacre in an 
Istanbul nightclub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/turkey-nightclub-shooting-reina-nightclub-istanbul-victims-search-continues>
 killed 39 revellers and left the country on edge.

Turkish authorities said two alleged gunmen were killed in a shootout 
following the attack in the city of İzmir. A third man is believed to have 
escaped. The city had been the scene of raids connected to the Istanbul attack, 
which was claimed by the Islamic State terror group.

The latest attack comes days after the end of an especially deadly year in 
Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, in which 275 people were 
killed in terror attacks and more than 1,000 maimed, according to Turkish media.


Kurdish militants have also intensified their deadly insurgency in recent 
months and the smaller scale of the attack, as well as the choice of target, 
led some officials to suggest it was carried out by one of several Kurdish 
militant groups. Provincial governor Erol Ayyıldız blamed Thursday’s carnage on 
the most prominent of them, the PKK.

Isis attacks in Turkey have focused on soft civilian targets and political 
rallies, whereas strikes by groups such as the PKK have typically targeted 
police officers and soldiers, as well as state institutions.


Ayyıldız said the gunfight occurred when police officers tried to stop a 
vehicle at a checkpoint and that the attackers detonated the car bomb while 
trying to escape. Arms including Kalashnikov rifles, hand grenades and 
ammunition for rocket-propelled grenade launchers were found at the scene, he 
said.

Images from the scene showed one suspect attacker apparently dead on the 
ground, still clutching an assault rifle. A video taken as the attack unfolded 
shows the flash of an explosion from a car. A burst of gunfire can be heard on 
other footage taken after the blast.

A police officer and court employee were killed, said Turkish deputy prime 
minister Veysi Kaynak, adding that the weapons found at the scene suggested 
that a much larger attack had been foiled. “Based on the preparation, the 
weapons, bombs and ammunition seized, it is understood that a big atrocity was 
being planned,” Kaynak told reporters.
İzmir locator 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/izmir_locator_map-zip/giv-3902xQX85IacyIkG/>
The focus of the manhunt for the Istanbul gunman, who escaped after mowing 
down 39 people with an AK-47 in a seven minute rampage, had turned towards 
İzmir on Wednesday, when 20 members of the Uighur ethnic minority were arrested 
by counter terrorism police. After initially suspecting the gunman to be from 
Kyrgyzstan,officials now believe he may be a Uighur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/istanbul-nightclub-attacker-ethnic-uighur-raid-selimpasa>
. Authorities say some of those arrested had travelled from China’s Xinjiang 
region.

Intelligence officials are also working on a separate theory that the attacker 
is from Uzbekistan. Either way, he is believed to have spent time in the 
central Turkish city of Konya, through where many of those to have launched 
attacks in Turkey are thought to have transited. European intelligence 
officials have long believed that Konya has been home to an Isis cell that has 
taken direct instruction from the group’s senior leaders inside Syria and also 
acts as a reception base for jihadis travelling beyond Turkey’s borders.

Turkey has stepped up its efforts to curb Isis inside its frontier and in 
Syria, where Turkish tanks and troops are supporting Syrian rebelsas they push 
towards the town of al-Bab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/syria-turkey-takes-fight-to-isis-in-assault-on-western-base-of-al-bab>
 - a vitally important hub for Isis, where its external operations arm has been 
based for the past three years.


After using Turkish borders to cross into Syria and Iraq from mid-2012, Isis 
has increasingly turned its guns on Turkey, which it accuses of allying with 
western interests as the military push to defeat it steps up in Iraq and Syria.


Efforts to fight Kurdish groups, especially the PKK, have also intensified, 
with Ankara believing that the Kurds are using the chaos of Syria to advance a 
four-decade goal of self-determination in south-eastern Turkey.


In December, two bombs outside a football stadium in Istanbul killed 44 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/bomb-outside-istanbul-football-stadium-causes-multiple-casualties>
, most of them police officers. The TAK – an offshoot of the PKK – claimed 
responsibility for what was the deadliest strike against security forces in 
several decades. Days earlier, a bomb on a bus in central Turkey killed 13 
soldiers and wounded more than 50.

Turkey attacks 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/attacks-zip/giv-39022V1u5lWvewvt> 