
Care home operators, trade unions and charities have been telling Theresa May 
for months that the care home industry is in crisis and needs help.

Last week, May got her sternest warning yet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/social-care-crisis-theresa-may-under-pressure-to-act-fast>
 – the chairs of three influential Commons committees urged the prime minister 
to deal with the “immense challenge” of paying for health and social care in 
the future.

Social care crisis: MPs put May under pressure to act fast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/social-care-crisis-theresa-may-under-pressure-to-act-fast>
“We are calling for a new political consensus to take this forward,” 
Conservative MP Sarah Wollaston of thehealth committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/health-committee/>
, Labour’s Meg Hillier of thepublic accounts committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/>
 and Clive Betts, another Labour MP, of thecommunities and local government 
committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/communities-and-local-government-committee/>
 wrote.

Since the collapse in 2011 of Southern Cross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jun/01/rise-and-fall-of-southern-cross>
, then Britain’s biggest care home operator, no other major nationwide company 
has failed. However, smaller firms are failing across the country.

The Guardian revealed late last year that 100 more care home businesses have 
collapsed since 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/care-homes-insolvencies-autumn-statement>
 than previously thought. A staggering 380 have been declared insolvent since 
2010, according to the Insolvency Service. The number of failures each 
year has risen sharply since 2010, when 32 businesses failed. In 2015, 74 were 
declared insolvent, while another 34 failed in the first six months of 2016, 
the most recent figures available. The squeeze is being particularly felt by 
so-called “mom and pop” operators, who may run one or two care homes but 
account for about 55% of the industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/09/care-homes-justin-king-four-seasons>
.

Care homes are struggling because of a fall in the amount that councils pay 
towards fees for residents at the same time as costs are rising, driven by the 
government’s “national living wage”, which meant that workers aged 25 or over 
must be paid at least £7.20 an hour from April 2016. This led to an increase in 
payroll costs of about 5% for most businesses last year. This rise would have 
been problematic anyway, but local authorities are also reducing how much they 
pay towards social care after seeing their budgets cut by up to 50% as a result 
of government austerity measures.

“Some local authorities are paying less than £2 an hour towards the cost of 
caring for a resident,” says one senior executive at a leading care home 
operator.

Large companies are also ailing. Four Seasons, the biggest care home operator 
in the country with more than 400 properties, is the most at risk. It recorded 
a pre-tax loss of £28m in the three months to the end of September 2016, the 
most recent financial accounts available.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fcare-home-closures-funding-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe3e50fb1d1c363d892fbf8545e5b839ca90c505%2F0_604_3355_2013%2F3355.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Care%20home%20closures%20set%20to%20rise%20as%20funding%20crisis%20bites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fcare-home-closures-funding-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Care%20home%20closures%20set%20to%20rise%20as%20funding%20crisis%20bites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fcare-home-closures-funding-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe3e50fb1d1c363d892fbf8545e5b839ca90c505%2F0_604_3355_2013%2F3355.jpg>
 Guy Hands, founder of Terra Firma, which now owns the care home operator Four 
Seasons. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
The company, which is owned by Guy Hands’ private equity firm Terra Firma, is 
also sitting on more than £500m of debt, a legacy left by the previous owners. 
This debt means it pays about £30m in interest to its lenders every three 
months.

Four Seasons insists it can easily manage its debt burden, but Robbie Barr, 
the chairman of Four Seasons, warns the industry is “struggling at tipping 
point”. As well as care home operators collapsing, other companies could simply 
pull out of the industry.Bupa, one of the largest operators behind Four 
Seasons, was reported to be looking to sell 200 homes 
<https://www.ft.com/content/9eca70fa-6cdc-11e5-aca9-d87542bf8673>, although it 
has said it remains committed to the industry.

Stung by accusations that the autumn statement ignored social care, last 
month, Sajid Javid, the communities and local government secretary, announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/15/council-tax-bills-can-rise-by-3-for-two-years-to-help-fund-social-care-says-javid>
 that councils could increase council tax by an extra 3% to fund social care. 
He also said there would be a £240m “adult social care support grant” to help 
councils with care of older residents.

But Barr is cautious. He says: “It is essential that councils use the powers 
they have been given to raise the social care precept and pass it on to 
frontline elderly social care services to help offset the additional costs of 
the national living wage increase and avoid further pressures on a sector that 
is struggling at tipping point.”

Secret figures collected by Four Seasons show that although more than 90% of 
councils increased council tax last year – thanks to a similar 2% precept 
announced by David Cameron’s government – less than half of these passed it on 
to care homes through an increase in their fees.

Even if councils pass on the new precept, Javid’s package of measures, worth 
£900m, will not even cover further increases in wage costs this year. The 
national living wage is scheduled to rise by 4.2% in April to £7.50, which is 
larger than the proposed 3% increase in council tax.

The Local Government Association estimates there will be a £2.6bn funding gap 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/media-releases/-/journal_content/56/10180/7991319/NEWS>
 in providing adult social care in England by 2020.A report by the Health 
Foundation, the King’s Fund and the Nuffield Trust calculates the gap would be 
£1.9bn in 2017 alone. 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/press/press-releases/autumn-statement-2016>

Izzi Seccombe, chair of the community wellbeing board for the LGA, says: “The 
care provider market cannot carry on as it is and there is a real danger of 
more widespread market failure.”

This squeeze is not just leading to the closure of care homes but compromises 
to the quality of care and an increase in costs for private residents.In a 
report last October 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/content/adult-social-care-approaching-tipping-point> the 
Care Quality Commission, the industry watchdog, warned that adult social care 
is “approaching a tipping point”. This conclusion was based on its inspections, 
tipoffs and external data. Its damaging findings included that half of the 
1,850 social care services rated as needing improvement had not changed when 
reinspected and that 153 were downgraded to inadequate. Furthermore, it said 
the total number of nursing homes has dropped for the first time in five years 
and 81% of local authorities have reduced their real-terms spending on social 
care.

Care homes in crisis as revised figures reveal surge in insolvencies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/care-homes-insolvencies-autumn-statement>
Another consequence of the crisis is that residents paying privately are 
suffering increases in their fees or top-up payments to make up for the 
shortfall in state funding. Well over half of care home residents are still 
either entirely or partly paid for by the state, with council funding available 
when a person’s savings and assets are worth less than £23,500. However,Age UK 
found that the number of residents paying their own costs has risen by 28.5% in 
the last decade 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/Documents/EN-GB/Press%20releases/behind_the_headlines_care_homes_oct2016.pdf?dtrk=true>
 and that the gap between private payers and council-funded residents is stark. 
While self-funders pay between £603 and £827 a week on average depending on the 
area, councils pay between £421 and £624 a week.

This is one of the reasons why the Competition and Markets Authority announced 
an investigation into the care home industry last month 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cma-launches-review-of-uk-care-and-nursing-homes>
, a move that could have serious ramifications for the government and the major 
operators. The CMA said it will probe the “effectiveness of competition between 
care homes in driving quality and value for money for residents and taxpayers” 
and also “consider how local authorities and other public bodies purchase and 
assign care home places”. The government regulator has the legal power to force 
companies to make changes, as well as make recommendations to the 
prime minister.

Given the structural issues in the industry, the investigation has been 
welcomed by the biggest care home groups. Joan Elliott, managing director of UK 
care services at Bupa, says: “A strong, functioning care home sector is vital 
if the UK is to meet the growing needs of our ageing population. The new CMA 
market study is a real opportunity to address the barriers and blockages in the 
system, in particular how some local authorities set up their contracts, price 
quality care and pass through government funding.”

With 430,000 people in care homes and more than 11 million people aged 65 or 
over in the UK, the problems need to be addressed urgently. The country cannot 
afford to lose another 70-odd care home businesses in 2017, but that looks 
likely unless the government steps in.
 