
When the US women’s soccer team rose to fame in the late 1990s, they projected 
an image that was a well-polished composite of fun, friendship and teamwork in 
the pursuit of excellence.

Two new memoirs, Carli Lloyd’s When Nobody Was Watching 
<https://www.amazon.com/When-Nobody-Was-Watching-Hard-Fought/dp/0544814622> and 
Abby Wambach’sForward 
<http://www.excellesports.com/news/abby-wambach-looks-for-a-way-forward-after-soccer/>
, shatter that perception. But they do so in a way that should open a more 
realistic discussion on what we expect from athletes, especially but not 
limited to female athletes, and what they should expect from themselves.

Megan Rapinoe kneels again as US Soccer says: we expect players to stand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/us-soccer-megan-rapinoe-kneels-national-anthem>
Four years ago, Hope Solo’s Solo: A Memoir of Hope 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/hope-solo-book-2012-8> swung the first 
sledgehammer at the team’s image, which had been built up through years of 
seeing Mia Hamm deflect praise upon her team-mates and plenty of commercials 
portraying the team as a fun-loving bunch of young women with ponytails and 
cute nicknames.

Any drama had been hidden behind the omerta of the locker room. New York Times 
writer Jeré Longman summed it up in his chronicle of the 1999 Women’s World Cup,
The Girls of Summer 
<https://www.amazon.com/Girls-Summer-Womens-Soccer-Changed/dp/0060934689>: “No 
team is without its internal tensions, and the American women had distinct 
groupings of age and alma mater, but private cliques never became public 
nuisances.”

By 2007, the nuisances were public. Before a World Cup semi-final against 
Brazil, coach Greg Ryanabruptly benched Solo in favor of Briana Scurry 
<http://www.espn.com/espnw/news-commentary/article/8262829/espnw-us-goalkeeper-hope-solo-details-benching-2007-world-cup>
, the accomplished but rusty back-up goalkeeper. The reasoning was murky – 
Ryan’s public line at the time was about goalkeeping styles, but he later said 
Solo had broken several team rules off the field. After Brazil won 4-0, Solo 
walked over to an interviewer in the mixed zone, over the objections of US 
Soccer PR staff, and ripped the decision to bench her. Since then, one sentence 
has lived in women’s soccer infamy: “There’s no doubt in my mind I would’ve 
made those saves.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK-c9h44U2F0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK-c9h44U2F0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK-c9h44U2F0&media=>
That’s unlikely – Brazil were simply a class above the USA at the time. But 
new coach Pia Sundhage worked a miracle to get the team on the same page to win 
the 2008 Olympics. The wounds were closed, until Solo re-opened them with her 
memoir after the 2012 Olympics.

Now, coincidentally timed just after Solo’s termination from the national 
team, Lloyd has revisited the controversy. Solo has long credited Lloyd as her 
most steadfast supporter through the years, and in Lloyd’s book, she strongly 
defends her friend.

“In men’s sports, people criticize coaches and managers all the time, call out 
team-mates too, and it’s not that huge of a deal,” Lloyd writes. “Often the guy 
speaking out is even lauded for having the courage to tell the truth.”

Men who lose their livelihoods – or at least spend a few days enduring a 
public slaughter on social media or talk radio – after being labeled a problem 
may beg to differ. In retrospect, Solo’s career is similar to that of Barry 
Bonds, Stephon Marbury or any other controversial male athlete – their 
disagreements were tolerated when they were stars, but they were easily 
jettisoned when the team no longer depended on them.

But that’s hardly the only complaint in Lloyd’s scorching book. In her eyes, 
the US Soccer marketing department never did enough to promote her. The 
national team “feels as if it’s a girls’ club, and no, new members are not 
exactly welcome.” After players convince then-coach April Heinrichs to cancel a 
fitness session, she gripes: “The players get their way. People have told me 
the inmates run the asylum on the women’s national team. Here is the first 
example of it I’ve encountered.”

She caps the complaints with a shocking accusation in the wake of Sundhage’s 
departure in 2012: “A so-called leadership group of players had a conference 
call and began to quietly push Sunil [Gulati, US Soccer’s president] to get rid 
of Pia.”

Lloyd says she doesn’t want “drama,” unlike many of her team-mates. 
“Unfortunately, in a dozen years on the US women’s national team, I’ve been 
around enough drama queens to fill a royal palace,” she writes.

Yet “drama” is the bulk of this book. And it’s actually much of her career. 
Prodded by trainer James Galanis, she always has a chip on her shoulder, and 
she readily admits she plays better with an underdog mentality. She always has 
to have someone to prove wrong, whether it’s a media critic, an opposing coach 
(based on whispers of disrespect), or any random person who doubted her.

USA's Hope Solo given six-month ban for calling Sweden 'a bunch of cowards'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/hope-solo-suspended-us-womens-soccer-rio-olympics-loss>
And she’s wildly inconsistent about those who criticize her. Some merely fuel 
her anger. But her relationship with Galanis starts when he gives a harsh 
assessment, saying she has world-class talent but neither the fitness nor the 
mentality to live up to it, and she appreciates the honesty. She is grateful to 
former youth national coach Chris Petrucelli for giving her a similar 
assessment in cutting her from the team. She’s pleased when current US coach 
Jill Ellis shows her stats proving she had been giving away possession far too 
easily – something Lloyd’s critics had noted for years.

She recounts a conversation with Abby Wambach, who warns that the team sees 
her setting herself apart from team-mates, sitting in a corner and texting, not 
talking with others. She concludes that Wambach is only saying these things to 
ingratiate herself to veteran players who don’t like Lloyd. But when Galanis 
tells her roughly the same thing, citing the “togetherness factor” of a team 
sport, Galanis is brilliant in her eyes.

(Curiously, while Lloyd mentions many of her club teams over the years, she 
does not mention the 2011 WPS season in which she played for the Atlanta Beat – 
under head coach Galanis. That year, the team won one of its 18 league games.)

Yet for all the head-scratching moments and petty accusations (the topper: in 
2007, when she was nowhere near the player she is today, she gripes that a 
team-mate isn’t passing to her, and it clearly must be for political reasons), 
Lloyd’s book has some value. It’s not as directly inspirational as Wambach’s 
book, in which the prolific goal-scorer recounts her battles with addiction 
with remarkable self-awareness. But Lloyd undoubtedly works hard. A familiar 
pattern sets in – she suffers a setback, then goes home to do such intense 
training with Galanis that the national team’s fitness coach worries she is 
overtaxing her body. She comes back fitter, coaches praise her, and she’s back 
where she wants to be.

And along with Wambach’s book, When Nobody Was Watching provides a harrowing 
account of athletes’ sacrifices. Lloyd’s single-mindedness has undoubtedly put 
her in a different plane to most people. Recently, she refused to take postgame 
media questions until a reporter deemed to be asking tough questions was 
dismissed. She and Galanis are constantly searching for enemies to motivate 
her, leaving her in a state of perpetual conflict. Worst of all, she’s tells us 
how she is estranged from much of her family over disagreements on how to 
handle her soccer career.

And yet despite her flaws, by the end of When Nobody Was Watching, the reader 
is rooting for Lloyd. Not necessarily to add more accolades to a distinguished 
career, but to salvage what she sacrificed of her life. We root for her to have 
a happy marriage – her boyfriend’s charming proposal is one of the few moments 
of levity in the book.

And we root for her to leave behind the world of paranoia and perfectionism in 
which she has lived for more than 10 years, and we hope that future athletes 
won’t give so much of themselves in pursuit of glory.
 