
During rush hour in Manila, it would be quicker to walk the 6.5km from Renee 
Karunungan’s family home to her office. Today we use public transport, and it 
takes almost two hours. We use a jeepney (a cross between a jeep and a van), a 
bus, then two more jeepneys and a motorised tricycle. The city’s 2.2 million 
vehicles frequently grind to a standstill, and it is not unusual for commuters 
to be stuck for for three to four hours. When torrential rains flood the city 
<http://www.rappler.com/move-ph/116074-heavy-rain-flood-traffic-metro-manila>, 
it can be much worse.


As the bus pulls onto EDSA, Manila’s notorious main thoroughfare, the honking 
is almost constant, drivers ignore the road markings and pedestrians frequently 
walk in the road – pavements are often absent or very narrow. This is the 
city’s most dangerous street, responsible for more traffic casualties than any 
other. In the last two decades 57,000 pedestrianshave been hit in Metro Manila 
<http://stories.thinkingmachin.es/road-danger-pedestrians/>; 3.2% were 
fatalities.

Known as “carmageddon” to locals, the traffic crisis in the Philippines’ 
capital rose up the political agenda in the weeks ahead of therecent national 
elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/rodrigo-duterte-declares-victory-in-philippines-election-vows-to-rewrite-constitution>
. Six months ago, the city was named as having the “worst traffic on Earth” in 
a survey of 50 million drivers across 32 countries,conducted by the smartphone 
navigation app Waze. 
<http://cnnphilippines.com/metro/2015/10/01/Metro-Manila-Philippines-worst-traffic-longest-commute-Waze-survey.html>
 It has become a major economic issue, thought to cost the metro area3bn pesos 
(£45m) every day 
<http://www.philstar.com/headlines/2015/09/16/1500512/metro-manila-traffic-costing-philippines-p3-billion-day>
. In January, a senior adviser at the American Chamber of Commerce warned local 
media that, based on current trends, the city could become “uninhabitable” 
within four years.

In practice, Manila is not one city but 16, plus a municipality. Over the 
years they have conjoined to form Metro Manila, one of the most decentralised 
and heavily populated urban areas in the world,according to online journal 
site, Demographia <http://demographia.com/db-worldua.pdf> (pdf). More than 22.9 
million people are now packed into 1,632 sq km, a population density seven 
times greater than New York and 2.4 times greater than Shanghai.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc93bf272538f5c6606ef882d62f86a27a61fe41%2F0_274_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carmageddon%3A%20can%20electric%20jeepneys%20ease%20Manila's%20traffic%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carmageddon%3A%20can%20electric%20jeepneys%20ease%20Manila%27s%20traffic%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc93bf272538f5c6606ef882d62f86a27a61fe41%2F0_274_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Manila’s major thoroughfares are extremely dangerous for pedestrians. 
Photograph: Jay Directo/AFP/Getty Images 
In Manila, motor vehicles are thought to be  
<http://cnnphilippines.com/news/2015/08/05/Metro-Manila-pollution-air-improving.html>
responsible for around 80% of the air pollution, putting its inhabitants at 
heightened risk of stroke, heart disease, cancer and asthma.

The traffic also brings a social cost. Karunungan, a 26-year-old young 
professional, no longer travels this route. Two months ago, she decided the 
traffic had got so bad she moved out of her family home, where she had lived 
free of rent, bills and grocery costs. Now she lives in a flat on her own, just 
10 minutes walk from work.


“It was accumulated anger and distress over time,” she says. “A lot of people 
are angry on the road. You can see it. You can feel it. There is a lot of road 
rage. It’s so draining that when I get to the office I am already tired and I 
just want to rest.”

Others have it worse. Karen Juanson, 36, has started staying at a local hostel 
rather than going home at night. The Alliance Francaise where she studies is 
16km from where she lives but the journey takes almost three hours.

“It’s exhausting. You’re not productive at all – stuck in stinking transport 
touching skin with someone who is as sweaty as you. How can you do anything?”

It takes the man next to me in the jeepney, who wishes to remain unnamed, two 
hours to get home. “That’s not so bad,” he says, and shrugs his shoulders. 
“[It’s] average. But I hate it because I have three children. I always get home 
late. I never see them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99a733a9a585e8168f2acf3a769d377277b7701d%2F0_0_4000_2842%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carmageddon%3A%20can%20electric%20jeepneys%20ease%20Manila's%20traffic%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carmageddon%3A%20can%20electric%20jeepneys%20ease%20Manila%27s%20traffic%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99a733a9a585e8168f2acf3a769d377277b7701d%2F0_0_4000_2842%2F4000.jpg>
 Traffic becomes a lot worse when Manila is hit by flooding. Photograph: Aaron 
Favila/AP 
Now those in power are taking note. The presidential candidates were competing 
to make promises to ease Manila’s traffic woes. Intheir final televised debate 
<http://cnnphilippines.com/news/2016/04/24/presidential-debate-solution-binay-duterte-poe-roxas-santiago-traffic.html>
, now-president Rodrigo Duterte promised to increase the capacity of the train 
system, while Grace Po heralded road expansion and clearing projects and 
improved enforcement of road rules. Meanwhile Miriam Santiago, who had run for 
president three times, called for investment in infrastructure to take people 
out of the capital and stricter discipline on the roads.

With a mind to this, in September former president Benigo Aquino handed 
control of traffic management on EDSA over to the national police force. In 
April the Metro Manila Development Authority (MMDA) launcheda flagship project  
<http://www.rappler.com/nation/122656-mmda-no-contact-apprehension-policy-traffic-violations>
to hold traffic violators to account by installing 400 CCTV cameras across the 
city, with plans for 400 more. Already their statistics show that the number of 
motorists being caught has doubled.

Corazon Jimenez, general manager at the MMDA, is not worried that the city 
will become uninhabitable by 2020.

“It’s an exaggeration. We’ve been here for the last how many years. This is 
Metro Manila … By 2020 there will be a change in terms of infrastructure and 
how the economy progresses in Metro Manila. Each city is doing redevelopment.”

It is true that the former government has invested heavily in large scale 
infrastructure projects to ease Manila’s traffic. Last year Aquinolaunched 
$8.42bn 
<http://asia.nikkei.com/Politics-Economy/Economy/President-Aquino-gives-green-light-for-8.42-billion-transport-projects>
-worth of new schemes, including two railways and two major road projects, 
including the “Skyway stage 3” an elevated expressway that will connect those 
on the north and south of the city.

But according to the MMDA, there are already 2.2 million vehicles on Manila’s 
roads. Last year, sales of cars and trucks soared by 23% 
<http://www.philstar.com/business/2016/01/13/1541874/car-truck-sales-23-2015>. 
So will the new road projects be part of the problem or the solution?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96bfcc800c3b7735b50ebaeaa0777210a51b7a7d%2F0_371_3200_1921%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carmageddon%3A%20can%20electric%20jeepneys%20ease%20Manila's%20traffic%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carmageddon%3A%20can%20electric%20jeepneys%20ease%20Manila%27s%20traffic%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96bfcc800c3b7735b50ebaeaa0777210a51b7a7d%2F0_371_3200_1921%2F3200.jpg>
 Filipinos ride a rail rickshaw on train tracks in Taguig city, south of 
Manila. Photograph: Francis R. Malasig/EPA 
“In my opinion the preference of the national government is to build more and 
more roads,” says Cresencio Montalbo Jr, professor in the school of urban and 
regional planning at the University of thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>.

“We have said this is the wrong thing to do – for a while those roads will 
befree of congestion but eventually they will be full of cars. Building more 
roads encourages more people to buy more cars … The traffic condition in Metro 
Manila is prevailing and paralysing. The solution – and this is true globally 
for cities – is you need high quality public transport.”

He is more hopeful about the 4.8bn pesos bus rapid transit system (BRT) the 
president approved in December. Part-funded by a loan from the World Bank, it 
will link Manila’s city hall near the waterfront with Quezon city, the 
metropolis’ largest, through a 12.3km segregated route.

“Its cost effectiveness, rail-competitive passenger capacity, shorter 
construction time, possibility to absorb some of the existing public transport 
workers, and its potential to affect public transport reform are among the 
BRT’s strengths,” Montalbo in his recent report on the topic.

Others believe that electrification is the way to incentivise commuters to 
leave cars at home. Freddie Tinga, former mayor of one of Metro Manila’s 
cities, is one of a number of entrepreneurs who hopes it can transform the 
Philippines’ most ubiquitous public vehicle of all – the jeepney.

An industry that emerged from adapted US army vehicles left abandoned from the 
second world war, Metro Manila’s fleet of 75,000 jeepneys are impossible to 
miss. Many are emblazoned with religious or political slogans or the names of 
American basketball teams (a popular sport in the Philippines).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cccb7c665e1be40daccbf2178d1ecfc41c88167%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carmageddon%3A%20can%20electric%20jeepneys%20ease%20Manila's%20traffic%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carmageddon%3A%20can%20electric%20jeepneys%20ease%20Manila%27s%20traffic%20crisis%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fcarmageddon-manila-philippines-electric-jeepney-traffic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cccb7c665e1be40daccbf2178d1ecfc41c88167%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Barack Obama helped launch the Comet electric vehicles, known as ‘e-jeepneys’ 
in 2014. Photograph: White House Photo/Alamy Stock Photo 
As dusk falls I jump onto a jeepney with neon disco lights that’s blasting out 
a drum and bass remix of Madonna’s “I should be so lucky”.

Passengers pay around eight pesos (12p) to sit on cramped parallel benches – 
or on each other’s laps – and have no choice but to inhale the toxic black 
fumes that spew out of its efficient diesel engines and in through its open 
sides. The drivers receive no salary and so are incentivised to speed, work 
long hours and cram in as many passengers as possible.

Two years ago, with a little help from Barack Obama 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MMY0VH7w68c>, Tinga launched Comet, a pilot 
fleet of 29 electric jeepneys. He believes the vehicles – better known as 
“e-jeepneys” – can fight the pollution and the worst practices of the 
traditional industry. They are part of a wider push for electric vehicles in 
the Philippines – there could be 1 million by 2020, according to the Electric 
Vehicles Association of the Philippines. Their members (not including Comet) 
currently run around 100 e-jeepneys in Metro Manila and 250 e-trikes.

Beatings and bribes: the corruption behind Lagos's traffic jams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/feb/25/beatings-bribes-corruption-lagos-nigeria-traffic-jams>
Their target has been given a boost by the government’s commitment to phase out
 <http://www.thephilippinepride.com/ltfrb-to-phase-out-15-year-old-jeepneys/> 
all jeepneys in the capital that are more than 15 years old by 2018. Tinga’s 
e-jeepneys, among others, will replace the old vehicles so that they are not 
creating more congestion.

Comet’s clean white e-jeepneys lack character but are spacious, quiet and use 
a prepay card system. Drivers are contracted, paid a salary and work fixed 
eight hour shifts. The company expects to be operationally profitable by June, 
after which it plans to implement fixed schedules, designated stops and an 
Uber-style booking app so customers can book rides in advance.

As Karunungan’s experience suggests, comfort will be key to the challenge that 
lies ahead for Manila.

“If we can give people a better ride they will leave their car at home,” says 
Tinga. “Outside it’s an unorganised mess. We ride in jeepneys because we have 
no choice. We want to build an A-grade first world vehicle that’s is good 
enough for a developing world country – in developing countries we’re always 
forced to settle. Why?”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion












 