
The actor and writer Carrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher> was poised to spend a 
second night in a Los Angeles hospital on Saturday, as concerned friends and 
co-stars of the Hollywood star expressed hope she would make a full recovery.

Fisher, 60, was aboard an 11-hour flight from London to Los Angeles on Friday 
when shereportedly went into cardiac arrest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/23/carrie-fisher-heart-attack-london-la-flight>
.

After the aircraft landed, Fisher, best known as Princess Leia in the Star Wars
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> series, was rushed to the Ronald 
Reagan UCLA Medical Center and placed in an intensive care unit.

The hospital declined to comment on her condition on Saturday, citing patient 
confidentiality laws. There were no further updates from relatives who spent 
Christmas Eve at her bedside.

Carrie Fisher in intensive care after heart attack on flight to LA
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/23/carrie-fisher-heart-attack-london-la-flight>
Amid the uncertainty, well-wishers shared their prayers and hopes for Fisher’s 
recovery.

“I am shocked and saddened to hear the news about my dear friend,” Fisher’s 
Star Wars co-starHarrison Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrisonford>, 
who played Han Solo opposite Fisher, said in a statement to the Associated 
Press.

The 74-year-old actor added: “Our thoughts are with Carrie, her family and 
friends.”

Others offered their hopes for the actor’s recovery on Twitter using the 
trending hashtag #MayTheForceBeWithHer.

Well-wishers included Fisher’s Star Wars co-stars Peter Mayhew, who played 
Chewbacca, and Mark Hamill, who played Luke Skywalker and said he and others 
were “sending all our love”.

Other Star Wars actors expressing sympathy for their hospitalized co-star 
where Anthony Daniels, who played C-3PO; Dave Prowse, who acted as Darth Vader; 
and Billy Dee Williams, who played Lando Calrissian.

Fisher had been in London filming the third season of the British television 
comedy Catastrophe and to promote her latest book, The Princess Diarist.

Fisher used he memoir, which recounts her behind-the-scenes experiences making 
the sci-fi blockbuster, to reveal how she and Ford had a secret affair.

It remains unclear precisely when and how Fisher became unwell on her flight 
to LA.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fcarrie-fisher-intensive-care-heart-attack-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carrie%20Fisher%20'in%20intensive%20care'%20following%20heart%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fcarrie-fisher-intensive-care-heart-attack-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carrie%20Fisher%20%27in%20intensive%20care%27%20following%20heart%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fcarrie-fisher-intensive-care-heart-attack-video&media=>
Carrie Fisher ‘in intensive care’ following heart attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/dec/24/carrie-fisher-intensive-care-heart-attack-video>
A source who was not authorized to discuss the incident aboard United Airlines 
935 told theLos Angeles <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> Times 
the actress was “in a lot of distress on the flight”. About 15 minutes before 
it touched down the crew reported a passenger was “unresponsive”.

According to the LA police department, officers responded around 12.15pm to an 
emergency call involving a female passenger in cardiac arrest. On arrival, they 
found paramedics performing CPR on the victim.

In just a few, short conversations with reporters since Fisher was 
hospitalized, her family have played down much speculation surrounding her 
illness and stressed that their information is limited.

Her brother, Todd Fisher, told Entertainment Tonight 
<http://www.etonline.com/news/205791_carrie_fisher_intensive_care_unit_after_heart_attack_brother_says/>
 late on Friday that his sister was in intensive care and being “well looked 
after”.

“If everyone could just pray for her that would be good,” he said. “The 
doctors are doing their thing and we don’t want to bug them. We are waiting by 
patiently.”
Asked for details of her condition, he replied: “We don’t know. We hope for 
the best. We certainly do not know her condition, that’s why she is in the ICU. 
I’m sure everyone wants to speculate, but now is not the time for that.”

There were no additional updates from Fisher’s family members or close 
associates on Saturday – although she was believed to still be in hospital.

The daughter of Debbie Reynolds and the late singer Eddie Fisher, Fisher shot 
to stardom when the original Star Wars was released in 1977. She revisited the 
role as the leader of a galactic rebellion in three sequels, including last 
year’s Star Wars: The Force Awakens.


In her first and best known book, Postcards From the Edge, she wrote about her 
turbulent relationship with her mother, as well as a cocaine addiction and 
mental health problems for which she had received electroshock therapy. She also
recently started writing an advice column for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/30/carrie-fisher-advice-column-mental-illness-bipolar-disorder>
.
 