
A rock face with carvings by first world war conscientious objectors, the 
wreck of a US-built ship buried deep in the sand of Minehead beach in Somerset, 
the oldest water chute in Britain, built in the 1920s in Northamptonshire, and 
a bronze age burial mound deep in suburban south-east London are among the most 
unusual structures and sites to have been listed by the government on the 
advice ofHistoric England <https://historicengland.org.uk/> in the last year.

The graffiti carved by conscientious objectors, who were on the run to avoid 
conscription, have survived on a natural rock outcrop in the Lake District 
national park. The carvings include the date 1916, the name A Boosey, and six 
sets of initials believed to be of men who were hiding out in a nearby 
farmhouse - and possibly keeping watch for the authorities from the rock.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcarved-rock-face-and-water-chute-among-historic-englands-listed-sites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F175e0e44f119486a754f39872b6aa8c957e32c02%2F0_355_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carved%20rock%20face%20and%20water%20chute%20among%20Historic%20England's%20listed%20sites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcarved-rock-face-and-water-chute-among-historic-englands-listed-sites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carved%20rock%20face%20and%20water%20chute%20among%20Historic%20England%27s%20listed%20sites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcarved-rock-face-and-water-chute-among-historic-englands-listed-sites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F175e0e44f119486a754f39872b6aa8c957e32c02%2F0_355_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A rock carving from conscientious objectors on the run during the first world 
war has been listed. Photograph: Historic England/PA 
The water chute - still much loved despite many faster and more imposing 
fairground rides - was designed and built by the engineer and philanthropist 
Charles Wicksteed, who created the Wicksteed amusement park at Kettering in 
Northamptonshire. He was also concerned at the lack of specially designed 
playground equipment for children, and the factory he launched to manufacture 
it is still in production.

The Shrewsbury Barrow is the last of six mounds, four built on in the 20th 
century and one now lost, known to have existed at Shooters Hill in Greenwich.

The listings were among 1,033 added to the register over the year, including 
640 war memorials, many honoured to mark the centenary of the first world war. 
Roger Bowdler, head of listing, said: “Historic England strives to keep the 
list rich and relevant so that the best of our, often weird and wonderful, 
heritage can continue to be enjoyed and understood for future generations.”

Other listings included Victorian lamp-posts, a tea house, a bathing house, a 
women’s prison exercise yard in East Sussex, and some 18th-century artificial 
bee hives in Cornwall.

 