

The National Mall in Washington could become a sea of bright pink the day after
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is inaugurated 
as US president if the vision of a pair of Los Angeles women is realised.

For two months, Krista Suh and Jayna Zweiman have called on people around the 
world to make 1.17m pink “pussy hats” for those attending the Women’s March, a 
rally on 21 January organised in the hope of bringing attention to civil and 
human rights issues.

The name of the hats stems partly from Donald Trump’s comments in an infamous 
2005 tape that came to light during his campaign. Discussing women, he said: “
When you’re a star they let you do it. Grab them by the pussy. You can do 
anything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
.”

Women's March on Washington set to be one of America's biggest protests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/womens-march-on-washington-protest-size-donald-trump>
The project is meant to “create a sea of pink hats, which is going to be a 
strong collective visual statement”, Zweiman said.


It is also meant to involve “people across the country and the world who want 
to be a part of the march but can’t physically be there and want to support the 
marchers,” she said.

The women have asked volunteers around the world to help sew, crochet or knit 
pink hats with ears by using simple patterns available on the project’s 
website. They say it is easier than knitting a scarf, the typical starter 
project for novices.

Marchers can get a hat by contacting a maker through an online distribution 
system, through social media or at sites in Washington.

“It’s a distribution system that’s very grassroots and our aim is to get a hat 
on every marcher’s head who wants one,” Zweiman said.

Organisers have said the protest could draw about 200,000 people, but Suh and 
Zweiman are hoping for the nearly 1.2 million people that could feasibly fit in 
the Mall.

For some knitters, it is hard to put the needles down as the deadline nears. 
“Doing this is taking my mind off things,” said Marina Mont’Ros. “This will be 
my 35th hat. Every time I think ‘OK, that’s enough. I’ve made enough, I’m going 
to stop,’ I read something in the news and, ‘give me that yarn! I’m making 
more.’”
 