
Cate Blanchett’s Broadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway> debut 
has been hailed as ferocious, commanding and glorious.

The Australian actor plays Anna Petrovna in The Present, Andrew Upton’s 
reworking of the Chekhov’s Platonov.

Directed by John Crowley and also starring Richard Roxburgh, the the 
adaptation unfolds over the course of a birthday celebration in the 
post-Perestroika Russian countryside.

Blanchett missed Sunday’s Golden Globes ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/meryl-streep-golden-globes-speech-donald-trump>
 to appear on stage at the Ethel Barrymore theatre in New York. She has been a 
regular fixture of the pre-Oscar awards, having been nominated nine times and 
winning on three occasions.

The Present review – Cate Blanchett dares to find truth in Chekhov’s trickiest 
play
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/the-present-review-cate-blanchett-antov-chekhov>
Reviews for The Present have been largely positive, with many commenting on 
her role in carrying an otherwise overwrought story.

The Guardian gave the production four stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/the-present-review-cate-blanchett-antov-chekhov>
. Critic Alexis Soloski wrote: “Anna isn’t one to sit idly by and let hourglass 
sands bleed away. In Blanchett’s hands, she is sexy, antic, ferocious, 
imperious, mordant, and angry.”

She added: “When this production works best, as in a debauched dance sequence, 
a sudden shock of violence, and the flammable scenes between Roxburgh and 
Blanchett, it feels entirely of the moment and urgently, ripely alive.”

The New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/08/theater/review-the-present-cate-blanchett-barrymore-theater.html?_r=0>
, Ben Brantley wrote: “Blanchett knows how to hold a stage and, if necessary, 
hijack it … Such commanding, try-anything charisma is useful if you’re 
attempting to hold together a badly assembled party or, for that matter, play.”

Variety said Blanchett was “a glorious example of profound Chekhovian ennui … 
Her throaty laugh suggests a cynical intellect and her long, loose limbs and 
bare feet convey a sense of wanton abandon that can drive men wild.”

The Telegraph also gave it four stars 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/theatre/what-to-see/cate-blanchett-makes-stellar-broadway-debut-present-review/>
, with critic Diane Snyder saying the actor made juggling successful film and 
theatre careers “look astonishingly easy”.

Snyder continued: “As Anna Petrovna, a young widow celebrating her birthday 
with an assortment of old friends at her late husband’s estate, Blanchett is a 
bounty of restless energy, which Anna uses to mask her dissatisfaction with the 
past, her fear of the future and her yearning for Roxburgh’s Mikhail Platonov.”

While this was Blanchett’s Broadway debut, it was not her first venture on the 
New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> stage. She has 
previously starred as Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire at the 
Brooklyn Academy of Music and as Yelena in Uncle Vanya at City Center. Both, 
like The Present, were Sydney Theater company productions.

On screen, Blanchett’s latest movie, Manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/06/sundance-film-festival-2017-full-lineup>
, receives its premier later this month at the Sundance film festival. The 
film, in which she plays multiple roles, is an enactment of artists’ statements 
from the German director Julian Rosefeldt.

The actor said in a recent interview 
<http://variety.com/2017/legit/news/actress-cate-blanchett-broadway-debut-1201951926/>
 that The Present brought to her mind political upheavals around the world in 
the past year, including Brexit and the election of Donald Trump in the US. 
“You can’t present anything at the moment without thinking of the state the 
world is in,” she told Variety.

“We’re in a real state of – I was going to say ‘transition’, but I think it’s 
more of a realisation of what we’ve lost. We’ve lost the state of passivity, 
perhaps, that we’ve all been in, no matter what side of the political spectrum 
you are.”
 