
The Catholic church <https://www.theguardian.com/world/catholicism> in England 
and Wales has brought the medieval manuscriptArs Moriendi – The Art of Dying – 
into the digital age, with a website aimed at helping terminally ill people and 
their loved ones deal with death.

Like the original 15th century work, The Art of Dying Well 
<http://www.artofdyingwell.org/> is intended to bring religious comfort and 
offer practical guidance to people in the final stage of life. The modern-day 
version offers videos, animations and interviews with terminally ill people and 
their carers.


Although the content is based in the Catholic tradition, the church says it is 
intended for anyone addressing end-of-life issues. It features real stories 
from dying people and their families, as well as interviews with palliative 
care experts.


In recent years there has been growing openness in society around what many 
see as the last taboo. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/death-and-dying> Death Cafes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/29/death-cafes-embrace-last-taboo>
 and other events to discuss issues around the end of life have flourished, 
websites such asFinal Fling <https://www.finalfling.com>, which offer death 
planning have emerged, and an increasing number of people are using the 
services ofdeath doulas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/03/death-doulas-women-who-stay-by-your-side-to-the-end>
.


Terminal cancer: how to live with dying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/sep/19/terminal-cancer-how-to-live-with-dying>
Katherine Sleeman, palliative medicine registrar at the Cicely Saunders 
Institute 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/lsm/research/divisions/cicelysaunders/index.aspx> in 
King’s College London, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/kings-college-london> said ending the 
silence about death would reduce fear and improve the quality of life of dying 
patients.


She told The Art of Dying: “We prepare about the arrival of a new baby, we 
plan for it, we think about what we are going to buy and what we are going to 
call the new baby. It is part of our daily life, our conversation. Why do we 
not prepare for our death in the same way? I would like everyone to have a good 
death but we can’t achieve that unlesswe as a society stop whispering and start 
talking about it.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/sep/13/palliative-care>


Another palliative care expert, Kathryn Mannix, who has witnessed some 10,000 
deaths over the course of her career, said: “Many people have lived to enjoy 
the last weeks and months of their lives.” Society expected terminally ill 
people to “remain miserable until they died”.


The original Latin texts of Ars Moriendi included advice on deathbed etiquette 
and prayers, and the five temptations that a dying person might face. It was 
illustrated with woodcuts, one of which depicted the battle between angels and 
demons for a dying man’s soul.

The modern digital version includes an animation, voiced by actor Vanessa 
Redgrave, <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/vanessa-redgrave> featuring a 
fictional family preparing for a peaceful death. Redgrave hasdiscussed wanting 
to die during health problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/13/vanessa-redgrave-interview-simon-hattenstone>
.

In 2012, Bronnie Ware, an Australian palliative care nurse, wrote a book 
called The Top Five Regrets of the Dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/feb/01/top-five-regrets-of-the-dying>
, based on interviews with terminally ill people. Among the regrets was: “I 
wish I’d stayed in touch with my friends”, and “I wish I’d let myself be 
happier.”


The Art of Dying Well launches on All Saints’ Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2010/nov/01/all-saints-day> 
(Tuesday) – the eve of All Souls’ Day, when Christians traditionally remember 
the dead. This year, the UK will mark All Souls’ Day with a mass celebrated by 
Cardinal Vincent Nichols, the leader of the Catholic church in England and 
Wales, at Westminster Cathedral.

 