
Somewhere amid the strikes, cancellations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/07/southern-rail-passengers-disruption-two-day-strike>
 and fury over Southern rail owners’ staggering profits, a new kind of train 
slipped quietly onto the lines in the south-east of England this summer.

It has been talked up as the “future of commuting” 
<http://www.railtechnologymagazine.com/Rail-Industry-Focus-/class-700-the-future-of-commuting-in-the-capital>
; a way of easing the overcrowding woes of all those unhappy souls crammed into 
London-bound carriages each day. But this future still involves the struggle to 
find a seat – let alone a table.

Theatre manager Martin, 42, travels on the new Thameslink train from Brighton 
to London Blackfriars at rush hour each morning.

“The new train feels quite odd because it’s one long tube-type carriage,” he 
says. “If I do get a seat, the lack of tables makes trying to get any work done 
on your laptop really awkward and difficult. And if I don’t get a seat and I’m 
forced to stand, it’s not any more comfortable than standing on the old train – 
you’re still jiggling around the doorway for an hour and 20 minutes.

“I can remember when the old train had a buffet cart about a decade ago,” he 
adds. “It feels like they’ve shaved off all convenience since then.”

You can understand the frustration if people are forced onto a mobile sardine 
tin for over an hour to get to work
Simon Smiler 
Many of Britain’s long-suffering commuters have become familiar with huddling 
in squashed doorways. But does Thameslink’s new metro-style train, with extra 
standing space formally agreed with the manufacturer, signal a national trend 
towards a new kind of standard? If we are now expected to do without a seat or 
the luxury of being able to work on trains, is the comfort of the commuter 
being downgraded – despite billions being invested in new train stock?

“It’s a sign of the times,” says British transport blogger Simon Smiler. “It’s 
a trend in a lot of cities where they’re trying to make sure a large number of 
people can travel quickly and easily through the city, as well as in and out of 
the city.

“Connecting up suburban trains into your transit system isn’t easy,” he adds. 
“But the metro-style trains aren’t really suitable for long journeys. People 
still like a seat and somewhere to put their coffee. So you can understand the 
frustration if people are forced onto a mobile sardine tin for over an hour to 
get to work on time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fthameslink-new-trains-tube-style-standing-up-future-commuting-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F572bec95670b05ef16e6a5283d7388e4f95147d5%2F0_137_2126_1277%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cattle-class%3A%20are%20Thameslink's%20new%20'tube-style'%20trains%20the%20future%20of%20commuting%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fthameslink-new-trains-tube-style-standing-up-future-commuting-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cattle-class%3A%20are%20Thameslink%27s%20new%20%27tube-style%27%20trains%20the%20future%20of%20commuting%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fthameslink-new-trains-tube-style-standing-up-future-commuting-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F572bec95670b05ef16e6a5283d7388e4f95147d5%2F0_137_2126_1277%2F2126.jpg>
 The new Class 700 train on the Brighton to London route 
The fleet of Class 700 Thameslink trains, commissioned at the cost of £1.6bn 
and now running through London on the Brighton to Bedford route, closely 
resemble the short-hop trains typical of urban transit systems. They have fewer 
seats than conventional suburban commuter trains, wider doors, wider aisles – 
and a lot more space for standing passengers.

In addition, all the tables have been removed from standard-class carriages, 
making working difficult for many passengers on journeys in and out of London 
that can run close to two hours.

Chris Page, a director at the campaign group Railfuture, points out that 
whereas theprevious incarnation 
<http://www.railfuture.org.uk/article1616-Standing-room-only> of Thameslink 
trains had 798 seats, the replacement class has only 666 seats.

Southern rail boss waives bonus and pay rise as profits rise 27%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/02/southern-rail-owner-reports-99m-pounds-profits-go-ahead>
Operator Govia Thameslink Railway says there will be an overall increase in 
seat numbers because of the increased frequency in trains as more rolling stock 
is added over the next two years.

“You don’t want standing to become a long-term solution to capacity problems,” 
says Page. “The risk is that it will become the norm for these longer journeys. 
If you’re commuting for over an hour and you’re paying a lot, it’s not 
unreasonable to expect a seat and a table.”

Commuters and campaign groups are worried Govia’s new class of high-capacity, 
metro-style trains is helping normalise standing on long rail journeys.

Between now and the end of 2018, 115 of the German-built trains will be 
introduced on Govia’s Thameslink and Northern services on routes as far out of 
London as Cambridge and Peterborough, as well as Brighton and Bedford – 
journeys that typically take well over an hour.

It follows London to Essex operator c2c introducing its own metro service 
<https://www.c2c-online.co.uk/travel-information/timetables-trains/new-look-trains/>
 last year, refurbishing 20% of its trains by stripping out seats, creating 
more standing space and introducing overhead hand straps to help pack in 150 
extra passengers on rush hour services.

Commuters coming into Birmingham, the UK’s second biggest metropolitan area, 
are also likely to experience the subtle shift towards a metro-style, 
cattle-class journey soon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fthameslink-new-trains-tube-style-standing-up-future-commuting-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dabdb304f53e7af442c8e01b987d41f3708e4ad%2F0_0_4144_2895%2F4144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cattle-class%3A%20are%20Thameslink's%20new%20'tube-style'%20trains%20the%20future%20of%20commuting%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fthameslink-new-trains-tube-style-standing-up-future-commuting-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cattle-class%3A%20are%20Thameslink%27s%20new%20%27tube-style%27%20trains%20the%20future%20of%20commuting%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fthameslink-new-trains-tube-style-standing-up-future-commuting-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dabdb304f53e7af442c8e01b987d41f3708e4ad%2F0_0_4144_2895%2F4144.jpg>
 A commuter on a delayed train from London in 1976. Photograph: Barry 
Lewis/Corbis/Getty 
A proposal to provide more standing space was included in the Department for 
Transport’s (DfT) consultation over theWest Midlands rail franchise 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/midlands-news/plan-remove-seats-toilets-midland-10721322>
, serving commuter routes into the city. Rail firms invited to bid to take over 
the London Midland line from October 2017 were asked to consider “fewer seats 
but more standing space and wider aisles” on the shorter distance services.

Other growing cities around the world face the same question: how do you 
balance the needs of commuters making long journeys to and from the city, with 
the need to deliver more frequent, “turn up and go” stopping services inside 
city boundaries?

Toronto’s GO commuter system has seen significant overcrowding 
<https://www.thestar.com/news/city_hall/2011/10/16/jammed_go_train_is_already_full_by_the_time_it_gets_here.html>
 in recent years, with many travellers in the Greater Toronto area forced to 
stand on 30-minute journeys downtown. The GO operator’s goal is to provide 
seats for 80% of its peak time passengers, but it achieved only 66% atthe most 
recent count 
<http://www.metrolinx.com/en/docs/pdf/board_agenda/20150625/2015-06-19_Annual_Report_201415.pdf>
.

Melbourne’s Metro commuter network has addressed rising numbers by ripping out 
seats 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/metro-cuts-seats-from-comeng-trains-to-squeeze-in-more-passengers/news-story/40a47d74b3f4d536fff3fea00e76fd4e>
 on its oldest fleet to create more standing space, leaving close to half of 
passengers standing when trains are at peak capacity. And the Bay Area Rapid 
Transit system, serving San Francisco and Oakland commuters on the US west 
coast, has alsoreduced seating 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/mr-roadshow/ci_29724900/roadshow-sit-or-stand-bart-testing-new-train>
 and added overhead hand straps.

So how long is it reasonable to ask passengers to stand? Many European 
countries such France, Italy and Spain don’t have to regulate for standing 
times on longer distance journeys because those trains don’t cater for 
unreserved passengers, so everyone has a ticket and a seat.

Crushing the commuters: does train chaos threaten the future of London?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/09/london-commute-finally-reached-breaking-point-rail-transport-mayor-tfl>
In the UK, the closest thing to regulating standing times is a vague principle 
that states it is acceptable to stand for up to 20 minutes. The DfT uses this 
20-minute principle – known as thepassengers in excess of capacity (PiXC) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/466412/rail-passengers-crowding-2014.pdf>
 measure – as the basis of monitoring levels of overcrowding. But it doesn’t 
mean any laws are being broken when your knees ache after an hour spent 
clutching a handrail.

Martin, the daily Brighton to London commuter, says he would settle for 
standing for 30 minutes. “Half an hour seems like it would okay. But on a bad 
day, with delays, I can be standing for more than 90 minutes. You can joke 
about it being first world problems, but it does become quite punishing.”

Still, there might be a chink of light at the end of the Thameslink tunnel. A 
spokesman for Govia told the Guardian talks with the DfT to retrofit seat 
tables into the Class 700 trains are at an “advanced stage”.

A tiny luxury reclaimed, perhaps. A small plastic table might not make 
standing any easier, but it should make those wonderful mornings you find an 
empty seat all the more precious.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion
 