
Storm Desmond left Scottish football badly affected. Three Premiership games 
were called off early with matches atCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> Park, Tynecastle and Firhill 
falling victim. Hearts’ match with Inverness was the first to go when the 
Edinburgh club announced “extreme adverse weather conditions” meant the game 
could not go ahead. Although the pitch had been wet on Friday, it was strong 
winds that forced the postponement – balls were rolling from the far corner of 
the pitch right into the dugout.

Partick followed with confirmation that their meeting with Motherwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/motherwell> was off because of a 
waterlogged pitch and Celtic’s home fixture against Hamilton soon went the same 
way.

In the Scottish Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottish-championship>, Stark’s Park 
passed an early pitch inspection but Raith later announced their match against 
the leaders, Rangers, could not go ahead.

St Mirren’s game with Queen of the South was postponed because of a 
waterlogged pitch – less than two hours after the club reported it was in 
perfect condition – while Morton’s home game against Hibernian and 
Livingstone’s trip to Falkirk also fell victim to the weather, meaning Alloa v 
Dumbarton was the only game in the division to go ahead.

The League One fixture between Albion Rovers and Stranraer at Cliftonhill was 
postponed, as was East Stirling v Clyde in League Two.

In the Scottish Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/scottishcup>, the 
third-round replays between Lothian Thistle Hutchison Vale and Huntly was 
called off due to high winds, as was Annan Athletic’s match at home to 
Inverurie Loco Works and Arbroath and Cowdenbeath at Gayfield was abandoned 
after 25 minutes.

Rugby union’s Pro12 was affected, with Glasgow Warriors’ encounter against 
Leinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster> at Scotstoun postponed.

Navan’s racing card was also called off because of the inclement weather, 
while Punchestown’s John Durkan Memorial Chase card on Sunday faces an 8am 
inspection. The Irish Turf Club called an inspection at Navan for 9.30am due to 
the threat of gale force winds but a deterioration in weather conditions meant 
it was cancelled ahead of before that.

The Turf Club press officer, Cliff Noone, said: “They were due to inspect at 
9.30am, but the situation has worsened and is due to get worse again through 
the morning. There is no problem with the ground, the track is fine, but they 
have gale force winds and it’s not safe for racing to take place.”


 