
Centrelink’s error-prone debt recovery system has been slammed for placing 
blind faith in big data and prioritising “efficiency over human welfare”, as 
lawyers, privacy advocates and data experts join calls for it to be suspended.

Labor has continued to press the Coalition to stop Centrelink’s automated debt 
recovery system, which senator Doug Cameron described as a deliberate targeting 
of the poor and vulnerable.

The government’s automated compliance system, which began in July, has been 
the subject of repeated complaints, which stem from itscomparison of income 
reported to Centrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
 and information held by the Australian Taxation Office.

It has been accompanied by threats of jail for those who do not pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/acoss-criticises-governments-appalling-jail-threats-to-welfare-recipients>
, a joint police-Centrelink campaign targeting geographic areas, the imposition 
of a 10% debt recovery fee and plans to charge interest on welfare debts and 
remove the six-year statutory limit on retrieving overpayments.

A crackdown on welfare while the richest pay no tax? It's one promise the 
Liberals kept | Van Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/a-crackdown-on-welfare-while-the-richest-pay-no-tax-its-one-promise-the-liberals-kept>
Legal Aid Victoria, the Australian privacy foundation, the Australian council 
for social service, andindependent Andrew Wilkie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/centrelink-urged-to-stop-collecting-welfare-debts-after-compliance-system-errors>
 have all raised serious concerns, urging the human services minister, Alan 
Tudge, to intervene.


IT and data expert Justin Warren – who has worked for IBM, ANZ, Australia Post 
and Telstra, among others – said Centrelink’s system appeared to rest on the 
“idiotic” assumption that “big data was magic”.


“It’s not. It’s a messy, complex, statistical system that is wrong a lot,” 
Warren said. “All models are wrong, but some are useful. It’s the choice of how 
you deal with when the system is wrong that reveals how you view the world.”

Once a discrepancy is detected by the automated data-matching process – 
currently occurring at a rate of 20,000 a week – the onus then falls on welfare 
recipients to prove they were entitled to claim benefits, often forcing them to 
find payslips and employment information from up to six years ago.

“What the department has done, however, is placed all the work of proving an 
error exists on the humans they are supposed to serve (the clue is in the 
name),” Warren said. “The humans have to do a bunch of paperwork to prove the 
machine is wrong.

“Prioritising efficiency over human welfare is just one choice among many. I 
don’t think it’s the ethical choice.”


The Australian Privacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> Foundation 
described the system as a “clusterfuck”, that wrongly assumed the initial data 
matching was accurate and then abandoned procedural fairness.


“There’s so much that can go wrong here that it’s astounding,” the 
foundation’s chair, Kat Lane, said. “And falsely accusing people of things, and 
sending them letters, and particularly some of our most disadvantaged people … 
you’d want to make sure you got it absolutely right before doing that.”

Lane said the sharing of data en masse should also cause significant privacy 
concerns for Australians.

“This is just the thin edge of the wedge, there is a clear plan to do 
comprehensive data matching of every silo of government,” Lane said. “It’s 
tracking, you’re tracking your citizens. You can’t live under a rock, we’ve all 
got bank accounts, we’ve all got tax returns, we’ve got people onCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> … you touch the 
government all the time.

“But what they want to do is track you, they want to gain efficiencies by 
tracking you.”


The government has continued to express its confidence in the compliance 
system, saying customers are given the opportunity to dispute discrepancies 
they believe to be incorrect.

The vast majority of disputes, they say, are resolved without the need for 
individuals to obtain payslips or letters from their old employers.

But Guardian Australia last week spoke with a Centrelink whistleblower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
, who works in the compliance area. The source said only about 20 of the 
hundreds of cases they had reviewed turned out to be legitimate debts

Victoria Legal Aid said there were real problems with using such an imprecise 
method of comparison.

The organisation’s civil justice, access, and equity executive director, Dan 
Nicholson, said it was inconceivable that such a flawed approach would ever be 
used to levy tax debts to corporations.


“So it’s hard to understand why it’s acceptable for Centrelink to do so,” he 
said.

Government backs Centrelink debt system despite 'incorrect' $24,000 demand
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/29/government-confident-in-centrelink-debt-compliance-system-despite-reported-errors>
“I agree with Acoss that the system should be suspended until concerns are 
addressed.”

Nicholson called on those who felt they had been wrongly billed to consider 
challenging the decision.

He said most people who did so had a good chance of winning, but warned that 
many would simply pay without bothering to check if the debt was justified.

The opposition renewed calls on Thursday for the system to be suspended. 

Cameron said the system should not be relying on a “robot” to deliberately 
target the poor.

“It’s deliberate, the cross-matching is a deliberate decision by the 
government to target welfare recipients. A deliberate targeting of some of the 
most vulnerable people in the community with a crude, inaccurate system,” 
Cameron said.

“We say suspend the system, do the analysis, do a proper check on what is 
being asked of individuals.”
 