
It’s been a year since the Cereal Killer cafe in London’s Brick Lane became 
the focus ofan anti-gentrification riot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/27/shoreditch-cereal-cafe-targeted-by-anti-gentrification-protesters>
, and its owners received letters saying “die hipsters”. To be fair, not 
everyone was hostile to the cafe: the morning after the riot in which 
protesters daubed the word “scum” on the shop window, there were queues of 
customers paying up to £4.50 for a bowl of cereal.

So how will Birmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> react when 
a branch of the cafe opens at Link Street in the Bullring next month?

With greater sangfroid than excitable Londoners, is my guess. Or maybe not. 
The second city is already divided – and not only between Villa and Blues fans. 
On the one side, there are those expressing their fabulously downbeat Brummie 
ennui on Twitter: “2016 carries on its reckless march toward societal collapse: 
cereal cafe to open in Birmingham,” tweets Hinkypunka.

On the other side is the Birmingham Evening Mail 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/whats-on/food-drink-news/birmingham-getting-first-cereal-caf-12014667>
, which exclaims: “We’re cerealously excited!” (There’s no excuse for that kind 
of language.) “The people behind this super cool cafe,” adds the Mail with 
heroic journalistic objectivity, “will be whipping up all of our favourite 
treats like Fluff, popping candy chocolate, party rings, hundreds and 
thousands, jelly and choccie milk and turning them into crazy good snacks.” I 
know what you’re thinking: choccie isn’t a word. Or if it is, it kind of proves 
the point about 2016’s march to societal collapse.

My sister, who lives in Birmingham’s Acocks Green, has a different reaction. 
“One word – beds!” she texts me. When a second London branch opened in Camden 
Town last year, there weren’t just bog-standard tables and chairs – but awhole 
row of beds, many of them featuring 90s-era duvet covers 
<http://now-here-this.timeout.com/2015/05/14/the-cereal-killer-cafe-has-just-opened-a-second-branch-in-camden/>
 like the Super Mario Brothers. Whether this innovation is an abomination or 
ergonomic boon depends on your politics. It may lead to punters queuing for 
breakfast clutching teddy bears in their PJs, though, in a fine prefiguring of 
the end of days.

A Cereal Killer cafe is opening in Birmingham, like we need over-priced 
hipster crap
Aceman on Twitter 
My brother, meanwhile, has a further intriguing perspective: “Not far from 
Jamie’s Italian. Wonder what he would make of it? Hardly the answer to the 
nation’s obesity problems.” Quite so; the celebrity chef Jamie Oliver has long 
been a campaigner for reduced sugar in British food, especially in dishes 
targeted at children. But theCereal Killer cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cereal-killer-cafe> boasts (if that’s 
the word) cereals like S’Mores, Superman and Trix, as well as Chocapic from 
France, Kariot from Israel and Milo from Australia. What’s that noise? It’s my 
arteries furring at the prospect.

But let’s set aside health issues and focus on the real reason people care 
about the Cereal Killer cafe: the social transformation it apparently implies. 
“Oh geez,”tweets Aceman <https://twitter.com/MGaceman/status/786178892050628614>
, “a Cereal Killer cafe is opening in Birmingham, like we need over-priced 
hipster crap.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanti-gentrification-protesters-target-shoreditch-cereal-killer-cafe-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-gentrification%20protesters%20target%20Shoreditch's%20Cereal%20Killer%20Cafe%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanti-gentrification-protesters-target-shoreditch-cereal-killer-cafe-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-gentrification%20protesters%20target%20Shoreditch%27s%20Cereal%20Killer%20Cafe%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fanti-gentrification-protesters-target-shoreditch-cereal-killer-cafe-video&media=>
Anti-gentrification protesters target Shoreditch’s Cereal Killer Cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/sep/27/anti-gentrification-protesters-target-shoreditch-cereal-killer-cafe-video>
Hold on, Aceman. Perhaps I don’t understand gentrification, but this kind of 
retail development doesn’t seem of a piece with what hipster culture usually 
means: the craft beers, beards and overpriced Jewellery Quarter apartments. 
Hipsters, surely, are more like the earnest young Texan couple terrorised by 
anti-gentrification campaigner Lillian Kaushtupper inThe Unbreakable Kimmy 
Schmidt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/19/unbreakable-kimmy-schmidt-pc-culture-tina-fey-south-park>
. They arrive in town looking for authentic signifiers of old New York – soul 
food restaurants, off-the-grid thrift stores – rather than the commodified, 
themed, pre-packaged retro eating experience the Cereal Killer cafe offers.

Surely gentrification is more like what happened in South Park when an eyesore 
neighbourhood was redeveloped intothe funky-sounding SoDo SoPa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/oct/26/what-south-park-teaches-us-about-gentrification>
 (short for “south of downtown South Park”), and whose new identity was 
validated by the arrival of a branch of Whole Foods.

If the Cereal Killer cafe offers gentrification, it’s not what it used to be. 
Without wishing to be snobbish (there’s no good way this sentence can end), I 
suspect that those most titillated by the arrival in Birmingham of the cafe are 
in the same demographic as those wowed by the roll-out of at-table service at 
all18 Birmingham McDonald’s branches 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/whats-on/food-drink-news/mcdonalds-rolling-out-table-service-11948972>
.


Crime stats or coffee shops? How to spot the world's most gentrified cities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/30/worlds-most-gentrified-cities-crime-stats-coffee-shops>
And yet it arrives at a poised moment for the city. Earlier this month, it was 
revealed thatmore than 6,000 people left London for England’s second city last 
year <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-37385265?> – more appealing to 
capital quitters than the second, third and fourth most popular destinations 
(Brighton, Thurrock and Epping Forest, respectively) – which are all within 50 
miles of London. The data was glossed thus byJay Islaam in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/10/londoners-birmingham-england-second-city>
: “Londoners, you live in a malodorous rat-pit. Come to Birmingham instead.” 
Gotta love that Brummie hospitality: welcoming you with one hand and giving you 
the finger with the other.

But here’s my worry: it’s quite possible that one reason Birmingham became 
appealing to unhappy Londoners is precisely because it didn’t, until now, have 
a branch of the Cereal Killer cafe. Those who quit the rat-pit sought an escape 
from the branded and commodified “experience dining” thatLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> offers in crazy numbers. Perhaps the 
next set of internal migration figures will show Birmingham being supplanted as 
a destination for Londoners by a city that has kept it real: Wolverhampton or 
Sunderland for instance. Birmingham, just possibly, may be becoming a victim of 
its own success.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 