
The commissioner of the Canadian Football League refused on Friday to admit a 
connection between football and chronic traumatic encephalopathy, the 
progressive degenerative brain disease that’s been linked to repeated blows to 
the head.

“Last I heard, it’s still a subject of debate in the medical and scientific 
community,” CFL commissioner Jeffrey Orridge said at the annual state of the 
league address in Toronto, where the Calgary Stampeders and Ottawa Redblacks 
meet in Sunday’s Grey Cup. “The league’s position is that there is no 
conclusive evidence at this point. And as I said, we continue to work with them 
and monitor the progress that they’re making in terms of getting a greater 
understanding of whether or not there is a linkage.”

Why the NFL's admission over CTE could be momentous in the long-term
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/15/nfl-cte-effects-admission-concussion-jeff-miller>
The CFL is facing a $200m class-action lawsuit filed in Ontario Superior Court 
by former players Korey Banks and Eric Allen, who allege the league and a 
Toronto clinic withheld information about how repeated concussions can lead to 
long-term cognitive disorders.

“I can’t comment on any pending litigation, otherwise I would compromise the 
legal process in this country, and we’re not going to do that,” Orridge said.

In March, an NFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> official acknowledged 
a link between football and CTE for the first time when Jeff Miller, the 
league’s senior vice-president for health and safety, spoke about the 
connection at a roundtable discussion with the House committee on Energy and 
Commerce.

NFL commissioner Roger Goodell later described Miller’s remarks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/roger-goodell-backs-nfl-official-who-linked-cte-with-football>
 as “consistent with our position”.

“The most important thing for us is to support the medicine and scientists who 
determine what those connections are,” Goodell said. “We think that the 
statements that have been made by Jeff Miller and others have consistent with 
our position over the years. We’ve actually funded those studies. So we’re not 
only aware of those and recognize them but we support those studies. A lot of 
the research is still in its infancy, but we’re trying to find ways to 
accelerate that.”

Orridge’s remarks come one week after Bob McKeown, a CBC investigative 
reporter who played six seasons with the CFL’s Ottawa Rough Riders during the 
1970s,published a column 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/health/bob-mckeown-concussions-1.3853245> declaring his 
intent to donate his brain to concussion research.

“If there’s one thing the CFL commissioner should be familiar with, it’s that 
the medical science is clear about the link between football and degenerative 
brain disease,” McKeown wrote. “Even the NFL now admits it and has agreed to 
that billion-dollar settlement.

“But for former CFL players suffering from dementia, there is little support 
from the league: no disability, no long-term care, apparently no attempt to 
identify victims and define the problem, not even recognition by the league 
that there is a problem.”
 