
The shadow attorney general, Shami Chakrabarti, has pledged to end the 
“authoritarian arms race” to lock up more criminals as prison officers deal 
with the aftermath of thelatest in a string of prison riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/18/birmingham-prison-riot-government-was-warned-two-months-earlier>
.

In remarks that are being seen as signalling an end to New Labour’s “tough on 
crime” mantra, Chakrabarti said prison overcrowding had contributed to “a 
crisis this Christmas in British prisons”.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme after riot officers ended a 
disturbance at HMP Swaleside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/23/prison-riot-ends-60-inmates-hmp-swaleside-isle-of-sheppey>
 on the Isle of Sheppey, Chakrabarti said: “In my adult lifetime I have seen a 
doubling of the prison population and I think this was caused by an 
authoritarian arms race in British politics between the two parties. We are not 
in the arms race.

“After my background, I wouldn’t have joined this shadow cabinet if I didn’t 
think there was an opportunity to at least reflect on what has been going on 
for nearly a quarter of a century. I don’t believe the sum of human wickedness 
has doubled in my adult lifetime.”

Her comments follow the intervention by the former deputy prime minister Nick 
Clegg and theformer home secretaries Ken Clarke and Jacqui Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/prison-population-should-be-halved-say-former-home-secretaries>
 demanding a dramatic reduction in the prison population.

Chakrabarti, the former director of the human rights organisation Liberty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/14/shami-chakrabarti-steps-down-liberty-director-12-years>
, suggested that Labour was prepared to listen to prisoners who had been 
rioting in Britain’s jails. “There is a crisis this Christmas in British 
prisons. We have to call for calm, because I’m sure it is a very miserable time 
to be inside a prison, whether you are working there or incarcerated there. We 
know there is a crisis. We have to say to prisoners: ‘We are listening. We want 
this to be a better, safer environment.’

“We now have overcrowded, understaffed prisons. They are very unsafe places 
for prison officers and prisoners alike.”

She also called for a fundamental rethink of criminal justice policy that 
would include ending private sector involvement in running jails.

“We have an opportunity now for a different kind of conversation and to ask 
some really serious questions about what prison is for, and what do we want to 
achieve when we send someone to prison?” she said.

“I think we need to ask questions about whether it is right that there are 
companies that are profiting from incarceration. Private prisons are exempt 
from freedom of information, so we can’t deliver the same level of scrutiny to 
G4S that we can in relation to public sector prisons. I question whether there 
should be commercial incentives to lock up more and more people.”

A G4S spokesman said Chakrabarti was wrong to claim that private companies had 
a financial incentive to see an increased population behind bars.

“We are paid by the taxpayer per available prison place, not per prisoner, so 
it’s inaccurate to suggest we have an incentive to see more people locked up,” 
he said. “In fact we run some of the most progressive programmes in the country 
aimed at reforming and rehabilitating prisoners in the hope that they turn away 
from crime on release.

“Nor is it true to say that our prisons business is not subject to freedom of 
information. We provide government with information all the time to satisfy FoI 
requests regarding the facilities we manage.”

The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP and former 
minister John Spellar accused Chakrabarti of unilaterally abandoning Labour’s 
policy of being “tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime”.
john spellar (@spellar) 
car crash interview on BBC Today as Shami Chakrabarti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/shami-chakrabarti> unilaterally abandons 
Labour's Policy of "tough on crime,tough on the causes of crime"
 <https://twitter.com/spellar/status/812218481223630848> December 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/spellar/status/812218481223630848> 
Her remarks came as the Prison Officers Association threatened a new wave of 
industrial action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/prison-officers-association-reject-improved-pay-deal>
 after rejecting a government pay offer. A ballot of members turned down the 
offer by 65.7% to 33.7%.

The POA’s general secretary, Steve Gillan, said he wanted to end the dispute 
through negotiation, but had not ruled out taking further industrial action.

“We have got a meeting on 10 January with the secretary of state [Liz Truss]. 
If she indicates to us that there is nothing else on the table, then our 
executive will determine a way forward and that will rule nothing in and 
nothing out,” he told the Guardian.

Asked whether the union was considering strike action, Gillan said: “I can’t 
spell out what that could mean, because we keep everything under wraps. I would 
rather a negotiated settlement than confrontation with the government.”


Gillan said the latest riot at Swaleside prison showed the kind of pressure 
that prison officers were under. “Our members at Swaleside and all over the 
country are picking up the pieces of failed government policy. Our members are 
brave and resilient, and it is about time they were rewarded by government … to 
ensure that prisons are safe and our members are safe,” he said.

Mike Rolfe, the national chair of the POA, said: “Prisons can work. What you 
have got to do is make sure you have got the staffing in place and you resource 
it properly. They need to be resourced properly. Unfortunately because it is a 
service that is behind walls and hidden, it is just somewhere they think they 
can cut quite easily and the general public aren’t going to notice.”
 