
Borussia Dortmund v Real Madrid, Tuesday

These clubs meet for the seventh time in four years on Tuesday to continue a 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> rivalry 
that has sparked in recent seasons. Home advantage has been key in the previous 
six matches and Dortmund have every right to feel confident going into this 
one. After a surprising 1-0 defeat at RB Leipzig in their first away match of 
the Bundesliga season, Thomas Tuchel’s side have won their last four games in 
all competitions, scoring 21 goals in the process.

The way the Dortmund midfield has supported star striker Pierre-Emerick 
Aubameyang – who has six goals in five games this season – has been 
particularly impressive. Gonzalo Castro has had a hand in eight goals already 
and Raphaël Guerreiro, who has been converted from a left-back to great effect, 
has scored three and provided three assists in his last four appearances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fchampions-league-borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-celtic-city-atletico-bayern-munich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4f4289259d3febc8dc778bbb21afc1cb173978%2F0_0_650_694%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20the%20matches%20to%20watch%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fchampions-league-borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-celtic-city-atletico-bayern-munich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20the%20matches%20to%20watch%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fchampions-league-borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-celtic-city-atletico-bayern-munich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac4f4289259d3febc8dc778bbb21afc1cb173978%2F0_0_650_694%2F650.jpg>
 Infographic:WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Real Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> have stuttered 
in the last couple of weeks after putting together a 16-game winning streak in 
La Liga. Disappointing draws against Villarreal and Las Palmas have coincided 
with an injury to Casemiro. Perhaps more worrying is the form of Cristiano 
Ronaldo, who has struggled since his return from injury. Zinedine Zidane 
substituted the forward on Saturday in the 2-2 draw at Las Palmas. Ronaldo did 
not look pleased but the manager’s decision was fully justified; Ronaldo has 
earned the lowest rating of all Madrid’s outfielders to start more than once in 
the league this season (6.81).

Gareth Bale has not scored in five matches, but the holders have goals 
throughout the side. In fact, in the 13 matches these sides have played this 
season, there have been as many as 23 different goalscorers. This should be a 
cracker, particularly with Madrid lacking the unglamorous shield to their 
glamorous back four.

Atlético Madrid v Bayern Munich, Wednesday
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fchampions-league-borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-celtic-city-atletico-bayern-munich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94c474bcd6c6e98817ac2b786c1e3e9664e106b5%2F0_327_4353_2890%2F4353.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20the%20matches%20to%20watch%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fchampions-league-borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-celtic-city-atletico-bayern-munich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20the%20matches%20to%20watch%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fchampions-league-borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-celtic-city-atletico-bayern-munich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94c474bcd6c6e98817ac2b786c1e3e9664e106b5%2F0_327_4353_2890%2F4353.jpg>
 Diego Simeone inches towards the pitch. Photograph: Gerard Julien/AFP/Getty 
Images 
This battle between clubs from La Liga and the Bundesliga on Wednesday night 
promises to be a different prospect entirely asBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> look for revenge after 
their defeat to Atlético in last season’s semi-finals. This should be a duel of 
the defences. Atlético have added a number of flair players to their squad in 
recent windows but their success is still built upon defensive resilience and 
commitment, particularly in big matches. Their French forwards, Antoine 
Griezmann and Kévin Gameiro, may be the envy of the continent, but their back 
four has been crucial during their unbeaten start to the season.

They may have gone seven games without tasting defeat, but this has been an 
underwhelming start to the campaign, with three wins and three draws in the 
league and an unconvincing victory against PSV in their first Champions League 
match only secured by a penalty save from the outstanding Jan Oblak. The former 
Benfica keeper is establishing himself as one of the best in Europe and he is 
likely to be busy against a prolific Bayern Munich side who were able to rest 
key players for their 1-0 win at Hamburg on the weekend.

Joshua Kimmich was the unlikely matchwinner on Saturday as he continued a 
remarkable goalscoring run, though Robert Lewandowski still poses the greatest 
threat for the visitors. Lewandowski’s goal wasn’t enough to stop Atlético from 
winning the semi-final on away goals earlier this year, but he is firing once 
more, with six goals in six games in the league and Champions League so far 
this season.

Franck Ribéry is also proving that he still has plenty to offer. The Frenchman 
has profited from a full pre-season and looks back to his very best, with two 
goals and five assists in the league. His return to form has been a welcome one 
given Thomas Müller’s recent struggles in front of goal. Müller’s place in the 
team could even come under threat from fit again Arjen Robben – how the Bayern 
fans would love to see their famed “Robbery” back in action, with the two named 
in the same starting XI just once since March 2015.

The home supporters will look to Antoine Griezmann for the winner. Having 
scored five of the team’s 11 league goals this season, the Frenchman has become 
the leading light for this side. If Mats Hummels – who was forced off at the 
weekend – isn’t fit to start, the hosts will surely look to pit their star 
striker against Javi Martínez rather than the more mobile Jérôme Boateng. In a 
tight match, that individual contest could be crucial.

Celtic v Manchester City, Wednesday
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fchampions-league-borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-celtic-city-atletico-bayern-munich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1049ef0f7aaeb12cf27960cfe86f626273cc37b0%2F0_177_3872_2323%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20the%20matches%20to%20watch%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fchampions-league-borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-celtic-city-atletico-bayern-munich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20the%20matches%20to%20watch%20this%20week&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fchampions-league-borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-celtic-city-atletico-bayern-munich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1049ef0f7aaeb12cf27960cfe86f626273cc37b0%2F0_177_3872_2323%2F3872.jpg>
 Brendan Rodgers tries to console his Celtic players after their defeat against 
Barcelona. Photograph: Zemanek/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
If Celtic are to provide any competition to Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and Barcelona in Group C 
they need to hit their stride at Parkhead on Wednesday night. City have done 
just that under Pep Guardiola so far though, with a 4-0 win in their Champions 
League opener among their strongest showings from a 100% record this season. 
Brendan Rodgers’ start to life in Glasgow has also been notable – not least 
with a thumping win in the Old Firm derby – but a 7-0 hammering in Barcelona 
suggests his side are unlikely to produce any big upsets in Europe.

Leicester City must protect their defence to succeed in the Champions League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/sep/14/leicester-city-champions-league-club-brugge>
There are plenty of connections between these two teams, though most of them 
only highlight the vast difference in quality between of the sides. Dedryck 
Boyata, Patrick Roberts, Kolo Touré and Scott Sinclair have all moved north of 
the border as former City players. Sinclair will feel he has a point to prove 
against his former club. His career suffered a real dip after he moved to City 
in 2012 and he failed to reignite it in a disappointing 18 months with Aston 
Villa. In fact, Sinclair earned the lowest rating of anyPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> outfielder to start more 
than five matches last season (6.24) as he scored in just one of his 27 
appearances. His run of scoring in all six of his league matches for his new 
club is a superb individual achievement but it only emphasises the gulf in 
class between the leagues.

City also have a forward in flying form, with Raheem Sterling meeting his 
former boss, Brendan Rodgers, who deserves some credit for the youngster’s 
development. That progress was stunted during a difficult first season in 
Manchester, but Sterling is flourishing once again under Guardiola. Four goals 
and two assists in the league give him a rating of 7.90, making him the third 
highest rated player in the Premier League so far, not far below first-placed 
Kevin De Bruyne (8.16) and not far above seventh-rated Sergio Agüero (7.71). De 
Bruyne is suffering from a hamstring injury but if Sterling or Agüero continue 
in the same vein, the hosts will little chance of providing another memorable 
European upset atCeltic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> Park.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week

 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Liga NOS team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 