
Time for a round of applause. So stand up the architects of the Champions Cup. 
A bit of format tweaking, qualifying made more competitive with fewer easy 
rides, and hey presto. Not that there was much wrong with theHeineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup>, but when it comes to the 
bottom line there can be little argument.

Remarkably, as we enter the last round of pool matches, only one side, Toulon, 
are through. This time last year six of the eight were bolted down and, unless 
you are from Ulster orMunster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster>, 
things are coming to the boil quite nicely.

Bath and Wasps, seemingly dead in late October having each lost both of their 
opening pool rounds, have genuine prospects, whileNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>, despite their injuries, 
are probably better than the side who got to the final four seasons ago and, 
suddenly, Saracens are starting to look the part.

And there are spin-offs. If Stuart Lancaster still has issues to resolve about 
his starting lineup for Cardiff, primarily the pecking order of the front row, 
then he can watch Alex Corbisiero and Mako Vunipola state their cases as 
back-up to Joe Marler when Northampton play Racing and Saracens go to Clermont 
Auvergne.

Corbisiero, you feel, has to start that pool five decider rather than run on 
for another 20-minute cameo off the bench. Ditto Dan Cole if he is to be 
understudy to Davey Wilson rather than leave the job to Kieran Brookes, 
currently down to play in that all-star Saxons side on Friday week.

Similarly in the backs. After being forced to re-evaluate his midfield 
followingBath’s pounding of Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/bath-toulouse-european-rugby-champions-cup>
 last Sunday, England’s head coach will be looking with fresh interest when 
Jonathan Joseph faces Glasgow at the Rec and Brad Barritt has to contend with 
the delights of Wesley Fofana and either Benson Stanley or Jonathan Davies in 
the Clermont Auvergne midfield.

All pluses then. Better the blood and thunder of Europe than the trials – 
Probables versus Possibles – that have fallen so far out of favour everywhere 
bar an odd Welsh reinvention. But there can be a downside, in as much as club 
rugby, even at such an exulted level as the Champions Cup, can only tell a Test 
selector so much.

Take, for example, last Sunday in Toulouse. Great to watch and a remarkable 
result. MightyToulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse>, unbeaten 
in Europe, go down to a bonus-point thumping by a Bath side seemingly capable 
of shredding the defence at will. If it forced England to look again at what 
Joseph might offer above Barritt at the Millennium, so well and good, but 
Lancaster was right this week to reject the simplistic notion of adding Kyle 
Eastmond to a mix that already includes George Ford and settle his midfield 
conundrum by buying one off the shelf from Bath.

The Bath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> formula might have been too 
much for Toulouse, who were well below par, but that kind of adventure can be 
pretty toxic in a Test arena – particularly a passionate, packed Millennium 
Stadium at night and with the roof closed (if Wales have their way).

Come to think of it, Glasgow will have watched that performance with a mix of 
apprehension and encouragement. They are a side who are great in contact and 
good over the ball. They feed on mistakes and in Gregor Townsend have a coach 
who can fine-tune a side for specific occasions.

Faced with the prospect of a run-from-anywhere Bath, my guess is that Townsend 
and Scotland’s defence coach, Matt Taylor, will be licking their lips. Of 
greater fear would be a Bath side who know they have more than an edge up front 
and use a more physical approach as plan A before the backs are let off the 
leash in the final quarter.

That probably flies in the face of the style espoused by the head coach, Mike 
Ford, who has been almost Keeganesque in some of his post-match reflections, 
but it is, after all, what his Bath had to do recentlyto put Exeter away  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/27/bath-exeter-premiership-match-report>
when all‑out attack left the sides level, two tries apiece, after 55 minutes. 
It may also be the way to win the Champions Cup, as Northampton have learned, 
albeit in reverse direction.

Back in 2011, when they lost the final to Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/may/21/leinster-northampton-heineken-cup>
, Northampton were forward orientated. Now, with George North, the Pisi 
brothers and Alex King continuing to improve the ambition of Stephen Myler, 
they are better balanced.

The most instructive point about the beating of Osprey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/northampton-saints-ospreys-dylan-hartley>
s last Sunday was the way they played when George Pisi was in the sin-bin. Down 
to 14, Northampton dispensed with the frills and went back to basics in the way 
that wins big matches, especially Test matches, and that maturity would 
probably have impressed Lancaster more and also given a decent mind-set for 
Saturday when Northampton should qualify for a home draw.

I also fancy (a disciplined) Bath to go through, along with possibly the form 
side, Wasps, although Saracens,so vastly improved against Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/17/saracens-munster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 after looking so below par against Gloucester, have their hands full even if 
Clermont were shabby in the defeat of Sale.

All in all, a good weekend for the Champions Cup and not a bad one for England.
 