
Barcelona v Manchester City, Wednesday


Pep Guardiola returns to Barcelona to face his former club for the third time 
in the marquee fixture of the week. His last visit to Camp Nou was pretty 
disastrous – a 3-0 defeat with Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/may/06/barcelona-v-bayern-munich-champions-league-semi-final-live>
 in the first leg of the semi-finals in 2015, which made Bayern’s 3-2 win in 
the return fixture the following week redundant.

Neither of these teams are at the peak of their powers. Luis Enrique’s side 
have looked far from infallible this season, dropping eight points in their 
last six league matches and needing a second-half comeback toovercome Borussia 
Mönchengladbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/barcelona-borussia-monchengladbach-champions-league-match-report>
 in their last Champions League outing. Their defence has been particularly 
unreliable at times, conceding 10 times in the league already, though the 
return from injury of Sergi Roberto gives them a boost.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9767a482f28109ed710885f902d72baecf0d770%2F0_0_650_612%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20where%20the%20week's%20big%20matches%20will%20be%20won%20and%20lost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20where%20the%20week%27s%20big%20matches%20will%20be%20won%20and%20lost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9767a482f28109ed710885f902d72baecf0d770%2F0_0_650_612%2F650.jpg>
 Infographic:WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Manchester City are without a win in three games but their form isn’t quite as 
bad as it may sound.Their performance against Everton at the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/manchester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 was actually very encouraging. They came up against a goalkeeper in the form 
of his life, withMaarten Stekelenburg 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/4065/Show/Maarten-Stekelenburg> producing 
seven saves, including two from the penalty spot as City mustered 19 efforts at 
goal to Everton’s three.

The goalkeepers will be worth watching on Wednesday night and not just because 
Marc-André ter Stegen had to play second fiddle to Claudio Bravo before the 
Chilean moved to Manchester. Both keepers are encouraged to play out from the 
back – with Bravo signed almost entirely with that in mind at City – but both 
have made some notable errors of judgment and distribution this season. They 
will be put under pressure and the attacking players all have the talent to 
punish even the smallest of mistakes. Guardiola’s team will have to cope better 
with Barça’s high press than they did against Spurs, who disrupted their rhythm 
in their2-0 win at White Hart Lane earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
.

Bayer Leverkusen v Tottenham Hotspur, Tuesday
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F169f4376a653ff471a7b0424e71b3ec249e4e942%2F0_271_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20where%20the%20week's%20big%20matches%20will%20be%20won%20and%20lost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20where%20the%20week%27s%20big%20matches%20will%20be%20won%20and%20lost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F169f4376a653ff471a7b0424e71b3ec249e4e942%2F0_271_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Spurs players train at the BayArena in the buildup to the game. Photograph: 
Lukas Schulze/Bongarts/Getty Images 
Tottenham and Bayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayerleverkusen> meet at the BayArena on 
Tuesday night in what is shaping up to be the most competitive group in the 
Champions League, with first and fourth separated by just three points. The two 
clubs are currently sandwiched between Monaco and CSKA Moscow, so this gives 
them a chance to put themselves in a strong position with a victory.

Both teams will be keen to get on the front foot early in what promises to be 
an energetic affair. Spurs have become renowned for their intense pressing 
approach and the same can be said of Roger Schmidt’s side. Teams that adopt a 
similar style can cancel each other out but Tottenham and Bayer both offer real 
pace and verve going forward so that seems unlikely.

Mauricio Pochettino confident Toby Alderweireld injury ‘not a big issue’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/tottenham-manager-confident-toby-alderweirelds-injury-not-a-big-issue>
While Tottenham have managed to strike a strong balance between defence and 
attack, the same can’t be said of their hosts, particularly in the Champions 
League. Although Bayer always offer a threat, they are always likely to leak 
goals at the other end too – indeed they have scored and conceded in each of 
their last eightChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> matches.

Javier Hernández is their main goal threat. The former Manchester United 
striker has scored five times in the league this season and once in the 
Champions League (in their 1-1 draw in Monaco last month). However, he has 
never scored against Spurs, although he started just one of his six appearances 
against them.

Meanwhile, Heung-Min Son, who was rested at the weekend, is in line to return 
to Tottenham’s starting XI and face his former club for the first time since 
his exit last summer. Son has really found his feet at Spurs this season – his 
rating of 8.31 makes him thehighest rated player in the Premier League 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Regions/252/Tournaments/2/Seasons/6335/Stages/13796/PlayerStatistics/England-Premier-League-2016-2017>
 so far this season (above Kevin De Bruyne, Alexis Sánchez, Sadio Mané and 
Philippe Coutinho).

Lyon v Juventus, Tuesday
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4efc37f7fe1af3318a9d86b8a274dd16ca00525f%2F0_175_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20where%20the%20week's%20big%20matches%20will%20be%20won%20and%20lost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20where%20the%20week%27s%20big%20matches%20will%20be%20won%20and%20lost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4efc37f7fe1af3318a9d86b8a274dd16ca00525f%2F0_175_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 Juventus defender Alex Sandro. Photograph: Marco Bertorello/AFP/Getty Images 
Lyon welcome Juventus to the Stade des Lumières knowing that a defeat could 
leave them adrift from the top two if Sevilla beat Dinamo Zagreb. It has been a 
tough campaign for the French club. Their defeat to Nice on Friday was their 
fourth in the league so far this season.Juventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus>, meanwhile, have enjoyed a far 
more convincing start to Serie A.

The Old Lady are already five points clear as they aim for a sixth successive 
league title, but their real priority is winning the Champions League for the 
first time since 1996. Max Allegri’s side won their fourth consecutive league 
match at the weekend. The Argentinian strike duo of Paulo Dybala and Gonzalo 
Higuaín are stealing the show, scoring 11 goals between them this season, 
though Higuaín was rested against Udinese.

Lyon will have Alexandre Lacazette back in contention after his recovery from 
injury. The team has missed him dearly in recent weeks – they have failed to 
score in four of the six matches he didn’t start. The Frenchman, long linked 
with a move to thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, has scored 54 league 
goals since the start of the 2014-15 season but he is yet to really make his 
mark in European competition and still needs to prove himself at the top level.

Having last met Juventus in the Europa League quarter-finals in 2014, Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lyon> will be looking for revenge for 
that exit but they will be significant underdogs, despite their home advantage. 
They will be looking to test Gigi Buffon, who has hit a rare rough patch in his 
career, committing a costly error against Spain during the international break 
before another at the weekend against Udinese.

Bayern Munich v PSV Eindhoven, Wednesday

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa91fd568346b2f25e96a035cfffe70fe90240c03%2F0_4_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20where%20the%20week's%20big%20matches%20will%20be%20won%20and%20lost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20previews%3A%20where%20the%20week%27s%20big%20matches%20will%20be%20won%20and%20lost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fchampions-league-previews-barcelona-manchester-bayern-spurs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa91fd568346b2f25e96a035cfffe70fe90240c03%2F0_4_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Arjen Robben scored for Bayern Munich in their 2-2 draw at Eintracht Frankfurt 
over the weekend. Photograph: Daniel Roland/AFP/Getty Images 
Carlo Ancelotti has accused his side of “sleeping for 45 minutes in every game 
this season” and he has a point. They lost to Atlético Madrid in their last 
Champions League match and then followed up that disappointment by drawing with 
Cologne and then 10-man Frankfurt. They will be confident of putting things 
right againstPSV Eindhoven <https://www.theguardian.com/football/psveindhoven>.

Phillip Cocu’s men will be wary of a backlash. They are going through a 
troubling period of their own, slumping to fourth in the Eredivisie following a 
run of nine points from the last 18 available. Nevertheless, they put up a real 
fight against Atlético Madrid in their opening fixture in the group to prove 
they are no pushovers, though a draw in Rostov severely dented their slim 
chances of escaping from a group containing two of the pre-tournament 
favourites.

'Cash is king in modern football' – fans react to the 'Atlantic league' 
proposal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/14/atlantic-league-football-europe-scotland-scandinavia-belgium>
Former Newcastle flop Luuk de Jong <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luuk_de_Jong>
 is the talisman for the Dutch champions, having excelled since a return to his 
homeland. The striker is yet to find the goalscoring form he showed in the 
previous two seasons but his ability to hold up play will be crucial as PSV 
face a side that love to dominate possession. The 26-year-old has three goals 
and three assists in the league this season (with one more of each in the 
Champions League) and he has won twice as many aerial duels in the Champions 
League (22) as any other player.


Bayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich>, meanwhile, 
have turned to an unlikely source of goals recently. Before this season Joshua 
Kimmich – who was often deployed as a centre-back under Guardiola - had never 
scored for Bayern or Germany. However, since opening his account for the 
national team at the start of September, the youngster has scored six goals for 
the Bundesliga champions: twice as many as any other Bayern player in that 
time, as Robert Lewandowski (three goals in the same period) and Thomas Müller 
(one) struggle to find their feet in front of goal.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Bundesliga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook
 <https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>• Follow Martin Laurence 
<https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 