
Reading’s Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> 
match withFulham was abandoned at half-time, with the score at 0-0, due to fog.

The referee, James Linington, had twice consulted Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/reading> and Fulham officials during the 
first half when conditions began to get worse.

Ironically much of the fog had cleared during the interval and the second half 
looked set to take place.

However, an announcement said that conditions outside the stadium had 
deteriorated and that the game had been abandoned.

It was Fulham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> who made the 
better start to the action that was possible and the left-back Scott Malone 
ventured forward to send a low drive skidding wide.

With the fog getting worse in the 35th minute, especially at one end, 
Linington spoke to Reading’s Jaap Stam and Fulham’s Slavisa Jokanovic.

Linington ruled the conditions were fit to continue but four minutes later he 
again spoke to Jokanovic. Again, though, the game resumed.

Button saved well from Callum Harriott in first-half stoppage time but the 
game never made it much further.

Newcastle back at top as Dwight Gayle brace sees off Nottingham Forest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/newcastle-united-nottingham-forest-championship-match-report>
A superb overhead kick by Brett Pitman gave Ipswich Town a priceless 2-1 
victory asBristol City’s struggles continued in the Sky Bet Championship.

The Town striker brilliantly grabbed an 88th-minute winner, one that Ipswich 
ultimately deserved after finishing the game on top.

They went in at half-time a goal ahead thanks to Kevin Bru’s deft finish but 
Bristol City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolcity> hit back when 
Tammy Abraham scored his 12th goal in 24 league matches following a defensive 
mix-up involving the Ipswich keeper, Bartosz Bialkowski, and the defender 
Christophe Berra.

It was left to Pitman to steal the show and relieve some of the pressure that 
had been mounting on the manager, Mick McCarthy.

The winner came in the 88th minute in fantastic fashion after Tom Lawrence 
released Freddie Sears down the right and his perfect cross produced a 
brilliant overhead from Pitman to give Frank Fielding no chance.

Brighton & Hove Albion’s home match against Cardiff City was called off due to 
thick fog.

Chris Hughton’s Seagulls side would have secured top spot to end 2016 with 
victory but the postponement meant Newcastle took the chance to return to the 
summit of the table.

Heavy fog on the south coast put the game in doubt and, less than two hours 
before the scheduled kick-off, Brighton released a statement saying: “The match 
has been called off after consultation between match officials and both clubs.”
 