
• It might not be in full swing but the managerial merry-go-round is certainly 
up and running.Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink was sent packing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/jimmy-floyd-hasselbaink-sacked-qpr-after-draw>
 byQueens Park Rangers on Saturday evening after they scrambled to a draw at 
Nottingham Forest. Idrissa Sylla headed home a late equaliser for QPR at the 
City Ground, where both teams were reduced to 10 men. Britt Assombalonga put 
Forest in front before half-time, four minutes after Karl Henry picked up his 
second booking. But Sylla found an equaliser – and his sixth of the season – 
five minutes from time after Hildeberto Pereira was sent off. Announcing his 
dismissal, QPR said: “The club appreciates Jimmy’s efforts during his time in 
charge and wishes him all the best for the future.”

• Newcastle United fended off a late Cardiff City fightback to earn a seventh 
successive win and remain top of the tree in the process. Christian Atsu, who 
failed to make a Premier League start on loan at Bournemouth last year, was 
restored to the starting lineup by head coach Rafael Benítez, and the winger 
sent the hosts on the way to victory after just three minutes. Yoann Gouffran 
doubled Newcastle’s lead before visiting manager Neil Warnock rang the changes, 
making three in as many minutes. Peter Whittingham, one of the substitutes, 
found the net with practically his first touch before the majority of the 
51,257 fans at St James’ Park celebrated that once elusive winning feeling once 
more.


• Second-placed Brighton and Hove Albion kept the pressure on the leaders, 
with an impressive 2-0 win atBristol City. Perhaps Steve Sidwell was watching 
YouTube clips of Xabi Alonso <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ru7RWSLyuBQ> on 
the team bus, after hisaudacious lob 
<https://twitter.com/Troll__Footbal/status/794960088519716864?lang=en> beat a 
frantically back-peddling Richard O’Donnell, beforededicating the goal to 
Anthony Knockaert’s late father. 
<https://twitter.com/AKnockaert/status/794961248312033280?lang=en> That goal 
rocked Lee Johnson’s side, with Jamie Murphy adding a second from outside the 
box shortly after to continue Brighton’s peerless away form – Chris Hughton’s 
side have lost just once on the road in their past 15 games.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampionship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3147e53b7bd2e4e7d50e0de44241c478443637%2F590_158_2846_1708%2F2846.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Championship%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Jimmy%20Floyd%20Hasselbaink%20sacked%2C%20Newcastle%20stay%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampionship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Championship%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Jimmy%20Floyd%20Hasselbaink%20sacked%2C%20Newcastle%20stay%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampionship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d3147e53b7bd2e4e7d50e0de44241c478443637%2F590_158_2846_1708%2F2846.jpg>
 Brighton celebrate Steve Sidwell’s opener by holding the shirt of Anthony 
Knockaert, left out of the travelling squad, aloft. The winger’s father, 
Patrick, passed away on Thursday. Photograph: Allward/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
FA Cup roundup: Westfields denied historic victory and MK Dons rattled
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/fa-cup-roundup-westfields-curzon-ashton-mk-dons-spennymoor-town>
• Huddersfield Town, remember them? David Wagner’s side were torn apart by 
Fulham at Craven Cottage last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/fulham-huddersfield-town-championship-match-report>
 and, unsurprisingly, kept things low-key for the first 45 minutes before a 
tight affair at home toBirmingham City sparked into life after 69 minutes. For 
a moment Elias Kachunga’s fifth goal of the season had given Huddersfield a 
whiff of back-to-back league wins, only for Lukas Jutkiewicz to equalise four 
minutes later. The draw keeps Birmingham on the edge of the play-off pack while 
Huddersfield remain third.

• Norwich City were also humbled 5-0 last week, by Brighton, with the captain 
Russell Martin labelling the performance “rubbish” and “embarrassing”. And 
although not in quite the same manner, Alex Neil’s side suffered another 
defeat, this time by a rampantLeeds United after academy graduate Ronaldo 
Vieira’s injury-time winner.Aston Villa remain on the up, too, after stretching 
their unbeaten run to five matches under manager Steve Bruce. Jonathan Kodjia’s 
double secured a 2-1 win overBlackburn Rovers, who went ahead through 
Southampton loanee Sam Gallagher. Kodjia,the former Bristol City striker, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/22/jonathan-kodjia-ivory-coast-new-didier-drogba-aston-villa>
 has now scored six goals since Bruce’s timely arrival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampionship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a0709e2d7e8c6bbd5dd93a660e106583906872%2F216_189_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Championship%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Jimmy%20Floyd%20Hasselbaink%20sacked%2C%20Newcastle%20stay%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampionship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Championship%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Jimmy%20Floyd%20Hasselbaink%20sacked%2C%20Newcastle%20stay%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampionship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a0709e2d7e8c6bbd5dd93a660e106583906872%2F216_189_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
 Garath McCleary and Chris Gunter celebrate with Reading’s manager, Jaap Stam, 
as Warren Joyce, who was appointed Wigan Athletic manager on Wednesday looks 
on. Photograph: JASONPIX/Rex/Shutterstock 
• Warren Joyce’s tenure as the Wigan Athletic manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/wigan-warren-joyce-manchester-united-manager>
 got off to the worst possible start, after watching his side fall behind 
inside 57 seconds against high-flyingReading. Garath McCleary’s opener was also 
the quickest in the division this season. They were two goals down after five 
minutes, when McCleary added his second of the afternoon. Yann Kermorgant 
completed the rout from the penalty spot, after John Swift was fouled in the 
box by Wigan’s Max Power. Jaap Stam, the Reading manager, whowas never hell 
bent on this managing malarkey, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/01/jaap-stam-player-talks-dressing-room-good-manager-reading-alex-ferguson>
 has guided his team to fourth in the league. “Nobody can expect Reading for 
next season to get promotion or get into the play-offs,”Stam said over the 
summer. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/01/jaap-stam-player-talks-dressing-room-good-manager-reading-alex-ferguson>
 Mick McCarthy, theIpswich Town manager, meanwhile is almost certainly not 
surprised by anything anymore. “You’re only ever two or three moves from going 
from God to dog,” he said this week. He’s God this week, though, after Ipswich 
secured only their second away win of the season atSheffield Wednesday. The 
defender, Luke Chambers, scored the winner three minutes from time.

Ince double lifts Derby as Wolves look ragged for new manager Paul Lambert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/wolverhampton-wanderers-derby-county-championship-match-report>
• Only one match in the second tier ended bereft of goals, as Burton Albion 
played out a bore draw at home toBarnsley, who are now unbeaten in three games. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampionship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97a7b18a72827d7219aa43a230611078340f6fa6%2F163_342_3068_1841%2F3068.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Championship%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Jimmy%20Floyd%20Hasselbaink%20sacked%2C%20Newcastle%20stay%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampionship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Championship%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Jimmy%20Floyd%20Hasselbaink%20sacked%2C%20Newcastle%20stay%20top&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fchampionship-your-thoughts-newcastle-remain-on-top-spot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97a7b18a72827d7219aa43a230611078340f6fa6%2F163_342_3068_1841%2F3068.jpg>
 Preston’s Callum Robinson cups his ears after scoring in the 3-1 win at 
Rotherham United. Photograph: Chris Vaughan - CameraSport/CameraSport via Getty 
Images 
• Wolves confirmed Paul Lambert as their new manager shortly after their 3-2 
defeat by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/wolverhampton-wanderers-derby-county-championship-match-report>
Derby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/wolverhampton-wanderers-derby-county-championship-match-report>
in the early kick-off, and despite sitting only three points above the 
relegation zone, they already have the Premier League in sight. “Ourselves and 
Paul share the same vision and the same mission, to achieve promotion from the 
Championship as soon as possible and then aim for a higher goal in the Premier 
League,” said the Wolves director Shi. Elsewhere,Rotherham United’s winless run 
was extended to 12 matches, afterPreston North End racked up a 3-1 victory away 
from home. Preston’s top scorer Jordan Hugill, Callum Robinson and Marnick 
Vermijl grabbed the goals to move up to 11th in the table, after recording 
their fifth win in eight matches. AndFulham claimed bragging rights in the west 
London derby on Friday night with a2-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/04/brentford-fulham-championship-match-report>
 overBrentford. 



 