
Having spent the last six months immersed in dark corners of various 
historical archives, researching a book on CocoChanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/chanel>, it has come as something of a 
surprise to emerge, blinking, into the light, to read a flurry of newspaper 
stories speculating that she was a Nazi.

The truth is more complicated, but then CHANEL WASN'T A NAZI would make less 
of a headline. That said, it would be hard to give an absolutely accurate 
account of her wartime activities in a headline, as she was operating in a 
world of double-dealings, double-crossings, and double agents.

Yes, she had an affair with a German officer, Hans Gunther von Dincklage, a 
playboy posted to Paris before the war; but his allegiances are as mysterious 
as his family origins: he had a British mother, and tended to speak English in 
conversations with Chanel.

Her relationship with Winston Churchill was warm enough for him to have 
written admiringly of her merits, and to approve of her relationship with his 
friend, the Duke of Westminster. She remained sufficiently close to Churchill 
to be able to write to him during the war. There has been much speculation 
about whether it was Churchill who intervened on Chanel's behalf when she was 
arrested after Paris was liberated.

There is much that is admirable about Chanel - her fierce independence, her 
refusal to follow convention - and much that remains mysterious, including the 
narrative of her past (one that she told and retold in a number of conflicting 
ways).

What is clear is that she wept on the day the Germans invaded Paris, and 
immediately closed her couture house. Thereafter, like other friends and 
contemporaries (including Cocteau and Colette), she found ways of accommodating 
the Occupation, proving - as she did throughout her life - to be a great 
survivor.

â€¢ Justine Picardie's book about Coco Chanel will be published this autumn by 
HarperCollins
 