
It’s heading for midday in an east London vintage store and Norwegian singer 
Dagny is brandishing a bright purple, preposterously shoulder-padded 80s 
jumpsuit one would only realistically consider wearing in anticipation of being 
belted byJoan Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/apr/26/your-next-box-set-dynasty>
. Hanging up are a number of rejected items ranging from a sparkly skirt to an 
oversized boiler suit. Dagny has tried on a lot of clothes this morning, and 
she’s not happy with any of them. Suddenly, she picks up a black and 
white-striped jumpsuit. “This looks sick,” she declares. “This is seriously 
cool.”

Hell isn’t other people, but it might be shopping with them. Sadly, this 
morning’s expedition is entirely my own fault: the consequence of not learning 
my lesson many years ago when a throwaway comment in a magazine editorial 
meeting resulted in indie act theLlama Farmers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eFMcOzBau24> being sent to an actual llama 
farm. Today’s scenario is the result of having thrown a cheery “I’ll do it!” 
into an email chain about Dagny’s styling requirements — a joke that was 
swiftly green-lit, then insisted upon, by all parties – and brings us this 
morning to Dalstonised “vintage” emporiumBeyond Retro 
<http://www.beyondretro.com/en/>. The awkwardness of the scenario is reduced 
slightly by the fact that Dagny’s on stage in London tonight and needs a new 
outfit anyway, so at the very least this represents good time management on her 
part.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7K0y1RT6M68&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7K0y1RT6M68>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7K0y1RT6M68&media=>
Video: Backbeat by Dagny <https://youtu.be/7K0y1RT6M68> 
Twelve months ago, Dagny’s understated but instantly absorbing single Backbeat 
<https://youtu.be/7K0y1RT6M68> hinted at the arrival of one of pop’s brightest 
new hopes; her career was kickstarted by unexpected coverage from Apple Music’s
Beats 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/01/zane-lowe-apple-beats-1-mainstream-radio-bbc-radio-1>
 station, then rocketed thanks to blanket support from Spotify, where current 
stats indicate over 1.5m monthly listeners. Her current EP, Ultraviolet, seals 
the deal: it’s an exuberant but pensive riot of pounding drums, live 
instrumentation and just enough electronic flourishes to give it a modern edge, 
combined with some truly extraordinary songwriting. “There’s a real art to 
making a good pop song,” Dagny decides as she examines an unwise purple basque. 
“People underestimate it: a good pop song can be fucking tricky.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdagny-backbeat-singer-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf7337f9c0fe288e081c752d5c29aafa255e502c%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Changing%20up%3A%20the%20irresistible%20rise%20of%20Dagny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdagny-backbeat-singer-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Changing%20up%3A%20the%20irresistible%20rise%20of%20Dagny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdagny-backbeat-singer-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf7337f9c0fe288e081c752d5c29aafa255e502c%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Checking the racks at Beyond Retro in London’s Dalston. Photograph: Richard 
Saker for the Guardian 
Getting those good pop songs heard can be equally tricky for some artists, and 
for some years Dagny was experiencing only modest success. Having flitted 
between a number of jobs — in a clothes shop, a wine bar and an elderly home — 
she came to London four and a half years ago to work on her music, and made 
waves back home in Norway with a series of low-key tours. But by summer 2015 
she was growing despondent, and began applying for places at university near 
her home town of Tromsø, northernNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway>.

In contrast with many musicians’ stories it was Dagny’s parents, both jazz 
musicians, who talked her out of it. “I asked my dad recently, do you ever get 
worried about my future?” Dagny smiles. “He said, ‘No, I never worry about you. 
I don’t think there’s one route for everybody.’”


From a very young age I had big thoughts about the kinds of things other 
people my age didn't seem to be thinking about

Last summer she also recorded Backbeat and, having been convinced to continue 
her music, planned to release it this February. Then on a Friday afternoon last 
September, Dagny’s manager received a call containing the phrase “Zane Lowe 
wants to premiere your track on Wednesday”. The song wasn’t even finished, but 
it was an opportunity too good to turn down. Dagny was in the studio on the day 
in question, so her manager and sister came over to listen to the song’s first 
play. They opened some beers and a bottle of Prosecco. “We sat down and we 
waited,” Dagny recalls. “The song started, and it was like, ‘Whoa.’” When the 
song finished, silence descended. “We just sat there and we looked at each 
other. And then I said: what happens now?”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdagny-backbeat-singer-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17d788e57394ad51a08e8b3dca5cd134a05c42ad%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Changing%20up%3A%20the%20irresistible%20rise%20of%20Dagny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdagny-backbeat-singer-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Changing%20up%3A%20the%20irresistible%20rise%20of%20Dagny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdagny-backbeat-singer-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17d788e57394ad51a08e8b3dca5cd134a05c42ad%2F0_0_3840_5760%2F3840.jpg>
 ‘I was Mel B when we dressed up as the Spice Girls’ …Dagny. Photograph: 
Richard Saker for the Guardian 
What in fact happened was that Spotify supported the track across its New 
Music Friday playlists and three days later the song — which aired on Beats 1 
in an unmastered state — had over 300,000 Spotify plays. “And then,” Dagny 
adds, “the emails started coming.” One of those emails led to a deal in the US 
with Republic Records, while Island picked her up in the UK.

But the what-happens-now conundrum is not one Dagny takes lightly. While we’ve 
been shopping, Beyond Retro’s in-house sound system has been playing a number 
of songs by Dagny’s peers; many, likeLéon’s Tired of Talking 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u69lXmBs08o>, are by acts well known to music 
bloggers and Spotify listeners, and who regularly pick up decent streaming 
numbers and excitable online coverage, but falter when it comes to crossing 
over. “I have a lot of fears about that,” Dagny nods. “I suppose this is the 
point where I become an artist.”

She recalls her early attachment to the Spice Girls — a band whose songs she 
enjoyed, but whose characters brought those songs to life — as an early 
influence. “I was Mel B when we dressed up as the Spice Girls,” she adds. “My 
sister was Emma. Everyone wanted to not be Victoria.”

My brother got cancer when he was very young; he was 15 and I was nine, and it 
naturally became a big part of my life

In any case, artistry seems to be no problem for Dagny: her emotive lyrics 
offer a strong sense of what it’s like to be 26 in 2016, and there’s a lyrical 
theme in many of her songs — like Too Young, with its “we’re too young to feel 
this old” refrain — that capture what it’s like to celebrate the twilight of 
one’s youth as adulthood insists on taking hold. She laughs when I suggest her 
music carries a sense of impending doom, and says she prefers to think of the 
tone as “pleasant melancholia”. “The first time that feeling hit me was when I 
was 11,” she continues. “From a very young age I had big thoughts about the 
kinds of things other people my age didn’t seem to be thinking about.”

When I ask what sort of topics were on her mind, she pauses. “Honestly? Death. 
My brother got cancer when he was very young; he was 15 and I was nine, and it 
naturally became a big part of my life. The contrast with that is now, I feel 
in some ways as if I age much slower than I should – I’m 26 and maybe I should 
be settled in my life but I’m not at all. I constantly have a feeling that I 
should have come further than I have, based on how old I am. People back home 
are settling into their big things, and I’m just getting started. Maybe that’s 
just going to be how I am forever: very aware about time. That’s my crisis.”

Support from big-hitters has diminished that crisis somewhat. Dagny responds 
with a diplomatic “that’s a good question” when asked if Spotify has replaced 
traditional radio, though she does add that it was traditional radio in Norway 
that made Backbeat a hit on home territory. “Quite frankly,” she offers, “I 
don’t think there are any rules in music any more, but you still have to go out 
and work for success. ”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdagny-backbeat-singer-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e33790e752e2c13b5d73778480362029bb2164c%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Changing%20up%3A%20the%20irresistible%20rise%20of%20Dagny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdagny-backbeat-singer-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Changing%20up%3A%20the%20irresistible%20rise%20of%20Dagny&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fdagny-backbeat-singer-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e33790e752e2c13b5d73778480362029bb2164c%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Dagny selects a choker … courtesy of the Guardian Photograph: Richard Saker 
for the Guardian 
That’s unlikely to be a problem for the foreseeable future: beyond tonight’s 
live show, at which she’s decided she’ll be wearing a silver choker purchased 
with 20 quid of the Guardian’s money, there’s a debut album to record. “I know 
that nothing is going to happen by itself,” Dagny smiles. “And I think that’s 
quite nice. Working is fun. I feel meaningless if I don’t do anything.”

 * Dagny’s Ultraviolet EP is available on Universal/Republic 
<http://www.dagnyofficial.com/>. She plays Patterns, Brighton, on 24 October 
<http://www.songkick.com/concerts/28058469-dagny-at-patterns>  