
At a press conference held in a Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/valencia> hotel two weeks ago, Jesús 
“Suso” García Pitarch was asked why Peter Lim had bought the city’s football 
team in the first place. It was a loaded question, one supporters have pondered 
often over the last couple of years, and the answer, or the lack of one, felt 
loaded as well. Pitarch, the sporting director recently back from Singapore 
where he had met with the owner to discuss plans for the club only to resign 
soon after, replied that he had never asked and had no explanation either. “I 
don’t know,” he said. “I suppose he likes football.”

Related: Sevilla end Real Madrid's run as Sergio Ramos shows sense of theatre 
again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/16/sevilla-end-real-madrids-run-as-sergio-ramos-shows-sense-of-theatre-again>

The son of a Singaporean fishmonger who had previously made a bid for 
Liverpool, a business partner ofthe Class of 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-class-of-92>, with investments in Salford 
City FC and Manchester’s Hotel Football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/22/salford-city-peter-lim-class-of-92>
, as well as in Formula One, Lim took over at Valencia in June 2014 with an 
initial €94m (£81m) investment. In a deal brokered by the then president Amadeo 
Salvo and the agent Jorge Mendes, Lim paid €22m up front, and loaned the club a 
further €72m for a 70% share, later taking that above 80%, with his total 
outlay so far close to €200m.

Valencia were in crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/mar/09/la-liga-valencia-unai-emery-david-villa>
, a club with two stadiums – one they could not sell and one that they could 
not afford to finish building – and a debt of €230m, the repayment of which was 
restructured. The risk of going out of business was very real, they hadsuffered 
disastrous presidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2007/nov/01/europeanfootball.valencia>, 
routinely lost their best players, and were effectively owned by a bailed-out 
bank, so Lim was welcomed as their saviour. In his first season, with players 
brought to the club paid for and owned by his company, Valenciareturned to the 
Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/porto-leicester-champions-league-nuno-espirito-santo>
 under their new manager, Nuno Espírito Santo. A sense of momentum developed, a
communion between fans and club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/oct/06/nuno-valencia-atletico-madrid>
, but it did not last.

There were chants of “Lim, we love you”, but it’s different now. Before the 
first game after Christmas, some supporters gathered outside Mestalla, holding 
a banner that declared: “Lim, go home.” Inside, there were further chants: 
“Peter, go now!” That was repeated last weekend. The sentiment was clear, even 
if there was something that jarred a little about the chants, something that 
would have been pointed, too, had it been deliberate: Lim was already home, not 
there.

“I’m just speculating”, Pitarch insisted when he suggested that Lim “likes 
football”. He has not been to watch Valencia – his team – for over a year. The 
closest he has been was in the summer when he was up the coast in Barcelona, 
arranging the sale of Paco Alcácer – the striker they had said was not for 
sale. “What sensibility does that show towards the fans?” Pitarch asked, more 
than a little self-interestedly.
 Gone: Cesare Prandelli speaks to the media following his resignation as head 
coach in December.

 Photograph: Manuel Queimadelos Alonso/Getty Images 
Whatever Lim bought Valencia for, it wasn’t for this. To own a club failing on 
the pitch and struggling off it, still with two stadiums, still in debt, 
apparently engulfed in continuous crisis, where the captain Enzo Pérez says 
they have hit “rock bottom” only to be proven wrong when things get worse, as 
they have done steadily for a year; where the team with the fourth biggest 
budget in Spain stands a solitary place above relegation; where there are 
divisions in the dressing room; where the fans have turned and the coach and 
sporting director have turned away, firing shots as they go, prompting the club 
to fire back, the mutual suspicion and distrust laid bare in public, wounds 
open. “I wouldn’t wish this on my worst enemy,” says the club’s former player 
Mario Kempes.

Pitarch was speaking to the media as he sought to justify his failure and his 
resignation as Valencia’s sporting director – just under a year since he took 
the job and 10 days after he claimed to have offered his resignation only to 
insist that he wasn’t about to “abandon” the club. Staying was about 
“responsibility”, he said then; now he admitted that he had made “mistakes” 
over the last 12 months, but that the biggest of all was not walking sooner. “I 
can’t defend what I do not believe in,” he said, describing the club as being 
immersed in a “grave institutional crisis.” And so he had gone.

He is not the only one. Pitarch went just days after the coach, Cesare 
Prandelli. A little before Christmas, Prandelli had held a press conference in 
which he had declined to answer questions and instead delivered a speech one 
minute 57 seconds long in which he accused his players of being unprofessional. 
Speaking in Italian, as he had done since he had taken over, gesturing to the 
door, he repeated one word over and over: “fuori!” Out! He wanted players who 
gave their all for the shirt, who “suffered” for it, who “loved” it.Anyone who 
didn’t could get out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/valencia-sinking-la-liga-sid-lowe>
.
 Gone: Gary Neville was sacked in March 2016 after less than four months in 
charge. Photograph: Juan Manuel Serrano Arce/Getty Images 
Fans agreed: one poll showed 98% thought he was right. The club hierarchy 
agreed too, or appeared to: after the next game, Prandelli travelled to 
Singapore with Pitarch and the club’s president, Layhoon Chan, to meet Lim. 
They were on the fringes of the relegation zone and reinforcements were top of 
the agenda, so were departures. Prandelli was given reassurances, or said that 
he was, but the economic reality was inescapable and shifting players out is 
not as easy as it sounds. Others asked recurring questions, like what the real 
motivation was? Was football the only factor? Why were the signings made and 
why have they failed?

In the summer, Valencia had raised over €100m, their best players departing – 
André Gomes, Alcácer, Shkodran Mustafi – while those they had wanted to sell 
stayed. The winter would not remedy that entirely, and Layhoon Chan publicly 
warned it was not just a case of Lim reaching into his pockets. Financial fair 
play – talked about as if it is somehow nothing to do with the way the club is 
run, an imposition upon their work rather than a consequence of the way they 
work – meant that they could not spend what they do not generate. Valencia do 
not even have a shirt sponsor.

Lacking faith, Prandelli resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/valencia-cesare-prandelli-resigns-la-liga-football>
. He had claimed to do so, in part, because Simone Zaza, the striker he wanted, 
wasn’t coming, but Zaza has come now. He had gone precipitously and 
emotionally, doing his own credibility little good, but he had not done so 
entirely surprisingly. The window had not opened yet, but he said Valencia 
wasn’t run by “football people.” They accused him of seeking excuses, running 
away from his own inability to rectify results.He had been there 90 days 
<http://www.espnfc.com/spanish-primera-division/15/blog/post/3028639/cesare-prandelli-exits-valencia-with-club-in-crisis-and-no-confidence-in-owners>
.

Related: Gary Neville’s Valencia experiment comes to an undignified end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-valencia-experiment-undignified-end>

Pitarch had promised to resign with Prandelli but reneged; 10 days later he 
actually did, departing a disaster. Pitarch was the third sporting director of 
the Lim era: Rufete had been sacked in a power struggle in the summer of 2015; 
his replacement Nuno, the coach who became manager as well,was soon unpopular 
with fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/21/valencia-fans-turn-on-nuno-la-liga>
 and was sacked in November 2015. Pitarch took over in January 2016 and was 
gone in January 2017, resigning just as the transfer window opens, leaving the 
head of the youth academy, Alexanco, to take over in a hurry, diving straight 
into the market.

As for Prandelli, he was the seventh coach of the Lim era. Pizzi had been 
sacked just before the takeover on Lim’s behalf;Nuno was sacked in November 2015
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/30/valencia-peter-lim-questions-nuno-exit>
; he was momentarilyreplaced by Phil Neville and Salvador González “Voro” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/30/phil-neville-valencia-assistant-voro>
, a former player, the club’s matchday delegate and their eternal, go-to 
caretaker boss;next came Gary Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/02/gary-neville-valencia-challenge>
, Lim’s business partner;Gary Neville was sacked in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/30/gary-neville-valencia-experiment-undignified-end>
 and replaced by his assistant,Pako Ayestarán 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/07/pako-ayestaran-gary-neville-valencia-best-man-job>
, who was in turnsacked in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/valencia-sack-pako-ayestaran-la-liga>
. One after the other, each worse than the last: under Nuno they won 49% of the 
points; under Gary Neville, 29%; under Ayestarán, 27%;under Prandelli, 25% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/19/valencia-bottom-la-liga-sid-lowe>
.
 Gone: Pako Ayestarán quit after losing the first five games of the season. 
Photograph: Manuel Queimadelos Alonso/Getty Images 
The season was only five games in, and it was only three months since he had 
been given a new contract, when Ayestarán was sacked. Pitarch publicly 
announced that he wouldn’t have kept him on at all, only there had been no 
money to get a replacement. It is remarkable how little was made of that 
comment at the time. Voro briefly took over again and when he left again to 
make way for Prandelli – who had been found and flown round the world to meet 
Lim – he said he hoped “never” to be there again. Now, though, he is back for 
his fifth spell in charge, his third in two seasons. This time, for the first 
time, he has been given backing. Well, sort of: he will be in charge until the 
end of the season and his contract is a managerial one for the first time.

The task before him is a big one, but it is a familiar one too. “Either we 
show our bollocks, or we’re going to shit,” the forward Santi Mina said after 
one loss recently. Valencia, the fourth biggest club in Spain, have made their 
worst ever start to a season and are just four points above the relegation 
zone. The good news amidst the bad news is that the departures of Prandelli and 
Pitarch, the conflict that their exits brought to the surface, may prove 
cathartic, some clarity achieved; the restructure should be beneficial. And 
then there’s the fact that there’s something about Voro.

They’ve nicknamed Voro “Mr Wolf”, Valencia’s temporary solutions man, the 
person you call when there’s a crisis, a mess to clear up. The coach who is not 
a coach has the best points record of any coach in the club’s history; this 
season he has led Valencia to 10 out of a possible 15 points, compared to none 
out of 12 for Ayestarán and six out of 24 for Prandelli. The latest of those 
came this weekend, in his first league game back. Valencia won, beating 
Espanyol 2-1. They needed to, things have got that bad; the club that 
considered Champions League qualification as standard now have another, less 
ambitious target. “The objective is to avoid relegation,” Voro said, “and I am 
convinced we can.”
 