
Charles Manson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/charles-manson>, the 
82-year-old killer and cult leader, has been taken from his California prison 
cell to a hospital, according to unconfirmed reports.

A state corrections official confirmed only that Manson was still alive, 
following the reportson TMZ 
<http://www.tmz.com/2017/01/03/charles-manson-hospitalized/> and in the Los 
Angeles Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-charles-manson-hospitalized-20170103-story.html>
.

TMZ said he had been taken to a medical centre in Bakersfield, about 60 miles 
south of Corcoran state prison, where he was being held.


Late on Tuesday night, three vans from the California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> Department of Corrections and 
Rehabilitation (CDCR) were parked outside Bakersfield’s Mercy Hospital 
Downtown, where state prisoners have been treated before.

The second summer of Charles Manson: why the cult murders still grip us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/16/second-summer-charles-manson-why-cult-murders-still-grip-us>
The CDCR spokeswoman, Terry Thornton, said only that Manson was alive and 
still assigned to the prison in Corcoran. She declined to say whether he was at 
the hospital in Bakersfield, citing safety privacy laws that prohibited her 
from discussing an inmate’s medical situation.


Manson was convicted of orchestrating the murders in 1969 of the pregnant 
actor Sharon Tate and six others.

Tate’s sister Debra told the Associated Press on Tuesday night that, as a 
Catholic, she had “no ill wishes” for the people who killed her sister, and 
that she would reserve her feelings until hearing Manson had died.

“I would probably say a prayer for them and shed a tear and ask God to have 
mercy on their souls, but so far I haven’t allowed myself to feel anything 
because it’s unsubstantiated,” Tate said. “I’m not allowing myself to feel 
anything until I know that it’s true.”


Manson was convicted of leading a cult in which disaffected young people 
living in a commune followed his orders and were ultimately turned into killers.

Manson and three female followers, Susan Atkins, Patricia Krenwinkel and 
Leslie Van Houten, were convicted of murder and sentenced to death for the 
killings at two gruesome scenes in the summer of 1969. Another defendant, 
Charles “Tex” Watson, was convicted later.


 All were spared execution when a US supreme court ruling temporarily banned 
the death penalty in 1972.

The Los Angeles county district attorney’s office said it had no information 
on Manson. The office prosecuted Manson and has objected to his release.He was 
most recently up for parole in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/11/charles-manson-loses-bid-parole> 
– his 12th application for freedom.

The California state prison, Corcoran, has medical facilities to provide 
urgent or emergency care as well as inpatient hospital stays.

“In general, inmates are sent to outside hospitals if they need surgical 
services, emergency care, or diagnostic services of an acute nature,” said 
Joyce Hayhoe, a spokeswoman for the federal receiver who controls prison 
medical care. “These services are not provided in state prison facilities.”

In November, the state inspector general, which monitors the corrections 
system, characterised care at Corcoran as inadequate.
 