
While many of us are putting our feet up, cosying up with family or partying 
away, thousands of charity workers are making sure vulnerable people get vital 
services and a bit of company atChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>.

Being family for vulnerable tenants

Some 20 adult tenants with long-term mental health problems will be getting 
together for a family Christmas with the staff of Wordsley Housing Society in 
Stourbridge, West Midlands. “Many of our tenants have no family of their own,” 
explains manager Karen Barr. “But we’ll all have one big happy time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3035b387ede80bc8f2811a36cc0ac1855a18de8e%2F0_630_2204_2202%2F2204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charity%20workers%20at%20Christmas%3A%20the%20people%20spreading%20festive%20cheer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charity%20workers%20at%20Christmas%3A%20the%20people%20spreading%20festive%20cheer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3035b387ede80bc8f2811a36cc0ac1855a18de8e%2F0_630_2204_2202%2F2204.jpg>
 Karen Barr, manager of Wordsley Housing Society. 
The dining room will be festooned in silver and purple. On the big day itself, 
there will be place names for tenants at the table and staff will become 
waiters. Then it will be time for karaoke singing and dancing, where the real 
fun happens. Barr remembers: “One year, one of our tenants got carried away. 
She kicked up her legs so high she went on to the floor, tipping crisps all 
over herself, and couldn’t stop laughing.”

Last year the international space station flew over the home, causing great 
excitement and jokes that it was Santa’s sleigh. All the staff tell Barr that 
they love working at Christmas, watching “happiness echoing around the home” 
and friendships building.

In a scene that could have come straight out of the film Brooklyn, Barr 
recalls when one usually quiet tenant “started to sing a carol after we’d had a 
tot of sherry. He continued to sing on his own and everyone clapped. It’s 
something I’ll always remember.”

Running a lunch party for 100 lonely people

Marjie Walker is on a mission to find every lonely person in Wokingham, 
Berkshire so, for her, Christmas is an opportunity. As manager of theLink 
Visiting <http://linkvisiting.org/> scheme that organises activities and visits 
for isolated people, she finds that at Christmas “lonely people come to the 
surface”.

For the past six years, Link has put on a special Christmas Day lunch. This 
year, a local day centre is providing the venue, Waitrose is funding the event 
and Walker has clinched the services of a professional chef, Luis Pereira. Word 
has gone out through community contacts, from mental health teams to the fire 
brigade, inviting people to get in touch. But even so, lonely people can be 
hard to reach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7a571203ebdfa54c6e44c6c498efa6b6615739a%2F707_0_3648_3648%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charity%20workers%20at%20Christmas%3A%20the%20people%20spreading%20festive%20cheer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charity%20workers%20at%20Christmas%3A%20the%20people%20spreading%20festive%20cheer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7a571203ebdfa54c6e44c6c498efa6b6615739a%2F707_0_3648_3648%2F3648.jpg>
 Marjie Walker and Waitrose chef Luis. Photograph: Megan Walker/Link Visiting 
Scheme 
“Once you are in the grips of loneliness, you are hypersensitive to 
rejection,” says Walker. “But once people are signed up, we’ll call them, visit 
them and then call them again as we get closer to the event. I’ll be on the 
door when they arrive, then volunteers will escort them to their table and help 
facilitate conversations.”

Inevitably, emotions run deep. “We sing Christmas carols, but we’ve decided to 
stick to the more light-hearted ones, rather than something like ‘Silent Night’ 
where people get very teary. We realise there are people missing, people we 
want to spend Christmas with and we can’t. But at the same time we don’t want 
to indulge in that sadness while we are all together.”

It’s a balance they usually manage to strike, Walker believes. “People are so 
appreciative. They look forward to it. They buy a new outfit. It is a really 
nice meal and they are honoured guests.”

Walker’s husband and three children, now in their early 20s, know the drill. 
They pop in to say hello, but they are not allowed to touch the food. Their 
family dinner, cooked by her husband, comes later, when the lunch guests have 
left and she can head home.

“I absolutely love it,” she says. “We’ve helped nearly 100 people to have a 
great Christmas. You can’t replicate that feeling.”

Coordinating all-day drop-ins for homeless clients 

Peter Rycroft’s family don’t expect to see a lot of him over Christmas. As 
company secretary andLifeshare <http://www.lifeshare.org.uk/>’s longest-serving 
member of staff, he’s been working to support homeless people in Manchester and 
Salford for nearly 30 years now. He spends Christmas at the charity’s drop-in 
centre, which opens all day every day over Christmas week.

On Christmas Day, people who have been sleeping rough might turn up for an 
early cooked breakfast, joined later on by those who have been rehoused into 
flats or hostels. There will be a lot of regulars, and some new faces too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3423222990cb8d12642126ad15a9f4a692782d01%2F436_0_3456_3456%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charity%20workers%20at%20Christmas%3A%20the%20people%20spreading%20festive%20cheer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charity%20workers%20at%20Christmas%3A%20the%20people%20spreading%20festive%20cheer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3423222990cb8d12642126ad15a9f4a692782d01%2F436_0_3456_3456%2F3456.jpg>
 Peter Rycroft. Photograph: Tony Dunmore/Lifeshare 
Rycroft registers and helps coordinate the large number of volunteers needed 
at this time of year, organising morning and afternoon shifts of 40 volunteers 
each.

“It’s a big building so you need quite a few people to police it”, explains. 
“We’re open longer at Christmas and you have more punters coming in. We always 
have a few more experienced volunteers, who’ve done it before and can keep an 
eye out in case anyone’s not themselves. But generally speaking, once they get 
in the building, people are so well looked after they forget their problems.”

Centre users get to do whatever they feel like – watch TV, play table tennis 
or cards, go on the PlayStation, have a sleep or just sit around chatting with 
the volunteers. Entertainment is also laid on by choirs, brass bands, musicians 
or any other performers who offer their time.

“There’s a magic about it. It really grips you,” says Rycroft. “Once you’ve 
been, you want to come again. You’d be quite amazed at how articulate our 
clients can be, how educated some of them are. They don’t complain. They’ll 
say, ‘I’m daft, because I did that’ or ‘I drank too much.’”

Occasionally, of course, there might be a bit of trouble, but nothing the team 
can’t handle, says Rycroft. “If they’re throwing handbags about, it only needs 
someone experienced to walk up and say, ‘Come on, calm it down a bit. Let’s 
have a nice happy Christmas.’ It usually works.”

Keeping vital community services going

Kate Smith, community services manager for Age UK North West Kent 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/northwestkent/>, will be making sure essential 
services from bathing to toenail-cutting and, especially, fresh meal deliveries 
continue to reach isolated older people in their homes over the Christmas 
period.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36f1d6bb6e765ef147625efce3ab7b3d94da1515%2F0_246_1836_2295%2F1836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charity%20workers%20at%20Christmas%3A%20the%20people%20spreading%20festive%20cheer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charity%20workers%20at%20Christmas%3A%20the%20people%20spreading%20festive%20cheer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvoluntary-sector-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fcharity-workers-christmas-vulnerable-tenants-older-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36f1d6bb6e765ef147625efce3ab7b3d94da1515%2F0_246_1836_2295%2F1836.jpg>
 Kate Smith. Photograph: Kate Smith/Age UK North West Kent 
“On a day-to-day basis, throughout the year, my team are quite often the only 
people they see,” she says. “So it’s vitally important over the Christmas 
period that we keep making sure they are OK and accessing everything they can.”

This year Smith asked her board of trustees to make a present of Christmas 
lunch, which users would normally have to pay for. They agreed to fund the gift 
this year, but are hoping to get corporate or other funding next Christmas. 
Funding can be a particular struggle for this kind of service, Smith finds.

“The day centres quite often get donations and funding. But because my service 
users are out in the community in their own homes it is a bit more difficult – 
you haven’t got a pretty thing at the end of it.”

The meals service operates seven days a week come what may and can be pivotal 
for the other services:

“It is a friendly face, a bit of social interaction. The staff pick up if 
someone is not very well that day; they’ll report it back to me or my admin 
team and we will act on that information.”

Smith will let nothing come between her service users and their Christmas 
dinner. In snowy years past she has commissioned the help of Kent county 
council’s four-by-fours, the park rangers and even the fire brigade. She is 
determined to ensure that any older person cut off in their home, unable to get 
out, gets to see a face with a meal at their door. “It’s the joy of helping 
people in their time of need when they haven’t got anybody else.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 