
Charlton Athletic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/charltonathletic> have 
parted company with their manager Russell Slade, the League One club confirmed 
on Monday night.

Slade leaves the Addicks 15th in the third tier, the final straw for their 
owner Roland Duchâtelet appearing to have beenSaturday’s 3-0 defeat at Swindon 
Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/tim-sherwood-swindon-town-charlton-athletic-match-report>
. That was only the 16th league game in charge for Slade, who joined Charlton 
in June – a month after his departure from Championship club Cardiff City.

Premier League’s most improved XI: from Pickford to Pedro, a team on the up | 
Paul Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/14/premier-league-players-most-improved-pickford-pedro-chelsea>
“Charlton Athletic has today parted company with manager Russell Slade,” said 
the club in a statement. “The club has reluctantly made this decision after 
results this season, which have left the team occupying 15th place. The club 
wants to give itself the best possible opportunity of achieving its number one 
priority – winning promotion to the Sky Bet Championship at the earliest 
opportunity.

“The club would like to thank Russell for his tireless work during his time at 
The Valley, particularly the processes and disciplines he has instilled at the 
training ground, and wishes him well for the future.

“The club will make no further comment until a new manager has been appointed.”

Slade’s departure means the controversial Duchâtelet has overseen six 
different managerial tenures –including two by José Riga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jan/21/charlton-jose-riga-relegation-valley-doom>
 – since Chris Powell’s departure in March 2014. They were relegated from the 
Championship last season andtheir supporters’ disquiet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/08/charlton-athletic-boycotts-roland-duchatelet-katrien-meire>
 has been such that a group travelled to Duchâtelet’s native Belgium on Monday 
to mark his 70th birthday with a protest against the regime.

Chris O’Loughlin, who previously managed the Belgian side Saint-Truiden – 
another club owned by Duchâtelet – is reportedly favourite to replace Slade. 
O’Loughlin has also coached the Congolese club AS Vita.
 