
Antonio Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> claimed 
that John Terry did not deserve to be sent off Peterborough United and he said 
that the club would appeal against the decision.

The captain was dismissed in the 67th minute for a last-man foul on Lee Angol, 
but Conte argued that Terry did not take out the Peterborough striker and, 
moreover, he was not the last man because Branislav Ivanovic was providing 
cover.

John Terry sees red but comfortable Chelsea ease past Peterborough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/chelsea-peterborough-united-fa-cup-match-report>
“I think it wasn’t right, this decision from the referee,” the manager said. 
“John didn’t take the opponent and also the second reason was because behind 
John there was Ivanovic to cover John. It’s a pity when this happens, because 
the red card is not good. You have to respect the referee’s decision but in 
this case, maybe we will do an appeal. The situation is very clear and I think 
John didn’t deserve this.”

Terry is out of contract in the summer and, as yet, there has been no 
indication thatChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> are ready 
to offer the 36-year-old fresh terms. “I think that now we are in January,” 
Conte said. “First of all, [with] this type of decision, it’s important to make 
this decision together [with] the club and not alone.

“I’m pleased for John, because he’s showing me great commitment when I ask him 
to play, and when he doesn’t play, because he’s helping me a lot in the 
changing room. He’s showing me to be a good player, but above all a good man. 
Now it’s important to continue in this way, because we have to play the second 
half of the season, theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>. We 
have a lot of commitments.”

Conte discussed the decision to recall Nathan Ake from his loan spell at 
Bournemouth and he said that the defender could provide an option for him on 
the left or in the centre of his preferred three-man backline. Conte would like 
to add a new signing or two during the January transfer window but he said, 
once again, that it would be difficult to find the right men. Ake’s return has 
the feel of an insurance policy.

“I called back Ake because I think he’s showing to be ready to stay in a squad 
of Chelsea,” Conte said. “Chelsea is his home. In the last season, he played a 
whole championship with Watford. This season, he was playing with Bournemouth. 
He’s showing to deserve to stay in a great team like Chelsea.

“Ake gives me important options, because we are playing with three central 
defenders. He can play on the left, he can play in the middle. Also, it’s 
important to see during a training session if he can play as a wing back. Me, 
the club, we wanted to bring back Ake because he gives me good opportunity, 
good solutions.” 
 