
Atalanta have rejected a €25m offer from Chelsea for Franck Kessié, with the 
Ivorian midfielder’s agent claiming there is also interest from several other 
Premier League sides including Liverpool,Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>, Manchester City and 
Arsenal.

Kessié, who spent last season on loan at Cesena, has been in outstanding form 
asAtalanta <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> have risen up to 
sixth place in Serie A after 18 games. The 20-year-old has scored six goals in 
16 appearances, leading to comparisons with a compatriot, Yaya Touré.

David Squires on ... football in 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/dec/28/david-squires-on-football-in-2016>
Kessié has been be selected in the provisional Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> squad for the African Nations 
Cup this week having become a regular in Michel Dussuyer’s side in recent 
months. A proposed move to Sunderland in August broke down after he was denied 
a work permit but his new status as a regular international and one of the 
highest-rated young midfielders in Italy should mean that is no longer an 
obstacle to any move to England.

Chelsea are keen to find a replacement for the Brazil international Oscar, who 
completed his move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/chelsea-oscar-shanghai-sipg-china>
 to Chinese Super league side Shanghai SIPG for £52m this week. However, 
Kessié’s agent George Atangana has confirmed that their initial bid was 
rejected by Atalanta, who are thought to value their prized asset at around 
€40m (£34m).

“We have a lot of interest from the Premier League – Chelsea, Liverpool, 
Manchester United,Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and Arsenal,” he told 
Guardian sport. “I cannot say at this stage how much he will cost but we are 
talking about one of the best young players in the world. But for us the most 
important thing is that the technical project is the right one for him. Franck 
is very young so we have to be very careful about his development.

“Chelsea are very interested and it is a great club but we must take our time 
to consider all the options,” Atangana, who will meet Stamford Bridge officials 
in London next week, added. “Now we are in January so he has to play at the 
African Cup of Nations for Ivory Coast so I am not going to rush anything.”
 