
Almost anyone who has lived in Mumbai has paused in the common area at the 
head of the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus suburban train platforms – not least 
to relieve the pervading mugginess by getting in the way of the industrial 
strength blowers that pass for fans.

From here one sees trains pull in, and commuters step off even before the 
train has stopped. A residual momentum propels them out into the city, as if 
the characteristic buzz of Mumbai is generated entirely in its trains.


It would be reason enough to pick Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (formerly 
Victoria Terminus) as the building most emblematic of Mumbai because more than 
three million of the city’s residents rush through its portals every day. But 
this late-19th-century railway terminus happens also to be one of the finest 
examples of colonial architecture in the country, representing an 
east-meets-west style that developed here.

This is also where the first passenger train service in India 
<http://www.irfca.org/faq/faq-hist.html> started; the railway would prove 
indispensable to Mumbai’s functioning and growth. The terminus was also perhaps 
the first truly public building in what was then Bombay. Now, its structure is 
iconic to the point of cliche: when a Hindi film needs to establish a scene as 
happening in Mumbai, it’s CST that fills the screen, a stately edifice amid a 
swirl of traffic and people.

A language was put together ... for monumental public buildings, and it gave 
the city centre its identity
Prasad Shetty  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchhatrapati-shivaji-terminus-cst-mumbai-railway-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429272191259%2F44f699f0-d29a-474a-b8c6-e477fb5a89de-2060x1341.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chhatrapati%20Shivaji%20Terminus%2C%20Mumbai's%20iconic%20railway%20station%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2020&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchhatrapati-shivaji-terminus-cst-mumbai-railway-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chhatrapati%20Shivaji%20Terminus%2C%20Mumbai%27s%20iconic%20railway%20station%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2020&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchhatrapati-shivaji-terminus-cst-mumbai-railway-station%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429272191259%2F44f699f0-d29a-474a-b8c6-e477fb5a89de-2060x1341.jpeg>
 Victoria Terminus in Bombay, circa 1900. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty 
Images 
And so, when CST became a target of the 2008 terrorist attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/30/mumbai-terrorism-attacks>, what 
was violated was much more than a railway station. Fifty-eight people died 
here; more than 100 were injured. Few Mumbaikars had seen the insides of the 
five-star hotels that were also attacked, but everyone had walked on the 
platforms that were seen bloodied in news reports. To strike CST was to get at 
the heart of Mumbai.

The prominence of CST has much to do with its location – it connects the 
administrative and business centre of the city with its residential suburbs. 
The urban juncture it occupies has its roots in the 1860s as the city of Bombay 
began changing its character from a military post of the British to a 
mercantile capital.

The governor of Bombay, Sir Bartle Frere 
<http://archive.spectator.co.uk/article/27th-august-1881/6/sir-bartle-frere-on-himself>
, had the fort demolished and created room for a group of public buildings. 
These were built from 1860 to around 1900, and they came to define the city of 
Bombay: the Bombay Municipal Corporation building, the Sir JJ School of Art, 
Bombay University, the High Court, the Western Railway offices, the General 
Post Office, and of course Victoria Terminus – also known as VT.

The favoured aesthetic was the gothic revival that was then fashionable in 
England, but architects and builders in Bombay had to work with Indian 
craftsmen, material, motifs and climate. The result was a style that has been 
called, among other things, “Bombay Gothic”. As Prasad Shetty, an urbanist who 
teaches at Mumbai’s School of Environment andArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture>, explains: “A language 
was put together during this period for monumental public buildings, and it 
gave the city centre its identity. The pinnacle of this gothic revival in 
Bombay was VT.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchhatrapati-shivaji-terminus-cst-mumbai-railway-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429272096346%2F00dfe0b0-5db4-4c7b-969c-e58f1e3c3cf1-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chhatrapati%20Shivaji%20Terminus%2C%20Mumbai's%20iconic%20railway%20station%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2020&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchhatrapati-shivaji-terminus-cst-mumbai-railway-station%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chhatrapati%20Shivaji%20Terminus%2C%20Mumbai%27s%20iconic%20railway%20station%20%E2%80%93%20a%20history%20of%20cities%20in%2050%20buildings%2C%20day%2020&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F21%2Fchhatrapati-shivaji-terminus-cst-mumbai-railway-station%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429272096346%2F00dfe0b0-5db4-4c7b-969c-e58f1e3c3cf1-680x1020.jpeg>
 Gunman Mohammad Ajmal Amir Kasab during the CST terror attack in 2008. He 
survived andwas hanged four years later 
<http://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/21/mumbai-terror-attacks-gunman-hanged>
. Photograph: Reuters 
Victoria Terminus was designed by the architect FW Stevens and built over 10 
years to open in 1887. From the outside, it looks far more imposing that its 
three storeys for its profusion of spires, turrets, domes and gables. Close up, 
the building is heavily ornamented with floral and animal patterns. The grand, 
modern identity the British sought for their colonial cities must have been 
evident in this cathedral that enshrined the power of steam locomotion. Above 
the central dome of the station is a personification of the whole affair, a 
14-foot-tall statue of Progress.

It’s doubtful whether the colonial origins of the station even register with 
commuters today, who stream through as if the structure were invisible. 
Victoria Terminus was officially renamed Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus in 1996, 
but it is still common to hear a snappy “VT return” at ticket counters across 
the city.

Mumbai and the railways were made for each other. The city is constrained by 
the sea to be narrow, so distances are large and discouraging of other means of 
commute. This also mean fewer train lines are required to connect the city. 
Although the trains are packed to bursting, they remain the most reliably 
predictable form of commute, essential for a city that runs on commerce. Mumbai 
is perhaps the only Indian city where many who can afford a car and a driver 
still choose to travel by public transport.

The first passenger rail service in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> started from here in 1853, going 
north to Thane through what are today densely populated suburbs. Soon, tracks 
were laid across the country and Victoria Terminus housed the headquarters of 
the Great Indian Peninsula Railway (now Central Railway). The original 
platforms are now used for suburban trains and an extension to the station, 
constructed in 1929, for intercity trains. Mumbai has grown as a city of 
migrants and for many, the city’s first taste must have been this railway 
station.

Shetty points out that VT was the first colonial structure in Bombay that 
counted as a truly public space in its scale and its “ability to hold people 
inside and outside with generosity”. It’s true that there were already markets, 
clubs, colleges and religious shrines, but none was open to all. With the 
construction of VT, here was a building shared between Europeans and Indians of 
all religions, castes and classes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIyt16efRrBo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIyt16efRrBo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIyt16efRrBo&media=>
 Video: CST flash mob 
More than a century later, it was this public space that came under attack. 
Yet the trains were back in service the following morning, and the space began 
to be reclaimed by normalcy – and occasionally, something more ...

There can’t be many songs about valour and sacrifice that also qualify as 
joyful, but then Hindi cinema contains improbable riches. On an evening, 
exactly three years and a day after the attacks, the station’s public address 
system stopped announcing trains and burst into one such song. A flash mob of 
200 Mumbai residentsdanced for around four minutes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iyt16efRrBo> in the area leading to the 
platforms, then rushed off into the city – as if they had just got off a train, 
and had many things to do.

• Which other buildings in the world tell stories about urban history? Share 
your own pictures and descriptions with GuardianWitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/23/50-buildings-great-stories-urban-history>
, on Twitter and Instagram using #hoc50 or let us know suggestions in the 
comments below
 