
The best city stories we’ve come across this week explore a new proposal for 
Chicago <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago> transport, an artwork in 
an abandoned nuclear reactor, “traffic light women” and the Indiana town 
struggling to overcome an HIV crisis. Share your thoughts about these city 
stories – and any others you’ve seen – in the comments below.

The Skyline cable car

Urban cable cars can be found in La Paz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/feb/10/la-paz-cable-difference-city-subway-sky>
, Barcelona, Ankara, London and Cape Town, among other places – and have become 
not justpopular tourist attractions but transport solutions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/06/urban-cable-cars-cities-tourist-attractions>
 (with varying success). Two years ago,a proposal was unveiled for the “East 
River Skyway” cable car network in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/sep/19/new-york-cable-car-animals-india-most-photographed-cities>
, and now Chicago wants in on the game.

According to ArchDaily 
<http://www.archdaily.com/786828/marks-barfield-architects-and-davis-brody-bond-propose-chicago-skyline-cablecar>
, London Eye designersMarks Barfield Architects 
<http://www.marksbarfield.com/#/projects/> and Davis Brody Bond 
<http://www.davisbrody.com/> have announced plans for the “Skyline”, an aerial 
cable car attraction spanning Chicago city centre, including along the recently 
revitalised Riverwalk. “TheChicago <http://www.archdaily.com/tag/chicago> 
Skyline could do forChicago <http://www.archdaily.com/tag/chicago> what the 
London Eye has done for London, and become a very identifiable landmark within 
the city, driving tourism and prosperity,” says David Marks, director at Marks 
Barfield Architects. As well as being a tourist attraction, it is hoped the 
Skyline will be a practical solution to link Navy Pier to the public transport 
network within the Chicago Loop.

Chicago once in fact had a cable car system, which operated from 1882 to 1906 
<http://forgottenchicago.com/features/cable-car-remnants/> – though these were 
ground-level, tram-like cable cars as opposed to the suspended aerial pods that 
are now planned. The Skyline project is still seeking permission.

Chernobyl’s mural

Chernobyl 30 years on: former residents remember life in the ghost city of 
Pripyat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/07/chernobyl-30-years-residents-life-ghost-city-pripyat>
The Russian photojournalist Igor Kostin took some of the first images of the 
ruined Chernobyl nuclear plant 30 years ago, and returned to the site 
periodically to document the impacts of the disaster. He died in an accident in 
2006 but this month, to mark a decade since his death and three since the 
disaster, an Australian artist has painted a poignant black-and-white mural 
referencing Kostin’s work within Chernobyl’s huge, abandoned Reactor 5.As 
CityLab explains 
<http://www.citylab.com/design/2016/05/chernobyl-street-art-igor-kostin-tribute/480495/>
, artist Guido van Helten travelled to the site with filmmaker Geo Leros at the 
behest of international antiwar groupArtUnitedUs <http://artunitedus.com/>.

Crosswalks for all 

A few years ago, Berlin politicans tried to bring gender equality to the 
city’s pedestrian crossing lights by introducing “Ampelfrau”, or “traffic light 
woman”, a female version of the iconic “Ampelmann” invented in East Germany in 
the 1960s. AsJackie Strawbridge in Next City explains 
<https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/designing-gender-into-and-out-of-public-space>
, Social Democrat district leader Martina Matischok-Yesilcimen specified that 
the figure should represent a modern-day woman without any “sexist stereotypes” 
such as ponytails, high heels or skirts.

But this design apparently turned out to be too difficult to achieve. Although 
other European cities,like Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/14/german-city-traffic-light-women-dortmund>
, Amersfoort and Valencia, implemented the “traffic light woman”, she was 
rejected in Berlin because the pigtails and dress in the design were seen as 
“outdated and cliched”. There has been a mixed reception even in places where 
the lights have been installed, with some in Valencia calling the lights sexist.

For Lisa Wade, a sociology professor at Occidental College and founder of the 
sociology site Sociological Images, creating these female crosswalk icons – 
even with outdated markers of femininity – is highly valuable because it 
challenges the male-centeredness of our public spaces. Crosswalks certainly 
seem to be one part of city infrastructure where this desire for inclusive 
design is playing out. As Jackie Strawbridge writes:

Before hosting the Eurovision Song Contest last year, Vienna introduced gay- 
and lesbian-themed crosswalk signals todemonstrate 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-music-eurovision-idUSKBN0NW1H520150511> 
open-mindedness. Wellington, New Zealand, has commemorated suffragette Kate 
Sheppard and transgender icon Carmen Rupe on crossing lights, in part to 
promote the city as “truly progressive” on the 150th anniversary of it becoming 
the capital, the mayor’s office says.

The HIV capital of small-town America


In December 2014, the single largest HIV outbreak in US history took place in 
Austin, Indiana – a town plagued by widespread drug use.Writing in Mosaic 
Science <http://mosaicscience.com/story/austin-indiana-hiv-america-syndemics>, 
in a piece accompanied by haunting photographs from Lauren Lancaster, Jessica 
Wapner traces the town’s decline, meets its residents and explores whether a 
new approach to public health can rescue the town.

“It’s kind of the epitome of years of neglect, poverty, lack of education and 
lack of opportunity, or people’s perception of lack of opportunity,” Jerome 
Adams, Indiana’s state health commissioner, says of Austin. Residents speak of 
growing up in a place where drugs are sold on every corner and parents deal 
narcotics in front of their young children.

Anti-homeless spikes are just the latest in 'defensive urban architecture'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/12/anti-homeless-spikes-latest-defensive-urban-architecture>
After the 2014 HIV outbreak, however, a new health strategy known as 
“syndemics” has been proposed as an answer to the town’s problems, which 
tackles physical illnesses as connected to wider social, economic and political 
factors known to accompany poor health such as poverty and drug abuse. By 
addressing the full context of problems, it is hoped that the syndemics 
approach can improve health among the town’s population.

Hostile cities

Writing in Atlas Obscura 
<http://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/the-subtle-design-features-that-make-cities-feel-more-hostile>
, Ella Morton takes an in-depth look at “hostile” or “defensive” architecture – 
those design features in cities, from “anti-homeless spikes” to barbed wire – 
that seek to limit public access or curb unwanted behaviour. Even potted plants 
and timed sprinklers, Morton says, can be designed to disperse homeless people 
from public space.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 