
Children who suffer a traumatic brain injury, including mild concussion from a 
blow to the head, are less likely to do well at school and are at increased 
risk of early death, researchers have revealed.

As adults they are also more likely to receive a disability pension, have 
failed to gain secondary school qualifications and nearly twice as likely to 
have been hospitalised for psychiatric reasons.

The team analysed data from more than a million people born between 1973 and 
1985, finding that around 9% had been diagnosed with at least one traumatic 
brain injury before the age of 25. More than 75% of these were mild injuries.

The researchers compared the outcomes for these individuals with those of 
others who had not experienced a head injury, as well as carrying out a second 
comparison, where possible, with siblings who had not been injured.

Concussion expert says children shouldn't play football until they turn 18
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/07/concussion-expert-says-children-shouldnt-play-football-until-they-turn-18>
Once factors such as age and sex were taken into account, the team found that 
those diagnosed with a traumatic brain injury have an increased risk of 
experiencing a number of health and social problems. Those who had suffered a 
traumatic brain injury were 76% more likely to receive a disability pension, 
58% more likely to have failed to gain secondary school qualifications and 
nearly twice as likely to have been hospitalised for psychiatric reasons, 
compared to those who had sustained no injury.

When the researchers looked at patients who had siblings that had not 
sustained a traumatic brain injury, they found similar - although smaller - 
effects, suggesting that genetics could also play a role.


The study also indicates that more than one brain injury increases the risk of 
ill effects and that the older the child, the more profound the potential 
impact.

Writing in the journal PLOS Medicine 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1002103>
, researchers from the UK, US and Sweden describe how they examined a number of 
Swedish national registries to explore how traumatic brain injuries could 
affect a variety of outcomes later in life.


“To summarise, we found that even a single mild traumatic brain injury will 
predict poor adult functioning,” said Amir Sariaslan, first author of the 
research from the University of Oxford.

Peter Jenkins, a neurologist from Imperial College, London who was not 
involved in the research, described the study as powerful. “I think clinically 
in healthcare at the moment we don’t necessarily recognise these persistent 
problems [and] we don’t necessarily have the resources available to help deal 
with those problems,” he said.

The study comes just five months after UK health experts called for a ban on 
tackling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/02/uk-health-experts-call-for-ban-on-tackling-in-school-rugby>
 in school rugby games, citing a number of concerns including the risk of 
fractures and head injuries.

Saracens rugby club sign up for head injury research project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/05/saracens-rugby-club-head-injury-research-concussion-nfl>
But experts are quick to warn that the new study does not mean that parents 
should prevent their children from taking part in sports. “What we also know is 
that across a range of health-related conditions sport is very good for you,” 
said Alan Carson from the Centre for Clinical Brain Sciences at the University 
of Edinburgh, who was not involved in the study. He added that exercise is also 
good for the brain as it thought toreduce the risk of dementia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/17/brain-walk-delaying-dementia-memory>
.

The researchers say more should be done to prevent children and adolescents 
from experiencing head injuries, and to make sure that any problems arising 
from such an injury are picked up early on.


“[Design of] playgrounds, helmets, the use of helmets, even certain rules in 
certain collision sports may need to be thought about,” said Seena Fazel, 
co-author of the research from the University of Oxford. With many head 
injuries in young adults down to traffic accidents, messages around road safety 
and drink driving are also important, he added.

Researchers say that parents should seek medical advice if their child has 
received a blow to the head, or appears to be having problems at school 
following an injury. “There is some vigilance required when the injury is 
severe, or there are changes to the trajectory of your child,” said Fazel.



While it is not known exactly how traumatic brain injuries affect later 
outcomes, scientists have proposed a number of possible mechanisms, including 
damage to the brain’s neurons, changes to levels of chemicals in the brain and 
long-term inflammation of the brain. Other effects, such as interruptions in a 
child’s education due their need to take time off from school, could also play 
a role.

But, the researchers point out, while traumatic brain injuries appear to be 
linked to a increased risk of a number of problems, the chances of experiencing 
such issues are still low. “Most children will be unaffected,” said Fazel.

Are we still struggling to get our heads around concussion in sport? | Sean 
Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/07/super-bowl-50-concussion-casting-large-shadow>
For those who had not experienced a traumatic brain injury, the chances of an 
early death were just under 1%, while the chances of failing to achieve 
secondary school education was 9%. For those who had sustained an injury the 
figures were 1.6% and almost 14% respectively.



 Peter McCabe, chief executive of brain injury charity Headway, said: “This 
research is a clear warning signal that the physical and psychosocial 
implications of brain injury can last a lifetime.”

McCabe says more support needs to be in place for those who have sustained 
traumatic brain injuries, and that teachers, social workers and GPs should all 
be aware of the possible effects.

“The often hidden effects of brain injury can make it difficult for people to 
get the diagnosis and help they need,” he said. “This is particularly the case 
in young people whose naturally developing personalities may mask any 
psychosocial changes following a traumatic brain injury.”


 