
Most mornings, 15-year-old Iqbal arrives for his job at a Dhaka panel beaters 
at about 10am, working on cars for up to 13 hours before he can go home.

The teenager, who earns less than £60 a week, has been working these hours 
since the age of 12, when his family’s financial problems forced him out of 
school and into a full-time job.

A major study released on Wednesday suggests his case might be typical of 
Bangladesh’s poorest young people. Asurvey of 2,700 slum households 
<https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-documents/11145.pdf> 
(pdf), carried out by the Overseas Development Institute, found that child 
labourers living in slums worked an average of 64 hours each week – many in 
supply chains connected to the world’s most popular brands.

Bangladeshi organisation offers a lesson on ending child labour | Anna Leach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/11/bangladeshi-organisation-delivers-a-lesson-on-ending-child-labour-sohay>
The survey, among the largest conducted in the south Asian country, found 15% 
of children aged between six and 14 did not go to school and worked full-time.

Two-thirds of girls from slum areas who were working full-time were employed 
in Bangladesh’s $30bn (£24bn) clothes manufacturing industry, which is one of 
the world’s largest despite anextremely poor safety record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/23/rana-plaza-bangladesh-factory-tragedy-little-changed>
.

The manager of one unnamed garment factory told researchers that, while he was 
aware children aged 11 and 14 should not be working, he did not regard their 
employment as illegal. He also admitted that many of his employees did not 
carry identification cards that would verify their age.

There was no immediate comment from Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> authorities or its powerful 
garment manufacturers, but union leaders said child labour in factories was 
rampant.

The extent of child labour in Bangladesh’s textile industry was laid bare in 
July when a nine-year-old boy wasbrutally killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/bangladeshi-child-labourer-tortured-to-death-at-textile-mill>
 at one of the largest spinning factories.

Police probing the case said they found a quarter of the workforce at the 
factory outside Dhaka were children.

International brands have been part of the push to eradicate child labour and 
improve safety standards in factories since the2013 Rana Plaza collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/may/23/bangladesh-factory-collapse-rana-plaza>
 that killed 1,135 people.

But the chief executive of Save the Children, Kevin Watkins, who co-authored 
the report, said that – given the number of children working in the industry – 
it was “implausible to believe that there isn’t significant pollution of the 
value chains of large-scale, western companies”.

“Many of these girls are not in the biggest factories in the formal sector, 
but they’re certainly in the supply chains of those factories,” he said.

Components of textile manufacturing such as sewing buttons were sometimes 
contracted out by the large factories to smaller workshops, over which 
government scrutiny was likely to be poor or non-existent, Watkins said.

“There are very significant levels of child labour in products that end up in 
retail outlets in the UK and elsewhere.”


The study also found that more than 36% of boys and 34% of girls said they had 
experienced “extreme fatigue” on the job. It said that families were usually 
keen for their children to remain in school, but were unable to afford to live 
without the extra income, albeit meagre.

Iqbal’s father said he was “very much worried and tense” about his son’s 
future and wished the teenager could continue his education. The boy felt the 
same way after he first dropped out of school, but said three years in the 
workforce had changed his perspective.

“Even if I got the chance to study I probably wouldn’t,” Iqbal said. “I have 
no interest any more.”
 