
A group of Chinese warships led by the country’s sole aircraft carrier entered 
theSouth China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> on 
Monday after passing south of Taiwan, the self-ruled island’s defence ministry 
said.

The ministry said the carrier, accompanied by five vessels, passed south-east 
of the Pratas Islands, which are controlled by Taiwan, heading south-west. The 
carrier group earlier passed 90 nautical miles (167km) south of Taiwan’s 
southernmost point via the Bashi channel, betweenTaiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> and the Philippines.

China live-fires aircraft carrier group amid Taiwan tensions with US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/china-live-fires-aircraft-carrier-group-amid-taiwan-tensions-with-us>
Ministry spokesman Chen Chung-chi declining to say whether fighter jets were 
scrambled or if submarines had been deployed but added: “Staying vigilant and 
flexible has always been the normal method of maintaining airspace security.”

Chen said the ministry was continuing to “monitor and grasp the situation”.

The move, which China called a routine exercise, comes amid renewed tension 
over Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/china-plan-taiwan-force-trump-call-state-media>
, which Beijing claims as its own, following US President-elect Donald Trump’s 
telephone call with the island’s president.

China’s Soviet-built Liaoning aircraft carrier has taken part in previous 
exercises, including some in the South China Sea, butChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is years away from perfecting carrier 
operations similar to those the United States has practised for decades.

Johnny Chiang , a senior Taiwan opposition Nationalist lawmaker, said the 
Liaoning exercise was China’s signal to the US that it had broken through the 
“first island chain”, an area that includes Japan’s Ryukyu Islands and Taiwan.

 The US state department on Monday said its position had not changed since 
July, when it said it was continuing to monitorChina’s military modernisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/images-show-significant-chinese-weapons-systems-in-south-china-sea>
 and that it expected nations conducting defence exercises to comply with the 
law. Representatives for the Pentagon declined to comment.

 Hope Hicks, a spokeswoman for Trump, said the incoming team had no comment on 
China’s move. Trump takes office on 20 January and has already made headlines 
over a series of statements on China and Taiwan.

In Beijing, Chinese foreign ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said people 
should not read too much into what the carrier was up to, because its movements 
were within the law.

 “Our Liaoning should enjoy in accordance with the law freedom of navigation 
and overflight as set by international law, and we hope all sides can respect 
this right of China’s,” she told a daily news briefing.

Influential state-run Chinese tabloid the Global Times said the exercise 
showed how the carrier was improving its combat capabilities and that it should 
now sail even further afield. “The Chinese fleet will cruise to the eastern 
Pacific sooner or later. When China’s aircraft carrier fleet appears in 
offshore areas of the US one day, it will trigger intense thinking about 
maritime rules,” the newspaper’s editorial said.

 China has been angered recently by US naval patrols near islands that China 
claims in the South China Sea. This month, a Chinese navy ship seized a US 
underwater drone in the South China Sea.China later returned it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/china-returns-us-drone-navy-after-friendly-consultations>
.

 Japan said late on Sunday it had spotted six Chinese naval vessels including 
the Liaoning travelling through the passage between Miyako and Okinawa and into 
the Pacific. A Japanese government spokesman said on Monday the voyage showed 
China’s expanding military capability and Japan was closely monitoring it.

 China’s air force conducted long-range drills this month above the East and 
South China Seas that rattled Japan and Taiwan. China said those exercises were 
also routine.

 In December last year, the defence ministry confirmed China was building a 
second aircraft carrier but its launch date is unclear. The aircraft carrier 
programme is a state secret.

 Beijing could build multiple aircraft carriers over the next 15 years, the 
Pentagon said in a report last year.

 China claims most of the South China Sea through which about $5tn in 
ship-borne trade passes every year. Neighbours Brunei, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam also have claims.
 