
China and Malaysia have said their navies will cooperate more in the 
politically sensitiveSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> in an agreement signed on 
Tuesday during a visit by Malaysia’s leader, Najib Razak.

The prime minister hopes to use his visit to Beijing this week to woo new 
investment and boost his image as he is shunned by western leaders over the1MDB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1mdb> financial scandal, which has prompted 
a US government investigation, analysts say.

South China Sea: Australia considers joint naval patrols with Indonesia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/south-china-sea-australia-considers-joint-naval-patrols-with-indonesia>
He was given a warm welcome on Tuesday by his Chinese counterpart, Li Keqiang. 
After meeting at the Great Hall of the People, they oversaw the signing of 
agreements, including a memorandum of understanding ondefence cooperation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/malaysia-najib-razak-defence-deal-china-beijing-visit>
.

Vice-foreign minister Liu Zhenmin said: “We have not touched upon the details 
of our cooperation. Mostly we are focusing on naval cooperation.”

Because China and Malaysia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> are 
both South China Sea coastal nations, “we need to enhance our naval cooperation 
to ensure peace and stability in the South China Sea and enhance our mutual 
trust,” he said.

Razak said former colonial powers should not “lecture countries they once 
exploited on how to conduct their own internal affairs today”, a Chinese 
newspaper reported on Wednesday, in a veiled attack on the west.

Najib said in an editorial in the state-run China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Daily that larger countries should 
treat smaller countries fairly.

Beijing asserts that virtually all the South China Sea is Chinese territory, 
but an international tribunal ruling in July invalidated those claims.China has 
ignored that ruling. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/14/philippines-urges-beijing-to-respect-south-china-sea-ruling>


1MDB: The inside story of the world’s biggest financial scandal | Randeep 
Ramesh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/1mdb-inside-story-worlds-biggest-financial-scandal-malaysia>
Six other Asian governments also claim part of the South China Sea, and some 
observers see it as a potential flashpoint that could spark conflict one day.

Najib is the second leader of a nation with rival territorial claims in the 
South China Sea to visit Beijing in two weeks. The first, Philippine president 
Rodrigo Duterte, played down his country’s dispute with China.

The international tribunal case was initiated by Duterte’s predecessor, and 
Duterte has sought to cast himself as far more conciliatory, an approach that 
appears to have paid off. While Chinese coast guard ships continue to guard a 
tiny, uninhabited shoal that China in effect seized in 2012, Filipino fishermen 
have been allowed to fish there for the first time in four years.

Malaysia claims a swath of the South China Sea north of Borneo, along with 
islands and reefs, but has been relatively understated amid the feuding between 
fellow claimants China, Vietnam and the Philippines.

Last month, Najib said Malaysia would not compromise on its South China Sea 
claims, but wants them to be worked out through dialogue and peaceful 
negotiations.

Liu said Najib agreed with the Chinese premier “to further advance the proper 
settlement of the South China Sea issue on a bilateral channel and through 
dialogue”. Beijing always prefers negotiating disputes on a one-to-one basis 
with the countries concerned, so it can bring more pressure to bear.

Liu said the two sides also agreed to enhance cooperation in infrastructure, 
agriculture, trade, investment and law enforcement, and would work together to 
build an east coast railway link in Malaysia and an oil and gas pipeline in 
Sabah. All this cooperation “will bring our relations to a new high”, Liu said.

Najib meets President Xi Jinping on Thursday. 

Najib has been implicated in a US government investigation into massive fraud 
at a Malaysian investment fund he founded, 1MDB. The Department of Justice said 
in a lawsuit seeking to seize assets in the US that at least $3.5bn was stolen 
from the fund and diverted through a web of shell companies and bank accounts 
in Singapore, Switzerland, Luxembourg and the US.

Malaysia’s attorney general has defended Najib, even as his popularity at home 
has plummeted in recent months.

James Chin, director of the Asia institute at Australia’s University of 
Tasmania, said Najib wanted to attract more Chinese money to make up for a drop 
in foreign direct investment from western countries spooked by the scandal. He 
said Najib also wanted to show that “there are still powerful countries around 
the world that are still willing to give him the five-star or red carpet 
treatment”.

“He’s showing the Malaysian domestic audience that a new upcoming power like 
China is still willing to host him, because it is quite obvious that he can’t 
get the same treatment in western capitals any more,” Chin said.

While Najib has more riding on the visit, the Chinese government is also eager 
to increase its clout with Malaysia as it looks to develop its “One Belt, One 
Road” initiative. Under Xi’s signature foreign economic expansion strategy, 
China aims to strengthen land and sea links and bilateral cooperation with the 
rest of Asia, Africa and Europe. One part of that is a planned high-speed 
railway from Singapore to south-west China which will pass through Malaysia.

“China for its part wants to be closer to Malaysia in economic and political 
terms because it’s trying to draw Malaysia into its sphere of influence,” Chin 
said.

Associated Press and Reuters contributed to this report

 