
Their buildings dot the globe, but you probably couldn't name one, nor would 
you ever guess they had come from the same practice. They have built a
gargantuan conference centre in China 
<http://www.aedas.com/Nanfung_Mixed_Use_Project> that looks like a teetering 
stack of mirror-clad Jenga blocks, anenormous concert hall in Singapore 
<http://www.aedas.com/Singapore-Star-PAC> in the shape of a crumpled beetle, 
and over 9.3m sq metres (100m sq ft) of shops, offices and hotels in variously 
sculpted towers across Asia and the Middle East. NowAedas 
<http://www.aedas.com/>, one of the largest architecture practices in the 
world, plans to bring its flashy brand of mixed-use huge projects to London. 
And there is very little to stand in their way.

“Our Chinese clients have their sights set on London, and they know what they 
want,” says Keith Griffiths, the Welsh-born chairman of Aedas, who presides 
over the 1,400-strong practice from its Hong Kong headquarters. “They are used 
to high rise, high density, truly mixed-use developments – having everything on 
one site, so you can live, work and play without ever leaving the building. We 
think that's the way London needs to densify.”

Based in Hong Kong since 1983, when he worked on the Hong Kong and Shanghai 
Bank headquarters 
<http://www.fosterandpartners.com/projects/hongkong-and-shanghai-bank-headquarters/>
 with Norman Foster, Griffiths has built up an empire of offices across Asia, 
with bases in 13 cities, from Shanghai and Singapore to New Delhi and Dubai. 
Last week Aedas announced a demerger from its European offices, where the scale 
of work was on a "different trajectory" (i.e. too small), but it has already 
set up a new base in London with the aim of importing its high-octane brand of 
gigantic Asian projects to Europe.

The company has come to specialise, Griffiths says, in a particular kind of 
urban development that has grown out of these fast-paced emergent economies. It 
is a design philosophy that conceives chunks of cities like self-contained 
ocean liners: clusters of high rise buildings that are “glued together” at 
their bases on podiums that brim with retail and leisure, usually perched on 
top of major transport nodes.
 The Star Performing Arts Centre in Singapore. Photograph: Aedas 
“The closest London has come is Canary Wharf, but that's just a shopping mall 
servicing office blocks,” he says. “It dies when the offices turn their lights 
off. We're talking about full 24-hour occupation, with a continuity of 
excitement between all the different floors, and blocks linked by elevated 
walkways above the streets.”

It is a form of mall urbanism that is now ubiquitous across Asia, as urban 
street patterns aretrampled beneath galumphing glass behemoths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/aug/02/zaha-hadid-destroying-beijing-heritage>
. The city's ground level is surrendered to cars, while pedestrians scuttle 
between air-conditioned retail hubs overhead. They are self-contained 
commercial ecosystems, built and managed by single private interests, on a 
scale that makes London's biggest developments look like tiny specks on the 
planner's map. Such projects, says Griffiths, are usually between 465–930,000 
sq metres (5-10m sq ft) in China.Westfield Stratford City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/sep/11/westfield-stratford-city-shopping-review>
, London's Olympic shopping Mecca whose developers claim is Europe's largest 
such complex, is just 177,000 sq metres (1.9m sq ft).

On the edge of Beijing's Olympic site, Aedas has completed the North Star 
mixed-use development <http://www.aedas.com/North-Star>, comprising a 
six-storey podium of swooping shopping arcades, from which 100m-tall towers 
rise into the smoggy skies. It is built on a plot measuring 200m x 200m, which 
the company's design director, Andrew Bromberg, describes as an “extremely 
small site”. By no means the worst of its kind, it is one of many such generic 
developments that are increasingly defining the nature of the Chinese capital: 
hermetic indoor worlds sprouting above stations, with little connection to the 
life of the street outside – because the street is usually a six-lane motorway.
 The six-storey North Star development in Beijing. Photograph: Aedas 
“In Asia you can easily get away with six storeys of retail, no problem,” says 
Bromberg, before flicking to a slide of the practice's Nanfung complex in 
Guangzhou. Opposite the world's largest conference centre, it's a pair of 
hulking towers of staggered blocks that look like the result of a glitch in the 
computer modelling programme. “People see the photos of the project and say, 
'Where's the humanism in this?'” he admits. “But when you see it inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, you realise it's actually very 
contextual.”

He flicks through more slides of wide-angle photos and dazzling renderings, 
showing floor plates stretched into ever more unlikely shapes and cladding 
systems wrenched around twisted lumps, as different global cities merge into 
one free-form soup of contorted mirror glass.

There is Centre 66 in Wuxi <http://www.aedas.com/Center%2066>, a 372,000 sq 
metre (4m sq ft) complex of shops and office towers clustered around a Ming 
dynasty hall, and renderings forXihongmen in Beijing 
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/292734044501256936/>, a 465,000 sq metre (5m sq 
ft) development on the Fifth Ring road, shaped like a troupe of streamlined 
golden tanks ready to charge at the city. Each sculpted carapace contains 
interiors of sparkling shopfronts arranged around swirling atria, visions of 
economic growth and prosperity, unperturbed by the fact thatthe country's 
largest mall still stands empty almost a decade after it was completed 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2013/03/03/business/china-worlds-largest-mall/index.html?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+rss%2Fcnn_topstories+%28RSS%3A+Top+Stories%29>
.

Such inward-looking buildings, which often span several city blocks, may be 
“contextual” to the new cities of China in some architects' eyes, but how such 
ambitions translate to London remains questionable, where news of 230 new 
towers planned across the city hasrenewed scrutiny of the skyline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/london-skyline-debate>.
 Plan for the Xihongmen development in Beijing. Photograph: Aedas 
China's biggest developers – from Greenland and Vanke, to Dalian Wanda 
<http://www.wanda-group.com/> and ABP <http://abp-london.co.uk/> – are already 
flocking to the capital in response to demand from the country's burgeoning 
billionaire class, looking to park their money overseas. Last yearABP signed a 
£1bn deal to transform the Royal Docks into an Asian business district 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/29/chinese-developer-deal-london-business-park>
, whileGreenland bought Wandsworth's Ram Brewery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/07/chinese-property-developer-greenland-buys-ram-brewery>
, slated for a 36-storey tower, and asite in Canary Wharf, where it plans the 
tallest residential building in Europe 
<http://in.reuters.com/article/2014/03/12/greenland-london-property-idINL6N0M92AK20140312>
.

In 2013 the Chinese were granted the most tier-one investor visas for the UK 
(which fast-tracks the immigration process for those investing more than £1m in 
the country), overtaking Russia for the first time. In 2003 there were no 
dollar billionaires in China; this year, theHurun Global Rich List 
<http://www.hurun.net/EN/ArticleShow.aspx?nid=274> recorded 358. With the 
slowdown in the Chinese economy and the strength of the renminbi versus the 
pound, London is an increasingly attractive proposition – and practices like 
Aedas are only too ready to provide the same services their clients are used to 
back home. But at what cost to the city?

“London can't continue just putting these towers up everywhere,” says 
Griffiths. “The city's infrastructure can't cope with densification across the 
board. It needs to densify at nodal points, and we think these big integrated 
mixed-use developments, connected around stations at first and second-floor 
level, are the answer.”

It might sound like a vision from Blade Runner, but it is a proposition that 
dates back more than half a century, to a grand plan for a future London 
connected by elevated walkways. In 1947, in a wave of postwar optimism, Charles 
Holden and William Holford developed a plan for a network of routes at 
first-floor level that would connect buildings across the City. Most 
extensively completed around the Barbican estate, the Pedway scheme was 
abandoned by the 1980s, incomplete and partially demolished, as the tide turned 
against the idea of separating pedestrians from the streets below. (Its history 
is loving documented in the filmElevating London 
<http://www.elevatinglondon.co.uk/>). The same happened in many US cities that 
had adopted elevated skywalks, from Milwaukee to Minneapolis to Cincinnati, 
where raised walkways resulted in empty pavements and deserted downtowns, 
forming cities that were physically separated by economic class, socially 
stratified in concrete and steel.

After 30 years in Hong Kong, the spiritual home of the elevated walkway and 
urban escalator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/feb/22/cities-without-ground-hong-kong-walkways>
, Griffiths is optimistic that its lessons can be transferred. “If you have 
enough pedestrian activity, then the street doesn't die,” he says. “There are 
three levels of the city in Hong Kong, and they're all flourishing.”

As London's increasingly international development market brings not only 
overseas investment, but the physical realities of urban forms spawned in the 
high-speed laboratories of Asia's developing cities, the skyline debate might 
end up being the least of our worries. The next frontier will be a wave of 
ground-scraping mega-buildings looking to gobble up our streets, making an ever 
more privatised, polarised city, all conveniently swept indoors.
 