
China’s Pearl River Delta has overtaken Tokyo to become the world’s largest 
urban area in both size and population, according to a report from the World 
Bank. The megacity – which covers a significant part of China’s manufacturing 
heartland and includes the cities of Shenzhen, Guangzhou, Foshan and Dongguan – 
is now home to more people than the countries of Canada, Argentina or Australia.


Urbanisation <https://www.theguardian.com/cities/urbanisation> which took 
place over a period of several decades in Europe and North America is happening 
in just a few years in East Asia, which already contains eight megacities (with 
populations above 10 million) and 123 cities with between one and 10 million 
people.

With almost two-thirds of the region’s population (64%) still non-urban at 
present, several hundred million are expected to move to cities over the next 
20 years as economies shift from agriculture to manufacturing and services, 
according toEast Asia’s Changing Urban Landscape: Measuring a Decade of Spatial 
Growth 
<http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Publications/Urban%20Development/EAP_Urban_Expansion_full_report_web.pdf>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Fchina-pearl-river-delta-overtake-tokyo-world-largest-megacity-urban-area%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F27%2F1422377296269%2F032f2bae-fb17-4a29-a9ea-865d88d01f53-1020x771.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%E2%80%99s%20Pearl%20River%20Delta%20overtakes%20Tokyo%20as%20world%E2%80%99s%20largest%20megacity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Fchina-pearl-river-delta-overtake-tokyo-world-largest-megacity-urban-area%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%E2%80%99s%20Pearl%20River%20Delta%20overtakes%20Tokyo%20as%20world%E2%80%99s%20largest%20megacity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Fchina-pearl-river-delta-overtake-tokyo-world-largest-megacity-urban-area%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F27%2F1422377296269%2F032f2bae-fb17-4a29-a9ea-865d88d01f53-1020x771.png>
Urbanisation in the Pearl River Delta - grey represents areas which were urban 
in 2000; red shows new urban areas in 2010. Illustration: University of 
Wisconsin-Madison/World Bank 
The report analysed built-up areas in the region in 2000 and 2010 using 
satellite imagery and geospatial mapping, an attempt to address the lack of 
internationally comparable data given that each country defines urban areas and 
populations differently. The Pearl River Delta grew from 4,500 square 
kilometres in 2000 to nearly 7,000 sq km in 2010, the analysis found. Treating 
the Pearl River Delta as a single urban area, it is now bigger than Tokyo in 
terms of geographical size and population.

In the region as a whole, the report highlighted 50 urban areas with growth 
rates that would double their populations in the two decades to 2020; despite 
the visibility of megacities, there was more urban land, population and growth 
in small and medium-sized cities.

Much of the growth of the region’s urban population was driven by China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, which had 477 million urban 
inhabitants in 2010 – partly due to the size of the country and its rapidly 
developing economy – but also due to Beijing’s focus on urbanisation as a key 
policy, with the government building cities and moving people into them.

East Asia’s rapid growth often leads to the merging of multiple cities into 
single urban areas, with spillovers from original boundaries into neighbouring 
administrations. The urban area of Jakarta in Indonesia, for example, is home 
to more than 23 million people over an area of 1,600 sq km – and encompassing 
12 different administrative areas – fragmenting government management and 
revenue sources. About 350 urban areas in East Asia spill over local 
administrative boundaries, the report found, and in 135 of these urban areas, 
no single jurisdiction covers even half the total urban area.

The report warned that although the growth of urban areas provides 
opportunities for the poorest citizens, unplanned urban expansion can also 
exacerbate inequality: large cities without affordable housing and efficient 
public transport can push the poor to live far from work, schools and markets, 
forcing them to choose between long and expensive commutes, and slum areas 
which are closer to the centre but lack land rights and services.

“While this transformation is going on, there is still an opportunity to set 
the course of urbanisation on a more sustainable and equitable path,” warned 
the report’s authors. “Within a few decades, this window of opportunity will 
close, and future generations will be left to deal with the consequences of how 
we urbanise today.”
 