
South Korean President Park Geun-hye’s approval rating fell to 4% amid a 
deepening political crisis, marking an all-time low for any democratically 
elected leader in the country, according to Gallup Korea polling.


 Fears of policy paralysis prompted by the political crisis also dealt a blow 
to consumer confidence, which fell to its lowest in more than seven years in 
November, South Korea’s central bank said.

 Park’s presidency has been rocked by allegations that a close friend used her 
ties to the leader to meddle in state affairs and wield improper influence. 
Prosecutors investigating the case haveindicted her friend, Choi Soon-sil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/choi-gate-prosecutors-accuse-south-korean-president-of-collusion>
, and areseeking to question the president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/south-korea-prosecutors-bid-to-question-president-over-scandal>
 about her role in the scandal.

 Park’s approval rating slipped one percentage point after hovering at 5% for 
three consecutive weeks, while her disapproval rating rose three points to 93%, 
the Gallup Korea poll showed.

South Korea scandal explained: six key points on the cronyism claims engulfing 
the president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
Choi was indicted along with a former presidential aide on Sunday on charges 
of colluding with Park to pressure companies to contribute funds to two 
foundations controlled by Choi.


 South Korean investigators have since widened their anti-graft probe into 
Park’s aides and businesses, raiding the offices of Samsung Group, South 
Korea’s largest family-run conglomerate, and Lotte Group.

 Hundreds of thousands of people took to the streets of Seoul on Saturday in 
thefourth straight weekend of protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/12/tens-of-thousands-march-demanding-south-korean-president-park-geun-hye-resign>
 against Park and the biggest public demonstrations in South Korea since the 
1980s.

 More than a million people are expected to gather again on Saturday, 
including about a thousand farmers, raising concerns of a clash with police 
trying to prevent the crowd from marching on the presidential Blue House.

 Park, whose five-year term ends in February 2018, has resisted calls to 
resign but has apologised twice.

 South Korea’s opposition parties are working towards launching impeachment 
proceedings against her but they need votes from Park’s ruling party if the 
motion is to succeed.

Gallup Korea, based in Seoul, is not affiliated with US-based Gallup Inc.
 