
Chris Robshaw pauses when he is asked if clinching the grand slam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
 in Paris this month, after all the adversity he has endured, felt so much 
sweeter than if he had achieved the same feat at the more innocent age of 21. 
The hurt he suffered as England’s captain over four years, sinking to the low of
a humiliating exit in the group stages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/04/england-crash-out-of-rugby-world-cup>
 of a home World Cup last October, was replaced by five successive victories in 
this year’s Six Nations.

The battered but resilient Robshaw not only overcame the public doubts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/24/eddie-jones-robshaw-oshea-england>
 of his new coach, Eddie Jones, who had dismissed his credentials as an 
international openside flanker, but he embraced a new position on the opposite 
side of the scrum and accepted his downgraded statuswhen Dylan Hartley was 
chosen to lead the team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/dylan-hartley-england-captain-eddie-jones>
. Despite losing the captaincy,Robshaw played a significant part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/20/james-haskell-england-six-nations-rugby-chris-robshaw>
 in England’s first grand slam in 13 years when a wounded squad transformed 
itself under Jones.

Owen Farrell hits winning note on return to No10 for Saracens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/owen-farrell-fly-half-saracens-exeter>
“I think it would have still felt very good at 21,” Robshaw finally says. He 
then bursts out laughing and echoes himself. “It would have felt very good.”

This is Robshaw’s amiable way of saying that, actually, the pain is still too 
raw to claim it was all worth it. He is not about to say that he wouldn’t 
change a thing or that the heartache has made him a better man. Instead, 
Robshaw would change a lot if he had the chance. If everything could be 
different he would have led England to an earlier grand slam on the way to 
winning a World Cup, which would have an incredible impact on his life. He 
would have loved to have won all those huge matches that England just lost – 
rather than being hit by disappointment so bad that it felt like grief.

Robshaw once told me that after another bitter letdown, when hearing he had 
not been picked for the Lions squad that went on toachieve a series win in 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/06/australia-lions-third-test-match-report>
 in 2013, “you just go home and close the curtains for a day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/06/chris-robshaw-england-wales-six-nations-ireland>
.” However, that personal blow felt minor compared to the overwhelmingdejection 
that spread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/04/england-rugby-world-cup-stuart-lancaster-10-reasons>
 across English rugby after the World Cup.

“This was worse, far worse,” Robshaw says of his devastation last October. “I 
actually went away for a weekend to the middle of nowhere with [his partner] 
Camilla and some of my friends – to get away from it all. It did help but you 
need a lot of time before, eventually, you start to feel better inside. Sean 
Fitzpatrick [the New Zealand captain who lost a World Cup final in extra time 
to South Africa in 1995] told me: ‘The sun will come up again. It might not be 
tomorrow, it might not be next week, it might not be next month – but it will 
come up again eventually. You will feel good again.’ That’s how it turned out. 
I feel good now but it did take time.”

How long? Weeks? “Probably longer. The feeling is still there sometimes. Even 
beating Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/england-wales-six-nations-match-report>
 [in the Six Nations] didn’t eradicate that feeling. The World Cup will always 
live with me and the other guys. It will always be part of me and I will always 
have that scar no matter the success we have in the future. Even after all the 
wins recently I don’t think you’ll be able to right those wrongs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fchris-robshaw-sport-life-england-captaincy-six-nations-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff616785c0fe5b9502a26e999a3614fb0b85fa5fd%2F135_406_7201_4320%2F7201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Robshaw%3A%20%E2%80%98In%20sport%20you%20go%20through%20different%20times%3B%20it%E2%80%99s%20how%20you%20get%20back%20up%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Donald%20McRae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fchris-robshaw-sport-life-england-captaincy-six-nations-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Robshaw%3A%20%E2%80%98In%20sport%20you%20go%20through%20different%20times%3B%20it%E2%80%99s%20how%20you%20get%20back%20up%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Donald%20McRae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fchris-robshaw-sport-life-england-captaincy-six-nations-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff616785c0fe5b9502a26e999a3614fb0b85fa5fd%2F135_406_7201_4320%2F7201.jpg>
 Chris Robshaw: ‘The World Cup will always live with me.’ Photograph: Linda 
Nylind for the Guardian 
Was he hard to live with in the months following England’s collapse? “I 
imagine so,” Robshaw says with a small smile. “You just need time. There is no 
magic formula. Hopefully you wake up one day and feel good again. I’m at that 
stage now but I needed the support of Camilla, my family, friends, team-mates 
here at Harlequins, Conor O’Shea [his club coach] andEddie Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones>. These people drag you back 
from hell when you’re going through those dark days. They still make you smile. 
You know, rugby is a great thing. You take the mick out of each other a lot but 
when guys struggle and need an arm around the shoulder, it’s there. I’ve seen 
that in spades over the last couple of years.”

Robshaw chuckles darkly when I say his heart must have sunk even further when, 
deep in his post-tournament blues, he heard Jones was aboutto succeed Stuart 
Lancaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/11/stuart-lancaster-england-tenure-nearly-men-head-coach>
 – who had backed him to the hiltand made him England captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/30/chris-robshaw-england-captain-stuart-lancaster>
 after he played only one previous Test match. Jones and Lancaster are 
contrasting figures and‘Fast Eddie’, the straight-talking Aussie gunslinger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/10/eddie-jones-england-squad-world-cup-hangover-announcement>
, had dismissed Robshaw during the World Cup.

“At international level he just doesn’t have that point of difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/rugby-world-cup-australia-team-england>
,” Jones said of Robshaw. “He carries OK, he tackles OK but he’s not 
outstandingly good in any area.”

Instead of fear, I would say Eddie Jones' best feature is building the 
players’ confidence

Robshaw remembers his uncertainty when hearing that the coach wanted to meet 
him for a coffee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/20/eddie-jones-england-rugby-captain-chris-robshaw-richie-mccaw>
. “I had seen what he said about me and I was a bit unsure. I’d also heard a 
couple of stories about him – but Eddie made it very simple. I had played as a 
7 but he viewed me as a 6. He told me I needed to move that way and hopefully 
I’m doing what he wants me to do. The most important point is that he has come 
in and done a great job.”

At their first meeting did Jones give Robshaw belief he had a real chance of 
remaining in the England side – even when most pundits were predicting the 
29-year-old would never play Test rugby again? “Yeah, very much so. Eddie’s an 
honest man. He will let you know what he thinks and what he wants and needs you 
to do. He won’t beat around the bush and that’s what you want. You want to know 
where you can improve. Look at how the boys are playing now. He’s filled them 
with confidence – myself included.

“He does work you very hard – but it’s effective, isn’t it? He also allowed us 
to have a good bit of downtime. When it was confirmedwe’d won the championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/england-win-six-nations-scotland-france>
 [afterFrance lost to Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/scotland-france-six-nations-match-report>
 on the penultimate weekend] we went out and had a beer together and enjoyed 
it. But then we were back in the next day working hard for the game in Paris. 
It was the right balance.”

Many former players under Jones have spoken of their fear of him – and he has 
reduced hardened Test forwards such as Ben Darwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/eddie-jones-england-six-nations>
, the former Wallaby prop, to tears. Did Robshaw and his team-mates feel that 
fear factor? “Players know it’s there and they want to do well for him. There 
is a huge amount of respect for him – and so, instead of fear, I would say his 
best feature is building the players’ confidence. He was brilliant at giving 
the players the confidence to believe in themselves. It showed in the way we 
finished off a couple of games. I know we let the Wales game slip a bit but we 
were pretty ruthless at the start and he breeds that confidence.”

Did Robshaw feel much more comfortable playing at 6? “I’m not sure. People are 
always talking about ‘a typical 7’ but it’s more to do with having the right 
balance in your pack to suit the team rather than saying, ‘Your 6 should do 
this, your 7 should do that, your 8 should do this.’ It’s about having the 
right framework for how you want to play the game.

Eddie Jones gets his retaliation in first as England set their sights on 
Australia | Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/24/eddie-jones-england-australia-the-breakdown>
“It was funny when James Haskell [who has switched from 6 to 7 under Jones] 
came out with two shirts for me and him with six-and-a-half on the back. 
Haskell surprised me with them after the Paris game. Like me, he’s been through 
a lot. He’s a guy who works so hard and he doesn’t always get the credit he 
deserves. It’s been great to play alongside him and Billy Vunipola.”

It is striking that 16 of England’s 23-man squad were born in the 1990s. Wales 
can only claim nine players of such youth in their squad. “A couple of us wise 
old boys are still there,” Robshaw quips. “But there is a huge amount of talent 
coming through and we’re now going in the right direction. We’ve won a grand 
slam but we want to go up another gear. As players, coaches, management we have 
a lot more to give. It’s going to be a very testing summer tour to Australia 
but that’s the next step – to beat those southern hemisphere teams.”

England finished the tournament with George Kruis and Maro Itoje 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/13/eddie-jones-england-maro-itoje-george-kruis-six-nations>
 locking the scrum. They have the youthful vibrancy to suggest they will be 
England’s key forwards for many years. “We’ve known for a while how good they 
are,” Robshaw says. “George scored early on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/feb/06/scotland-v-england-six-nations-2016-live?page=with:block-56b627bae4b00a8a9e2a8e6c#block-56b627bae4b00a8a9e2a8e6c>
 against Scotland and just got better. His lineout leadership and carrying was 
fantastic. Maro, too. He got his opportunity to come on against Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/14/italy-england-six-nations-match-report>
 and never looked back. They were hugely impressive.”

Itoje can also play in the back row and he and young loose-forwards such as 
Jack Clifford, Dave Ewers and Sam Underhill will ensureRobshaw’s position 
remains under scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/25/eddie-jones-england-talent-centre-dean-ryan>
. “Very much so,” Robshaw nods. “But if we want to compete with the best teams 
in the world we need a lot of very good players pushing each other. All I can 
say is that I’m enjoying my rugby.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fchris-robshaw-sport-life-england-captaincy-six-nations-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F634e616ef78fd38277713b5ed6f27a496b692b56%2F26_41_3168_1901%2F3168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Robshaw%3A%20%E2%80%98In%20sport%20you%20go%20through%20different%20times%3B%20it%E2%80%99s%20how%20you%20get%20back%20up%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Donald%20McRae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fchris-robshaw-sport-life-england-captaincy-six-nations-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Robshaw%3A%20%E2%80%98In%20sport%20you%20go%20through%20different%20times%3B%20it%E2%80%99s%20how%20you%20get%20back%20up%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Donald%20McRae&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F28%2Fchris-robshaw-sport-life-england-captaincy-six-nations-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F634e616ef78fd38277713b5ed6f27a496b692b56%2F26_41_3168_1901%2F3168.jpg>
 Chris Robshaw drinks out of the Six Nations trophy watched by his England 
team-mate George Kruis after beating France. Photograph: David Rogers/The RFU 
Collection via Getty 
Next year’s Lions tour to New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/22/george-kruis-billy-vunipola-maro-itoje-british-lions-all-blacks-2017>
 and even the 2019 World Cup remain significant goals for Robshaw. “The Lions 
are a driving force for me – and for all the players – but it’s a year away. Of 
course I would also love to play in the next World Cup but I need to focus on 
the here and now. You can’t drift off to something that might happen in a year 
or three years’ time.

“My focus is now on Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/27/northampton-saints-harlequins-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 [who are sixth in the table]. We want to give Conor a good send-off [as O’Shea 
takes charge of Italy next season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/25/conor-oshea-italy-head-coach-mike-catt>
]. He’s been great for me and a lot of other players, so we want to end the 
season well. We’re still in the Challenge Cup and I think we can make the top 
four again. We scraped in two years ago when we had to win every game and that 
has to be the mindset. But it’s the tightest Premiership there’s ever been. 
It’s certainly not going to be relaxing but these are the games you want to 
play in, don’t you?”

At least Robshaw and his grand slam winning team-mates could relax and have a 
party in Paris. “We enjoyed each other’s company – let’s put it like that,” 
Robshaw grins. “I’m very proud. When you look at the teams who have won a grand 
slam we are only the 13th to do it. So to win it with guys who went through the 
World Cup and a lot of near misses over the last four years was special. We 
understood what it really meant when we finally got our hands on that trophy.

“In a winning changing room there are pictures galore, the boys having beers 
together 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/21/six-nations-2016-guardian-writers-awards>
, Billy Vunipola singing a bit of Backstreet Boys. When you lose it’s heads 
down, you’re not really talking. In sport and in life you do go through these 
different times. It’s how you get back up and go again. In the end it really 
does make the person you are today.”
 