
Chris Ashton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-ashton> has in effect 
ended his international career by getting out of his Saracens contract early at 
the end of the season to join Toulon despite the efforts of the Premiership and 
European champions to keep the England wing.

Ashton is serving a 13-week suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/chris-ashton-saracens-england-biting>
 for biting the Northampton prop Alex Waller, his second long ban of the year, 
and it was that which Saracens feel influenced his request for his contract to 
end early rather than the offer of more money.

“It was done quite quickly,” the Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> director of rugby, Mark McCall, 
said. “Chris came to us a week or so ago and said he wanted to leave at the end 
of the season. We allowed that to happen after making sure we would be 
compensated for the time left on his contract.

“You will have to ask Chris why he wanted to leave. He will have been here 
five years by the end of the season and we are grateful for the contribution he 
has made. If you’re asking me if it’s the right move from a rugby point of view 
to develop his game or develop him as a person, I think it’s not and I told him 
that. But he obviously doesn’t agree.

“His game has come on leaps and bounds at this club which is the right one for 
him to grow as a player and as a person. I understand his reasons for going: 
the international door in his own eyes seems to be shut and clearly there is 
probably another reason as well. That’s the way it is but his decision is 
unfortunate.”

Ashton, who will link up at Toulon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon> 
with Mike Ford, a member of England’s management team when the wing won the 
first of his 44 caps in 2010, said it was the hardest decision he had taken in 
his career which started in rugby league with Wigan. He joined Northampton in 
2007 and spent five years at Franklin’s Gardens. “I will leave one of the 
greatest rugby clubs in the world at the end of the season,” he said. “The 
opportunity to play in France was too good to turn down but I will be giving my 
all to Sarries for the rest of the season.”

Ashton, 29, has not played for England since the summer of 2014. He was 
recalled to the squad by Eddie Jones at the start of the year but was unable to 
take up his place after receiving a 10-week ban for putting his hand near the 
Ulster centre Luke Marshall’s eyes. He was chosen in the Saxons squad for the 
summer tour to South Africa but pulled out.

“I think his latest ban probably changed everything,” McCall said. ”It was not 
in his mind before. We did not have a conversation about money: he wanted to 
leave and that was that. He didn’t ask me to persuade him one way or the other. 
We could have said no, but we are not a club to keep people who do not want to 
be here.”

Scotland have named five England-based players in their squad for the November 
internationals against Australia, Argentina and Georgia despite a dispute with 
Premiership Rugby over a six-figure injury compensation bill. A sixth, the 
Gloucester centre Matt Scott, who has scored six tries this season, was omitted.

The English clubs have threatened to withhold the players, Greig Laidlaw, 
Moray Low, Duncan Taylor, Sean Maitland and Tim Visser, until they receive the 
money, but Scotland’s head coach, Vern Cotter, said: “We are anticipating 
having the players available to us, so I will let the whole thing unfold over 
the next couple of days and then we will know a bit more.”

Mike Ford takes charge of Toulon in place of Diego Domínguez
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/24/mike-ford-placed-in-charge-toulon-diego-dominguez>
Chris Ashton (@ChrisAshton1) 
pic.twitter.com/sstF4Xezfp <https://t.co/sstF4Xezfp>
 <https://twitter.com/ChrisAshton1/status/790874833873756160> October 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisAshton1/status/790874833873756160>  