
Brendon Burns wrote earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/19/brendon-burns-on-bill-hicks> – 
in reference to Bill Hicks – that we shouldn't take comedians too seriously, 
nor make messiahs of them. I'm sure he's right, but I plead guilty all the same 
to putting the satiristChris Morris 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Morris_%28satirist%29> on a pedestal. I'm 
not alone. "He has this reputation as the dark lord of comedy, this godlike 
presence," the Peep Show writer Sam Bainonce said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/may/01/chris-morris-four-lions-interview>
. Along with Hicks, Morris has an iconic status among discerning comedy fans as 
an artist whose best work pushes beyond mere laugh-generation to speak 
striking, unflinching truths about the world.

Another similarity between Hicks and Morris, another reason why their elevated 
status is so perfectly preserved, is that they were both cut off in their 
prime. Hicks by death; Morris, because he just stopped doing it. OK, so he's 
been operational in the past dozen years, making aBafta-winning short film 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yqZyqV7O2AY>, co-writing the Channel 4 sitcom 
Nathan Barley <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/nathan-barley/4od>, and 
writing and directing the suicide-bombing farceFour Lions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/06/four-lions-review>. But as a 
comedy performer, there's been almost nothing since the 2001Brass Eye 
paedophile special <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RcU7FaEEzNU> that sparked 
tabloid outrage 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-71037/TV-watchdog-demands-apology-Brass-Eye-paedophile-spoof.html>
 and cemented his status as the most breathtakingly militant comic critic of 
our media-dumbshow culture.

But now he's back. First of all, making a rare stage appearance 
<http://www.chortle.co.uk/news/2014/02/16/19608/chris_morris,_live_on_stage> 
with Stewart Lee at the Royal Festival Hall last weekend, then being revealed 
as the co-star of the new series of Lee'sComedy Vehicle 
<http://www.comedy.co.uk/news/story/000001377/chris_morris_stewart_lee_comedy_vehicle_3/>
 BBC show. Morris was already script editor on the show; now he is to take over 
Armando Iannucci's onscreen role as "hostile interrogator 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sbekcRE30Iw>", posing questions to Lee between 
the show's standup segments. It's a tantalising prospect: Morris is one of the 
few men alive who can out-deadpan Lee, his bloodless poker face making the 
upward-twitching corners of Lee's mouth seem like a Coco the Clown grin by 
comparison.

So might this toe-in-the-water return to performing comedy justify hope of a 
proper Morris comeback? How our comedy, and our culture, crave a satirist with 
that fire in his belly, that moral indignation, that fearlessness and insight. 
It's a commonplace nowadays to say of this contemporary phenomenon or that 
instance of collective delirium (the royal wedding, the Olympics, the death of 
Margaret Thatcher) that they're crying out for the Brass Eye treatment. Which 
tells its own story about how toothless much mainstream "satire" has become. 
(On their 2011 tour,Punt and Dennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jan/13/punt-and-dennis-live-review> 
were advertising themselves as "kings of satire", which says it all, really.)

The likelihood is, these Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> 
Vehicle cameos will allow just a glimpse of the great man, before he retreats 
back into the shadows. Which is fair enough. He's moved on from Brass Eye, his 
interests now lie elsewhere. Maybe we should be glad Morris isn't hanging 
around, diluting the industrial strength of his burlesque, sullying the 
memories. But I won't be able to look at that 
inscrutable-bordering-on-malevolent mug on the small screen without wishing 
Morris was back wreaking his devilment on Britain circa 2014, which needs his 
brand of tough love now more urgently than ever.

Three comedy events to look out for this week

Virgin Trains comedy carriage

A gimmick to promote this year's Glasgow Comedy festival, the "comedy 
carriage" finds eight standups performing to passengers aboard the 2.30pm 
London Euston to Glasgow train. Participating jokers include the Show Me the 
Funny champ Patrick Monahan and the livewire Canadian maestroPhil Nichol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/aug/08/comedy.edinburghfestival2007>.
• Thursday 27 February (virgintrains.com/comedy-festival 
<http://www.virgintrains.com/comedy-festival/>)

Tim Key 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/22/kafka-comics-standup-key-basden>

The former Edinburgh Comedy award champ and latterday Alan Partridge sidekick 
Tim Key launches his new show Single White Slut. Previous form suggests that 
this purveyor of oddball humour and gnomic comic poems will lay on something a 
mite more theatrical than static standup. The show transfers to the Arcola Tent 
after its sell-out Soho run.
• Monday 24 February to 8 March, Soho theatre <http://www.sohotheatre.com/> 
(020 7478 0100); 10 to 29 March atArcola Tent <http://www.arcolatheatre.com/> 
(020 7503 1646).

Festival of the Spoken Nerd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/25/festival-of-the-spoken-nerd-review>

A national tour is well underway for the show that unites science, maths and 
comedy, with numbers bod Matt Parker, science broadcaster Steve Mould and 
ukulele-strumming comic Helen Arney. Proofs, experiments and geek gags are 
fizzing in their test tube. Ramshackle fun for the sci-ignorant and 
sci-initiates alike.
• Tonight, Artrix, Bromsgrove (01527 577330); Friday 21 February, Trinity 
theatre, Tunbridge Wells (01892 678 678); Saturday 22 February, the Old Market, 
Brighton (01273 201800).

More comedy coverage

• Brendon Burns on Bill Hicks: 'I felt like he was speaking directly to me' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/19/brendon-burns-on-bill-hicks>

• Bill Hicks: what is his legacy? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/17/bill-hicks-what-is-his-legacy>

• Katherine Ryan, Simon Evans and John Robins dissect their comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/18/behind-joke-katherine-ryan-simon-evans-john-robins-comedy>

• The science of comedy: can humour make the world a better place? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/11/science-comedy-academics-social>
 