
With Chroma <>, which makes its Australian debut on Tuesday, the Royal 
Ballet's resident superstarWayne McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wayne-mcgregor> is giving classical ballet a 
rock'n'roll edge. Performed by theAustralian Ballet 
<https://www.australianballet.com.au/>, choreographed by McGregor and set to 
the music ofthe White Stripes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/thewhitestripes>, it combines sizzling 
guitar riffs with dazzling dance moves.

First performed at London's Covent Garden in 2006, Chroma’s first incarnation  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/nov/11/royal-ballet-chroma-review>
gathered accolades including a Laurence Olivier award and Critics' Circle 
National Dance award. Its modern mash-up style of dance is becoming 
increasingly popular all over the world. Set to the music of Radiohead,Radio 
and Juliet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/21/radio-and-juliet-perth-festival>
electrified the Perth festival this summer, whilst Christopher Bruce's highly 
acclaimed “rock ballet” Rooster, set to the music of the Rolling Stones, 
enthralled US audiences as the Washington Balletcelebrated the 50th anniversary 
of the Beatles hitting American shores 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2011/02/18/AR2011021807181.html>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2SMmL6kIx-w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2SMmL6kIx-w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2SMmL6kIx-w&media=>
 Laura Morera and Eric Underwood from the Royal Balley dance to The Hardest 
Button to Button by the White Stripes. 
Chroma juxtaposes White Stripes songs including Blue Orchid and The Hardest 
Button to Button with Mozart and Tchaikovsky compositions. It is danced on a 
minimalist set by architectJohn Pawson <http://www.johnpawson.com/>, which 
McGregor describes as "these amazing plain canvases in which anything can 
happen”. As for the dancers, McGregor says “you see the flesh move, you see the 
torsions in the bones. They are bodies pushed to the extreme in many ways, but 
also you get the more delicate intricacies. They’re so exposed; they’re very 
vulnerable in that environment.”


Speaking at the press preview on Monday, artistic director of the Australian 
BalletDavid McAllister 
<https://www.australianballet.com.au/about_us/artistic_staff/david_mcallister_am>
 said that audiences with have “the rare opportunity to see the work of three 
of the world’s most exciting choreographers of the day” and “promises something 
for all lovers of the arts”.

Sharing the bill is Jiří Kylián <http://www.jirikylian.com/>’s Mozart Double, 
Petite Mort and Sechs Tänze – contemporary ballets meshed with Mozart. There is 
also a brand-new creation from resident choreographerStephen Baynes 
<https://www.australianballet.com.au/about_us/artistic_staff/stephen_baynes> 
titled Art to Sky.

Having worked on many Hollywood movies including a stint as the movement 
director for Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, and taught Thom Yorke to 
dance for the video of Radiohead'sLotus Flower 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cfOa1a8hYP8>, McGregor has also worked with 
anthropologists and scientists. With Chroma, his experimental approach has 
created a combustible cocktail of classical and contemporary dance.

 *  Chroma is at Sydney Opera House on 29 April - 17 May and Melbourne Arts 
Centre <https://artscentremelbourne.com.au/whats-on/ballet/chroma> 6 - 14 June.
 