
The UK government is facing renewed pressure to make a full disclosure of its 
involvement in the CIA’s post-9/11 kidnap and torture programme after another 
leading Bush-era US official said suspects were held and interrogated on the 
British territory of Diego Garcia.

Lawrence Wilkerson, who was chief of staff to Colin Powell at the US state 
department, said the Indian Ocean atoll was used by theCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> as “a transit site where people were 
temporarily housed, let us say, and interrogated from time to time”.

In an interview with Vice News 
<https://news.vice.com/article/cia-interrogations-took-place-on-british-territory-of-diego-garcia-senior-bush-administration-official-says>
, Wilkerson said three US intelligence sources had informed him that the CIA 
used Diego Garcia for what he described as “nefarious activities”, with 
prisoners being held for weeks at a time.

“What I heard was more along the lines of using it as a transit location when 
perhaps other places were full or other places were deemed too dangerous or 
insecure, or unavailable at the moment,” said Wilkerson, who served under 
Powell from 2002 to 2005.

“So you might have a case where you simply go in and use a facility at Diego 
Garcia for a month or two weeks or whatever and you do your nefarious 
activities there.”

Donald Campbell, spokesman for the legal rights group Reprieve, said: “We 
already know Diego Garcia was used for CIA renditions, yet over a decade on the 
British government has yet to own up to the full part the island played in the 
CIA’s torture programme.

“Ministers have consistently claimed that no CIA detainees were held on the 
island, but Col Wilkerson’s account suggests that either they are lying or they 
have been lied to. It is high time the British government came clean over the 
part UK territory played in the CIA’s shameful torture programme.”

Diego Garcia’s population was removed during the late 1960s and early 70s and 
forced to settle on the Seychelles and Mauritius. Since then the atoll has been 
leased by the UK to the US for use as a military base.

Wilkerson is the latest of a number of well-placed officials who have said 
that after 9/11 the atoll was also used in the CIA rendition programme.

Barry McCaffrey, a retired four-star American general, has twice spoken 
publicly about the use of Diego Garcia to detain suspects.

Manfred Nowak, a former United Nations special rapporteur on torture, has said 
he has heard from reliable sources that the US held prisoners on ships in the 
Indian Ocean.

Dick Marty, a Swiss senator who led a Council of Europe investigation into the 
CIA’s use of European territory and air space, said he received confirmation of 
the use of the atoll. He later said he received the assistance of some CIA 
officers during his investigation.

There also is a wealth of circumstantial evidence to suggest that Diego Garcia 
was used in the so-called rendition programme.

There have been reports that an al-Qaida terrorist known as Hambali 
<http://projects.nytimes.com/guantanamo/detainees/10019-hambali-riduan-isamuddin->
, who was suspected of involvement in the 2002 Bali bombing in which 202 people 
died, was taken to Diego Garcia to be interrogated following his capture in 
August 2003. Areport in Time magazine 
<http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,493256,00.html> quoted a 
regional intelligence official as saying he was being interrogated there two 
months after his detention.

An American detention facility of some sort is known to exist on Diego Garcia. 
In 1984 a review by the US government’s general accounting office of 
construction work on the atoll reported that a detention facility had been 
completed the previous December.

According to answers given to parliamentary questions, British military 
officials – who are nominally in command of the atoll – re-designated another 
building as a prison three months after the September 11 attacks.

In the past, Tony Blair, as prime minister, and Jack Straw, as foreign 
secretary, both denied the use of the atoll during the rendition programme, but 
these denials were contradicted by David Miliband, one of Straw’s successors, 
whotold parliament 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200708/cmhansrd/cm080221/debtext/80221-0008.htm>
 in February 2008 that information had “just come to light” to show that two 
rendition flights stopped there to refuel.

That statement was made after human rights organisations obtained flight data 
showing that two aircraft closely involved in the CIA’s rendition programme had 
flown into and out of Diego Garcia.

A number of sources in the US have said there were a number of references to 
the CIA’s use of Diego Garcia in thereport on the agency’s use of torture 
<http://www.intelligence.senate.gov/study2014/executive-summary.pdf> that was 
published last month by the US Senate intelligence committee.

Since then the UK Foreign Office has evaded a series of media inquiries about 
Diego Garcia and about the report, and has instead responded with a stock 
response.

Asked about Wilkerson’s comments, a spokesperson issued the same statement: 
“The US government has assured us that apart from the two cases in 2002 there 
have been no other instances in which US intelligence flights landed in the UK, 
our overseas territories, or the crown dependencies with a detainee on board 
since 11 September 2001.”

The Foreign Office has also performed a number of twists and turns when asked 
questions about the fate of flight and immigration records relating to Diego 
Garcia.

Last July the Foreign Office minister Mark Simmonds told 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmhansrd/cm140708/text/140708w0001.htm>
 Andrew Tyrie, the Tory MP who has been investigating the UK’s involvement in 
the rendition programme for almost a decade, that daily records were 
“incomplete” due to water damage.

The following day, however, a Foreign Office official was photographed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/12/uk-cia-torture-flights-rendition-programme>
 in Whitehall carrying a batch of emails that showed that Scotland Yard 
detectives had taken possession of “monthly log showing flight details” and 
“daily records [obscured] month of alleged rendition”.

A few days later, Simmonds told MPs 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-question/Commons/2014-07-10/205172/>
 that “previously wet paper records have been dried out”, and that “no flight 
records have been lost as a result of the water damage”.

Two months after that, the Foreign Office told the Commons foreign affairs 
committee that a number of immigration records relating to civilians landing on 
Diego Garcia “have been damaged to the point of no longer being useful”.
 