
The @guardiancities <https://www.instagram.com/guardiancities/> Instagram 
account curates the best urban photographers from around the globe, and this 
year weâ€™ve seen an amazing array of images from IGers who love to capture their 
city â€“ including those who participated in our live weeks inJakarta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/guardian-jakarta-live>, Lagos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/guardian-lagos-week> and Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/guardian-canada-week>. Hereâ€™s a 
selection of some of the best.

Follow us <https://www.instagram.com/guardiancities/>, join the community and 
tag your own city shots with #guardiancities.

Hong Kong

Hi everyone, this is @vdubl and I'll be taking over the @guardiancities feed 
this week to show you my city of #HongKong. While building facades like these 
are ubiquitous, only 30% of land in Hong Kong are developed - the remaining 70% 
are rural landscapes, mountainous terrains, agricultural land and wetlands. 
Follow my takeover all week on #vdubl_guardiancities. 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/_eyM39DbX0/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Dec 19, 2015 at 9:00am 
PST

Rotterdam, the Netherlands

@vincentdemmenie lives in #Rotterdam. "When you love architecture you probably 
also love Rotterdam," he says. "Sadly a big part of the city was bombed during 
the second world war, but rebuilding resulted in a very varied architectural 
landscape. When I wander through the city I find a lot of hidden gems and new 
cool buildings (as well as all the awesome bridges and underground stations 
Rotterdam has to offer). Other #igersRotterdam he recommends include 
@jeroenvandam, @instabruijn, @claireonline, @veer74, and @igobythename. Who 
else would you add to the list? #guardiancities 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/_o_SM4jbfv/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Dec 23, 2015 at 8:07am 
PST

Barcelona, Spain


@saz444 lives in #Barcelona. "I love so many things about Barcelona. The 
history, the relaxed Mediterranean lifestyle, the constant sun, the great wine 
and food, the open-minded community, and the beautiful mixture of architectural 
styles that makes the city one of a kind. I try to capture the true soul of 
Barcelona. It sounds cliche, but I like to think that my photos speak to both 
foreigners and Barcelona natives alike." Other #igersbarcelona he recommends 
following include @stoptheroc @nicanorgarcia @lauraponts @bcndesapareguda 
@ovunno and @bensroom. Who would you recommend following in Barcelona? 
#guardiancities <https://www.instagram.com/p/BBaW8gJjbSE/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Feb 5, 2016 at 8:48am PST

Jakarta, Indonesia

This is @ijoeel and I'm sharing pictures and stories of my lovely hometown 
#Jakarta this week for #GuardianJakarta. Tanjung Priok railway station is one 
of the oldest stations in Jakarta. It was built in the 1950s and it's still in 
operation. It is located across the Tanjung Priok Port, which is the main port 
of Jakarta. . Share your own photos of Jakarta with #GuardianJakarta 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BNOzOXUh3uR/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Nov 25, 2016 at 3:21am 
PST

Oradea, Romania

@andreeaiancuphotography lives in #Oradea, Romania. "I love Oradea's beautiful 
#ArtNouveau architecture," she says. "I also love to observe the city evolving 
over the years and discover new corners that I didn't notice before. I'm 
curious to see how it will look in 5, 10 or even 20 years from now." Other 
#igersromania based in Oradea she recommends include @alisaanton and 
@brigittetohm. Which other IGers from cities in #Romania would you recommend? 
#guardiancities <https://www.instagram.com/p/BDGCj9gDbSM/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Mar 18, 2016 at 5:28am 
PDT

Boston, US

@k__h__r/ lives in #Boston. "I love that Boston is full of all sorts of 
different people who all love their city. As a street photographer there is 
never a dull day in this city with the proud people that inhabit it." Other 
#igersboston she recommends following include @subciity, @lhermida and 
@distinctsight. Who else from Boston do you follow? #guardiancities 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BGJui-8DbXR/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Jun 2, 2016 at 5:24am PDT

Lisbon, Portugal


@martadalmeidaribeiro lives in #Lisbon. "What I most love in Lisbon is, 
definitely, the atmosphere. People are extremely kind and the city is full of 
beautiful details. What I always try to show is the things you walk by every 
day but are too busy to notice. I like to pay attention to the little things, 
little details, everywhere." Other #igersLisbon she recommends include 
@anitados7oficios, @fabiobf, @voodoolx, @sejkko and @kitato. Who else would you 
recommend from Lisbon? #guardiancities 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BBnMWWsDbVg/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Feb 10, 2016 at 8:25am 
PST

Lagos, Nigeria


This week @oluwatamo is taking over @guardiancities for #GuardianLagos. Here a 
man carries large plastic containers during a fuel scarcity in #Lagos. Share 
your own photos of the city with #GuardianLagos. #whatiseeeveryday 
#dailyaesthestics #nigeria #oluwatamo #guardiancities 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BCN24P4DbWm/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Feb 25, 2016 at 8:48am 
PST

London, UK

@elensham lives in #London. "I love that each area in London is different and 
has its own charm, I'm always looking for new places to photograph." Other 
#igersLondon she recommends include @roselladegori @whatalexloves and 
@whatinasees. Who would you add to the list? #guardiancities 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BCDfTpzjbay/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Feb 21, 2016 at 8:10am 
PST

Shanghai, China

@panvelvet lives in #Shanghai, where he likes to capture images both on the 
ground and above the city, particularly in the Bund area. "I'm really in love 
with Shanghai, I canâ€™t stop exploring new areas ... I always try to capture 
different objects, but mainly keep focusing on the people of the concrete 
jungle." Other #igersshanghai he recommends include @reycanlasjr - who else 
would you recommend? #guardiancities <https://www.instagram.com/p/BEGx_kUjbRr/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Apr 12, 2016 at 8:54am 
PDT

Vienna, Austria

@tagazd lives in #Vienna. "I love the idea of elegance and purity that Vienna 
conveys and the ability to combine it with the complexity of its cultural 
background," he says. "I try to lay bare the essence and the peculiarities of a 
city, suggesting a new way to feel it emotionally." Other #igersvienna he 
recommends include @misterflopatrick and @somekindadavid - who would you add to 
the list? #guardiancities <https://www.instagram.com/p/BETeSwtjbXI/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Apr 17, 2016 at 7:12am 
PDT

Singapore

Hello, this is @misterkitt from the city of #Singapore! ðŸ‡¸ðŸ‡¬ I'm taking over 
@guardiancities this week and I am honored to show you guys around. Let's start 
off with one of my favorite spots to shoot in the city. The Esplanade Bridge 
was opened in 1997 to provide faster access between Marina Centre and the CBD. 
Till today, it has stood as one of the most iconic structures at downtown 
Marina Bay. Follow my takeover all week on #misterkitt_guardiancities 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BMgYwkJh-PT/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Nov 7, 2016 at 2:45am PST

SÃ£o Paulo, Brazil


@lahpaschoalli lives in #SÃ£oPaulo. "SÃ£o Paulo is a large metropolis with its 
own magic and excitement. I learned to observe this bustling daily life of the 
city, with its historic architecture and so many people coming and going. I 
love my city for this intense movement of people, as well as the old and modern 
architecture." Other #igerssaopaulo she recommends include @d.ede @mel.ns 
@cesinha @lemesant and @yuribittar. Who else would you recommend? 
#guardiancities <https://www.instagram.com/p/BNr5kImhyz7/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Dec 6, 2016 at 10:34am 
PST

Cyberjaya, Malaysia

@syarifsyahab lives in #Cyberjaya, one of the youngest cities in Malaysia. 
"Some people call it "The Silicon Valley of Malaysia", since the city is mostly 
home to modern offices and university campuses," he says. "The city is less 
crowded compared to the capital city, Kuala Lumpur. This picture was taken near 
the Fisabilillah Mosque in Cyberjaya. I am pretty sure the red textile was from 
the curtain, or carpet from the office near Mosque." #guardiancities 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BMeUWgqhhiw/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Nov 6, 2016 at 7:28am PST

Warsaw, Poland

This is @urbanentdecker_ and I'm taking over @guardiancities this week to show 
you my city #Warsaw. Follow my takeover all week on 
#guardiancities_urbanentdecker_ Warsaw old town was founded in the 13th century 
as the prince's castle it is surrounded by walls. During World War II, 90% of 
it was destroyed, but thanks to its excellent restoration, in 1980 it was 
granted the status of a UNESCO World Heritage List. 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BIUvNqegNWu/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Jul 26, 2016 at 5:04am 
PDT

Beirut, Lebanon

Hello ! This is @karliseverywhere and I'm taking over @guardiancities this 
week to show you my city ðŸ‡±ðŸ‡§ #Beirut (@LiveloveBeirut) Saifi Village also 
known as Le Quartier des Arts due to its numerous art galleries, antique store, 
artisan shops, and specialty boutiques, is a residential upscale neighborhood 
in Beirut. The village has a vernacular style that seeks to be somehow 
reminiscent of French colonial buildings. Locals and tourists visit the 
neighborhood to enjoy a walk in the narrow streets, sit in the square or visit 
some art galleries and antique stores while others enjoy taking artistic 
pictures of the colorful houses. Follow my takeover on 
#Karliseverywhere_GuardianCities Tag your pictures on #GuardianCities 
#architecture#perspective#mytinyatlas#discoverAround#liveloveBeirut 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BNb-JWPhFmE/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Nov 30, 2016 at 6:06am 
PST

Copenhagen, Denmark

@kindofcamila lives in #Copenhagen. "It's a city that caught my heart in many 
ways," she explains. "The best way to get to know the city is by renting a 
bicycle and getting lost on the streets. The colourful houses, canals and 
bridges around the Copenhagen are a good representation of the urban landscape 
- the city is mostly flat and its buildings are not so tall, which creates a 
sensation of open space." Other #igerscopenhagen she recommends include 
@mathiasmilton @somewhereincopenhagen @alonavibe @meetmartin and @nana_ha. Who 
else do you follow from the city? #guardiancities 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BN7FHmBhNT-/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Dec 12, 2016 at 8:04am 
PST

Beijing, China

@motakh lives in #Beijing. "Watching a city grow is a magical experience," he 
says. "This photo was taken in #Sanlitun. It's one of the places that I visit 
often. Watching people come and go and the sun rising and setting, you find 
peace and comfort and slow your pace down. What I really love so much about 
Beijing is its tenderness. Born and bred here, it's a city that makes me smile 
each and every day. It's a city full of luck and wonders." Other #igersbeijing 
he recommends include @fei_miniberry and @ericube23. Who would you add to the 
list? #guardiancities <https://www.instagram.com/p/BALGpPLDbea/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Jan 5, 2016 at 2:05pm PST

Toronto, Canada


As part of #GuardianCanada week, we're happy to feature @s_aamer from 
#Toronto. "What I love about Toronto is that it is one of the most diverse 
cities that represents multicultural heritage," Aamir says. "I love the fact 
that within an hour radius of Toronto, you can enjoy sandy beaches, country 
living and the suburbs. I also love capturing my city's beauty throughout each 
season." Other #igerstoronto he recommends include @bora.vs.bora, @mindz.eye, 
@eyehigh and @abdullaaaah__. Who else from the city do you enjoy following? If 
you live in a Canadian city tag your urban shots and stories of your city this 
week with #GuardianCanada <https://www.instagram.com/p/BHmhEV4AN8G/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Jul 8, 2016 at 6:16am PDT

Gold Coast, Australia

Hi, @ladybreakfast here for my takeover of @guardiancities this week to show 
you the Gold Coast, Australia. A slightly different architectural take on the 
beach theme; I find this facade satisfyingly soothing. Follow along with me all 
week at #ladybreakfast_guardiancities. 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BBH5tP0DbQq/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Jan 29, 2016 at 4:46am 
PST

Seoul, South Korea

@seoul_stateofmind lives in #Seoul, #SouthKorea. "I love how this city strives 
for rapid economic growth yet importantly keeps its own traditional aspects. 
This can be very much reflected on the cityscapes where there is a constant 
juxtaposition between old and modern buildings." Other #igersseoul he 
recommends include @raonkk and @robinleeseoul. Who else from the city would you 
recommend? #guardiancities <https://www.instagram.com/p/BAmRrG9jbXv/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Jan 16, 2016 at 3:21am 
PST

Porto, Portugal

@viveroporto lives in and photographs #Porto. "I love my city for its people, 
and for the fact that despite not being a big city, there is always a lot going 
on. I try to capture the real essence of the city, life on the streets, and the 
magic and beauty of the river and sea that is always there." Other #igersporto 
she recommends include @joao.bernardino, @catarinapaninho, @_diogooliveira_ and 
@hugofortuna. Do you know any others? #guardiancities 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BEbeUbdjbZR/>

A photo posted by GuardianCities (@guardiancities) on Apr 20, 2016 at 9:46am 
PDT

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 