
Bucking the trend for charity tracks and X Factor winners, this year’s 
Christmas No 1 has been revealed asClean Bandit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/feb/13/clean-bandit-cleverest-most-stupid-band-in-pop>
’s tribute to single mothers, Rockabye – a dancehall-inspired song featuring
Sean Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/05/sean-paul-drake-kanye-dancehall-bieber>
 and Anne-Marie.

The classical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/01/clean-bandit-pop-classical> 
crossover group who formed at Cambridge University managed to stave off 
competition from Brits critics choice winnerRag’n’Bone Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/08/ragnbone-man-wins-2017-brits-critics-choice-award>
, One Direction’sLouis Tomlinson <http://www.onedirectionmusic.com/gb/home> and 
pop groupLittle Mix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/07/little-mix-the-prime-minister-should-dress-like-ru-paul>
 – a remarkable feat bearing in mind the track entered the chart nine weeks 
ago, before climbing to the top spot for a seven-week reign.

Clean Bandit: 'We're the cleverest and most stupid band in pop'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/feb/13/clean-bandit-cleverest-most-stupid-band-in-pop>
Rockabye – dedicated to “all the single mums out there / Going through 
frustration” – is one of 2016’s biggest hits across downloads and streams, with 
combined chart sales of 589,000.

“To have been No 1 for seven weeks is something amazing in its own right that 
we are all incredibly proud of, but to now be Christmas No 1 is mind-blowing,”
Clean Bandit <https://www.theguardian.com/music/clean-bandit> said in a 
statement. “It’s something we never imagined would happen with Rockabye when we 
were writing and recording it. Thanks to everyone who has made this happen!”


Speaking about the track’s poignant lyrics, guitarist and keyboard player Jack 
Patterson, told the OfficialCharts.com: “It’s weird actually. My mum has got 
this theory about the song, about “Rockabye, baby” being about Jesus, and that 
Jesus is the baby. She’s talking about this woman who’s looking after the child 
on her own and saying it’s a bit like Mary … and Joseph is kind of there, but 
not.”

In recent years, a mix of charity tracks and Simon Cowell-created pop acts 
have taken the top spot, with theLewisham and Greenwich NHS Choir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/25/justin-bieber-beaten-by-nhs-choir-to-uk-christmas-no-1>
 at No 1  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/25/justin-bieber-beaten-by-nhs-choir-to-uk-christmas-no-1>
in 2015, X Factor’sBen Haenow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/21/x-factor-winner-ben-haenow-wins-race-christmas-no-1>
 in 2014, andSam Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/16/sam-bailey-dropped-syco-14-months-x-factor-win>
 in 2013.

Elsewhere in the charts, Rag’n’Bone Man is at No 2 with Human, One Direction’s 
Louis Tomlinson and Steve Aoki slip down to No 3 with Just Hold On, Little 
Mix’s new single Touch jumps 19 places to No 4, andMariah Carey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mariahcarey>’s classic track All I Want For 
Christmas Is You rounds off the Top 5. Other vintage Christmas tracks to 
re-enter the top 40 thanks to streaming services include the Pogues’ and Kirsty 
MacColl’sFairytale of New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/06/fairytale-new-york-pogues-christmas-anthem>
, in at No 15, Shakin’ Stevens’ Merry Christmas Everyone at No 22 and Chris 
Rea’s Driving Home For Christmas at No 26 – his highest chart position to date.

Rangers football supporters delivered the highest charting fan-led campaign 
this week: Glad All Over by theDave Clark Five 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/dec/17/pop-pictures-dave-clark-five>
 is back in the Top 40 at Number 31 in support of striker Joe Garner.

Top of the album chart are Michael Ball and Alfie Boe whose record Together 
had a huge pre-Christmas surge, with 98% of their sales being physical copies. 
Combined sales to date are 466,000.

“It’s a dream come true,” Ball and Boe told OfficialCharts.com. “There’s only 
one thing better than having a No 1 album and that’s having a Christmas No 1 
album. A huge thanks to everyone who bought the album. Our hearts go out to you 
all for Christmas. We hope we entertain you with the album for Christmas and 
lots of love to everyone.”
 