 The Jamaican record producer Clement "Sir Coxsone" Dodd, who has died of a 
heart attack aged 72, nurtured the career of nearly every internationally 
renowned reggae artist. He was one of the first to record local talent, and an 
integral force in the development of ska. Having been involved in the 
development of reggae for more than 50 years, his contribution to the evolution 
of the island's music, from his Studio One recording facility, is simply 
enormous. It was at Studio One that he cut the first recordings by Bob Marley 
and the Wailers.
Dodd was born in Kingston, spent some formative years in the parish of Saint 
Thomas, and returned to the capital to learn cabinet making and train as an 
automobile mechanic. Dodd's father was a contractor-cum-mason who helped build 
the Carib Theatre, a landmark building in the Kingston Cross Roads business 
district. In the early 1950s, Dodd's mother ran the Nanny's Corner restaurant 
at the downtown junction of Lawes Street and Ladd Lane. There customers were 
entertained by the sound, if not the presence, of Billy Eckstein, Sarah 
Vaughan, Lionel Hampton and Louis Jordan wafted out of the family Morphy 
Richards radio.

In the early 1950s, Dodd worked as a farm labourer in the United States. 
Having seen the money being made at outdoor block parties he started thinking 
about an entry into the music business.

From the late 1940s, the Jamaican music scene was based around the sound 
systems, huge sets of portable equipment that played rhythm and blues at 
open-air dance events. In the early 1950s the leading sound was Duke Reid The 
Trojan, established by former policeman Arthur Reid, a friend of Dodd's 
parents. Dodd did guest spots, spinning his records on Reid's set, but then 
became Reid's biggest competitor with the Sir Coxsone's Downbeat sound system. 
It took its name from a noted Yorkshire cricketer whose batting skills Dodd was 
said to emulate.

Dodd had a superior selection of R&B and rare jazz discs; he also had toaster 
Count Machuki, a wisecracking DJ. Several other later famous figures worked for 
Dodd in this early phase. These included Prince Buster, a former boxer who 
staved off attacks from rival sound systems before striking out on his own in 
1957, and Lee "Scratch" Perry, who began working for Dodd as a vocalist, talent 
scout and general dogsbody in 1961.

In 1956, Dodd began recording artists such as Bunny and Skully at Federal 
studio, usually with R&B echoes. An early hit, Theophilus Beckford's Easy 
Snappin, had a different beat, pointing the way to the ska that Dodd would 
champion by the end of the decade. By the early 1960s, he was rulingJamaica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jamaica> with ska hits by Toots and the 
Maytals, the Gaylads and the Skatalites, Jamaica's premier ska group.

In October 1963, on the site of a former nightclub, The End, Dodd opened the 
Jamaica Recording and Publishing Studio - always called Studio One - close to 
the Carib Theatre at 13 Brentford Road. He signed Bob Marley and the Wailers, 
and gave them immeasurable guidance, selecting Marley as leader and scoring 
several number ones with them. He acted as something of a surrogate father to 
Marley during this period, even giving him a place to live on the premises.

When rock-steady briefly supplanted ska in 1966, Dodd found Duke Reid 
overshadowing him, but when the new reggae style emerged in 1968, Coxsone was 
back on top with enthralling recordings by the Heptones, the Abyssinians, Bob 
Andy and Marcia Griffiths. The organist Jackie Mittoo, who arranged much of 
this material, also scored instrumental hits of his own.

In the early 1970s, Dodd advanced Dennis Brown's career and made forays into 
dub. Although recuts of his rhythms recorded at his rivals, Channel One, 
subsequently found greater favour, he beat them at their own game with a Studio 
One renaissance in 1979, voicing new material with proto-dance hall singers 
such as Sugar Minott, Johnny Osbourne and Freddy McGregor, plus DJs Lone Ranger 
and Michigan and Smiley.

Then armed bandits attacked the Brentford Road headquarters. Dodd transferred 
Studio One to Brooklyn, New York, where he recorded during the 1980s and early 
1990s. The music included dancehall works, with Frankie Paul and JD Smoothe 
sometimes voicing on new mixes of old rhythms. Reissues by Boston's Heartbeat 
records also kept his vintage material in focus.

In 1991, he received the Order of Distinction, Jamaica's third highest honour. 
Following his mother's death, Dodd moved back to Kingston in 1998 and reopened 
the Brentford Road for new recordings with veterans and young talent alike, 
while reissues and a documentary DVD released by London's Soul Jazz records 
brought Studio One's popularity to an all-time high. Last week, the Jamaican 
government renamed Brentford Road Studio One Boulevard.

Throughout it all, Dodd remained an avid music lover and an astute 
businessman. For the past few years, he had been plagued by arthritis. His wife 
Norma and several children survive him.

Â· Clement Seymour Dodd, record producer and entrepreneur, born January 26 
1932; died May 4 2004
 