
Millions of pounds of climate change aid to Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> has been returned unspent to the 
British government following a long-running dispute over its delivery.

Academics and climate change experts claim the return of £13m to the 
Department for International Development (DfID) over the past year, through the 
World Bank, represents a failure by the UK to recognise Bangladesh – one of the 
world’s most climate-vulnerable countries – as an expert on the issue.

News of the unspent cash comes as the world gathers in Morocco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/marrakech-climate-talks-giving-the-fossil-fuel-lobby-a-seat-at-the-table>
 for the first climate change talks under the Paris agreement.

The money was part of a £75m pledge made to Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/feb/20/climate-funds-developing-nations>
 by Britain in 2008 to provide developing countries with climate finance.

DfID decided that, rather than giving the money directly to the government, it 
should be channelled through the World Bank as part of the multi-donor
Bangladesh Climate Change Resilience Fund <https://www.bccrf-bd.org/> 
established in May 2010.The Bangladeshi government opposed the move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/feb/15/bangladesh-world-bank-climate-finance>
, initially refusing to accept the donation amid concerns that the World Bank 
would attach unfavourable “strings and conditions”, and there were protests in 
Dhaka about the bank’s involvement. However, donations to the fund were later 
accepted.

Joseph Hanlon, a visiting fellow in international development at the London 
School of Economics, said the unspent money was indicative of a failure by 
donors to trust Bangladeshis, who are “ahead of the curve” in climate change 
mitigation. He accused DfID and other donors of wanting to portray Bangaldeshis 
as “victims”, and of insisting they know better.

Marrakech climate talks: giving the fossil fuel lobby a seat at the table
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/marrakech-climate-talks-giving-the-fossil-fuel-lobby-a-seat-at-the-table>
“Bangladesh has long had a struggle with the World Bank,” said Hanlon. “But 
Bangladeshis are very experienced. The level of expertise in terms of engineers 
and scientists is spectacular. They have been pushing against climate change 
for 20 years. They have led developing countries in negotiations on climate 
change. Yet the USA, DfID, and the other donors kept saying, ‘We know better 
than you.’”

As co-author of the forthcoming book Bangladesh Confronts Climate Change, 
Hanlon has charted how scientists, politicians and communities in the country 
have tackled the issue through measures such as raising the land to match sea 
level rise, and bringing down cyclone deaths. “Bangladesh is poor and 
vulnerable and needs this money,” he said.

Saleemul Huq, director of the International Centre for Climate Change and 
Development in Dhaka, said it was a mistake for donors, including DfID, to set 
up a fund through the World Bank. Huq said: “The bank didn’t work with the 
Bangladeshi government, they did their own thing. There were demonstrations in 
the streets about why the World Bank should take that money from a developing 
country to manage the scheme.”

The Bangladeshi government operates its own climate fund, the Bangladesh 
Climate Change Trust fund <http://www.bcct.gov.bd/> (BCCTF).

“It was a mistake for donors to set up a separate fund,” said Huq. “It’s like 
saying we don’t trust you and we’re not giving you the money – that’s a bad 
message from the beginning. What they should have done is said, ‘We are giving 
it to the government trust fund but with strings attached – it has to be 
monitored and evaluated.’”

Huq said differences of opinion existed between the banks and the government 
over which projects to fund.

Last year, DfID’s annual review 
<http://iati.dfid.gov.uk/iati_documents/5005829.odt> (odf) of the Bangladesh 
climate programme in Bangladesh highlighted “ongoing challenges” and tensions 
within BCCRF. The upshot was a decision by the World Bank and contributing 
donors to close the fund in June 2017.

The BCCRF started with a pledged $125m (£101m), according to the World Bank. 
At one point, this had increased to $188m.

DfID’s report said: “The lack of understanding between donors and the World 
Bank on the operations of the bank’s trust fund model led to much of the 
tension between donors and the bank over the slow delivery of BCCRF.”

A lack of commitment by the government of Bangladesh had also hampered 
delivery of the fund, according to the report, which went on to speculate that 
“this might be explained in part by competition from the nationally owned 
BCCTF”. DfID’s review, which highlighted corruption and fraud as a “high risk” 
in the country, also made the point that the fund was at risk due to political 
instability in Bangladesh the previous year.

A DfID spokesman said: “No UK funds have been lost in the closure of the 
Bangladesh Climate Change Resilience Fund and DfID’s investment in protecting 
Bangladesh from climate change has not been affected. Projects started under 
the fund are protecting some of the poorest and most vulnerable people from 
weather shocks and will continue until their planned end date.


 “The UK remains fully committed to helping the people of Bangladesh build 
their resilience to the devastating floods and cyclones which hit the country, 
helping to save lives, homes and schools over the coming decades.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fclimate-finance-dispute-bangladesh-returns-13-million-uk-aid-world-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc15a59291af66379ba6d1205de9161f7bb863470%2F0_0_4801_2882%2F4801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20finance%20dispute%20prompts%20Bangladesh%20to%20return%20%C2%A313m%20of%20UK%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fclimate-finance-dispute-bangladesh-returns-13-million-uk-aid-world-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20finance%20dispute%20prompts%20Bangladesh%20to%20return%20%C2%A313m%20of%20UK%20aid&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fclimate-finance-dispute-bangladesh-returns-13-million-uk-aid-world-bank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc15a59291af66379ba6d1205de9161f7bb863470%2F0_0_4801_2882%2F4801.jpg>
 Villagers walk on a dried-up river bed in Satkhira, Bangladesh, in 2015. 
Photograph: Zakir Hossain Chowdhury / Barcro 
A spokesman for the Bangladeshi high commission in London suggested relations 
between the World Bank and the government had soured after the bank pulled out 
of a £764m project to build Bangladesh’s largest bridge, thePadma Bridge project
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-18655846>, citing corruption 
concerns.

He said: “There were issues over the World Bank over accusations they were 
making. There are a few issues that the prime minister is very strict about – 
like there should not be strings attached [to aid]. The PM feels very strongly 
that we will only take deals that will help. We are becoming stronger in our 
dealing with the international community.”

In a statement, the World Bank confirmed the BCCRF had been closed down after 
a joint decision by donors and the bank.

“[The unspent money] could not be spent on activities by a December 2016 
deadline,” said the statement. “This money was refunded back to the donors 
because they wanted to use it for other purposes and asked for refunds. The 
refund process for all donors is almost complete.

“The government of Bangladesh chaired the management committee running BCCRF 
and decisions on projects were made by this committee and not the donors alone. 
The fund was approving projects that passed certain basic criteria/standards 
and approved by the government of Bangladesh. Projects that were not considered 
well-designed by the management committee did not get approved.

 “Following a review of BCCRF, the donors and the bank jointly decided not to 
extend the trusteeship, and communicated the desire for strategic planning for 
a pipeline of climate financed projects.”
 