
Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is set 
to cause a refugee crisis of “unimaginable scale”, according to senior military 
figures, who warn that global warming is the greatest security threat of the 
21st century and that mass migration will become the “new normal”.

The generals said the impacts of climate change were already factors in the 
conflicts driving a current crisis of migration into Europe, having been linked 
to theArab Spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2011/mar/22/middle-east-protest-interactive-timeline>
, thewar in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/02/global-warming-worsened-syria-drought-study>
 and theBoko Haram terrorist insurgency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/adam-smith-international-partner-zone/2015/dec/05/climate-change-has-exacerbated-poverty-in-nigeria>
.

Military <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/military> leaders have long warned 
that global warming could multiply and accelerate security threats around the 
world by provoking conflicts and migration. They are now warning that immediate 
action is required.

“Climate change is the greatest security threat of the 21st century,” said Maj 
Gen Munir Muniruzzaman, chairman of theGlobal Military Advisory Council on 
climate change <http://gmaccc.org/> and a former military adviser to the 
president of Bangladesh. He said one metre of sea level rise will flood 20% of 
his nation. “We’re going to see refugee problems on an unimaginable scale, 
potentially above 30 million people.”

Previously, Bangladesh’s finance minister, Abul Maal Abdul Muhith, called on 
Britain and other wealthy countries toaccept millions of displaced people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/nov/30/rich-west-climate-change>.

Brig Gen Stephen Cheney, a member of the US Department of State’s foreign 
affairs policy board and CEO of the American Security Project, said: “Climate 
change could lead to a humanitarian crisis of epic proportions. We’re already 
seeing migration of large numbers of people around the world because of food 
scarcity, water insecurity and extreme weather, and this is set to become the 
new normal.

Trump’s climate denial is just one of the forces that point towards war | 
George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/donald-trump-climate-change-war>
“Climate change impacts are also acting as an accelerant of instability in 
parts of the world on Europe’s doorstep, including the Middle East and Africa,” 
Cheney said. “There are direct links to climate change in the Arab Spring, the 
war in Syria, and the Boko Haram terrorist insurgency in sub-Saharan Africa.”

After Donald Trump, who has called climate change a hoax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/climate-change-a-chinese-plot-beijing-gives-donald-trump-a-history-lesson>
, won the US presidential election in November, Cheney said he expectedsenior 
military officials to impress upon Trump 
<http://www.toledoblade.com/local/2016/11/10/Leaders-at-U-N-climate-talks-aim-to-convince-Trump-to-join-forces.html>
 the grave threat posed to national security by global warming. “I’ve got to 
believe there are enough folks on the national security side that we can make a 
dent in this.”

R Adm Neil Morisetti, a former commander of the UK maritime forces and the 
UK’s climate and energy security envoy, said: “Climate change is a strategic 
security threat that sits alongside others like terrorism and state-on-state 
conflict, but it also interacts with these threats. It is complex and 
challenging; this is not a concern for tomorrow, the impacts are playing out 
today.”

Morisetti said climate change would mean the UK military will be deployed more 
often to conflict and disaster zones. The military leaders were speaking ahead 
of anevent in London 
<https://www.chathamhouse.org/event/security-and-climate-change-are-we-living-age-consequences>
 on Thursday.

In September, a coalition of 25 US military and national security experts, 
including former advisers to Ronald Reagan and George W Bush, warned that
climate change poses a “significant risk to US national security 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/military-experts-climate-change-significant-security-risk>
 and international security” that requires more attention from the US federal 
government.

In 2015, a UK foreign office report made a stark assessment of the dangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/13/climate-change-threat-serious-as-nuclear-war-uk-minister>
 posed by unchecked global warming, including very large risks to global food 
security, increased risk of terrorism as states fail, and unprecedented 
migration that would overwhelm international assistance.

“Countries are going to pay for climate change one way or another,” said 
Cheney. “The best way to pay for it is by tackling the root causes of climate 
change and cutting greenhouse gas emissions. If we do not, the national 
security impacts will be increasingly costly and challenging.”
 