
Turkish officials’ claims that the prime suspect for the New Year’s Eve attack 
on the Reina nightclub in Istanbul is a Uighur –a member of the largely Muslim, 
Turkic-speaking, group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/istanbul-nightclub-attacker-ethnic-uighur-raid-selimpasa>
 – deserves to be taken seriously.

The killer’s assumed name, a nom de guerre, is one clue. It was given on 
Thursday by Turkish media asAbu Muhammed Horasani 
<http://%20http//www.hurriyetdailynews.com/istanbul-nightclub-attacker-identified-turkish-fm.aspx?pageID=238&nid=1081120>
, the second part meaning “the man from Horasan”.

Istanbul nightclub attacker is ethnic Uighur, officials believe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/istanbul-nightclub-attacker-ethnic-uighur-raid-selimpasa>
Horasan, or more usually Khorasan, is the name given by Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> and other Islamic extremists to an 
area that includes much of central Asia, Afghanistan, Pakistan and, less 
frequently, western China. Those regions have substantial Uighur diaspora 
communities. Though it may seem odd for clandestine operatives, it is almost 
unknown for a fighter to use a name giving a false place of origin.

A second factor is that Isis, which has claimed and is almost certainly 
responsible for the attack, has a history of using extremists from 
Turkic-language speaking communities, such as the Uighurs, for terrorist 
operations inTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>.

The network, behind the attack on Istanbul’s Atatürk airport in June last 
year, appears to have included members from Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan, both 
majority Turkic-language speaking countries. More than 25 men and women 
detained by police in Izmir, west Turkey, werereported to be from Syria, the 
Russian Republic of Dagestan, western China and Kyrgyzstan. 
<http://%20http//www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-36670576> Though not claimed by 
Isis, that attack was attributed to the terrorist group by Turkish officials.

The Reina atrocity shows how deeply Islamic fanaticism has taken hold in 
Turkey | Elif Shafak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/reina-islamic-fanaticism-turkey-new-years-eve-massacre>
Using attackers from Turkic-language communities in Turkey helps logistically, 
making terrorists less visible and vulnerable, but serves an important 
propaganda purpose too, sending the message that even those who share both 
faith and language with the Turks can be turned against them.

Isis do this systematically and not just in Turkey. Almost everywhere attacks 
involve a target nation’s own citizens. French nationals are sent to kill other 
French men and women; Egyptians against Egyptians and Bangladeshis against 
Bangladeshis.

Isis also has a substantial number of Uighur recruits, assets that will be 
deployed in a wave of terrorism likely to intensify as the group’s strongholds 
shrink and it begins to fragment.

Estimates vary as to quite how many Uighurs have made the long journey from 
the Xinjang province of China, where most live, to join Isis. Security 
officials in the west and international experts at the UN and elsewhere have 
challenged Chinese official claims of there being 300 or more Uighurs with the 
group.Isis documents  
<https://na-production.s3.amazonaws.com/documents/ISIS-Files.pdf>indicate that 
between mid-2013 and mid-2014, 114 Uighurs, almost all from China, joined the 
group.

The Guardian view on Turkey: multiple traumas, immense courage | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/the-guardian-view-on-turkey-multiple-traumas-immense-courage>
As with other communities across the Islamic world, Isis has reached out to 
this community, or at least has prominently featured Uighurs in propaganda 
campaigns.

Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of Isis, has prominently criticised Chinese 
oppression of Muslims while laying out a vision of an Islamic caliphate 
stretching from Morocco to Xinjiang. The group has also released suicide 
attackers identified as “Chinese brothers”.

The appeal has fallen on fertile ground. There has been long running unrest 
among Uighurs in westChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> for many 
decades, where some view their culture and even land as under attack from Han 
Chinese “invaders”. This resentment led a tiny minority to become involved with 
Islamist extremism in Afghanistan and Pakistan in the 1980s and 1990s.

An extremist organisation, known as the East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM),
 <http:// http://www.cfr.org/china/east-turkestan-islamic-movement-etim/p9179> 
was formed. It was listed as a terrorist group by the US in 2002. Other 
factions emerged over the next decade, such as the Turkestan Islamic party 
(TIP), and were blamed for attacks in China.

At the same time Uighur diaspora communities, particularly in central Asia, 
were exposed to waves of Islamist activism too. In recent years Uighurs have 
been blamed a car attack on pedestrians in Beijing, a bombing and mass knifings 
in Chinese cities. There has also been evidence of growing international 
connections and capabilities.

The mind of Islamic State: more coherent and consistent than Nazism | Robert 
Manne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/the-mind-of-islamic-state-more-coherent-and-consistent-than-nazism>
China has accused Uighur groups of recruiting among Uighur communities in 
central Asia, especially in Krgyzstan and Turkey. It has also repeatedly called 
onPakistan <http://www.dawn.com/news/1204443> to eliminate the group’s presence 
there. Kyrgyz officials last year identified a suicide bomber, who attacked the 
Chinese embassy in Bishkek in August, as an Uighur militant.

Isis is not the only international jihadi group interested in the Uighurs. 
Most Uighur fighters inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> joined a 
faction effectively embedded within Jabah al Fateh al Sham (JFS), al-Qaida’s 
principal proxy in the region and a bitter rival of Isis. Although exact 
numbers are impossible to confirm, analysts believe there are hundreds Uighurs 
fighting with JFS. They have reportedly been deployed in battles against 
government forces in Idlib and Aleppo provinces, at times as suicide attackers.

Reports in Turkish media of the recent movements of the New Year’s Eve gunman 
underline the international nature of the jihadi threat. They describe how Abu 
Muhammed al Khorasani had combat training in Syria, then returned to central 
Asia, and finally flew with his family from Kyrgyzstan to Istanbul on 20 
November.His victims included citizens of 14 countries.  
<http://%20http//edition.cnn.com/2017/01/02/europe/turkey-nightclub-attack-victims/>
 