
On the day that South Africa dropped out of the top four of the world rankings 
for the first time in 10 years following theirdefeat against Italy in Florence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/italy-beat-south-africa-first-time>
 on Saturday the Springboks head coach, Allister Coetzee, called on everyone 
involved in the game in the republic to work together, shake it up and stop 
papering over cracks.

Coetzee, who succeeded Heyneke Meyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/12/allister-coetzee-south-africa-coach-rugby-union>
 this year, will face calls for his sacking when he returns home, regardless of 
the result against Wales in Cardiff on Saturday. The experience of the Welsh 
from the end of the 1980s, when they kept sacking coaches and results became 
even worse as they ignored structural decay, suggests caution.

“In the short term South African rugby is in pain but I think it will have 
long-term benefits for our game,” Coetzee said. “We have regressed and at times 
we have tried to blast over the cracks but as South Africans we can see the 
system is not working. If we do not address that collectively, we will be in a 
worse position; there will be discussions about administration, coaching, 
players, the whole lot.”

The defeat by Italy was South Africa’s seventh in 2016, equalling their record 
number in a calendar year, set in 2006. They lost athome against Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/south-africa-ireland-first-test-match-report>
 andItaly anywhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/italy-beat-south-africa-first-time>
 for the first time and endured arecord home defeat by the All Blacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-championship-match-report>
. Last year they were beaten byJapan in the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/19/south-africa-japan-rugby-world-cup-2015-match-report>
 having lost their unbeaten record against Argentina.

Italy celebrate famous first win over sorry South Africa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/italy-beat-south-africa-first-time>
South Africa have not won the Rugby Championship since 2009 and last provided 
the Super Rugby winners in 2010. They supplied both finalists that year – the 
Bulls beating the Stormers – and what has happened to the two starting lineups 
highlights a problem facing Coetzee: 20 of the 30 are earning their living 
abroad and six retired after stints overseas. Only four are part of the 
provincial system there, and two of them returned home this year.

“A big problem for us is conditioning with several of our squad based 
overseas,” Coetzee said. “Their season does not finish until June and we are in 
the middle of ours when they join up. I would love to keep more players in 
South Africa because the position is crazy but we cannot control the euro and 
the yen. We are in discussions about formulating a policy and I have a good 
idea of what should happen, sooner rather than later. I will be meeting the 
Super Rugby coaches next month and players will know where they stand.”

Rugby union autumn internationals: talking points from the latest action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-talking-points>
Coetzee spared his players training in Cardiff’s driving rain on Monday as he 
looks to end a challenging year with a victory. If South Africa’s slump turns 
into a recession, it will have a profound impact on the international game. In 
Test match history, South Africa lie second to New Zealand in terms of success 
rate, 65.1% compared to 78.9%. England are in third with 58% and France fourth 
with 56.8%.

“We were really poor against Italy, a game we would have won easily if we had 
taken our chances,” Coetzee said. “We want to get back into the top four of the 
rankings ahead of next year’s World Cup draw because we do not want to suffer 
the fate of England when they had two other top teams in their group. This week 
is more mental than physical for the players and I will give some guys a chance 
having gone for continuity against Italy.”

The lock Eben Etzebeth has been all but ruled out of the match against Wales 
following the concussion he sustained in a clash of heads with England’s Billy 
Vunipola 10 days ago and it will be the final Test appearance of the South 
Africa captain, Adriaan Strauss.

“Wales is a massive, vital game, the biggest of my life,” he said. “We have a 
lot to prove to ourselves and we know the significant impact the loss to Italy 
has had. There is no space for personal emotion now because my focus is on what 
needs to be done. After the Italy game Bryan Habana spoke to the players and 
said we had to stick together and fight back, that South Africans never lie 
down.

“One thing I learned after Japan is that you cannot have too many voices after 
a defeat like that. You need a clear vision that everyone buys into. As 
players, we need to forget about the discussions that will happen afterwards 
and just think about Wales. Everyone is hurting. We are desperate to win.”
 