
Billionaire Philip Anschutz, the businessman whose company organizes Coachella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/coachella>, has denied donating funds to 
anti-LGBT groups after reports resurfaced linking his charitable foundation to 
the organizations.

Coachella 2017: Beyoncé, Radiohead and Kendrick Lamar to headline festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/03/coachella-2017-lineup-beyonce-radiohead-kendrick-lamar>
Anschutz, 77, has reaped billions across the oil, telecom, real estate and 
entertainment industries, but his Anschutz Foundation drew criticism last year 
from Freedom For All Americans, a group that supports gay rights. The campaign
last year reported 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2016/07/07/here-they-are-the-enemies-of-equality-for-lgbt-americans/?utm_term=.4a68284cb94b>
 that the Anschutz Foundation had given almost $200,000 to anti-gay 
conservative activists, including the Family Research Council and Alliance 
Defending Freedom. Both groups have beencondemned 
<https://www.splcenter.org/20160211/religious-liberty-and-anti-lgbt-right> for 
anti-gay rights activism by the Southern Poverty Law Center, a left-leaning 
watchdog of hate groups.


This week, several 
<http://consequenceofsound.net/2017/01/head-of-coachellas-parent-company-aeg-has-donated-to-anti-lgbtq-and-climate-denial-groups/>
 musicblogs 
<http://uproxx.com/music/coachella-philip-anschutz-anti-gay-climate-change-denier/>
 picked up last year’s report, after the full lineup for this year’sCoachella 
music festival was revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/03/coachella-2017-lineup-beyonce-radiohead-kendrick-lamar>
 this week. Coachella is organized by the Anschutz Entertainment Group.

In a statement 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/aeg-ceo-philip-anschutz-anti-lgbtq-reports-fake-news-w459307>
 sent to Rolling Stone, Anschutz called the recent reports “fake news” and 
“garbage”. He denied that he would ever knowingly support any anti-gay cause.

“I unequivocally support the rights of all people without regard to sexual 
orientation,” Anschutz said. “Neither I nor the Foundation fund any 
organization with the purpose or expectation that it would finance anti-LGBTQ 
initiatives.”

He added that when anti-gay activity by recipients has come to his attention, 
“we have immediately ceased all contributions to such groups”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fcoachella-owner-denies-anti-lgbt-donations-philip-anschutz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83c8b832a906bc0722365535f8c98bdf32b30e12%2F0_0_1660_2000%2F1660.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coachella%20owner%20denies%20donating%20to%20anti-LGBT%20groups%20amid%20outrage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fcoachella-owner-denies-anti-lgbt-donations-philip-anschutz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coachella%20owner%20denies%20donating%20to%20anti-LGBT%20groups%20amid%20outrage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fcoachella-owner-denies-anti-lgbt-donations-philip-anschutz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83c8b832a906bc0722365535f8c98bdf32b30e12%2F0_0_1660_2000%2F1660.jpg>
 Philip Anschutz: ‘I unequivocally support the rights of all people without 
regard to sexual orientation.’ Photograph: David Zalubowski/AP 
“It’s encouraging to see that even those who’ve funded groups opposed to LGBT 
equality in the past are willing to change their views and come around to 
opposing discrimination,” saidMatt McTighe 
<http://www.freedomforallamericans.org/about/team/#matt-mctighe>, executive 
director of Freedom for All Americans. “We appreciate the willingness of Philip 
Anschutz and the Anschutz Foundation take steps to ensure that their resources 
are no longer used to undermine protections for LGBT Americans.”

Anschutz also said that across his businesses, he employs “ a wealth of 
diverse individuals”.

“The only criteria on which they are judged is the quality of their job 
performance,” he wrote. “We do not tolerate discrimination in any form.”

A major Republican donor, Anschutz gave more than $1m to conservative 
candidates 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/overview/topindivs.php?view=hm&cycle=2016&type=src> 
and political fundraising groups in 2016, according to the Center for 
Responsive Politics, a nonpartisan watchdog. Employees of the Anschutz 
Corporation alsoleaned heavily 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/orgs/recips.php?id=D000000589&type=P&state=&sort=A&cycle=2016>
 toward Republican candidates. The businessman has attended political events 
hosted by the Koch brothers, the billionaire scions of an oil fortune and also 
Republican donors, and Anschutz hasdonated to their political group Americans 
for Prosperity 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/01/16/the-man-who-owns-l-a>, which 
opposes climate change research and regulations. Anschutz’s natural gas company 
has alsosued small towns 
<https://www.law360.com/newyork/articles/311888/ny-court-upholds-fracking-ban-in-town-s-row-with-anschutz->
 inpursuit 
<http://www.csindy.com/IndyBlog/archives/2016/04/28/anschutz-sued-small-town-over-fracking>
 of fracking rights, and the businessman hasinvested heavily 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/20/us/as-wind-power-lifts-wyomings-fortunes-coal-miners-are-left-in-the-dust.html>
 in a gigantic Wyoming wind farm.

Asked about possible donations to groups opposed to climate change research 
and action, a spokesman for AEG, the entertainment company, said he could not 
comment on any specific charities. He noted that AEG has invested heavily in 
sustainability at several venues, including solar panels at the Staples Center 
in Los Angeles and composting at the O2 Center in London.

Coachella’s three 2017 headline acts are vocal liberals. The members of 
Radiohead, especially frontman Thom Yorke, have frequentlyspoken out about 
global warming 
<http://pitchfork.com/news/62241-thom-yorke-discusses-climate-change-with-writer-george-monbiot/>
 and criticizedoil executives 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/thom-yorke-asks-for-hope-slams-oil-execs-in-father-christmas-letter-20151207>
 andconservative politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/17/radiohead-thom-yorke-david-cameron>
. Beyoncéactively campaigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/05/im-with-her-beyonce-and-jay-z-back-hillary-clinton-in-battleground-state-of-ohio>
 for Democrat Hillary Clinton during the 2016 presidential election andperformed
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z-DSFrGnQrk> at Barack Obama’s second 
inauguration. Kendrick Lamar has also met Obama on several occasions, and race, 
inequality and police violence are frequent themes of his work.
 