
The Turnbull government has agreed to set the backpacker tax at 15% after a 
weekend of wrangling with key Senate crossbenchers.


The treasurer, Scott Morrison, told reporters on Monday the government would 
compromise at 15% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/28/turnbulls-agenda-hangs-in-balance-as-minor-party-support-skyrockets-politics-live>
 to enable the parliament to move on fromlast week’s political impasse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/24/senate-votes-for-jacqui-lambies-suggestion-of-105-backpacker-tax>
, which would have seen the rate go to 32.5% on 1 January if left unresolved.

The bill stalled last week after the Tasmanian independent senator Jacqui 
Lambie <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/jacqui-lambie> won support 
from Labor, One Nation and the Greens for the tax to be set at 10.5%.

Last week the government declared it was unwilling to compromise on the 
proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/24/senate-votes-for-jacqui-lambies-suggestion-of-105-backpacker-tax>
 but at the weekend the Nationals began to break ranks. The Nationals MP Andrew 
Broad said he would support a 15% tax rate compromise just to get the bill 
passed this year.

The backpacker tax is a textbook case of how not to develop policy | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/nov/27/the-backpacker-tax-is-a-textbook-case-of-how-not-to-develop-policy>
“Parliament mustn’t adjourn until we deal with it, the politicians cannot go 
into a Christmas break with a tax rate of 32.5% – this would undermine workers 
for horticulture,” Broadtold the Weekly Times 
<http://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/news/national/backpacker-tax-andrew-broad-backs-rate-of-15-per-cent/news-story/94cf10e8c58f79ec772cc7a371111877>
 on Sunday.

A spokesperson for One Nation said last week if the 10.5% tax rate did not 
pass, the party would be prepared to accept a higher rate of between 12% and 
15%.

Morrison said on Monday the government could accept a 15% rate, which will 
cost the budget $120m over four years, and the treasurer said the government 
would honour undertakings it made last week to crossbenchers to win their 
support for the measure.

“In this parliament, the 45th parliament, it’s about what you get done,” 
Morrison said.

Morrison phoned the One Nation leader, Pauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson>, on Monday morning 
to say the government would accept 15%. He described that conversation as warm 
and convivial. “I wished her a merry Christmas, as she did me.”

Hanson declared Morrison’s compromise “a win for farmers, small business and 
tourism but this is also a win for One Nation and a win for common sense”.

“Instead of letting lobbyists and special interests groups dictate policy, 
politicians should be visiting their voters and listening,” Hanson said.

While the government appears to have the numbers to get 15% through the 
parliament if One Nation, the Nick Xenophon Team bloc andDerryn Hinch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/derryn-hinch> hold firm, it is not 
yet clear whether Lambie will accept it.
Nick Xenophon (@Nick_Xenophon) 
Backpacker tax breakthrough: Great news for Aussie job seekers too, as govt 
backs NXT plan to allow them to earn up to $5k without penalty.
 <https://twitter.com/Nick_Xenophon/status/803004701180444672> November 27, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/Nick_Xenophon/status/803004701180444672> 
The government has agreed with the NXT to trial a plan where welfare 
recipients would be allowed to earn up to $5,000 picking fruit without losing 
benefits.

A spokesman for Lambie said she was seeking further details on the proposal 
and would consult growers inTasmania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania> before coming to a final 
position.

Labor said on Monday it would stand firm at 10.5%. The shadow agriculture 
minister, Joel Fitzgibbon, said a tax rate set at 15% was “just a flip of a 
coin”.

“There has been no research or modelling done,” he said. “It is an arbitrary 
figure and this government stands condemned still for selling out our farmers 
and putting some of their own interests around Senate negotiations in front of 
the interests of the country and our farmers.”

George Brandis under pressure on Gleeson row – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/28/turnbulls-agenda-hangs-in-balance-as-minor-party-support-skyrockets-politics-live>
Earlier in the day Morrison told reporters the onus was on Labor to make up 
the $120m budget shortfall as a consequence of setting the tax at 15%, but the 
shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, said the opposition didn’t intend to take 
lectures from the treasurer.

Bowen said Morrison had delivered a “petulant” performance at his press 
conference on Monday morning. He said “theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> could go jump and he 
is clearly not interested in a proper and sensible discussion in this 45th 
parliament”.

Bowen said Labor would assess any future savings proposals on their merits.

The Greens attacked the deal. The Greens treasury spokesman, Peter 
Whish-Wilson, said the combined new tax rate of 15% from the first dollar 
earned, plus a new 95% tax on all superannuation paid by backpackers, would 
leave Australia at a competitive disadvantage.

“The Senate really should not be supporting this proposal on a 15% backpacker 
rate,” he said. “With the 95% clawback on superannuation of backpackers then 
the effective tax rate is closer to 24% which is no longer competitive with our 
neighbours.

“This is roughly double the effective rate of tax paid by working 
holidaymakers in New Zealand. We are seeking advice on whether we can move an 
amendment to this new bill to cancel the superannuation clawbacks.”

The Justice party senator Derryn Hinch said he would support the 15% rate but 
he was surprised the government had shifted.

Hinch told reporters on Monday Morrison had told him at the prime minister’s 
Christmas drinks on Sunday evening that “it would cost too much money if it 
dropped to 15%”.

“Something obviously happened in the interim so ... that is that.”

Hinch argued that the whole saga had been blown out of proportion. “I honestly 
believe it is a storm in a teacup in one way apart from the poor bloody farmers 
and their fruit,” he said.

“When you are a backpacker you wouldn’t have a clue what the bloody tax is. 
You don’t say I am not going to the Great Barrier Reef and Ayers Rock because 
[Australia’s] backpacker tax is higher. I’ll go to Iceland.”

The government started in the 2015 budget with a proposal to tax backpackers 
at 32.5% thendropped the rate to 19% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/27/backpacker-tax-scott-morrison-announces-cut-from-325-to-19>
 after an outcry from farmers groups and horticulturalists.
 