
Scott Morrison <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/scott-morrison> 
says the Turnbull government will not compromise on its backpacker tax package 
and will be testing Labor’s proposed amendments in the Senate.

The treasurer has dismissed Labor’s call to cut the backpacker tax from 32.5% 
to 10.5%, saying it will cost the budget hundreds of millions of dollars.

He said the government’s proposal to cut the tax from 32.5% to 19% was good 
policy, and a greater cut would simply hand taxpayer dollars to foreign workers.

Backpacker tax: Labor proposes cutting rate to 10.5% to end impasse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/backpacker-tax-labor-proposes-cutting-rate-stalemate>
Labor announced on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/backpacker-tax-labor-proposes-cutting-rate-stalemate>
 it would support the government’s backpacker tax legislation if the government 
cut the tax to 10.5%. It also wants to scrap the government’s proposed $5 
increase to the charge for all travellers leaving Australia.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, said Labor would move an 
amendment to the government’s bills in the Senate and if those two proposals 
were accepted Labor would support the rest of the government’s package.

He said the amendments would have to be passed by the House of 
Representatives, so someNational party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/national-party> MPs would have to 
support them.

But the Nationals MP Andrew Broad told Guardian Australia that no one from the 
Nationals would vote for Labor’s amendments in the lower house.

On Wednesday Morrison said Labor was only playing politics on this issue and 
its proposed amendments would cost the budget $500m over four years. He said the
Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> would be 
testing the amendments in the Senate.

“They just want to drive a wedge in the House of Representatives and play 
politics with a very serious issue,” Morrison told ABC radio.

“What they’re saying is they want to give a bigger tax cut to foreign workers 
and ask Australian workers to pay for it. Who else is paying for it? It’s $500m 
where the budget goes backwards.”

The government’s proposal to cut the backpacker tax from 32.5% to 19% is an 
attempt to undo an Abbott government policy. In the 2015 budget the then-Abbott 
government proposed raising the income tax onworking holidaymakers from roughly 
13% to 32.5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-savings-hit-surprising-targets-backpackers-and-fly-in-fly-out-workers>
.

A significant backlash from the agricultural industry, and members of the 
Coalition backbench, led to Malcolm Turnbull announcing a review of the tax in 
the leadup to this year’s election.

Down on the farm: Australia at war with its backpacker workforce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/05/australia-cherry-picking-backpacker-tax-agriculture>
In September Morrison announced a planned 19% tax rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/27/backpacker-tax-scott-morrison-announces-cut-from-325-to-19>
, with a $5 increase in the passenger movement charge to $60. To balance the 
package, the government also proposed to reduce the visa application charge by 
$50, increase the working holiday visa age from 30 to 35, and increase the time 
backpackers could work for one employer from six to 12 months.

The government has been promoting the proposed 19% rate as a tax cut. It also 
warns if Labor and the Greens do not support the legislation the tax rate will 
remain at 32.5% from 1 January.

“The common law position is if the Senate is unable to resolve this then it 
will default to 32.5 cents,” Morrison said on Wednesday. “Now I don’t want to 
see that. That’s why we’ve compromised.”

But Peter Whish-Wilson, the Greens’ Treasury spokesman, said there was no 
reason why that should be the case, according to advice from the parliamentary 
library and answers from Treasury and the tax office.

The Tax Office said last week 
<https://www.ato.gov.au/Media-centre/Media-releases/Commissioner-clarifies-tax-arrangements-for-working-holiday-makers/>
 if the government’s legislation did not pass parliament, a 32.5% tax rate 
would apply next year for non-resident holidaymakers.
 