
The Turnbull government has been hit by yet another embarrassing parliamentary 
blunder after a One Nation no-show blocked its proposed $5 departure tax 
increase.

The Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> tried to 
rush the vote through on Wednesday night, minutes before adjournment, thinking 
it had the numbers.

But Pauline Hanson <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> 
and her One Nation colleague Brian Burston, who would have voted with the 
government, were not in the chamber and missed the vote.

It allowed Labor, the Greens and the crossbenchers Jacqui Lambie and David 
Leyonhjelm <https://www.theguardian.com/world/david-leyonhjelm> to join forces 
to stop the legislation, defeating it 31 to 30.

Down on the farm: Australia at war with its backpacker workforce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/05/australia-cherry-picking-backpacker-tax-agriculture>
The tactical blunder has thrown the government’s plans into disarray. It hoped 
to increase the departure tax by $5 (to $60) to pay for its proposed reduction 
in the backpacker tax, from 32.5% to 19%.

It says it plans to recommit the vote on Thursday afternoon.

Hanson released a statement on Thursday morning saying she now plans to move 
an amendment to freeze the departure tax for five years. If she had voted with 
the government on Wednesday night she would have voted without that amendment.

“Although the vote was unsuccessful last night I am hopeful that once it is 
reintroduced into the house it will pass with our amendment,” Hanson said on 
Thursday. “All we want is for the tax to remain steady for five years so the 
travel and tourism industry has some certainty.”

Senator David Leyonhjelm said Hanson and Burston had missed the vote because 
they did not realise it was a live vote when they heard the Senate bells. He 
says he voted against the bill because he does not want the extra tax.

The Labor senator Katy Gallagher criticised the government on Thursday for 
trying to pull a “swifty” in the Senate, saying its plan had backfired.

“The government had presented the bills, we were debating the bills and then 
they tried to pull a swifty just before the adjournment and tried to push those 
bills to a vote,” Gallagher said.

“That plan was going well until they didn’t have the numbers. We called for a 
separation of the vote on the passenger movement charge and the government lost 
that vote.

“So, that means that bill will not be debated in the Senate, it has been 
rejected at the second-reading stage and that blows a $260m hole in the 
government’s package and it remains to be seen how they deal with that.”

Barnaby Joyce signals Coalition could compromise on backpacker tax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/23/barnaby-joyce-signals-coalition-could-compromise-on-backpacker-tax>
Barnaby Joyce criticised the Labor party for voting against the departure tax, 
saying the tax was needed to pay for a reduction in the backpacker tax. He said 
Labor was pushing for a lower backpacker tax than the Coalition (10.5% compared 
with 19%), but wasrefusing to say how it would pay for it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/23/barnaby-joyce-signals-coalition-could-compromise-on-backpacker-tax>
.

Tony Mahar, the chief executive of the National Farmers’ Federation, said the 
government and Labor were playing politics with the issue.

“While ever the government sees the tax as a budget-fix measure, and while 
ever the opposition and crossbenchers see it as a political edge, we won’t get 
an outcome,” he said.
 