
Residents of an Essex <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/essex> village have been 
told to leave their homes by Friday morning as severe weather, which has 
already led to flight cancellations and travel chaos across the country, 
threatens to cause a flood.


Police officers will be calling at addresses in Jaywick, a coastal village 
south-east of Colchester, from 4pm on Thursday to tell residents a full 
evacuation plan is to be implemented, beginning at 7am on Friday.

An evacuation centre in Clacton will receive evacuees from 4pm on Thursday and 
accommodate them until it is safe to return to their homes.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Thundersnow is a rare weather phenomenon which looks set to make an appearance 
in the UK over the next couple of days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/12/what-is-thundersnow-video-explainer>
Ch Insp Russ Cole, of Essex police, said: “Acting on all the professional 
guidance and experience of our colleagues at the Environment Agency and the Met 
Office, a partnership decision has been taken to evacuate the homes in Jaywick 
to ensure the safety of all residents.

“My officers will start calling at all residences in Jaywick from 4pm this 
afternoon to advise them that from 7am tomorrow we will be transporting people 
out of the town to the rest centre.

“We will also advise that from 4pm they can of course self-evacuate and make 
their own way to the rest centre or to another place of safety at a friend or 
relative’s home outside of Jaywick.

“This decision has not been taken lightly and has been made in the best 
interests of all residents to ensure their safety until the severe weather 
passes.”

The evacuation comes as the Environment Agency warned communities on the east 
coast of England they could face large waves and possible flooding throughout 
Friday and into Saturday morning.
 The Brooklands estate in Jaywick, which is to be evacuated. Photograph: Nick 
Ansell/PA 
Lincolnshire, Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex are particularly at risk from gale 
force winds combining with high tides to create large waves that could carry 
dangerous debris, including rocks.

The conditions could also lead to traffic disruption and affect coastal 
properties, the agency said.

People are urged to take extreme care near the coast and avoid walking along 
coastal paths and promenades. Motorists should avoid driving through floodwater 
as just 30cm (1ft) of flowing water can move a car, the agency said.

Mark Sitton-Kent, the national duty manager at the Environment Agency, said: 
“Gale force winds and high tides are likely to create large and dangerous waves 
along parts of the east coast on Friday and Saturday.

“These conditions could also cause flooding to coastal roads and could impact 
properties.

“We understand that powerful tides can be dramatic, but please do not put 
yourself at unnecessary risk by going to the coast for a thrill or to take 
pictures.
 People out walking through the snow in Stirling. Photograph: Jane Barlow/PA 
“We are prepared to take action wherever it is needed. We have moved resources 
and equipment to the coast and the army is on standby to assist if needed.”

Environment Agency teams have moved 5,200 metres of temporary barriers and 25 
pumps to depots and towns including Newcastle upon Tyne, Blyth, Great Yarmouth, 
Chelmsford, Rye and Trustthorpe and South Ferriby in Lincolnshire.

The Hull tidal barrier will be operated on Thursday evening, while all east 
coast flood gates have been closed, the agency said.

Earlier, dozens of flights were cancelled at Heathrow, the UK’s busiest 
airport, as blizzards, high winds and heavy rain caused difficult travel 
conditions across the country.

Heavy snow lay across Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, 
Northern Ireland and parts of England on Thursday morning, and the Met Office 
issued yellow warnings of snow and overnight ice.

Heathrow said a combination of snow and windy weather conditions had affected 
flights.

British Airways flights were among those affected. A BA spokeswoman said: 
“We’re sorry that some of our customers’ travel plans have been affected due to 
the forecast snow at Heathrow, which will lead to a reduction in the number of 
aircraft which can land or take off from the airport.

Related: Snowy weather hits the UK - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2017/jan/12/snowy-weather-hits-the-uk-in-pictures>

“For safety reasons, Heathrow airport, air traffic control and all airlines 
have agreed to operate a reduced schedule to help mitigate the effects of the 
snow, which is likely to fall throughout Thursday afternoon and early evening.

“We are refunding or rebooking any affected customers on to alternative 
flights so they can continue their journeys as soon as possible. Customers on 
some flights can also choose to travel on alternative dates even if their 
flight is still scheduled to operate.”
 A snow plough drives on the A924 in Pitlochry Scotland. Photograph: Russell 
Cheyne/Reuters 
Highways England urged drivers to take extra care on motorways and major A 
roads. It said gritters would work through the night to spread salt, and more 
than 500 of the vehicles were on standby.

Drivers were also advised to keep a winter kit in their vehicle that included 
an ice scraper and de-icer, warm clothes and blankets.

Emma Sharples, a Met Office meteorologist, said on Thursday that snow was 
already affecting the northern and western coasts of Scotland and some parts of 
north-west England.

“At the moment [we have] rain across the south, but there’s a chance that will 
turn to snow as it begins to pull away east later, which could bring a little 
snow across east Anglia and the south-east,” she said. “The cold air is really 
setting in so we are likely to get quite a lot of ice … that will cause more 
problems.”

Snowfall in the south-east remains a possibility, but not certain, Sharples 
said. “We never quite know exactly – snow is difficult to forecast – but the 
ingredients are there for there to be a chance of a bit of snow across the 
south-east.”

The difficult conditions are likely to continue into Friday, with weather 
warnings in place for Wales, Northern Ireland, eastern Scotland, and south-west 
and eastern England. “Overnight, there is another area of rain, sleet and snow 
that moves into northern and eastern Scotland and then runs down the rest of 
the east coast of the UK,” Sharples said. “That could well bring another chance 
of sleet and snow, especially inland, along with some coastal gales as well.”

Public Health England (PHE) urged people to stay warm, ensure they had stocks 
of food and vital medicine, and think about how they can help people with 
underlying health conditions, and those aged over 65.


Prof Paul Cosford, the PHE’s director for health protection, said: “Keeping 
your home heated to at least 18C, wearing lots of thin layers instead of fewer 
thicker ones, and – if you have to head out – using footwear with a good grip, 
are all ways to deal with this weather and stay well this winter.”

Sharples told the Guardian on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/11/polar-maritime-airmass-uk-weather-warnings-snow>
 that the bad weather was being caused by a polar maritime airmass.

“That relates to where the weather is coming from,” she said. “Polar relates 
to where the air is coming from; maritime is to do with the fact that it’s 
coming over sea before reaching us, rather than being a continental airmass, 
which would mean something from Europe and over land.”

A respite from the unsettled weather is forecast for the weekend, although the 
cold is likely to continue, Sharples said. “We’ve got a warning for the east 
coast, there still will be some wintery showers running down that side of the 
country,” she said.

“But as we go through the second part of the weekend, so into Sunday, it’s 
turning less cold. We’ve got a weak weather front coming in from the west that 
will bring a lot of cloud and patchy rain, perhaps a little bit of snow 
initially but becoming less cold generally. So a bit of a change on the way but 
it looks as though we are going back into cold conditions next week with the 
winds more easterly as high pressure sets in.”





• This article was amended on 13 January 2017 to correct the spelling of Blyth.
 