
A survivor of a plane crash in Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia> that killed 71 people says the 
pilot never told passengers to fasten their seatbelt before the aircraft 
smashed into a hillside.

'Our club represented Brazil': Chapecoense tragedy a crushing blow to nation 
in crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/chapecoense-soccer-team-chapeco-brazil-fans>
Brazilian radio journalist Rafael Henzel spoke with Fantastico program Sunday 
night fromColombia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia>, where he is 
recovering.

“At no point did someone from the cabin or the crew tell us, ‘Put on your 
seatbelts’,” said Henzel. “We just kept flying without any idea of what was 
about to happen.”

The plane took off from Santa Cruz, Bolivia and crashed near the airport in 
Medellín, Colombia on 28 November. Only six of the 77 passengers on board 
survived. The dead included 19 members of the Chapecoense soccer club from 
southernBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> and 20 of the 
journalists covering the team. The survivors were two Bolivian crew members and 
four Brazilians – Henzel and three soccer players.

Investigations have been launched in Brazil, Bolivia and Colombia. Colombian 
authorities have said they believe a lack of fuel caused the crash.

Henzel said that toward the end of the flight, passengers around him began 
asking how long it would be before they landed.

“Ten minutes” was the response from the crew, he said. “Then suddenly, the 
lights went off and the engines went off.”

At that point, everyone rushed back to their seats and fastened their 
seatbelts, said Henzel. Then the plane crashed into a hillside.

'What he did was mass murder': little sympathy for Colombia plane crash pilot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/colombia-plane-crash-pilot-brazil-chapecoense>
Henzel said when he awoke, there were emergency workers around him and he was 
in immense pain from what turned out to be seven broken ribs. He called out to 
the colleagues who had been sitting on each side of him, but they had died.

He said he believed he survived thanks to a miracle and the good fortune to 
wake up just as emergency workers passed by.

Henzel said he was sickened to learn the cause of the accident was likely a 
lack of fuel.

“People died because of a lack of judgment,” he said. “That is revolting.”
 