
The pilot of the chartered plane carrying a Brazilian soccer team told air 
traffic controllers he had run out of fuel and desperately pleaded for 
permission to land beforecrashing into the Andes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/plane-carrying-brazilian-footballers-team-chapecoense-crashes-en-route-to-medellin>
, according to a leaked recording of the final minutes of the doomed flight

 In the sometimes chaotic exchange with the air traffic tower, the pilot of 
the British-built jet could be heard repeatedly requesting authorization to 
land because of “fuel problems”. A controller explained another plane had been 
diverted with mechanical problems and had priority, instructing the pilot to 
wait seven minutes.

As the plane circled in a holding pattern, the pilot grew more desperate. 
“Complete electrical failure, without fuel,” he said in the tense final moments 
before the plane set off on a four-minute death spiral that ended with it 
slamming into a mountainside Monday night.

Just before going silent the pilot said he was flying at an altitude of 9,000 
feet and made a final plea to land: “Vectors, señorita. Landing vectors.”


 The recording, obtained on Wednesday by Colombian media, appeared to confirm 
the accounts of a surviving flight attendant and a pilot flying nearby who 
overheard the frantic exchange. These, along with the lack of an explosion upon 
impact, point to a rare case of fuel running out as a cause of the crash of the 
jetliner, which experts said was flying at its maximum range.

For now, authorities are avoiding singling out any one cause of the crash, 
which killed all but six of the 77 people on board, including members of 
Brazil’s Chapecoense soccer team traveling to Medellin for the Copa 
Sudamericana finals the culmination of a fairy tale season that had electrified 
soccer-crazedBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>.

A full investigation is expected to take months and will review everything 
from the 17-year-old aircraft’s flight and maintenance history to the voice and 
instruments data in the black boxes recovered Tuesday at the crash site on a 
muddy hillside. The US National Transportation Safety Board was taking part in 
the investigation because the plane’s engines were made by an American 
manufacturer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fbrazilian-relatives-mourn-plane-crash-victims-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazilian%20relatives%20mourn%20plane%20crash%20victims%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fbrazilian-relatives-mourn-plane-crash-victims-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazilian%20relatives%20mourn%20plane%20crash%20victims%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fbrazilian-relatives-mourn-plane-crash-victims-video&media=>
Brazilian relatives mourn plane crash victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/30/brazilian-relatives-mourn-plane-crash-victims-video>
As the investigation continued, mourning soccer fans in Medellín and the 
southern Brazilian town of Chapéco, where the team is from, were converging on 
the two cities’ soccer stadiums for simultaneous candlelight vigils. The six 
survivors were recovering in hospitals, with three in critical but stable 
condition, while forensic specialists worked to identify the victims so they 
could be transferred to a waiting cargo plane sent by the Brazilian air force 
to repatriate the bodies.

Alfredo Bocanegra, head of Colombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia>’s aviation agency, said that while 
evidence initially pointed to an electrical problem, the possibility the crash 
was caused by lack of fuel has not been ruled out. Planes need to have enough 
extra fuel on board to fly at least 30 to 45 minutes to another airport in case 
of an emergency, and rarely fly in a straight line because of turbulence or 
other reasons.

plane crash route 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/colombia-crashlocatorrevision/giv-15726ZRNW0FEG8G8g/>
Before being taken offline, the website of LaMia, the Bolivian-based charter 
company, said the Avro RJ85 jetliner’s maximum range was 2,965km (1,600 
nautical miles) – just under the distance between Medellín and Santa Cruz, 
Bolivia, where the flight originated carrying close to full passenger capacity.

'Our club represented Brazil': Chapecoense tragedy a crushing blow to nation 
in crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/chapecoense-soccer-team-chapeco-brazil-fans>
It is also possible the pilot dumped fuel, or a lack of fuel was caused by a 
leak or some other, unexplained reason.

“If this is confirmed by the investigators it would be a very painful because 
it stems from negligence,” Bocanegra told Caracol Radio on Wednesday when asked 
whether the plane should not have attempted such a long haul.

One key piece to unlocking the mystery could come from Ximena Sánchez, a 
Bolivian flight attendant who survived the crash and told rescuers the plane 
had run out of fuel moments before the crash. Investigators were expected to 
interview her on Wednesday at the clinic near Medellín where she is recovering.

“’We ran out of fuel. The airplane turned off,’” Sánchez told Arquímedes 
Mejía, who helped pull the flight attendant from the wreckage. “That was the 
only thing she told me,” he told the Associated Press in an interview.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcolombia-plane-crash-pilot-out-of-fuel-chapecoense-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8665d495fdbcf54bfb6f7129ee2034396699f9d5%2F0_188_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colombia%20plane%20crash%3A%20leaked%20audio%20shows%20pilot%20said%20he%20ran%20out%20of%20fuel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcolombia-plane-crash-pilot-out-of-fuel-chapecoense-brazil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colombia%20plane%20crash%3A%20leaked%20audio%20shows%20pilot%20said%20he%20ran%20out%20of%20fuel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fcolombia-plane-crash-pilot-out-of-fuel-chapecoense-brazil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8665d495fdbcf54bfb6f7129ee2034396699f9d5%2F0_188_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A fan cries while paying tribute to the players of Brazilian soccer team 
Chapecoense among those who died in the fatal crash. Photograph: Buda 
Mendes/Getty Images 
Investigators also want to speak to Juan Sebastián Upegui, the co-pilot on an 
Avianca commercial flight who was in contact with air traffic controllers near 
Medellín’s José María Córdova airport at the time the chartered plane went down.

In a four-minute recording that appears to be an audio message to a friend, 
Upegui described how he heard the flight’s pilot request priority to land 
because he was out of fuel. Growing ever more desperate, the pilot eventually 
declared “Mayday! Mayday!” because of a “total electrical failure”, Upegui 
said, before the plane quickly began to lose speed and altitude in an almost 
three-minute death spiral.

“I remember I was pulling really hard for them, saying ‘Make it, make it, make 
it, make it,’” Upegui says in the recording, which circulated on social media. 
“Then it stopped … The controller’s voice starts to break up and she sounds 
really sad. We’re in the plane and start to cry.”

Another clue is the crash site itself, where no traces of fuel have been 
found. Often planes go up in a ball of flames upon impact but one reason six 
passengers survived was because the plane did not explode.
 