
Jack Straw <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jackstraw>, the former 
foreign secretary, has denied that British commercial relations with Col 
Muammar Gaddafi’s Libya held back compensation demands for people killed or 
injured by IRA weapons supplied by Tripoli.

 Straw told a parliamentary committee on Wednesday that the main priority of 
Tony Blair’s government in negotiations with Gaddafi was to dismantle Libya’s 
chemical and nuclear weapons programme.

Questioned by the Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> affairs committee at 
Westminster, Straw said that while “it is a matter of record that we encouraged 
British companies to do business with Libyan companies … the issue of 
compensation was never set aside because of commercial considerations”.

 Straw said compensation for victims of weapons supplied by Gaddafi’s regime 
to the IRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/28/tony-blair-refuses-to-be-questioned-over-ira-and-gaddafi>
was “not an active issue” at the time of the 2003 discussions with the then 
Libyan leader.

 He said: “Even if this had been raised as an active issue, and my 
recollection is that it was not, I might well have said, ‘Let’s concentrate on 
getting the Libyans to agree to give up their chemical weapons and their 
nuclear holdings, and then we can move on to another track.’”

The former foreign secretary said there had been “no sense that victims of 
PIRA killings come at the back of the queue” during these negotiations.

Straw said it would be “cruel” to keep pursuing compensation for victims with 
theLibyan state in disintegration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/16/libya-gaddafi-arab-spring-civil-war-islamic-state>
 and the country at war with itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fjack-straw-blair-gaddafi-libya-ira-victim-compensation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F730d0e89165b1d38229b5ec421e1cf07324d95e7%2F0_62_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Compensation%20for%20IRA%20victims%20wasn't%20set%20aside%20in%20Libya%20talks%2C%20says%20Straw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fjack-straw-blair-gaddafi-libya-ira-victim-compensation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Compensation%20for%20IRA%20victims%20wasn%27t%20set%20aside%20in%20Libya%20talks%2C%20says%20Straw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fjack-straw-blair-gaddafi-libya-ira-victim-compensation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F730d0e89165b1d38229b5ec421e1cf07324d95e7%2F0_62_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Tony Blair with Muammar Gaddafi in Libya in 2007.
 Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
In relation to his former boss at 10 Downing Street, Straw said: “The issue 
was never swept aside. Mr Blair devoted great effort into securing peace in 
Northern Ireland.”

The former prime minister has faced accusations he personally blocked any 
inclusion of Irish and British victims of Tripoli-supplied weapons in any 
compensation scheme designed to reinstateLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> on the international diplomatic 
stage. Blair’s spokesman described these allegations as “malicious”.

Sylvia Hermon, the independent unionist MP for North Down, challenged Straw to 
ask the current Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, to support theIRA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ira> victims’ campaign for compensation from 
Libya. “If you want me to write to him I will do so,” Straw said, “but all of 
us will wait for a reply with great interest!”

Tony Blair declines to appear before inquiry into Libya-backed IRA terrorism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/15/tony-blair-declines-inquiry-libya-ira-terrorism>
Gaddafi’s regime had paid out compensation for the 1984 murder of PC Yvonne 
Fletcher <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/yvonne-fletcher> outside the Libyan 
embassy in London, as well as for theLockerbie plane bombing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lockerbie> in 1988. Neither the Gaddafi regime 
nor the current administration in Tripoli has agreed to any compensation for 
hundreds of IRA victims killed or injured by Libya-supplied semtex explosives 
and other weapons.

The US government under George W Bush approved legislation that allowed 
Gaddafi’s regime to pay $1bn in compensation for American victims of 
Libya-sponsored terrorism.


In the early 1970s and later in the 80s, the Gaddafi regime supplied the 
Provisional IRA with tonnes of weapons including semtex, which was made in the 
Czech Republic.


The explosive was used as a powerful booster for bombs that devastated parts 
of the City of London as well as other British cities during the Troubles.


In 1995, as part of efforts to improve relations with western nations, the 
Libyan regime suppliedJohn Major 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-major>’s government, via the UN 
security council, with the entire inventory of weaponry it gave the PIRA and 
vowed to stop smuggling guns and explosives to Irish republican terror groups.

During the parliamentary hearing, it emerged that there are still millions of 
dollars of frozen Libyan assets in the British financial system.
 