
Families of the victims of MH370 have found their battle for compensation has 
stalled over access to documents fromMalaysia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaysia> Airlines, which claims it has 
“actually gone beyond its legal obligations”.

Two hundred and thirty-nine people from 15 countries were on board the Boeing 
777-200ERwhen it deviated from the course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/09/queensland-families-mourn-couples-malaysia-airlines-flight>
 on 8 March 2014 en route to Beijing from Kuala Lumpur. The plane’s final 
resting place remains unknown.


Passengers’ next of kin around the world are seeking compensation from the 
airline and other entities associated with the loss of MH370, with action under 
way in Malaysia, China, the US and Australia.

Under the international treaty governing compensation for the victims of air 
disasters, any court action to claim damages must be taken within two years 
from the date the aircraft arrived, or should have arrived.

Related: Malaysia Airlines flight MH370: underwater search called off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/malaysia-airlines-flight-mh370-search-called-off>

The Montreal convention places the onus on Malaysia Airlines to prove that it 
was not negligent or that there is a third party to blame for the tragedy, or 
else be liable to pay compensation to the passengers’ families.

In 2014 all the families of passengers and crew on board MH370 were offered 
interim payments of US$50,000, non-conditional and regardless of any legal 
action, which some accepted.

But as the third anniversary of the disappearance of the plane nears, no other 
resolution seems in sight.

Among the most advanced cases against Malaysia Airlines are separate 
proceedings lodged in the Kuala Lumpur high court and the Australian federal 
court, both of which are now in limbo over access to documents and logs 
relating to the flight.

The Malaysian law firm Tommy Thomas brought proceedings against five 
defendants – the two companies associated with Malaysia Airlines, that 
country’s government, its civil aviation department and its air force – on 
behalf of 76 plaintiffs related to 27 passengers in March 2016.

In Australia, the adult children of Rod and Mary Burrows and Bob and Cathy 
Lawton – two married couples from Brisbane travelling together – have been 
embroiled in a battle for compensation for more than a year, suing for damages 
from Malaysia Airlines under common law and the Montreal convention. Progress 
has been slow, though the airline has denied stalling.

The plaintiffs are seeking damages for the loss of their parents and the 
resulting psychological harm caused by the extraordinary circumstances of their 
deaths.

But in its defence lodged in the federal court in August, Malaysia Airlines 
said the next of kin were “not entitled to bring a claim for nervous shock and 
any consequential loss”, citing law based on the Montreal convention that does 
not require it to compensate victims’ families for psychiatric injury or 
psychological harm unless it is inextricably linked to some physical injury.

 A spokeswoman for the administrator-appointed Malaysian Airline System Berhad 
told the Guardian that it has been committed to compensating all next of kin, 
and “has not evaded its obligations”.


“MAS has actually gone beyond its legal obligations by advising and reminding 
all affected families of the two-year limitation period under the Montreal 
convention ... whilst continuing to pursue settlement discussions.”

To date, she said, all next of kin of MH370 passengers who had pursued claims 
of compensation had either had them settled; were in the process of settling 
them; “or have otherwise filed court claims in various jurisdictions to pursue 
claims of compensation.

“MAS takes its legal obligations seriously but would not be able to comment 
further on ongoing litigation cases.”

In the Australian federal court on 9 December, Malaysia Airlines resisted an 
order to produce relevant documents to MH370’s flight, including maintenance 
logbooks and medical certificates of the crew.

It also requested that the plaintiffs bear the cost of the hearing and 
complained to the federal court Justice Nye Perram of unfair media reporting. 
The case will next be heard on 28 March.

The airline had previously been ordered to allow general discovery of the 
documents by a Malaysian judicial commissioner in September in Tommy Thomas’s 
case in the Kuala Lumpur high court. It has argued that they are not relevant 
and applied to appeal the decision, with the hearing set for 27 February.

In the meantime, the discovery order has been stayed and the case is in limbo.

Ganesan Nethi, a barrister with Tommy Thomas, told the Guardian the deadline 
to file civil proceedings in Malaysia against the Malaysian government expired 
on the third anniversary of MH370’s disappearance, and that he hoped all the 
next of kin were fully aware.

Related: MH370 pilot's sister: 'My brother loved life' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/17/mh370-pilot-sister-my-brother-loved-life-zaharie-ahmad-shah>

Malaysia Airlines is understood to have been paid more than US$200m in hull 
insurance for the loss of MH370 and MH17 four months later, though the 
spokeswoman said the payout was confidential to MAS and its insurer Allianz and 
had no bearing on compensation payouts to victims’ families.

In late 2014 it received nearly $2bn in state aid for a major restructuring 
exercise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/29/malaysia-airlines-cuts-6000-jobs>
, with MAS placed in administration. Its assets and many of its employees were 
transferred to a new organisation, Malaysia Airlines Berhad, with new 
management, though MAS states that the two are separate companies.

MAS retained the airline’s legal liabilities arising from the loss of flight 
MH370 as the national carrier continues to operate as part of MAB.

Mary Schiavo, the lawyer representing 44 victims of MH370 and their families 
in the US district court for the District of Columbia,reportedly described it 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/airlines-switch-riles-mh370-mh17-families/news-story/86d5156bc76fbc047112c2b83d14e74b>
 as a “sleight of hand by the Malaysian government” and demanded a jury trial 
for the action against MAS, MAB and Allianz.

The MAS spokeswoman said the restructure was determined to be in the public 
interest “to ensure the continued existence of a national carrier … The 
objective of the restructuring has never been to frustrate the legal process or 
avoiding its responsibilities, as it has been inaccurately portrayed.”

She added that, “notwithstanding that MAS is now in administration”, it had 
adequate insurance coverage in place “to meet all of the airline’s legal 
liabilities arising from the loss of flight MH370”.

The spokeswoman did not reply to a follow-up question asking how the airline 
could be sure its coverage was adequate when the extent of its liabilities had 
not been determined.
 