
“Death really opens your eyes,” Conor Murray says on an unusually sunny winter 
afternoon in Limerick. The Munster scrum-half, who has been inspirational for 
his province and country this year, most notably when sparking Ireland to a
momentous first victory over New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/ireland-new-zealand-rugby-union-report>
 in Chicago last month, is still marked bythe death of his coach and mentor 
Anthony Foley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death>
.

Foley, or Axel as everyone calls him in Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster>, suffered an acute pulmonary oedema 
and died in Paris on 16 October at the age of 42. He was helping Murray and his 
team-mates prepare for their opening European Champions Cup game against Racing 
92 that Sunday afternoon.

As a boy Murray had worshipped Foley – the home-grown captain who lifted 
Munster’s first European Cup in 2006 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIA7mx0b5OA>. Foley had also coached Murray 
from the under-20s to the first team over the past seven years. “When you lose 
someone,” Murray continues, “you go: ‘Let’s really take life for what it is and 
enjoy every day.’ After a while you forget and just go back to worrying about 
things. But Axel’s been dead more than two months and it’s still there for me. 
Little things don’t stress me any more. It’s had a profound impact and you 
learn new things.

Anthony Foley, a Munster legend to his core and ‘proper rugby bloke’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death>
“I didn’t know much about his family life until I went to see [Foley’s wife] 
Olive and the kids. They have a beautiful home in Killaloe, overlooking the 
lake, with a wood at the back. Home was the most important thing. He used to 
ring Olive 15 times a day – which amazed me. I said: ‘What?’ I couldn’t believe 
it because Axel would barely utter a word to you in the morning.”

Murray laughs as he remembers Foley’s grumpier moods. But he becomes 
thoughtful again. “Olive was amazing at the funeral 
<https://www.joe.ie/sport/olive-foley-gave-an-incredible-eulogy-to-her-husband-axel-today/564587>
 –the way she spoke was presidential 
<https://www.rte.ie/sport/rugby/2016/1021/825733-foley/>. But Axel was gone 
before he should have been. I know when it’s your time, it’s your time. But …”

The 27-year-old shakes his head. “When death happens you can usually process 
it. But with Axel I feel he should be here. For a couple of weeks there was so 
much attention on his death and an outpouring of sympathy. It was beautiful. 
But now everyone is carrying on – which is strange but natural. Axel would want 
us to carry on. He continues to inspire us.”

Murray talks with moving simplicity as he describes the day Foley died in 
Paris. “We woke up, had breakfast and at 11 o’clock we had our lineout 
walkthrough with the forwards. Axel is usually at that but there was no sign of 
him. The lads thought he’d slept in or forgotten the time difference. Back at 
the hotel, before the pre-match meal, people were scurrying around. I remember 
seeing our physio holding the lift with his leg and saying: ‘The green bag, the 
green bag …’ It was his medical bag. Someone handed it to him and the lift went 
up.

“People started asking: ‘Where’s Axel?’ I said: ‘Man, I have a bad feeling 
here.’ An ambulance pulled up outside our hotel but they didn’t seem in a rush 
and that made it even more worrying. Rassie Erasmus [Munster’s new director of 
rugby who took over once, this season, Foley moved back down to being a coach] 
called us in. He was emotional and said: ‘Axel’s sick. I don’t know what’s 
happening yet.’

“Twenty minutes later Niall O’Donovan [the team-manager] came down and just 
said it: ‘Axel passed.’ Some people cried. Some people walked out. It was 
surreal and chilling. I sat there and said: ‘Oh my God.’ I couldn’t believe it, 
so I rang my dad. He was at the ground and they were all having beers. He could 
see other people finding out as news trickled through the crowd.The mood 
changed completely 
<http://www.independent.ie/sport/rugby/munster-rugby/watch-munster-fans-in-paris-remember-anthony-foley-with-poignant-rendition-of-the-fields-of-athenry-35134471.html>
.

“We had six hours to wait for our flight, so we went to a cafe and had a pint 
for Axel. What else do you do? He had just died but we ended up laughing about 
things he did, which is natural. But Axel had been a big part of my life for 
seven years.”

I check that Murray is comfortable talking about Foley – because it is obvious 
how much the Munster coach meant to their current star. “It’s OK,” Murray says, 
ignoring his lunch. “It was only later in the week that it really hit me.The 
game against Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/munster-glasgow-european-champions-cup-match-report>
, six days later, was when his two boys, Tony and Dan, joined the team in the 
huddle on the pitch. That was the moment I couldn’t stop myself crying. Really. 
The funeral had been the day before and, in the huddle, we sang [Stand Up and 
Fight]. It was chilling. I can feel it on my neck now. The crowd went silent 
and listened. You could feel how close everyone was in that moment. We were 
mourning together, sharing our grief and supporting each other. It was 
incredible – far beyond anything I’ve ever experienced.”

Another tribute to Foley, who played at No8, carried almost as much resonance 
two weeks later in Chicago. Preparing to face the All Blacks’s haka,the Ireland 
players formed a figure of eight at Soldier Field 
<https://www.balls.ie/rugby/haka-vs-ireland-in-chicago/350946>. “It was a big 
moment,” Murray murmurs. “At first the crowd didn’t know what it was but, 
slowly, you could hear recognition spreading through them. Jonny Sexton and Joe 
Schmidt had said: ‘Let’s get the Munster lads at the front of the connection.’ 
I was at one front with CJ Stander [Munster’s flanker] at the other. I didn’t 
have anyone around me and I was looking at the haka and going: ‘Aaargh! You’re 
on your own here.’ But you could sense the crowd feeling it. It gave us a big 
lift right just before we went out and laid it all on the line. It pushed us 
even further.”

Murray played with imperious brilliance all afternoon – producing arguably his 
finest game. “Yeah, yeah,” he grins. “A good game for me is when you do all 
your basics really well and then have three or four standout moments when you 
express yourself and do something good. That afternoon things went really well.

“It was roasting. A beautiful day. The sun was out. Amazing. Not a puff of 
wind. In a way it could scare you because you knew the All Blacks would love 
that, too. But we have confidence in our team. We played really well and put 
them under pressure. One thing against the All Blacks – and it’s way easier 
said than done – you’ve got to keep attacking them. Keep going at them. In 2013 
we had an unbelievable lead against them [19-0 in Dublin] and at half-time we 
were saying: ‘Oh my God let’s just blow [the final whistle] now and enjoy it.’ 
We took our foot off the gas. They ground their way back into it and beat us 
because we stopped going after them. But in Chicago, at half-time, we said we 
have to keep going after them. We did. We kept attacking them.”

Ireland were cruising at 30-8 before, in only six minutes, New Zealand scored 
14 points. Murray shudders with comic effect. “Oh God. Psychologically that was 
hard. We were thinking: ‘We’ve worked incredibly hard and we’re so tired now. 
But very good sides stretch you and you get tired, and that’s when you make bad 
decisions. There was big pressure. So to come back and score a few more points 
and another try was brilliant. When Robbie [Henshaw] scored his try it took us 
beyond seven points.”

Murray is beaming now. “In that corner you could tell we were in an American 
football stadium. There was a wall and fans were up high and shouting down at 
us. The noise was deafening. I remember running back with Rob and he was 
shouting: ‘Keep your head switched on!’ I said: ‘Man, that’s it. It’s the 78th 
minute. They’re not going to score a try, convert it and score again.’ He was 
like: ‘You’re right, you’re right.’ We knew then we’d have a good night. I had 
my dad and mates over from Ireland and New York and loads of cousins. It almost 
felt local. Normally you’re just so tired you don’t feel like celebrating – but 
we did that night.”

Ireland lost to New Zealand two weeks later in Dublin – but it was a ferocious 
contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/ireland-new-zealand-match-report-autumn-internationals-rugby-union>
 in which the home team dominated territory and possession. “Personally, with 
Beauden Barrett’s try, I slipped off a tackle and he scored,” Murray says. “I 
was like: ‘Oh my God!’ as it happened early on. I’ve got better at putting a 
mistake to one side and I was pretty happy with the rest of the game. We showed 
real heart, real toughness to stick with our game-plan – even when we went two 
scores down. I was properly proud of the team. A lot was made of the high 
tackles – but we stood up and gave it to them. That game showed that even if we 
get ruffled around we’re a tough team and we back each other. We learned a lot 
about ourselves.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fconor-murray-munster-ireland-anthony-foley-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc486b95b4018b64f97e72b1da2a66339c29afdd%2F227_146_4273_3229%2F4273.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conor%20Murray%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20usually%20process%20death.%20But%20I%20feel%20Axel%20should%20be%20here%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fconor-murray-munster-ireland-anthony-foley-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conor%20Murray%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20can%20usually%20process%20death.%20But%20I%20feel%20Axel%20should%20be%20here%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fconor-murray-munster-ireland-anthony-foley-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc486b95b4018b64f97e72b1da2a66339c29afdd%2F227_146_4273_3229%2F4273.jpg>
 Munster and Ireland scrum-half Conor Murray in Dublin. Photograph: Patrick 
Bolger for the Guardian 
Murray has also learned a lot about life and death these past two months. It 
means he can chat about the prospect of playing New Zealand again in six months 
– as a likely key member of the Lions – with a light touch. “The Lions are 
amazing. I do want to go and I am trying hard to go. I had a good laugh with 
Ben Youngs [England’s scrum half, who is Murray’s main rival for the No9 shirt 
in the Lions Test team] after we played Leicester up here [when Munster and 
Murray were dominant in a 38-0 European win almost two weeks ago]. I’d had 
questions about it all week and Ben had also done media and he was asked about 
me. We said to each other: ‘We have so much time to fuck this up!’ [Murray 
laughs]. It’s a long way away. But I’m happy with the start I’ve made – but so 
is Ben. Even guys here are talking about it and I don’t want to hear. Just keep 
doing your thing and what will be will be. But it will be an amazing tour to go 
on.”

Our interview lasts for an hour and, because it feels so easy, we chat for 
another 20 minutes. Murray tells me about great cites and restaurants he loves 
and how he flew back his younger sister Aisling from Sydney last Thursday – so 
they could surprise their parents and big sister Sarah at Christmas. “Dad’s 
really missed Aisling – she’s definitely the favourite child,” Murray chuckles.

He remembers being with his father on that emotional afternoon when Munster, 
led by Foley, won their first European Cup in Cardiff in 2006. Murray had just 
turned 17. “When Axel lifted the trophy it was a dream. I remember it was the 
first proper hug I’d had from Dad – ever. Even that moment alone was quite 
famous for me. That’s why it’s so exciting right now. There is potential – and 
I emphasise that word – we could also do something special this season.”

Murray smiles gently when asked how he would feel if Munster, somehow, did it 
again for Axel. “Oh … if we won it this season we’d probably not really 
celebrate. We’d cry a little bit. I get tingles just thinking about it.”
 