
Sweett Group, a stock market listed construction firm, has been ordered to pay 
£2.25m 
<https://www.sfo.gov.uk/2016/02/19/sweett-group-plc-sentenced-and-ordered-to-pay-2-3-million-after-bribery-act-conviction/>
 in fines and other charges after pleading guilty to a criminal offence of 
failing to prevent bribes made to secure a contract to build a £63m luxury 
hotel in Abu Dhabi.

The company, which is listed on the Aim junior stock market, notified the 
Serious Fraud Office about suspected corruption after the Wall Street Journal 
published an investigation into its Abu Dhabi activitiesthree years ago 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887323300004578557190292596654>.

Since then, Sweett has repeatedly issued statements to the stock exchange 
saying it“ 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sweett-group/rns/wall-street-journal-allegation---update/201407140700121878M/>
continues to co-operate fully with the SFO” 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sweett-group/rns/wall-street-journal-allegation---update/201407140700121878M/>
. But on Friday, sentencing judge, Martin Beddoe, told Southwark crown court 
that Sweett’s cooperation had not always been complete.


He said initially there had been no admission that bribes had been paid, 
adding that the company had tried to divert prosecutors’ attention away from 
certain parts of its business.

At one point, he said, Sweett had made contact with the Abu Dhabi company 
responsible for the development contract, seeking a letter clarifying that past 
payments had been finder’s fees rather than criminal bribes.

This, Judge Beddoe said, was a deliberate attempt to mislead the SFO.

He imposed a fine of £1.4m, in addition to an £850,000 confiscation order and 
a £95,000 contribution to SFO costs. Sweett is also said to have incurred more 
than £2.5m in costs of its own. At previous hearings, the construction firm – 
which had sales last year of £88m – told the judge that it could not afford a 
penalty of more than about £2m.


Judge Beddoe made clear Sweett was being sentenced for offending behaviour 
which began in 2012, but continued up to December last year, when Sweettpleaded 
guilty 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sweett-group--csg-/rns/interim-results---update-on-the-sfo-investigation/201512020700056526H/>
.


In a statement to the stock exchange 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sweett-group--csg-/rns/conclusion-of-the-middle-east-investigation/201602191554186453P/>
 on Friday evening, Sweett chief executive Douglas McCormick, who joined the 
company in March last year, said of the criminalv g conviction and fine: “[The] 
Middle East legacy issue is closed and this marks an important step in the 
delivery of the company’s new strategy.”

The firm said it is no longer active in the Middle East and stressed that, 
over the last year, new management had been installed.

Although Sweett pleaded guilty to the offence of failing to prevent bribery, 
the group was not offered a deferred prosecution agreement (DPA) by SFO 
director David Green QC. DPAs are a new form of prosecution available to the 
SFO in instances where companies fully cooperate with prosecutors.

The SFO wrote to Sweett in November 2014, days after the construction firm 
issueda statement to the stock exchange 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sweett-group--csg-/rns/pre-close-trading-update/201411060700203123W/>
 again telling investors it “continues to co-operate with the SFO”.

The SFO letter made clear prosecutors did not agree that Sweett was fully 
co-operating with their inquiries. Instead, they believed the company had not 
made sufficient efforts to discover the full extent of the scandal and had not 
removed all individuals responsible.

After receiving the SFO letter, Sweett was forced to issue a further update 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sweett-group--csg-/rns/update/201411111007107034W/>
 to the stock market, clarifying that “the SFO no longer considered Sweett 
Group to be co-operating”. It added that the company nevertheless “believes 
that it is doing all that it reasonably can to co-operate with the SFO 
investigation while at the same time exercising its fundamental right to legal 
and professional privilege in fulfilling its corporate and regulatory 
requirements.”

Asked on Friday if Sweett accepted that it had misled the SFO, the company 
declined to comment. It also declined to comment on whether its statements to 
the stock exchange about co-operation had been accurate.

An SFO investigation into individuals suspected of being involved in the 
bribery scandal remains ongoing.

 