
Tomorrow, Wednesday 11 January, human rights campaigners will mark the 15th 
year ofGuantánamo Bay <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay> with 
a silent demonstration in Trafalgar Square from 12 noon. They will be dressed 
as sad clowns to signify that 15 years of indefinite detention without charge 
in Guantánamo is no joke.

This demonstration also marks the failure of President Obama to fulfil his 
first pledge as president, eight years ago, to close Guantánamo. He 
consistently acknowledged that its existence is a stain on the US and on his 
presidency. To date, 55 prisoners remain there, isolated from the rest of the 
world. Of these, 19 have been approved for release and 26 are indefinitely 
imprisoned without charge. Seven prisoners face charges in a fake military 
commission court process that has nothing in common with justice. All these 
remaining prisoners should be shown compassion. They should be allowed to leave 
immediately beforeDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>
 takes over. They are now old and infirm, many need walking aids or 
wheelchairs. They have suffered enough.

Over the long years of this notorious torture camp, over 780 men were held 
there. There has been no apology to any of them for their lost time with their 
families and for their years of torture and abuse. There have been no apologies 
to the families of the nine prisoners who died there. The scars of the 
beatings, the fear of being dragged and restrained and cruelly force-fed, the 
pain of broken limbs, are still with the survivors of this shameful place.

Obama failed these men and now Trump’s nightmare promise to fill Guantánamo 
with “bad dudes” means that the US will continue to violate international human 
rights laws. We have to keep protesting for the closure of the US prison at 
Guantánamo Bay and for the return of its 45 square miles to Cuba.
Joy Hurcombe
Worthing, West Sussex

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 