
When Theresa May surveys the political obstacles ahead of her, the figure of 
Jeremy Corbyn does not loom large. A prime minister only has time to worry 
about a limited number of hazards and withdrawal from theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> brings a unique hierarchy of problems. 
The Labour party ranks well below Tory backbenchers, continental diplomacy, the 
supreme court and a Europhile civil service. Were it not for the weekly 
requirement to answer questions from the opposition leader in the Commons, May 
might forget about him altogether.

Is it time for a maximum wage cap? Our panel responds to Jeremy Corbyn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-maximum-pay-panel>
Fear of irrelevance provoked Corbyn into a flurry of activity on Tuesday – a 
dense schedule of broadcast interviews in the morning and aspeech in the 
afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
, all choreographed to monopolise the news cycle. That mission was 
accomplished. Anyone chancing across an afternoon bulletin would learn that the 
Labour leader thinksthere should be some kind of cap on wages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyns-morning-interviews-politics-live>
 (but not how high the ceiling on earnings should be). Most would also glean 
that Corbyn had said something about immigration and Brexit – perhaps that
Labour is no longer “wedded” to free movement of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
but rejects the idea that numbers must come down.

The dearth of detail and confusion about what had actually been announced 
provoked ridicule in Westminster, but Corbyn’s team are relaxed about that. 
Theirstrategic plan for the new year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/labour-plans-jeremy-corbyn-relaunch-as-a-leftwing-populist>
 factors in certainty that anything the Labour leader says will be savaged by 
pundits and disowned by some of his own MPs. The theory is that Corbyn can pull 
off a kind of jujitsu on his opponents, deflecting their own power against 
them; recasting the ferocity of an attack as proof of the target’s virtue.

If the combined forces of a corrupt establishment are so hostile to the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader, he must be doing 
something right, or so the argument goes. And if the product of a day’s media 
frenzy is people arguing about something Corbyn has planted on the agenda – 
grotesque disparities between the pay of bosses and their staff, for example – 
it counts as terrain seized from the enemy. Better to be pilloried than ignored.

This concept flows from observation of the Vote Leave campaign and Donald 
Trump’s White House bid, both of which succeeded by making a virtue of 
notoriety. Both were denounced for lurching wildly beyond the bounds of 
acceptable argument. Both times the attack mistakenly presumed public respect 
for political orthodoxies and protocols as policed by elite institutions and 
experts. Corbyn’s strategists posit that this dynamic can be replicated to 
generate anti-establishment momentum behind radical left causes – chiefly the 
taming of megalithic corporate power, which many Conservatives also identify as 
an incoming populist tide.

There is a difference between seeing the wave and surfing it. There are many 
problems with the idea that Corbyn might replicate a Trumpesque subversion of 
conventional political wisdom. One is stylistic. Setting policy aside, Corbyn’s 
triumph in Labour leadership contests – a model that he would like to scale up 
for a wider audience – depended on a modest persona. He was the accidental hero 
who plucked the sword from the stone that had entombed Blairism. Admirers of 
Corbyn’s mild manners feel protective of him when he is attacked. They rally to 
his meekness, which is a different impulse to nationalistic admiration for 
swaggering braggarts.

The bigger problem is that Britain has already cast its vote for radical 
change and the verdict was Brexit. It is too late to tell people they boarded 
the wrong train, ask them to unload their anger and point them to a different 
platform. In fairness to Corbyn, his speech on Tuesday recognised this point. 
He tried to position Labour as a party that can be enthusiastic about Brexit as 
long as the terms are unlike those dictated by Tory libertarians, with their 
axe poised over employment protections, and Ukip nativists beating the drum for 
a lower foreigner count.

They are instinctive Eurosceptics, albeit coming at it from opposite ends of 
the ideological spectrum

The hard part is describing a left-friendly Brexit in terms that fire the 
imagination. Outside the EU it would be easier to push the state into parts of 
the economy where government subsidy is currently prohibited. But that is the 
stuff of theoretical, anti-capitalist Euroscepticism, which comes instinctively 
to Corbyn but doesn’t cut through into the bigger debates about openness to the 
world and what should be sacrificed for border control. That is the question 
that will dominate politics in the coming years. When Corbyn is pressed on it, 
he withdraws into vagueness.

May is no model of clarity, although she hints often enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/uks-brexit-approach-is-not-muddled-at-all-says-theresa-may>
 that a Brexit without lower immigration is unworthy of the name. Her reticence 
is partly tactical. She knows that any statement of intent is a hostage to 
fortune in the coming negotiations. But stubbornness plays a part too. May 
wanted to be prime minister long before she was obliged to take Britain out of 
the EU and she is determined that Brexit will not define her. She has a 
doctrine of 21st-century Conservatism, based ongreater government activism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/the-guardian-view-on-mayism-pragmatism-over-ideology>
 in pursuit of social mobility, which she is expounding in instalments. On that 
theme she can speak with fluency and moral urgency.

In that respect, she and Corbyn are oddly alike. They are instinctive 
Eurosceptics, albeit coming at it from opposite ends of the ideological 
spectrum. But Euroscepticism was not a passion for either of them. They 
half-heartedly campaigned to remain in the EU, more from tactical calculation 
than conviction: Corbyn because his party demanded it, May because she thought 
she was backing the winning side. They are now forced to make Brexit their 
defining purpose, having spent decades in politics with other motives and goals 
in mind. They both feel that the referendum result was the manifestation of 
some other discontent, which they interpret – as most people do – as proof of 
things they had believed long before last year’s vote.

Neither May nor Corbyn has a problem with leaving the EU; but neither of them 
is animated by the process, still less excited by it. Both know they must walk 
the walkout of the EU, but both would rather talk about something else. On 
Brexit, Corbyn is barely an adversary to May at all. When it comes to avoiding 
the subject, they are on the same team.
 