
Tesco, WPP and Berkeley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/berkeleygroupholdings> Group are among 
the lowest-ranked companies for corporate governance according to a report 
released as companies are facing pressure to rein in runaway pay and show 
commitment to wider society.

The Institute of Directors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/institute-of-directors> (IoD), which 
published the report, warned companies to improve how they are run after a year 
in which excessive pay for bosses and a string of scandals has once again 
battered the reputation of corporate Britain.

Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> came bottom of the rankings 
of FTSE 100 companies. The supermarket chain was brought down by the lowest 
scores for accounting and audit practices that were largely a hangover from an 
accounting scandal and a series of profit warnings in the past two years.

WPP, the world’s biggest advertising company, was ranked 96. Its weak point 
was pay after the company handed its founder and chief executive Sir Martin 
Sorrell £70m for last year,prompting a third of shareholders to oppose one of 
Britain’s biggest paydays at WPP’s annual general meeting in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/08/sir-martin-sorrell-pay-deal-faces-investor-revolt-at-wpp-agm>
.

Berkeley, the upmarket London housebuilder, was 99th due to weak board 
effectiveness and low scores on pay and shareholder relations.The company, 
which is due to drop out of the FTSE 100, paid founder and chairman Tony 
Pidgley £21.5m for 2015 after awarding him £23.3m the year before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/berkeley-group-boss-tony-pidgley-gets-215m-pay-packet>
. But fewer than 13% of shareholders voted against the pay report at Tuesday’s 
AGM.

Rolls-Royce <https://www.theguardian.com/business/rollsroycegroup>, once one 
of Britain’s most respected companies, was also rated a lowly 93rd after a 
series of profit warnings and allegations of illegal payments that are under 
investigation by the Serious Fraud Office.

Corporate governance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/corporate-governance> – how companies and 
boards operate and deal with shareholders, workers and customers – has shot up 
the political agenda amid disquiet about inequality and remote business elites.

Big shareholders, under pressure to take a stand, rebelled over pay at AGMs 
this year including a majority vote against the £14m deal for BP’s chief 
executive Bob Dudley.

Theresa May has promised to rein back executive pay and has threatened to 
place workers on boards to make companies act in the interests of society and 
the economy. City institutions and business people have admitted the gap 
between those at the top and the rest of the populace contributed to the vote 
for Brexit.


Oliver Parry, head of corporate governance policy at the IoD, said: “Companies 
need to own this now. You have got to get to grips with your corporate 
governance because if you don’t then policymakers will regulate you more.

“We are saying to companies: ‘You have still got an opportunity to sort it out 
for yourselves.’”


The IoD released its report as Sports Direct prepared to face angry 
shareholders at its AGM on Wednesday. The Guardian’s investigation into working 
practices at the company added to existing concerns about its corporate 
governance and the dominance of founder and majority owner Mike Ashley.

The resulting slide in the company’s shares caused Sports Direct to fall out 
of the FTSE 100 list of Britain’s most valuable companies in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/sport-direct-falls-out-of-ftse-100-guardian-investigation-share-price-working-conditions>
, excluding it from the IoD’s list. On Tuesday Sports Direct tried to win over 
shareholders bypromising a governance review by a City law firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/sports-direct-to-ditch-zero-hours-contracts>
.

The IoD’s survey rated companies on board effectiveness, audit and risk, pay, 
and relations with shareholders and other stakeholders. It also factored in the 
opinion of its members – company secretaries, accountants and other groups – 
about companies’ governance.


The highest ranked company was British American Tobacco (BAT), whose top score 
on governance measures held up against a relatively low perception ranking of 
42. Others in the overall top 10 included Unilever, Next and Royal Mail.

Parry said BAT’s perception score was low because tobacco companies have a bad 
reputation and it showed companies need to do better at behaving well and 
getting their message across.

The IoD, which has 34,500 members, has traditionally been to the right of its 
rival the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), but it has been a fierce 
critic of high pay and unaccountable bosses – which, it argues, threaten the 
legitimacy of capitalism.

The report was the IoD’s second annual survey into corporate governance. Last 
year Britain’s banks were all in the bottom 20 along with Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/16/iod-index-corporate-governance>
. This year Barclays was the only bank in the bottom 20 though banks did badly 
in the perception survey.
 