
In 2010, when the motorway between the German cities of Duisburg and Dortmund 
was closed as part of a cultural project, three million peoplewalked, skated or 
cycled along the road <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oF_Q7u1gt_4>. For one 
day only it had been transformed into a gigantic city boulevard.

Spatial planner Martin Tönnes took the opportunity to cycle from Essen to 
Dortmund. “There were so many people that, for the first time in my life, I 
experienced a bicycle traffic jam!” he recalls. “But that was when we started 
thinking about building a highway for bikes through theRuhr Area 
<https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruhr_Area>. When we saw this mass of people 
cycling down the motorway, we understood there was a real demand.’’

Five years later, in December 2015, the first Radschnellweg 
<http://www.rs1.ruhr/> (bicycle highway) in Germany was opened, between the 
western cities of Mülheim an der Ruhr and Essen. It is just the first stretch 
of what is going to be the biggest bicycle highway in the world: 62-miles long, 
connecting 10 cities and four universities.

When complete, the network will remove 50,000 cars from the road – with an 
associated annual reduction of 16,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions –according to the 
Regional Assocation Ruhr 
<http://www.rs1.ruhr/fileadmin/user_upload/RS1/pdf/RS1_Machbarkeitsstudie_web.pdf>
, where Tönnes is head of planning.

This new bicycle highway is very different from the narrow, painted strips 
which cyclists have to make do with in German cities, often risking collisions 
with motorised traffic. It is fully segregated from cars, a comfortable 13-ft 
wide, and equipped with flyovers and tunnels to avoid intersections (a footpath 
runs parallel to it). It is also fully lit, and will be cleared of snow in 
winter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fintercity-cycle-highways-revolutionise-daily-commute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd92d7c3b2f52e383b5ea6b0a9295cf1192167da%2F0_327_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20intercity%20cycle%20highways%20revolutionise%20the%20daily%20commute%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fintercity-cycle-highways-revolutionise-daily-commute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20intercity%20cycle%20highways%20revolutionise%20the%20daily%20commute%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fintercity-cycle-highways-revolutionise-daily-commute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd92d7c3b2f52e383b5ea6b0a9295cf1192167da%2F0_327_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Germany’s first bike expressway, RS1, was opened in late 2015. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Together with the booming popularity of the electric bike, the highway could 
lead to a new era of cycle commuting inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. In the Ruhr, the distance between 
cities varies from six to 10 miles, which makes this industrial area ideal for 
commuting by bike, explains Tönnes.

“There are 1.6 million people living within 1.25 miles of the bicycle 
highway’s route; there are 150,000 students and 430,000 jobs. So I am not in 
the least worried about demand for it. The bicycle highway will persuade many 
people to start commuting by bike – with electric bikes making this choice even 
easier and faster.”

Bicycle highways are not a modern invention: the first was opened back in 1900 
in California, with the opening stretch connecting the Green and the Raymond 
hotels, both in Pasadena. This segregated highway for cyclists was a wooden 
construction for which users paid a toll of 10 cents – but itssuccess was 
short-lived 
<http://gizmodo.com/an-1899-plan-to-build-a-bike-highway-in-los-angeles-an-1699592512>
. At the time, the number of cyclists was declining, and it was dismantled 
before the end of the decade.

When it comes building serious bicycle highways, the Danes and the Dutch were 
the great pioneers. While the Danishsupercykelstiers are concentrated in and 
around Copenhagen, theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> boasts a network of about 20 
fietssnelwegen throughout the country.

The Netherlands started building bicycle highways in 2006 as a means to combat 
traffic jams. The first stretches were situated alongside busy motorways to 
offer frustrated motorists a visible alternative.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fintercity-cycle-highways-revolutionise-daily-commute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74a081af4478043ece9b9421ac39d7b13ed6772b%2F0_132_1390_834%2F1390.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20intercity%20cycle%20highways%20revolutionise%20the%20daily%20commute%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fintercity-cycle-highways-revolutionise-daily-commute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20intercity%20cycle%20highways%20revolutionise%20the%20daily%20commute%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fintercity-cycle-highways-revolutionise-daily-commute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74a081af4478043ece9b9421ac39d7b13ed6772b%2F0_132_1390_834%2F1390.jpg>
 The short-lived elevated cycleway in Pasadena, California, 1900. Photograph: 
Southern Pacific Railroad Company/Dobbins Collection, Pasadena Museum of History
“The term ‘bicycle highway’ sounds very luxurious, so we prefer to talk of 
‘fast cycle connections’,” says Ineke Spapé, a Dutch traffic planner and 
bicycle professor at Breda University of Applied Sciences. “In the Netherlands, 
they are not always 13-ft wide with expensive overpasses and underpasses. 
Sometimes there’s no space; sometimes it’s more practical to just improve 
existing cycle paths and connections. And it’s cheaper to give cyclists 
priority at a crossing than to build a flyover or a tunnel.”

We believe the bike is the answer to traffic and environmental problems
Birgit Kastrup 
Spapé is often consulted by traffic planners from other European countries, 
and her message is always: don’t spend too much time on feasibility studies and 
don’t aim for perfection. “For example, the Germans have guidelines that 
require footpaths parallel to their bicycle highways. When this is not 
possible, don’t cancel the plan: be pragmatic. What you want is to get people 
on their bikes – because the bike really is the future.’’

Many big German cities such as Frankfurt, Hamburg, Berlin, Munich and 
Nuremberg share this view, and are now studying the possibilities for 
Radschnellwege to suburbs and surrounding cities.

“Our population is growing fast, and that means traffic will increase and 
public transport will be under pressure,” says Birgit Kastrup from the Planning 
Association of Greater Munich. “We have to think of intelligent solutions for 
these problems.”

Munich is now considering to build a cycle highway to its northern suburbs of 
Garching and Unterschleissheim. “We believe the bike is the answer to traffic 
and environmental problems,” Kastrup says. “Bicycle highways are also a way to 
promote a healthier lifestyle.”

There remains one problem to be solved: finance. Cycle highways are not cheap, 
the costs vary between €500,000 and €2m per kilometre (£400,000 to £1.7m). In 
total, the Ruhr bicycle highwayis predicted to cost  
<http://www.rs1.ruhr/fileadmin/user_upload/RS1/pdf/RS1_Machbarkeitsstudie_web.pdf>
€183.7m.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fintercity-cycle-highways-revolutionise-daily-commute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc649a853a9de70bf43c0c19b9d91aeb89452c950%2F0_66_5308_3186%2F5308.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20intercity%20cycle%20highways%20revolutionise%20the%20daily%20commute%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fintercity-cycle-highways-revolutionise-daily-commute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20intercity%20cycle%20highways%20revolutionise%20the%20daily%20commute%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fintercity-cycle-highways-revolutionise-daily-commute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc649a853a9de70bf43c0c19b9d91aeb89452c950%2F0_66_5308_3186%2F5308.jpg>
 The first part of Germany’s planned 62-mile long bike expressway. Photograph: 
Alamy Stock Photo 
Whereas the Dutch central government subsidises the building of its bicycle 
highways, in Germany bicycle infrastructure is solely the responsibility of 
municipal and federal governments. The German minister of transport, Alexander 
Donbrindt, has made it clear that cities eager to build bicycle highways should 
expect nothing from him.


“He has been much criticised for a lack of vision,” Tönnes says. “Luckily, our 
federal government [of Northrhine-Westfalia] understands the importance of 
bicycle highways, and is changing the law to be able to finance the entire 
project.”

Other federal states are not so generous, which means cities such as Munich 
are still groping in the dark when it comes to financing their first project. 
“It will be exciting to see what comes out of this discussion,” Kastrup says. 
“But the political will is certainly there, so I am sure we will find the 
means.”

In Berlin, a city that struggles with huge debt, the idea was put forward to 
finance bicycle highways through advertising along the route. The proposal is 
in stark contrast to the Norwegian government’s recently announced plan to 
invest £700m in bicycle highways in and around nine of its biggest cities. The “
super-sykkelveier 
<http://www.vg.no/nyheter/innenriks/frp/synes-ikke-super-sykkelveier-er-saa-supert/a/23628259/>
” are considered an important means to combat CO2 emissions – a remarkable step 
for a mountainous country where winters are long and very cold, and cycling not 
as common as in other Scandinavian states.

Meanwhile, the Netherlands is working on 30 new projects, including an 18-mile 
bicycle highway to connect the northern cities of Assen and Groningen. And for 
the initiator of this project, a bicycle highway alone is not enough: “We want 
to offer an exceptional experience to the people who’re going to use the 
highway,’’ says politician Henk Brink.

How Groningen invented a cycling template for cities all over the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/29/how-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world>
Five different bureaus have been asked to come up with innovative ideas. There 
are plans for artworks along the highway that change with the weather 
conditions, and for a multifunctional highway where people can practise all 
kinds of sports when the rush hour is done – not to mention a highway with 
Wi-Fi hotspots and the possibility to charge your electric bike along the way. 
There’s also a plan for a canopied highway to keep cyclists out of the rain – 
or one that shelters cyclists from crosswinds by screens that rotate with the 
wind direction.

“These are just ideas, we don’t know what were are going to decide 
eventually,” Brink says. “But we believe that if you want people to start 
commuting by bike, you have to make sure they are going to enjoy it.’’

Asked whether Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is 
entering a new age of long-distance cycle commuting, Spapé says: “Of course! 
The Dutch already have, thanks to the enormous popularity of electric bikes and 
our network of fast cycle connections. And in Germany it’s going to happen in 
the very near future.’’

According to Spapé, fast electric bikes enable commuters to easily cover 
stretches of 12 to 18 miles – provided there’s a well-designed highway with a 
smooth surface. “I have a colleague who commutes by power bike from Tilburg to 
Breda. That’s 16 miles,” she says. “In the future, more and more commuters will 
cycle – smiling – past the traffic jams.”

 * This article was updated on 3 July to state that, when complete, the 
network will induce an annual, rather than a daily, reduction of 16,000 tonnes 
of CO2 emissions.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 