
A six-day conference on Americana music <http://americanamusic.org/> would 
suggest that all the artists were from where we expect Americana music to 
originate: America.

Not so. While the Americana Music Festival and Conference, which wrapped on 
Sunday in Nashville, primarily focused on artists from the States, a good 
number were from Britain, where the genre is becoming better known and where 
artists are feeling more enabled to play music that appeals to their 
sensibilities for string-based music that harkens back to traditional country 
icons, from Hank Williams to Dolly Parton. The hope among many is that the next
Margo Price <http://margoprice.net/>, Chris Stapleton  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/05/chris-stapleton-steals-cma-awards-justin-timberlake>
orSturgill Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/31/sturgill-simpson-country-music-reluctant-saviour-metamodern-sounds-interview>
 won’t come from Tennessee but from the UK.

John Prine review – legendary songwriter looks back to the beginning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/24/john-prine-songs-music-review-nashville-first-album-concert>
“Before, people [in the UK] put your music in folk or blues categories. But 
there is newfound ownership of this genre and the origin of it as well,” said 
Yola Carter, an unsigned country singer from outside Bristol, who performed 
songs from her forthcoming album throughout Nashville last week.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdtmDIC1E1FI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdtmDIC1E1FI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdtmDIC1E1FI&media=>
The conference, which featured familiar artists such as Emmylou Harris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/emmylou-harris>, John Prine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/24/john-prine-songs-music-review-nashville-first-album-concert>
, andDwight Yoakam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jul/19/beck-dwight-yoakam> as well as 
dozens of new faces, is geared to distinguish artists whose music falls outside 
the narrow aesthetics of commercial country radio in an effort to grow a 
community among industry leaders and audiences. TheAmericana Music Association 
<http://americanamusic.org/>, the not-for-profit that organized the festival, 
has had early successes in promoting Americana. There are now threeGrammy 
categories dedicated to Americana artists 
<http://theboot.com/best-americana-album-2016-grammy-awards-predictions/>, 
Billboard nowcharts its best sellers 
<http://www.billboard.com/charts/americana-folk-albums>, and the 
Merriam-Webster dictionarynow defines Americana as a legitimate musical genre 
<http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/Americana>. 

Effects of those efforts are rippling across the Atlantic. Just four years 
ago, theAmericana Music Association UK <http://theamauk.org/> formed with 
similar goals. This year the organization accomplished two benchmarks: its 
campaign to have an Americana Album sales chart tracked by the Official Charts 
Company wasa success 
<http://www.officialcharts.com/charts/americana-albums-chart/> and in February 
it hosted its first annualUK Americana Awards 
<http://theamauk.org/the-uk-americana-awards-winners-2016> featuring 
performances by a slate of local talent including Billy Bragg,Danny and the 
Champions of The World <http://www.dannyandthechamps.com/>, Bear’s Den 
<http://www.bearsdenmusic.co.uk/>, Robert Vincent 
<http://www.mangoneblog.com/interview-robert-vincent-lma-best-male-vocalist-nominee-as-long-as-the-proceeds-dont-go-to-funding-someones-war-somewhere-im-all-for-local-music-awards/>
 andCale Tyson <http://www.caletyson.net/>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyWlQV_KmnQ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyWlQV_KmnQ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyWlQV_KmnQ0&media=>
Stevie Freeman, the organization’s board chair, says the charts and awards are 
both talkers that allow DJs and others to get engaged on a deeper level with 
the music. “The more the people mention it, the bigger it’ll get,” she says. 
Next year’s awards will take place in February with an accompanying conference 
similar to the one in Nashville.

Nashville music festival defines 'Americana': the art, not the business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/25/nashville-americana-festival-country-music-songs>
England, of course, is a root country for Americana music as many of its 
ballads and folk songs that traveled to these shores became the fundamental 
material for what developed early last century. The folk revival of the 1950s 
was in full swing in the UK and by the 1960s, British groups like the Faces, 
the Rolling Stones and the Beatles, all championed Nashville music through 
direct covers or through co-opting a bit of strum and twang. Freeman, also a 
co-owner ofUnion Music Store <https://unionmusicstore.com/>, a record shop in 
Lewes that specializes in Americana, says that the resurgence of interest can 
be traced to the success ofMumford and Sons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mumford-and-sons>, a band that pushed 
against conventional pop hitmakers because of their use of stringed instruments 
and low-key production. They represent, she says, the millennial generation’s 
punk rock.

For those bands, breaking into America is incredibly difficult due to the high 
cost of touring and an entry process that often makes it difficult to get in or 
stay for a reasonable duration. TheBritish Underground 
<http://www.britishunderground.net/> aims to change that. In Nashville, the 
London-based organization, which is funded byArts Council England 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/>, a state-funded institution, helps subsidize 
75% of costs for British musicians to travel abroad and play international 
showcases here and abroad at important industry fetes like theSouth By Southwest
 <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> music conference in Austin and, 
this year, the Americana festival in Nashville where the organization hosted an 
afternoon-long barbecue on Saturday outsidethe Groove 
<http://thegroovenashville.com/>, a record store on the city’s east side. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLzN3YIX2J28&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLzN3YIX2J28>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLzN3YIX2J28&media=>
The hope is that, once here, the British artists will get signed or, at the 
very least, get buzz that leads to favorable reviews, press mentions, airplay, 
and invitations back to tour.Crispin Parry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/jun/16/mondaymediasection1>, the 
organization’s CEO, describes the grant money as “a stepping stone”.

“We are giving them the best possible opportunity here,” he says. Artists are 
required to be organized enough to receive invitations to the showcases and, 
once in, have to produce a business plan for how the money will be spent. Once 
chosen, the organization does all the marketing and introductions. Each artist 
receives up to £5,000. “That’s career changing,” he says. And it was for Robert 
Vincent, one of three British artists who received grants to attend the 
Nashville conference. By the weekend, Vincent had signed to a label, Last 
Chance records of Arkansas, home to favorite US Americana acts Tim Easton 
<http://www.timeaston.com/>, Slobberbone’s Brent Best 
<http://www.dallasobserver.com/music/brent-best-comes-out-the-other-side-after-having-his-life-turned-upside-down-7462653>
, andAmerican Aquarium <http://www.americanaquarium.com/>. 

Giving independent artists chances to play overseas is a good investment for 
the British government. According to May 2016 data from the PRS for Music 
Foundation, the organization that manages the British Underground funding, for 
every £1 spent on artist grants, the same artists generated an additional £8.90 
in revenues back home. Indeed, as artist funding has increased 143% over the 
last 12 months to £6,823,247, money benefiting both the UK music industry and 
British economy increased to £4m.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO7ld6tjLpVo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO7ld6tjLpVo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO7ld6tjLpVo&media=>
The cultural exchange goes both ways. A panel discussion on Friday among 
representatives of British record labels, the British Underground and the 
Americana Music Association UK was geared to help US artists navigate the UK. 
In many ways, Freeman pointed out, the opportunities in her home country are 
legion for Americana artists due to regional DJs, festivals, a network of 
independent record stores, and an audience hungry for the music. In fact, 
before he became a phenomenon in the US, Sturgill Simpson first showed up in 
England where he signed to Loose Records, an Americana label that also put 
records out byNeko Case <http://caselangveirs.com/>, Hurray for the Riff Raff 
<http://www.hurrayfortheriffraff.com/#about>, and the Felice Brothers. 

At last Saturday’s barbecue the division between the US and UK was nonexistent 
as the showcasing artists showed they were just as original as their 
counterparts in the States. Inside an adjoining record shop, folk duos and solo 
acts performed, includingLewis & Leigh <http://www.lewisandleigh.com/>, a 
harmony duo from Mississippi and Wales, respectively, who played haunting songs 
reminiscent of Gillian Welch and David Rawlings.


Outside the shop, under the blistering heat, an afternoon of British acts 
rotated through sets. The day started early with a set byWilliam the Conqueror 
<http://www.greennote.co.uk/production/william-the-conqueror/>, the alter ego 
of Ruarri Joseph who, in a trio setting, played stomping country rock, at the 
end veering into stoner grunge reminiscent of Built to Spill.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Famericana-music-british-artists-mumford-sons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F220b42fc42c77e95a9dee9cdf0b61eccdca45a5d%2F0_178_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20the%20future%20of%20Americana%20be%20%E2%80%A6%20British%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Famericana-music-british-artists-mumford-sons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20the%20future%20of%20Americana%20be%20%E2%80%A6%20British%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Famericana-music-british-artists-mumford-sons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F220b42fc42c77e95a9dee9cdf0b61eccdca45a5d%2F0_178_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Stomping country meets stoner rock: Ruarri Joseph aka William the Conqueror. 
Photograph: Pickhaver/Rex/Shutterstock 
The breakout performance was by Yola Carter <http://yolacarter.com/> and her 
five-member band who played country gospel driven with the driving energy of 
old-fashioned soul music. Carter, a former vocalist with Massive Attack, 
presented autobiographical songs, some of which dealt with the discrimination 
she experienced, not just as a black women growing up outside Bristol, but one 
drawn to country music. Her songs brandished big hooks and she filled them with 
stirring vocals, shouts, and yes, yodeling.

Afterwards, Carter said country music offered what real life didn’t when she 
was younger: community. “I’ve never been much of an in-crowd person. Where I 
grew up I was the only black person. So I felt a sense of isolation and also a 
sense of isolation musically.”

In Nashville, community was all around her. In this town, yodeling is not just 
natural, it’s also a mark of celebration.

“You can’t yodel sad,” she said. “It’s a happy way to sing.”
 