
Sitting on a Los Angeles <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> 
freeway – not in a traffic jam but, literally, sitting cross-legged in the 
middle lane of one of the busiest freeways in the United States – is a contrary 
infrastructural experience.


This is a space passed over by more than 125,000 cars a day, most speeding 
through at 60, 70 or 80 miles an hour. At a speed of zero, there’s a cognitive 
dissonance created by the frozen freeway’s stillness. It feels like visiting 
the moon, a place you know is real but never thought you’d see firsthand.

The freeway – a two-mile section of the southbound side of US Route 101, east 
of downtown Los Angeles – has been completely shut down for six hours this 
Sunday morning. It’s a rare opportunity for the State Department of 
Transportation to perform an intensive maintenance job on what otherwise is a 
constantly flowing river of traffic in three lanes. For these few hours, the 
river is dry.

It’s called “swarm maintenance”, after the crew of more than a hundred workers 
who are scattered along this stretch of freeway, trimming trees, cleaning 
debris, repairing lights and making inspections. Entire sections of freeway 
aren’t often closed down like this, mainly because of thedisruption it can cause
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/17/carmageddon-los-angeles-freeway-demolition>
 to the regional transportation system. At a time when cities across the 
country are consideringplans to tear down old freeways 
<http://transportationblog.dallasnews.com/2014/03/these-cities-scrapped-old-freeways-and-were-glad.html/>
 and proactively turning over thecar-space of streets to pedestrians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/10/live-debate-ban-cars-city-centres-pedestrianisation>
, six hours without three lanes of freeway in Los Angeles still seems like a 
lot to ask.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flos-angeles-survive-without-freeways-vision-carless-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F27%2F1422360018368%2F715790ae-e8da-4d8a-aac6-901f1e981478-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20LA%20survive%20without%20its%20freeways%3F%20My%20six-hour%20vision%20of%20a%20carless%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flos-angeles-survive-without-freeways-vision-carless-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20LA%20survive%20without%20its%20freeways%3F%20My%20six-hour%20vision%20of%20a%20carless%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flos-angeles-survive-without-freeways-vision-carless-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F27%2F1422360018368%2F715790ae-e8da-4d8a-aac6-901f1e981478-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A more common image of LA’s freeway system. Photograph: Ron Chapple Stock/Alamy
In hard-hats and reflective yellow vests, groups of community service workers 
are clipping tangled vines on the sound protection walls that line the freeway, 
and hoeing weeds on overgrown hillsides – unpaid work done as partial 
punishment for crimes including unpaid parking tickets and drunken driving.


Department of transportation workers, meanwhile, perform a raft of 
higher-level tasks that would typically only happen in response to an accident, 
or when a single lane could be closed for an hour without bottle-necking a 
region. Light crews replace three “knockdowns” – light poles damaged in car 
accidents. A guy 30 feet up in the basket of a cherrypicker methodically 
supplants old lightbulbs on the 60 or so poles lining this section of road with 
new LED fixtures; three minutes a pop.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flos-angeles-survive-without-freeways-vision-carless-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F27%2F1422359242581%2F371e62db-a779-4ba7-901b-e9d22cc986a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20LA%20survive%20without%20its%20freeways%3F%20My%20six-hour%20vision%20of%20a%20carless%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flos-angeles-survive-without-freeways-vision-carless-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20LA%20survive%20without%20its%20freeways%3F%20My%20six-hour%20vision%20of%20a%20carless%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flos-angeles-survive-without-freeways-vision-carless-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F27%2F1422359242581%2F371e62db-a779-4ba7-901b-e9d22cc986a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A worker in full hazmat suit oversees the clearing of a roadside drain. 
Photograph: Nate Berg 
At the back of another truck, a worker has his hand on a joystick and his eyes 
on a video monitor as he guides a tiny, four-wheeled camera robot through a 
drainpipe. It appears damage-free, which is impressive for an underground 
concrete pipe from the 1940s in seismically-active southern California. Recent 
rains have washed out any blockages, at least in the dozen-or-so feet within 
the camera’s view, but it has a few hundred more feet to inspect yet. Nearby, a 
worker in a fullhazmat suit <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hazmat_suit> is 
manning the 20-foot hose of a vacuum truck, pushed deep down into another drain 
and sucking out a horrible slurry of fetid stormwater, garbage and oil.

The freeway is a harsh, dirty environment. Railings are powder-coated with a 
grey carbon soot. Gutters are swathed with piles of a unique freeway dust made 
up of dirt, rubber, metal and garbage, all ground down by the incessant 
movement of cars and wind. The Portland concrete cement roadbed is mostly free 
of debris, but the small grooves and cracks in the surface are packed tight 
with that freeway dust. At the roadside, amid the brush and shrubs, garbage 
large and small is pulled out by the work crews – stripped tyre, front bumper 
of a blue sedan, bottles, bolts, old clothes. In the trash-strewn central 
reservation, two large tumbleweeds nestle against a roadsign.


Absent of any motion, the freeway has the barren eeriness of an abandoned 
building. Empty, it is even bigger than you’d expect, and it’s hard not to 
marvel at the sheer amount of land used to make this small, two-mile stretch 
that is only a tiny fraction of what’s been cleared and paved worldwide. 
Walking across it feels about the same as walking across a regular street, 
albeit with the unshakeable worry that a car might come barrelling by at 70 
miles an hour. Looking out down the lanes, as they slowly curve into the 
distance, the unfolding carpet of concrete as far as you can see gives the 
sensation of being very, very small.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flos-angeles-survive-without-freeways-vision-carless-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F27%2F1422362168603%2F0a482655-ee4b-4cb3-a449-b44f43b37146-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20LA%20survive%20without%20its%20freeways%3F%20My%20six-hour%20vision%20of%20a%20carless%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flos-angeles-survive-without-freeways-vision-carless-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20LA%20survive%20without%20its%20freeways%3F%20My%20six-hour%20vision%20of%20a%20carless%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Flos-angeles-survive-without-freeways-vision-carless-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F27%2F1422362168603%2F0a482655-ee4b-4cb3-a449-b44f43b37146-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Absent of any motion, the freeway has the barren eeriness of an abandoned 
building.’ Photograph: Nate Berg 
Seeing a road like this, drained of its traffic, inevitably leads one to 
wonder whether it needs to be reopened at all. For Los Angeles, freeways serve 
a critical role – yet their inevitability in the modern metropolis is becoming 
less certain around the world. Perhaps even Los Angeles can rethink its 
transportation system in a way that would allow the closure of some of its 
famous freeways. Maybe I am glimpsing a vision of the future.

Hours later, the freeway is back open to the masses. Cars and trucks are again 
driving through this short section, heading south at speeds that could kill. 
They’re passing all the inspected stormdrains and new light poles and trimmed 
trees in fractions of a second, traversing hundreds of feet of concrete 
pavement in mere moments. The freeway landscape is once again seen but not 
seen, overlooked and forgotten, yet very much a dominating presence in this 
city.
 