
Luke Bryan <http://www.lukebryan.com/tour.html> doesn’t have to work 
especially hard to offend traditional country music fans. He’s become the 
figurehead of the much-maligned bro-country movement in recent years, andeven 
if bro-country is dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/07/bro-country-dying-genre>, he’s 
still seen as public enemy No1 when it comes to country music’s diminished 
perception to the outside world.

But this week, Bryan kicked the dust up in a huge way with traditional country 
fans when he compared Merle Haggard, Waylon Jennings and Willie Nelson to 
“strung out” drug addicts inan interview with HITS 
<http://hitsdailydouble.com/news&id=296751>. “I think that people who want 
Merle, Willie and Waylon just need to buy Merle, Willie and Waylon,” he said. 
“I’m not an outlaw country singer. I don’t do cocaine and run around. So I’m 
not going to sing outlaw country.” He continued, “I like to hunt, fish, ride 
around on my farm, build a big bonfire and drink some beers – and that’s what I 
sing about. It’s what I know. I don’t know about laying in the gutter, strung 
out on drugs. I don’t really want to do that.”

A storm of angry tweets and blog posts followed the interview, and you can bet 
that people took umbrage at those words – including members of Jennings’s 
family. Kathy Pinkerman Jennings, the daughter-in-law of Waylon,posted her 
thoughts 
<http://www.savingcountrymusic.com/waylon-jennings-family-member-responds-to-luke-bryans-comments>
 on Facebook (and then in a subsequent video) and defended her father-in-law, 
who did battle with and eventually overcame drug addiction. “You told us Waylon 
was one of your musical heroes,” she wrote about meeting Bryan at the Grand Ole 
Opry. “You are a platinum, disrespecting, no singing, whining, grasping for 
media attention asshole. Use your platform for something good, instead of 
bashing the LEGENDS that came before you.”

Bryan has since attempted to clarify his comments 
<http://radio.com/2015/07/13/luke-bryan-outlaw-country-response/> on Twitter, 
and according toan Los Angeles Times interview 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/music/posts/la-et-ms-luke-bryan-waylon-shooter-jennings-apology-outlaw-country-20150713-story.html>
 with Shooter Jennings, Waylon’s son, Bryan has personally called Jessi, 
Waylon’s widow, to apologise, and he asked for Kathy’s number to speak to her 
as well. “It’s all flush in my book,” Shooter said. “He said some [stuff] and 
because of the internet it came back on him. But he went above and beyond and 
manned up and apologized.”

Despite Bryan’s shallow understanding of the outlaw era, which, in fact, had 
very little to do with crime and drug use from a musical standpoint, I’m 
willing to follow Shooter’s advice and let his comments lie. What’s far more 
intriguing to me about the whole debacle is that Bryan made those remarks in 
response to an utterly innocuous statement from the interviewer, whichread 
<http://hitsdailydouble.com/news&id=296751>: “The party energy of [country 
music] right now, with all those hip-hop and rock influences, is so infectious.”

Yep, that was the big, scary non-question that elicited Bryan’s kneejerk 
reaction and subsequent outlaw country quotes. It reveals an internal 
defensiveness within Bryan about his musical style. It’s clear that he knows 
he’s a contested figure within country music, that he knows there is mass 
criticism directed at hip-hop’s fusion with country music, that he knows many 
people think of him asa twerking mannequin in skinny jeans 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vvQbOFR_Vp0> and not much else. But it’s 
curious that a platinum-selling superstar normally so well-versed in the PR 
game would let that frustration out into an interview.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkMr7NCFoHFo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkMr7NCFoHFo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkMr7NCFoHFo&media=>
Jake Owen <http://www.jakeowen.net/splash>, whose choreography-filled 
performance of single Real Life at the CMT awards felt like a flashback to 1999 
pop music, has also been venting to the media lately. “I get so tired of 
hearing these people ask, ‘So what do you think of bro-country?’ I don’t care,” 
hetold Rolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/jake-owen-on-exhausted-bro-country-debate-its-so-annoying-20150709>
. Describing his live show, Owen said, “People are there for the experience and 
for the music, and they’re there for the way it feels to relate to a song that 
youjust like. There’s not much more thought to it than that.” He concluded: “If 
you try to put more thought into it than that, you’re a dick.”

Let’s be clear here: Bryan and Owen are not victims of the music industry. 
They have better careers than 99.9% of musicians, and they can make the music 
they want to make, and I would hope they could stand by it confidently, not 
defensively. Thinking deeply about their artistic output does not make you a 
dick, and desiring substance in popular music does not mean you want stars 
exclusively singing about being strung out on drugs. Those are both unfair 
statements meant to reframe legitimate criticism as baseless, antagonistic 
chatter.

Both interviews are indicative of a mentality currently on the rise in 
mainstream country music – that the genre should “evolve” into something that 
sounds and looks different than it ever has, and that all questions regarding 
that trajectory are automatically villainous. That’s just not the case.

No one is arguing for country music to replicate the past. But people are 
concerned about what appears to be a conscious step away from thoughtful 
songwriting and to an assumed tailgate mentality. They’re worried that real 
instrumentation will disappear in the wake of digital sounds. They’re annoyed 
that abarely countrified remix <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZcsg4mS2yA> of 
Andy Grammer’s Honey I’m Good is suddenly getting added at country radio. 
They’re frustrated that labels aren’t pushing fearless artists with 
irrepressible perspectives, but moldable pop acts like Dan + Shay, who’ll style 
their hair and roll around in the mud with puppies (for a tune theyrecently 
mashed up with Nick Jonas’s Chains <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3726ijzTLXs>
) in their new music video, slap the word “country” beside their names on 
iTunes, and call it a day.

Labels and many artists would undoubtedly prefer for audiences to look at the 
puppies and say, “Aw, puppies!” or to look at Luke Bryan’s shaking ass and bite 
their lips with lust. But it’s a lack of critical assessment that has helped 
create so many problems in country music today – and if the genre’s stars are 
finally starting to feel the heat of the public’s desire for more substance – 
then it’s high time to keep asking questions.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0uPHfQSe5rI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0uPHfQSe5rI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0uPHfQSe5rI&media=> 