
Billy Sharp struck twice to give Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> a 2-1 win over Coventry 
in a game interrupted by protests from the home fans.

The match was twice held up by fans running on to the pitch, briefly in the 
first half and then for six minutes as the players were taken off in the 86th 
minute. The interruptions were just the latest in a series of protests against 
the Coventry owners Sisu, with the club one point off the bottom of theLeague 
One <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> table after a run 
of six league defeats. For the Blades, meanwhile, the win takes them up to 
second, behind Scunthorpe on only goal difference.

Coventry City’s fingers caught in Sisu sliding door that Saints dodged | 
Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/05/coventry-city-sisu-southampton>
“It had no bearing on the result,” said Coventry’s interim manager, Mark 
Venus. “I think we worked really hard today and tried our best and the longer 
the game went on the more threat we had and the less threat they had. To give a 
late goal away says where we are at the moment, everything seems to go against 
us.”

The Sheffield United manager, Chris Wilder, was disappointed the fans took 
their protest on to the pitch, adding: “I didn’t enjoy it if I’m honest. That’s 
twice that’s happened to us, at Charlton, now here. It’s disrupted the game. 
It’s poor – I have a bitter sweet taste in my mouth. We’re talking about stuff 
that’s off the pitch in the stands, it’s a sad day.”

Speaking on Friday, the Coventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/coventry> chairman, Tim Fisher, pleaded 
with supporters to not proceed with any planned protests in the future. 
“Supporters need to get behind the football team because we are down the bottom 
of the league, we need to get up the league and we are not going to do that by 
people jumping up and down chanting ‘Sisu out’,” he told TalkSport.

“If you saw last night with the ‘Sisu out’ banners and the singing, the 
shoulders of the footballers slump forward. It does affect the psychology of 
the footballers. I’m not saying this is easy, it is challenging, but what we 
have got to do is get away from mixing the ownership of the football club with 
the football club.”

 “With regard to the supporters, I have had two sets of messages this morning. 
One saying, ‘I’m ashamed, I’m embarrassed to be a Coventry City supporter from 
what I saw last night’. Then there are those who are saying: ‘I’m impassioned, 
I’m so fired up, we should do more of these things’. Maybe the second lot 
didn’t see the little ball boys and ball girls who were frightened, who were 
crying.

“There are supporters who just want to come and watch football and we should 
be minded to think of them.”

Sharp put Sheffield United in front in the 23rd minute when a clearance from 
Jordan Turnbull went straight to his feet inside the penalty area and he 
returned a low shot into the corner of the net. The game had already been held 
up by a pitch invader and the mood threatened to get uglier but United failed 
to build on their lead in the first half.

Coventry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/05/coventry-city-sisu-southampton>
 failed to manage a shot on target before the interval and when they pulled 
level six minutes after the break, it was thanks to a large deflection off Paul 
Coutts. Dan Agyei, on loan from Burnley, tried his luck from 20 yards and 
watched the ball balloon over the goalkeeper Simon Moore.

The second delay was caused by fans carrying banners and, straight after play 
resumed, Sharp pounced on a loose ball to win the match in the 90th minute.
 