
Prosecutors have rejected an attempt to overturn their decision not to charge 
anyone over the involvement of the British intelligence agency MI6 in the 
kidnapping of two Libyan dissidents in a joint operation with theCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia>.

Lawyers for the two families accused prosecutors of a “complete stitch-up” 
after failing to quash the decision not to bring anycharges over the abduction 
of the dissidents and their families, including a pregnant woman and children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/08/cps-will-not-bring-charges-against-mi6-over-rendition-of-libyan-families>
.

The Crown Prosecution Service announced in June that, after a Scotland Yard 
investigation 
<http://blog.cps.gov.uk/2016/06/crown-prosecution-service-statement-operation-lydd-.html>
 lasting four years,it did not have enough evidence bring criminal charges. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/mi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj>

Detectives had compiled a 28,000-page file on how the CIA and MI6 had 
collaborated toabduct the families of the two prominent dissidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/nov/08/libyan-dissident-rendition-damages-supreme-court-belhaj>
, Abdel Hakim Belhaj and Sami al-Saadi, and fly them to the late Libyan 
dictator Muammar Gaddafi’s prisons in 2004.


Documents that came to light in 2011 after the toppling of Gaddafi revealed 
the UK’s participation in the abduction of Belhaj and his pregnant wife,and 
al-Saadi and his wife and four young children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/rendition-islamists-mi6-torture-libya>
, from south-east Asia.

Blair government's rendition policy led to rift between UK spy agencies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/31/revealed-britain-rendition-policy-rift-between-spy-agencies-mi6-mi5>
Detectives questioned Sir Mark Allen, the former head of counter-terrorism at 
MI6 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/mi6>, about faxes from London to Tripoli, 
signed “Mark”, that acknowledged his role in the abduction of Belhaj.


They also uncovered evidence that MI6 had sought political authority from 
ministers for some of their actions.


The two families demanded a review of the CPS decision not to charge, as they 
were entitled to do so as victims under an official scheme.

On Friday, Greg McGill, the CPS’s director of legal services, said: “As the 
result of a request under the victims’ right to review scheme, the decision to 
take 
<http://blog.cps.gov.uk/2016/08/operation-lydd-victims-right-to-review-decision.html>
 no further action in this case was looked at again. After careful 
consideration of all the evidence I have decided to uphold the original 
decision in this case.”

Cori Crider <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/cori-crider>, a lawyer with 
thehuman rights group Reprieve <http://www.reprieve.org.uk/about/>, 
representing the two families, said: “This was exactly what we feared would 
happen when the CPS froze the victims out of the so-called ‘victims’ review’.”

She said the review was “not a run-of-the-mill exercise” as the police 
investigation had examined the conduct of ministers and senior intelligence 
officers.

“It was vital that the review command public confidence. Instead the CPS 
flogged it through in seven weeks, without making even the feeblest attempt to 
engage the victims about their concerns,” she said.


MI6 gets off scot-free over rendition of suspected Islamists to Libya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/rendition-islamists-mi6-torture-libya>
She added that Alison Saunders, the director of public prosecutions, “came 
into post saying that women and child victims got a raw deal out of the justice 
system – and she promised to make it better. The Belhaj and al-Saadi families 
have seen no sign that those words meant anything.”

In June, Belhaj and his wife, Fatima Boudchar, spoke of their distress at the 
decision not to charge anyone.Boudchar said she could not believe it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/10/libyan-rendition-couple-boudchar-belhaj-criticise-cps-decision>
. “I was heavily pregnant when Britain helped kidnap and deliver me to Gaddafi. 
My baby weighed four pounds when he was born,” she said.

“I wonder how a British mother would have felt in my situation, if, while she 
was still carrying her baby, a gang of kidnappers seized her, took her to a 
secret cell, tortured her, taped her to a stretcher, and delivered her and her 
baby to a horrendous dictator.”

The two families, who were living in exile when they were abducted, have 
described how they were tortured for years after they were sent back toLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya>.
 