
A new report <http://www.crisis.org.uk/publications-search.php?fullitem=516> by
homeless charity Crisis <http://www.crisis.org.uk/> has revealed the shocking 
level of violence and intimidation homeless people face in England and Wales.

Researchers speaking to people sleeping rough found:

 * More than one in three have been deliberately been hit, kicked, or 
experienced some other form of violence while homeless. 
 * Over one in three (34%) have had things thrown at them. 
 * Almost one in 10 (9%) have been urinated on while homeless. 
 * More than one in 20 (7%) have been the victim of a sexual assault. 
 * Almost half (48%) have been intimidated or threatened with violence whilst 
homeless. 
 * Six in 10 (59%) have been verbally abused or harassed. 
Jon Sparkes, chief executive of Crisis, said that for anyone sleeping on the 
street, life can be a struggle just to survive. “As our research shows, rough 
sleepers are far more likely to be victims of crime, including violent assault, 
abuse and intimidation, compared to the general public,” he commented. “This is 
a horrifying state of affairs and shows why we need to prevent people ending up 
in this situation in the first place.”


Homelessness in England is soaring. It’s a scandal – but we can fix it | Dawn 
Foster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/21/homelessness-england-rising-scandal-rough-sleeping>
The charity is calling for action to prevent people having to face street 
homelessness in the first place. The homelessness reduction bill going through 
parliament would force local authorities to make sure homeless people can get 
support at an early stage.

Christmas is a particularly difficult time for homeless people, according to 
Sparkes. Over the festive period, Crisis is opening many more shelters, run by 
volunteers and staff, to feed, provide accommodation and support for homeless 
people, with hairdressers, benefits and legal advisers, and counsellors working 
with the shelters’ temporary tenants. “We also need to make sure people can get 
help all year round, ideally before they become homeless in the first place,” 
said Sparkes.

For its survey, Crisis spoke to 458 people in 21 locations 
<http://www.crisis.org.uk/publications-search.php?fullitem=516> across England 
and Wales. The findings show:

 * Almost eight out of 10 (79%) have suffered some sort of crime or antisocial 
behaviour while homeless, while 77% have suffered it in the past year. 
 * More than half (54%) have had things stolen from them while on the street. 
 * Almost one in four (23%) have had their belongings deliberately vandalised 
while homeless. 
 * In more than half of cases (55%) of people being hit or kicked, a member of 
the public unknown to the respondent was responsible. 
 * Over half (53%) said they had not reported the last crime or incident to 
the police often because they thought the police wouldn’t do anything about it. 
One homeless man told the Crisis researchers: “We don’t know if we’re going to 
get burnt alive or anything; it’s too dangerous out there. You’re always 
looking over your shoulders. You can’t trust anyone.” But he added that 
homeless people did have support from one another: “I’m glad we’ve got each 
other out there, because I don’t know how people cope on their own.”

As well as violence against individuals, theft was a commonly reported problem 
in the research. Proportionally female rough sleepers (54%) were more likely in 
the last 12 months to have experienced a theft than their male counterparts 
(50%). Overall more than half of rough sleepers (51%) reported having had 
things stolen from them when sleeping on the streets. Women were also more 
likely to experience verbal abuse than men: 65% of homeless women had been 
verbally abused in the last 12 months, compared to 53% of male rough sleepers.

The housing poverty trap means work doesn't pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/dec/09/housing-poverty-trap-work-doesnt-pay>
This year has seen a series of violent incidents against homeless people. In 
Manchester’s Chinatowntwo homeless men died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/25/manchester-chinatown-fire-bodies-found>
 after lighting a fire to keep warm. Two men were jailed after setting a 
homeless man on fire in Salford. In Worthing, police released CCTV to help them 
trace men who attacked andset alight a homeless man 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-sussex-38032123>. And in Kent, a man was 
jailed for shooting andkilling 59-year old Philip Fox 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-38247512>, in the tent he slept in.

The 2015-16 crime survey for England and Wales found 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/crimeinenglandandwalesbulletintables>
 that 3.6% of the population of England and Wales experienced being 
intimidated, verbally abused or harassed within the past 12 months. In the 
survey of people who had slept rough in the past 12 months, 55.5% had 
experienced being verbally abused or harassed – 15 times higher than the 
general population.

“This research shows that urgent action is needed by both the police and 
government. It is not acceptable that homeless people are put in harm’s way on 
a daily basis. The police must act to reassure homeless people that their 
safety is paramount and crimes against them will be fully investigated. 
Attitudes to homelessness and rough sleeping also need to change,” Sparkes 
says. “Existing support from Local Authorities does not go far enough. That is 
why theHomelessness <https://www.theguardian.com/society/homelessness> 
Reduction Bill going through parliament is the first opportunity in a 
generation to make a real change and improve the assistance to homeless people 
and those at risk of rough sleeping.”



Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 