
Glasgow University is giving theology students what the Daily Mail calls 
“trigger warnings” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4089302/Bible-students-warned-crucifixion-upsetting-Critics-say-trigger-warnings-distressing-content-creating-generation-snowflake-students.html#ixzz4UsSXBJpA>
 about potentially upsetting images of the crucifixion. The theology department 
concedes that its course about Christ in cinema “contains graphic scenes of the 
crucifixion, and this is flagged up to students beforehand”. Given it includes 
Mel Gibson’s blood-spatteredThe Passion of the Christ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/aug/27/dvdreviews>, you can understand 
the anxiety (though the university tells us no students opted out); more 
recently, Martin Scorsese has featured underwater crucifixions inhis new film 
Silence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/25/martin-scorsese-silence-premiere-vatican-jesuit-missionaries-japan>
. Yet long before Jesus was dying on screen he was being nailed up in paintings 
and in sculpture.

One work that haunts me, and not in a good way, is a painting by Lucas Cranach 
the Elder that I chanced on a few years ago in the great Alte Pinakothek museum 
in Munich. Painted in 1503, it shows not onlyChrist but the two thieves who 
died beside him 
<https://www.pinakothek.de/kunst/lucas-cranach-d-ae/klage-unter-dem-kreuz>. At 
first sight it may not seem so sensational – except for a nasty spurt of blood 
out of Christ’s nailed feet. Then you notice that a single huge nail goes 
through both feet. Oh wait, this really is horrible. For the feet are bizarrely 
twisted together and shapeless, as if the nail has smashed bones and torn 
tendons in its violent riveting of flesh to wood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fcrucifixion-glasgow-theology-students-violent-brutal-images-death-paintings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44cba8d012065194bdfd71c33f46140ddb95d37b%2F0_0_2953_4218%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Crucifixion%20is%20horribly%20violent%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0we%20must%20confront%20its%20reality%20head%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fcrucifixion-glasgow-theology-students-violent-brutal-images-death-paintings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Crucifixion%20is%20horribly%20violent%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0we%20must%20confront%20its%20reality%20head%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fcrucifixion-glasgow-theology-students-violent-brutal-images-death-paintings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44cba8d012065194bdfd71c33f46140ddb95d37b%2F0_0_2953_4218%2F2953.jpg>
 Biblical horror … Crucifixion, by Lucas Cranach the Elder, 1503, at the Alte 
Pinakothek, Munich. Photograph: PHAS/UIG via Getty Images 
Such gross deathly distortions can be seen, too, in the roughly slung up, 
lumpen bodies of the criminals, the slump of a head sagging into a chest, legs 
hanging as flaccidly as animal skins. Then you see more blood, seeping from the 
spear wound in Christ’s torso, dripping over the face and throat of a thief who 
appears to have been beaten and perhaps garrotted before being crucified, 
streaming down an inert flank.

Cranach – who later served as best man at Martin Luther’s wedding and was a 
magistrate responsible for several judicial murders of supposed witches – 
paints the crucifixion with an almost nauseating physical realism. This great 
and horrible picture reminds me of Francis Bacon in its insistence on the 
carnal facts of torture and death. Bacon’s ownThree Studies for Figures at the 
Base of a Crucifixion 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/bacon-three-studies-for-figures-at-the-base-of-a-crucifixion-n06171>
 (c1944) is another painting nervous teachers might want to warn their students 
about. Bizarre gargoyles crouch and gurn, eyeless and many toothed, their grey 
bodies warped and stumpy. They are, perhaps, creatures made up of the leftover 
flesh after Christ’s spirit left his body. As in Cranach’s painting, Bacon’s 
nightmare dwells not on the triumph of the soul but the decay and sickness of 
our biological selves.

These creatures, too low to be saved, are monsters at the base of the cross, 
but even Christ himself can look repulsive in art.Mattias Grünewald 
<https://www.ibiblio.org/wm/paint/auth/grunewald/crucifixion/crucifixion.jpg> 
in 1512-16 gives him grey-green skin covered in sores and scabs. His fingers 
are twisted and splayed in grotesque positions of paralysed agony. As in 
Cranach’s version, both feet are pinned together by a single nail, the bones 
that stick through collapsed skin horribly tautened by this brutality.

Why do Renaissance artists such as Cranach and Grünewald resort to such excess 
in painting the crucifixion? The theological answer is surely straightforward. 
God gave his own son to suffer and die as a mortal human. To grasp the nature 
of this sacrifice you need to picture its full tragic reality. In art, the 
image of a suffering Christ evolved as medieval Christianity became 
increasingly personal and introspective. As laypeople took more responsibility 
for their own piety, and the rich lavished their money on personalisedBooks of 
Hours <http://www.luminarium.org/medlit/medlyric/crucifixion.jpg>, depictions 
of the crucifixion became more realistic and harrowing. Late medieval artists 
dwell not only on the crucifixion but the grief ofChrist’s followers as they 
collect his corpse 
<http://www.artble.com/imgs/6/f/a/65703/rogier_van_der_weyden.jpg>, the agony 
of his mourning mother 
<https://www.khanacademy.org/humanities/medieval-world/latin-western-europe/gothic1/a/rottgen-pieta>
 and even the inertness ofhis lifeless body 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lamentation_of_Christ_(Mantegna)#/media/File%3AMantegna_Andrea_Dead_Christ.jpg>
.

Leaving aside moral panics over “trigger warnings”, “politically correct 
universities” and a supposed “snowflake generation”, it is interesting that the 
21st century may shy away from the graphic nature of Christian images 500 years 
ago. For we are much less used to death in general. Every old parish church 
should have a trigger warning, and not only for images of the crucifixion. In 
any English church with tombs that go back to pre-Victorian times, you are 
guaranteed to see horribly realistic skulls with empty black eye sockets and 
grinning, vacant mouths. These grisly icons of death are found on Tudor and 
Jacobean tombs and on 18th-century memorials

Jesus's tomb in Jerusalem exposed during conservation work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/jesus-tomb-jerusalem-restoration-church-of-the-holy-sepulchre-christ-christianity>
One reason people before modern times wanted their crucifixions gory and their 
churches full of images of death was that mortality and its horrors haunted 
their real lives. Death was everywhere, from the sick beds of people struck 
down by all the diseases medicine had yet to conquer to public executions whose 
victims were left to rot on gibbets or,as Bruegel paints them 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Triumph_of_Death#/media/File%3AThetriumphofdeath.jpg>
, on open platforms at the tops of wooden poles.

In other words, when artists 500 years ago depicted the crucifixion they were 
not showing a totally unfamiliar sight. People were still executed and left to 
rot in public, just as they had been in ancient Roman times. Death was ever 
present.

It still is, of course, in cells and war zones. But we in wealthy peaceful 
countries don’t usually see death on the street. We can turn our eyes away more 
easily from suffering. That is why we need art’s tormenting images of the 
crucifixion – to make us see what we would rather ignore.
 