
Everyone says work was better five years ago. Five years ago they were saying 
exactly the same thing. Ever since I first strapped a radio to my bag, people 
have been warning me that the cycle courier is an endangered species. The 
internet’s been steadily chipping away at our workload for the last 15 years, 
and the recession’s only made things worse.


Over in the US, the courier industry died off rather more abruptly, when 9/11 
was followed by a series of mail-borne anthrax attacks and Americans developed 
a healthy phobia of anything that came in an envelope. Rebecca Reilly, who was 
working in Washington DC at the time, recalls that, “We went from a high of 500 
messengers pre-9/11 to … about 150 in 2005. It’s been declining since then, 
y’know, emails got faster, attachments were like – boom!

“Once you’ve got that, there’s internet speed, and then you got online 
signatures, and then Capitol Hill put a whole bunch of stuff online. That was 
it. A whole bunch of companies folded, and a whole lot of messengers had to 
leave the business.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F06%2F-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407170736929%2Ff6d934c0-95ec-4bf0-852a-487a4fbfc488-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycle%20couriers%3A%20my%20life%20as%20one%20of%20the%20dwindling%20band%20of%20urban%20cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F06%2F-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycle%20couriers%3A%20my%20life%20as%20one%20of%20the%20dwindling%20band%20of%20urban%20cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F06%2F-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407170736929%2Ff6d934c0-95ec-4bf0-852a-487a4fbfc488-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In London, couriers live on the fringes of society, yet are integral to key 
industries such as law and finance. Photograph: Graeme Robertson 
Most London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> courier companies have 
hung on, progressively lowering their rates, desperately undercutting each 
other to survive. And, this being a notoriously unfair industry, the costs are 
usually passed on to the courier. Where riders had previously made a bare 
minimum of £2.75 per delivery, now they made £2.25. Extra deductions begin to 
appear on payslips – uniform hire; bag hire; a weekly £2 insurance charge.

Back in the golden days of the early 1990s, or so I’m told, couriers were 
urban superheroes, riding for 12 hours a day because the work never stopped 
piling up, taking home £500 a week, or more. Adrian Knight took up couriering 
in Sydney in 1992, earning up to A$1,500 a week. When he returned to the 
circuit at the turn of the century, after a few years travelling, he was 
unpleasantly surprised to find that his paycheque had shrunk to an average of 
AU$600. It’s a story that’s repeated in cities across the world, by old men 
with dodgy backs and dicky knees, still riding because after 20 years, no other 
job will have them, struggling to earn half of what they did before, warning 
newcomers like me to get out while the going’s good.


But I’m still here, and every summer a new crop of bright-eyed tight-thighed 
young men joins me on the streets, as captivated by the courier mystique as I 
still am, six years after I started. Perhaps, rather than the mystique, it’s 
the sense of knowledge that keeps them hanging on – that perpetual feeling of 
opening the city up like a pocket watch and seeing its cogs and springs all 
whirring away inside.


After all, I now know London better than anyone else. A cabbie can name more 
of the streets, but he couldn’t tell you as much about how the city works – 
about the planning applications I carry between architects, law firms and 
council offices, the designer shoes I ferry from press offices to model 
agencies to photoshoots, the tapes I rush from post-production companies to 
Channel 4 on Horseferry Road, or ITV on the Southbank. I’ve stood behind the 
front door of 10 Downing Street while an affable flunkey signed on behalf of 
the prime minister, and I once delivered a court summons to a 
disgruntled-looking squatter in a Hoxton council estate.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F06%2F-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F6%2F1407315494406%2Fbd9c3945-aa1f-4a08-958f-79b516960455-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycle%20couriers%3A%20my%20life%20as%20one%20of%20the%20dwindling%20band%20of%20urban%20cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F06%2F-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycle%20couriers%3A%20my%20life%20as%20one%20of%20the%20dwindling%20band%20of%20urban%20cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F06%2F-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F6%2F1407315494406%2Fbd9c3945-aa1f-4a08-958f-79b516960455-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A bike messenger in the city traffic, getting from point to point in the 
fastest time. Photograph: Caro/Alamy 
I get to see things most people never will, like the loading bay under the 
Gherkin with its bomb-proof glass window, where the package I deliver will be 
signed for, sorted into a pigeonhole and eventually deposited on the desk of 
the addressee, who gives little thought to its journey across London, tucked in 
next to a hard-drive, a legal file, and my sandwiches. I share clunking goods 
elevators with builders, electricians, cleaners, clerks, waiting staff, 
security guards, and window cleaners hung all over with abseiling equipment. I 
savour the smell of the food stalls as I ride down Whitecross Street market at 
about 11am, inhaling successive wafts of roasting steak, baking flatbreads, 
frying onions, toasting cumin seeds, sizzling bacon, curries and chillies and 
pickles and melting cheese. I escape to tiny green squares and gardens, often 
just a step away from the busiest streets, but so well hidden that there’s 
always a free bench, even at the height of summer. I once spent a whole autumn 
making friends with a robin who lived on the west side of St James’s Square.


With such knowledge comes a predictable illusion of power, though this is all 
too regularly punctured by the indignity of being kicked out of shiny 
receptions and told to use an entrance more befitting of our lowly status – or 
of having my pronunciation of “Southwark Street” incorrectly corrected by a 
receptionist, who gives her colleague a sidelong smirk, commiserating over my 
supposed ignorance.
 Two bike messengers ride in San Francisco. Photograph: Aurora Photos/Alamy 
Like tramps, we know the city for its benches, its cheap cafes and public 
toilets; the parks where we can find shade in summer and the air vents where we 
can keep warm in winter. And, like tramps, we expect to be moved on, sooner or 
later, as more and more of London’s public space becomes private. Some 
buildings turn out to own the pavement around them and insist that I go back 
across the street to lock up my bike. There used to be a low wall outside a 
building on Gresham Street, the perfect height to sit on, where cycle couriers 
would congregate between jobs, buying each other cheap cups of tea from the 
kiosk up the road, and fastidiously binning the Starbucks cups left behind by 
office workers on their fag breaks. Eventually someone decided that this 
wouldn’t do, and they redesigned the outside of the building, replacing the 
wall with a sloping metal air vent and a line of spikes.


We’re not wanted, and yet we’re essential. The smartly dressed woman who 
scowls at me as I speed through a light she hadn’t noticed was green might be 
the relieved receptionist whose job I’ll save later that day by getting her 
boss’s passport from Holborn to Paddington in ten minutes flat, just before the 
train leaves for Heathrow. “Blimey – that was quick!” And though work continues 
to dwindle, somehow there is still just about enough to keep a few of us going. 
We depend on the vacillations of technology – 15 years ago the internet began 
to eat into our workload, but nowadays the files coming out of Soho’s edit 
suites are so big that it’s quicker to download them to a hard drive and stick 
them on the back of a courier than to transfer them online.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F06%2F-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F6%2F1407316134641%2F0a329f89-7fe7-42bb-a10a-9ac366282ff6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycle%20couriers%3A%20my%20life%20as%20one%20of%20the%20dwindling%20band%20of%20urban%20cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F06%2F-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycle%20couriers%3A%20my%20life%20as%20one%20of%20the%20dwindling%20band%20of%20urban%20cowboys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Faug%2F06%2F-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F6%2F1407316134641%2F0a329f89-7fe7-42bb-a10a-9ac366282ff6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A cycle courier radios back to base. Photograph: Bruno Vincent/Getty Images 
And couriers, individually and as a workforce, have begun to adapt to the 
changing market. The career courier may be a thing of the past – nowadays it’s 
increasingly common for couriers to earn their money from two or three jobs, 
enjoying the freedom of the road three or four days a week, supplementing this 
with the odd evening of bar work, and otherwise busily building up their 
portfolio as a photographer, or frame-builder, or sommelier, or writer.


Some have taken matters into their own hands. Two years ago, the resourceful 
chaps at CTRL Couriers set themselves up as a “rider-owned and operated 
collective”, running the company from the seats of their bikes, and relying on 
open-source technology and a small, flexible fleet that includes two cargo 
bikes – meaning that as well as the usual envelopes, couriers can now deliver 
flowers, food, and the sort of bulky packages that would otherwise have had to 
be put in a van. The CTRL riders are a far cry from the tattooed, dreadlocked 
hooligans of popular stereotype. Young and personable, in head-to-toe Rapha 
cycle clothing, they give the impression of taking themselves and their 
livelihood very seriously indeed.


Adrian Knight relocated to Yorkshire four years ago and set up his own one-man 
company. Having started his career in the heyday of the early 1990s, ferrying 
packages across Sydney’s harbour bridge, he now supports his young family by 
delivering train tickets and internal mail around Leeds, and cheerfully admits 
to having almost more work than he can stay on top of. Perhaps our future isn’t 
so gloomy after all.


 * What Goes Around by Emily Chappell (Guardian Faber, £12.99). To order a 
copy for £8.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/363009/s/what-goes-around/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99. 
 * Why can’t all cities have bike bridges like Copenhagen’s new Cycle Snake? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/14/bike-lanes-bridge-copenhagen-new-cycle-snake-cykelslangen>
 