
“We wanted to start thinking about the total experience of cycling,” says 
CycleHack <http://www.cyclehack.com/> co-founder Sarah Drummond. 
“Infrastructure is important, of course, but we wanted to move the conversation 
beyond that. We’re not just looking at what needs to change, but how we need to 
change it.”

Drummond, the director of Snook <http://wearesnook.com/> design agency, 
started CycleHack in 2014 with Jo Holton and Matt Lowell, with the idea of 
running one event in Glasgow, before Melbourne and Beirut came on board. Last 
year, more than 500 people took part across five continents as the hack 
expanded to another 22 cities. This year there are 38 cities signed up – from 
Amsterdam to Athens, and São Paulo to Sydney, via Mexico City, London and 
Tokyo. Drummond is astonished at how quickly the movement has grown, and says 
she has already had a further 10 enquiries from cities who would like to join.

The hacks bring together participants from a wide range of backgrounds – cycle 
activists, developers, designers, planners and engineers – to innovative and 
collaborate on new ideas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcycle-hackers-world-glasgow-global-movement-cyclehack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed7c637ca60a6f63abdfdeaf5331efa7d57d3394%2F0_600_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cycle%20hackers%20of%20the%20world%20unite%3A%20how%20a%20global%20movement%20grew%20out%20of%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcycle-hackers-world-glasgow-global-movement-cyclehack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cycle%20hackers%20of%20the%20world%20unite%3A%20how%20a%20global%20movement%20grew%20out%20of%20Glasgow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Fcycle-hackers-world-glasgow-global-movement-cyclehack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed7c637ca60a6f63abdfdeaf5331efa7d57d3394%2F0_600_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 CycleHack Tokyo 
“Someone might come to enjoy talking to people about cycling and they might 
meet somebody who can start to turn their idea into something real,” says 
Drummond. “Some people, especially cycle campaigners, are often shocked at how 
quickly a person with developer skills can sketch out their ideas, and the next 
thing you know you’ve got a prototype.”

CycleHacks biggest-hitting idea yet is Penny in Yo’ Pants 
<https://vimeo.com/98808131> – an easy way to make a skirt more wearable on a 
bike using a coin and a rubber band. The video went viral with more than 3.5 
million views on Vimeo.

Then there was Stack Rack 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0PIvka117E4&feature=youtu.be> – a two-tiered 
bike parking system made from old drop-handle bars and inner tubes – andBack 
Chat <http://www.cyclehack.com/catalogue/backchat/> waterproof rucksack covers 
featuring eye-catching messages (“I am a human and I need to be loved”, or “I’m 
you on two wheels.”) designed to make drivers think twice as they pass.

Can Johannesburg reinvent itself as Africa’s first cycle-friendly megacity?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/24/johannesburg-africa-first-cycle-friendly-megacity-bicycles>
Other recent ideas include solutions for mapping and theft-prevention – and an 
app whichsounds a smartphone alert on the approach of an Uber taxi 
<http://www.cyclehack.com/catalogue/uber-alert/> (designed to alert the cyclist 
that one of their quiet Toyota Prius electric hybrids is nearby).

All hacks are presented at end of event and uploaded to the 15-strong open 
source catalogue <http://www.cyclehack.com/catalogue/>. “It’s not a competition 
and there’s no money at the end of it,” adds Drummond. “CycleHack is about 
collaborating to develop new ideas.”

The CycleHack 2016 cities <http://www.cyclehack.com/cyclehack-2016/> in full 
are: Amsterdam, Athens, Beirut, Berlin, Birmingham (Alabama), Breda, Brussels, 
Bucharest, Cambridge, Chesterfield, Dundee, Glasgow, Istanbul, Kalamata, 
London, Luxembourg, Manchester, Medellin, Mendoza, Mexico City, Nuremberg, 
Paris, Portland, Prague, Rome, Rotterdam, Santiago, São Paulo, Stuttgart, 
Sydney, Tokyo, Vancouver, Vienna, Wuppertal and Wiesbaden.


Have you come up with the new Penny in Yo’ Pants or smartphone alerts for 
approaching Ubers? Share your CycleHack ideas in the comments below,or tweet 
using the hashtag #cyclehack

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 