
The newspaper stand at Koula Myrahi’s kiosk in downtown Nicosia is usually 
brimming with titles at midday. In the age of the internet, hard-copy sales of 
the lavish number of dailies the island produces have dwindled considerably.

Friday, however, was an exception. As Cypriots woke up to the news that the 
latest effort to reunify their islandhad stalled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/cyprus-reunification-talks-stall-over-question-of-security>
 – but not died – it was news that they wanted.

“By midday, almost every paper had gone,” says Myrahi. “That’s a rarity these 
days but people want the real thing to go home and study.”

All week, negotiations in Geneva have been watched with nervous anticipation in
Cyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus>. On both sides of the 
UN-patrolled buffer zone that divides their capital, Greek and Turkish Cypriots 
know that this is the last chance for peace. If the talks had collapsed, any 
hope of a breakthrough would have collapsed with them.

Cyprus talks: Turkish troops will remain on island, vows Erdoğan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/cyprus-talks-turkish-troops-will-remain-on-island-vows-erdogan>
But as word filtered through that a historic Cyprus conference attended by 
both communities and all three of the island’s postcolonial guarantor powers, 
had ended without conclusion, the mood, though cautious, was far from 
depressed. Instead, supporters of reconciliation insisted there was still time 
for a settlement to be reached.

“We have now progressed to a point where we can have hope,” beams Nikos 
Dimitriou whose barber shop, La Finesse, draws a diverse crowd of young and 
old. “I’m very, very optimistic.”

At 70, Dimitriou quips that he has seen every phase of Cyprus’s modern 
conflict. “I can remember Eoka, I can remember our struggle for independence 
from the British; I can remember what the Turkish Cypriots suffered and, of 
course, I can remember 1974 and what we suffered, too,” he says.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcyprus-talks-bring-nicosia-to-a-point-where-we-can-have-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ae21ea30f4d03bea8fdc3b716c2d5284074cc09%2F0_92_5566_3340%2F5566.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cyprus%20talks%20bring%20Nicosia%20to%20'a%20point%20where%20we%20can%20have%20hope'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcyprus-talks-bring-nicosia-to-a-point-where-we-can-have-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cyprus%20talks%20bring%20Nicosia%20to%20%27a%20point%20where%20we%20can%20have%20hope%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcyprus-talks-bring-nicosia-to-a-point-where-we-can-have-hope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ae21ea30f4d03bea8fdc3b716c2d5284074cc09%2F0_92_5566_3340%2F5566.jpg>
 Cypriots followed the negotiations avidly. Photograph: Iakovos 
Hatzistavrou/AFP/Getty Images 
Like most small business owners on the Greek side of the war-divided city, he 
has been glued to the developments unfolding on the screen of his television 
set in the corner of his store. By mid-afternoon on Friday as Turkey’s leader, 
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, announced that Turkish troopswould “forever” be on the 
island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/cyprus-talks-turkish-troops-will-remain-on-island-vows-erdogan>
, the news was not everything he wanted to hear.

“It’s going to be difficult,” he says. “The issue of security, the role the 
guarantor powers will play, is perhaps the most difficult issue of all but we 
are going to come back together again. We are going to unite.”

Cyprus peace talks – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
For Greek Cypriots, led by President Nicos Anastasiades, the prospect of 
Turkish occupation forces remaining in the breakaway north – 43 years after an 
abortive rightwing attempt to unite with Greece promptedTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> to invade – could never be accepted.

But Turkish Cypriots, led by the equally moderate Mustafa Akıncı, could not 
countenance the spectre of a state in which they have little, or no, access to 
the levers of power.

The negotiations in Geneva have been like a high-stakes game of poker, each 
move fraught with risk. Conciliation cannot come without concession and 
concession cannot come without pain.

“You can sit at the table but ultimately everything depends on what you have 
when you get up,” says Constantinos Polyzos, a student out drinking coffee with 
his friend Anna. “A solution will have to be accepted by [twin] referenda and 
that’s when it will get hard, very hard.”

Fear and loathing in Nicosia: will peace talks unify Europe's last divided 
capital?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/12/fear-loathing-nicosia-peace-talks-unify-divided-cypriot-capital>
Building the long-hoped-for two-state federation will not only require 
compromise but alsoGreece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> and Turkey 
on board. “This should be about our two communities but unfortunately that is 
not the case,” says Andreas Neophytou, 26, expressing a widespread view on both 
sides. “We also have to dance to the tune of what Athens and Ankara say. In my 
view, that is very wrong.”

For Turkish Cypriots, who were left out in the cold when the island’s 
internationally recognised Greek-run south overwhelmingly rejected a 
UN-brokered reunification plan in 2004, the latest push comes at an especially 
sensitive time.


Impoverished and isolated, the self-proclaimed statelet is dependent almost 
exclusively on Turkey for funds. “If there is no solution we will end up being 
absorbed by Turkey and losing our Cypriot identity,” says Orhan, a teacher, 
preferring not to be fully identified.

With talks set to resume on a technical level next week before reconvening in 
the form of a second international Cyprus conference in the coming months, it 
is vital, he adds, that progress is made.

“Day by day we are losing control of our country, day by day the [mainland] 
Turks are taking over. We can’t shout about it too loudly but that is the 
truth. In a united Cyprus, we would belong to the family of European nations. 
We would live in a different world.”
 