
Talks to resolve the division of Cyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> are close to a settlement, the UN 
secretary general, António Guterres, has said, but he cautioned against 
expectations of a miracle.

Progress has been described as fast, but not so dramatic that it would warrant 
the attendance on Friday of the leaders of Cyprus’ guarantor countries – Greece,
Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and former colonial power the 
UK – at the talks in Geneva.

Instead it is likely that further detailed work will be undertaken by 
officials before the political process recommences in a few weeks.


Flanked by the Greek Cypriot leader, Nicos Anastasiades, and the Turkish 
Cypriot leader, Mustafa Akıncı, Guterres said at lunchtime on Thursday that 
“enormous progress” had been made on internal island issues such as property, 
future boundaries and relations with the European Union.

Fear and loathing in Nicosia: will peace talks unify Europe's last divided 
capital?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/12/fear-loathing-nicosia-peace-talks-unify-divided-cypriot-capital>
But speaking later on the fourth day of reunification talks, he said 
instruments were still needed to implement new security guarantees satisfactory 
to both the Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots.

The talks are being attended by foreign ministers from the three guarantor 
countries. Boris Johnson, the UK foreign secretary, is at the heart of the 
negotiations. It is the first time the island politicians have formally 
discussed security guarantees in detail.

Britain is offering to reduce the territorial size of its military bases by 
nearly half. Separately, the UK has said it is up to the other parties to 
decide if they wish it to continue as a guarantor. It could end that role, but 
only if the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot populations agreed to a new 
arrangement. A range of possible alternative multinational guarantors are 
conceivable including the EU, the UN, the Organisation for Security and 
Co-operation inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and Nato.

Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is pressing for the 30,000 
Turkish troops to leave the island over a fixed timetable and for Ankara to end 
its right to intervene. Turkey has so far refused to make that concession, but 
it is widely agreed the deal on security – probably the most difficult part of 
the talks – is dependent on how favourably the two communities view the 
agreement on the internal dossiers on governance, boundaries, compensation, the 
economy and relations with the EU.

Turkey is demanding all Turkish Cypriots receive full rights to EU membership. 
Guterres stressed no one was looking for “miracles or a quick fix, but a solid 
and sustainable solution”.

“Our goal here is to get the necessary results and to do that we want to work 
seriously for the amount of time that is necessary,” he said. “We are facing so 
many situations of disaster, we badly need a symbol of hope. I strongly believe 
Cyprus can be the symbol of hope at the beginning of 2017.

Cyprus peace talks – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
“We are coming very close to the settlement in relation to the creation of a 
bizonal bi-community federal institution in the republic of Cyprus.” But he 
stressed this needed a security guarantee to underpin the deal.

Guterres said a deal was needed that satisfied both sides, pointing out any 
agreement would have to be put to the two communities in a referendum. He 
added: “Looking at what is happening in the world, referenda are not an easy 
challenge.”

The island was split in a Turkish invasion in 1974, which was triggered by a 
coup organised by Greek and Greek Cypriot nationalists trying to unite the 
island with Greece.
 