
UN-led talks on the reunification of Cyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> entered the second of four scheduled 
days on Tuesday, with only a major intervention by the Turkish president or the 
Greek prime minister thought to be capable of changing the slow rate of 
progress.


The first days of the Geneva talks, which are seen as the best chance for a 
peace settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/talks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages>
 on the divided island in more than a decade, are focusing on detailed issues 
including property transfers between Greek and Turkish Cypriots, before moving 
to future security guarantees on Thursday.

But, in a potential blow, neither Recep Tayyip Erdoğan nor Alexis Tsipras has 
committed to attending the second set of talks on Thursday for the three 
current security guarantors, Turkey, Greece and the UK.

The British foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, confirmed on Tuesday he would be 
attending the talks, designed to end a division between the Turkish Cypriot 
north and a Greek Cypriot south that has lasted since 1974.

Talks to secure Cyprus reunification enter 'final stages'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/talks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages>
But after negotiations on the first day became bogged down on property 
transfers and governance, including a rotating presidency and power-sharing 
chapters, progress has been slower than the UN had hoped.

A leak of documents from the talks showed 10 major differences on the 
governance chapter and 14 on the property issue. The leak prompted the Greek 
Cypriot side to warn they would not be distributing any more documents to the 
political parties attending the talks in Geneva.

Issues such as rights to compensation for the loss of property, the right of 
return, the compensation for improvements, work permits for Turkish Cypriots, 
access to public sector jobs and the speed with which an agreement comes into 
force still divided the negotiators, the leak showed.

Cyprus peace talks – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
On Wednesday the two sides are expected to present their respective maps of 
the future internal boundaries of a federated Cyprus inside the EU.

There are concerns that the UN’s timetable is slipping, and fears are growing 
that neither side will make major concessions until there are indications about 
whether there will be a deal on the crucial issue of security guarantees.


Greece wants Turkish troops off the island, with a clear timetable for them 
leaving, and a commitment to non-interference.

Observers fear, however, that Erdoğan may not be in a position to make a 
concession on the troops in the north while he still needs the support of 
Turkish nationalists in his parliament topush through his controversial plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/turkish-parliament-controversial-new-constitution-recep-tayyip-erdogan>
 for an executive presidency.

A referendum on his plans is not due to be held until April, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/turkey-erdogan-presidency-referendum-akp-nationalist>
 on the assumption that the complex package wins the approval of three-fifths 
of parliamentary deputies, or 330 votes. The first discussion of the package 
was only narrowly passed.

Turkish parliament debates controversial new constitution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/turkish-parliament-controversial-new-constitution-recep-tayyip-erdogan>
Analysts at the Eurasia Group said: “The gap between Turkey and all the other 
parties over security is likely to be the main reason this week’s talks will be 
inconclusive.”

They added: “Turkey is likely to continue to stall on Cyprus until April. 
Erdoğan needs the support of nationalists at home to pass a package of 
constitutional reforms to introduce an executive presidential system. For this 
to succeed, in the next few weeks Erdoğan will need the parliamentary support 
of the Nationalist Movement party – who take a hard line stance over Cyprus – 
to put the reforms to a referendum.

“Even after clearing the parliamentary vote, however, Erdoğan will still need 
to convince nationalist voters to support the reforms in a referendum. For 
Erdoğan, any kind of concession on its current Cyprus policy would be a 
liability, and he is unlikely to agree to any revised security framework until 
after the referendum.”
 