
UN-led talks in Geneva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/talks-to-secure-cyprus-reunification-enter-final-stages>
 hoping to create a reunified Cyprus after decades of bitter division ended 
without a breakthrough on Thursday, leaving officials to reconvene later this 
month to readdress the issue of how any agreement could be militarily secured.

The two sides will meet again on 18 January to look again at the security 
question, before a fresh attempt to forge a complete political deal.

Cyprus peace talks – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
The UN secretary general, António Guterres, said he was confident the 
participants were determined to make a “last effort” to find a solution. There 
was no precise date set for the guarantors of the process – the Greek, Turkish 
and British foreign ministers – to meet again. Negotiators said much progress 
had been made on the shape of the deal, but more time was needed to agree how 
external actors could persuade islanders that any plan will be enforced.

The outcome of the four days of talks is at one level a disappointment since 
there had beenhopes that the Greek and Turkish Cypriots might sign a final 
outcome agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/11/cyprus-greek-and-turkish-leaders-edge-closer-to-deal-to-end-conflict>
. But diplomats think the talks have not collapsed, and the scope for an 
agreement genuinely remains.


Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, was upbeat, saying: “I welcome the real 
progress made towards finding a solution to the Cyprus settlement over the last 
few days, in particular on the future security of a unitedCyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus>.”

He added: “With continued commitment and political will, I believe a 
historical agreement is within reach.”

Britain is offering to almost halve the territorial size of its military 
bases. Separately, the UK has said it is up to the other parties to decide if 
they wish it to continue as a guarantor. It could end that role, but only if 
the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot populations agreed to a new arrangement. 
A range of possible alternative multinational guarantors are conceivable
including the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/31/europe-cyprus-reunification-2004-greek-turkish-cypriots-eu>
, the UN, the Organisation for Security and Co-operation inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and Nato.

Fear and loathing in Nicosia: will peace talks unify Europe's last divided 
capital?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/12/fear-loathing-nicosia-peace-talks-unify-divided-cypriot-capital>
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is pressing for the 30,000 
Turkish troops to leave the island over a fixed timetable and for Ankara to end 
its right to intervene. Turkey has so far refused to make that concession, but 
it is widely agreed the deal on security – probably the most difficult part of 
the talks – is dependent on how favourably the two communities view the 
agreement on the internal dossiers on governance, boundaries, compensation, the 
economy and relations with the EU.

Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> is demanding that all 
Turkish Cypriots receive full rights to EU membership. Guterres stressed no one 
was looking for “miracles or a quick fix, but a solid and sustainable solution”.

“Our goal here is to get the necessary results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/cyprus-deal-close-but-dont-expect-miracles-says-un-chief>
 and to do that we want to work seriously for the amount of time that is 
necessary,” he said. “We are facing so many situations of disaster, we badly 
need a symbol of hope. I strongly believe Cyprus can be the symbol of hope at 
the beginning of 2017.”

Guterres said a deal was needed that satisfied both sides, pointing out any 
agreement would have to be put to the two communities in a referendum. He 
added: “Looking at what is happening in the world, referenda are not an easy 
challenge.”

The island was split in a Turkish invasion in 1974, which was triggered by a 
coup <https://www.theguardian.com/world/1974/jul/22/eu.politics> organised by 
Greek and Greek Cypriot nationalists trying to unite the island with Greece.

 