
Rival Cypriot delegations have failed to agree on maps for new borders on the 
divided island state, each slamming the other’s proposals as “unacceptable”, 
Turkey’s foreign minister said on Saturday after peace talks stalled.

Cyprus talks: Turkish troops will remain on island, vows Erdoğan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/cyprus-talks-turkish-troops-will-remain-on-island-vows-erdogan>
Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu said the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot delegation had 
delivered letters to the UN secretary-general, António Guterres, “saying they 
would not accept the maps they had seen”.

A week of UN-brokered talks in Geneva between Greek Cypriot president Nicos 
Anastasiades and Turkish Cypriot leader Mustafa Akıncı had sparked optimism 
that an agreement to reunify the island could be at hand.

Each side unveiled their vision on Wednesday of how they saw the borders of a 
reunifiedCyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus>. But hopes stalled 
on Friday, with the rival sides in the decades-old dispute at loggerheads over 
the future of Turkish troops on the divided island – and its boundaries.

Turkish Cypriot leader Mustafa Akıncı “strongly stressed that the Greek offer 
could not be taken seriously, (and) that no Turkish Cypriot would accept this 
map”, Çavuşoğlu told reporters in Ankara. “The same goes for us,” he added.
Map of Cyprus 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/cyprus/giv-3902nr1RQbtWT3mg/>
The thorny issue centres on how the boundaries are redrawn, including around 
the once Greek Cypriot town of Morphou on the northern coast. Anastasiades has 
warned that there can be no deal without a full return of Morphou, while some 
in the Turkish Cypriot camp have declared its return a non-starter.

The maps swapped on Wednesday will not be disclosed publicly, with the UN 
hoping that both sides eventually agree on a compromise version. ButTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> has cast a shadow over the peace 
talks, with President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan saying Friday that Greek Cypriots 
still have “different expectations”.

Cyprus reunification talks stall over question of security
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/cyprus-reunification-talks-stall-over-question-of-security>
“These maps are not open for discussion,” Çavuşoğlu said. “This is neither the 
time nor the place.” He added that more pressing issues would have to be 
resolved first.

One such issue is troop deployment. Cyprus’s so-called guarantor powers – 
Britain,Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> and Turkey – were at 
the UN on Thursday to talk about security, a bedrock issue in the peace process 
aimed at creating a two-zone federation.

Turkish Cypriot leaders have agreed in principle to return some of the land 
controlled by Greek Cypriots before the 1974 invasion by Turkish troops, which 
came in response to an Athens-inspired coup seeking union with Greece.
 