
Tromsø-born Dagny Sandvik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/20/dagny-backbeat-singer-interview> 
is already feted in her native Norway and making inroads elsewhere with her 
first international single,Backbeat 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7K0y1RT6M68>, which reached 26m streams on 
Spotify. Yet she’s still at the stage where a ticket for her (sold-out) show 
costs just £7, and she can glide through the audience without being accosted 
before her set. She’s in full fig – glitter on eyelids, metallic silver dress 
and weapons-grade platform heels – but makes her way past fans almost unnoticed.

The streaming figures say that her next stop should be bigger venues, and once 
she’s actually on stage, the crowd leap to attention – but Dagny in the flesh 
is not easily quantifiable. After two years’ touring, she has the confidence of 
an old hand; backed by an assertive guitar band, she’s cultivated a glam-rock 
stompiness that serves her pulsing tunes well. She sets about the opening 
Ultraviolet – seemingly a homage to both Robyn and Blancmange – like a blond 
leopard making short work of a steak.Like a Bullet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c86oK8S3W-M> is a growling menace that engages 
her entire body, while singing Backbeat every night since 2015 has made it a 
lighter-waver that demands big-stage fireworks.

On the other hand, Dagny is hampered not just by the size of the venue, but a 
kind of enthusiastic anonymity.Pink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/25/pink-review> and Charli XCX 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/02/charli-xcx-boom-clap-festivals-interview>
, working in the same ballpark, are natural big personalities; Dagny has the 
assurance and the voice, but that career-making jot of singularity hasn’t 
blossomed yet.

 