
He was supposed to be the prize that everyone wanted to win. Replete with 
gormless look and dressed in a lumberjack-esque shirt and cap, Warren the 
24-year-old "work experience boy" was prepared to do "whatever you want him 
to". But with youth unemployment hovering near the million mark, and thousands 
of young people desperate to do anything to get their foot on the employment 
ladder,Dairy Crest <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup>, the 
company behind the competition to market Frijj bottled milkshakes, has admitted 
being insensitive and apologised for offering up a "slave for a day" prize.

Warren was won on eight occasions by people around the country who put him to 
a range of tasks: everything from clearing up dog faeces to washing cars, 
breaking wood, gardening and painting fences. His eight-hour days as Frijj's 
intern were filmed andposted on YouTube 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DNG-3FsDEU8> where they have been viewed by 
more than 80,000 people. More than 2,800 have been following his experiences on 
Twitter.

Dairy Crest, which also makes Cathedral cheddar, Clover spread and Country 
Life butter, said it had received a handful of complaints about using Warren as 
a prize but stressed that he was a paid actor who was not made to do anything 
"illegal or immoral" or anything he regarded as "mistreatment".

Abigail Aked, 23, who has campaigned for youth employment rights in the past, 
said the competition had hit a raw nerve with her.

"Why does a huge brand like Frijj need a generic work experience boy to front 
their competition? I guess they didn't want to seem to miss out on the free 
youth labour gravy train that businesses now believe they are entitled to.

"This is just an incredibly puerile attempt to make what appears to be an 
in-house office joke into a marketing strategy," she said, adding that calling 
a fully grown man a "boy" was "weird".

In April, Nick Clegg spoke out against the culture of unpaid internships 
<http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/standard/article-23938472-nick-clegg-tells-firms-widen-access-to-internships-to-improve-social-mobility.do]>
, saying it was damaging social mobility because only the children of the rich 
could afford to work for free. However the prime minister, David Cameron, said 
he would becomfortable 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/8469243/David-Cameron-reignites-intern-row.html>
 with offering unpaid experiences to friends and family.

There are estimated to be more than 100,000 interns in the UK at any one time 
and a good proportion of them are believed to be unpaid or remunerated below 
the minimum wage. In arecent survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/apr/28/businesses-interns-cheap-labour>
, 17% of managers said they took on unpaid interns to lower business costs.

Dairy Crest said the competition had gone down well with their target market 
of 15- to 24-year-old males and that they had received 187,000 entries, "far 
more" than they expected.

The company also apologised for causing offence. "This is a light-hearted, 
'tongue in cheek' campaign that is meant to entertain and in no way offend any 
of our consumers. It was never our intention to make fun of young people 
looking for work," it said.

"If the promotion has caused any upset, we are very sorry indeed and can only 
reiterate that there was never, nor is there now, any intention for the Win 
Warren campaign to cause any offence."

Warren was unavailable for comment.
 