
Almost 500 jobs at Dairy Crest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup> are under threat after 
the milk producer announced plans to close two dairies, highlighting the 
fragility of the job market ahead of unemployment figures out on Wednesday.

Although economists expect fewer new benefits claimants in March, forecasts of 
painfully weak pay inflation suggest the climate remains bleak. Economists 
expect to see 5,900 more people signing on in March, compared with 7,200 in 
February; but salaries are forecast to grow by just 1.4%.

Chris Williamson, chief economist at data provider Markit, said: "While 
[Wednesday] might see some good news on the labour market, the overall picture 
is one of persistent high unemployment. The key factor which characterises just 
how weak it is are the pay figures. People can't negotiate up their wage rates 
because they are worried about job security and visibly high levels of 
unemployment."

Dairy Crest announced plans to shut a glass bottling dairy at Aintree, where 
220 people work, and a site at Fenstanton in Cambridgeshire employing 250 
people.

The company also said its contract to supply milk to Tesco would not be 
renewed when it comes to an end in July. Dairy Crest sells around 3% of its 
liquid milk to Tesco and insisted that the loss off the contract was not a 
factor in closing the dairies.

Instead, it said the closure of the Aintree plant reflected changing habits, 
as milk deliveries decline and people opt for plastic bottles and bags of milk 
over glass bottles.

Chief executive Mark Allen said: "It's not a decision we've taken lightly; it 
has an impact on quite a lot of people." Dairy Crest is hoping to find jobs for 
10% of the 470 staff affected by the closures in other parts of the business. 
Allen said the company was working with the rest of the staff, retraining them 
were necessary and offering help with CVs and interview techniques.

Dairy Crest expects the closures to cost around Â£15m, but said the loss of the 
Tesco contract would not hit profit expectations for the year to March 2013.

Analysts at Exane BNP Paribas said the loss of the "hard-won" contract was a 
blow for Dairy Crest. "This was small in the context of Dairy Crest and Tesco, 
but this had been seen as a potential foot in the door to the UK's biggest 
retailer." They added that it was "a further reminder that the UK liquid milk 
industry remains challenging on all fronts".
 