
Thousands of dairy farmers are expected to mount new blockades of milk 
processing plants on Thursday night in what some activists say will be their 
biggest demonstration to date.

Following a series of protests over the last week, the latest blockade will 
spread from processing plants to some supermarket depots. Early estimates 
suggested more than 2,000 farmers and their supporters will take part.

This week the farming minister, Jim Paice, announced a government-brokered 
draft deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/23/dairy-farmers-milk-price-dispute>
 between the farmers and processors, paving the way for a voluntary code, but 
the National Farmers Union said the deal did not allay its concerns.

Farmers are angry about cuts to the price they are paid to produce milk. Over 
the past few months milk processors including Arla, the owner of the 
Cravendale, Lurpak and Anchor brands, and Robert Wiseman have cut the amount 
they pay their producers.

Processors say they have no choice because the selling price of cream on the 
commodities market has fallen sharply over the past 12-18 months. But farmers 
and their representatives say current payments do not cover their production 
costs and will force many out of business this winter.

Andrew Hemming, vice-chairman of Farmers for Action, and one of the protest 
organisers, said: "Farmers are good guys but â€¦ we will continue this course of 
action until we get some commonsense and get the price cuts rescinded. We are 
not asking for more money, we are just asking for what was there before."

The National Farmers Union said the cost of production was around 30p per 
litre (ppl). If all the cuts come into force next month farmers will be paid 
about 25ppl.

Some supermarkets have increased the premium they pay to farmers, but unions 
say the rise is not enough to cover their costs.

Asked who was profiting from the shelf price of milk, Robert Newbery, chief 
dairy adviser for the NFU, said: "Retailers are making the most money. The 
processors are making some but they have been selling the milk too cheaply [to 
supermarkets], they've been cutting their throats to increase their market 
share and the farmer bears the brunt."

The farmers' action is beginning to have an impact. Dairy Crest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup>, one of the milk 
processors, announced on Thursday that it was setting aside the milk purchase 
price cut, due to be implemented on 1 August, for two months. First Milk has 
ditched its planned cut.

Mike Sheldon, milk procurement director at Dairy Crest, said: "We are in no 
doubt about the difficulties that the farmers affected by the forthcoming 
August price cut have been facing. Our bold move to set aside this cut for two 
months will allow us to continue to work with our farmers to find long-term 
solutions. We remain committed to paying fair milk prices, a commitment fully 
demonstrated by today's decision."
 