
Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> faces a day of 
action on Thursday by dairy farmers angry at milk price cuts they say are 
forcing them out of business.

The protests – outside the supermarket’s distribution centres – come as 
farmers prepare for wider action on Friday with a “trolley dash” in which they 
hope to clear supermarket shelves of milk up and down the country.

Supermarket price war takes toll on UK food suppliers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/20/supermarket-price-war-takes-toll-uk-food-suppliers>
The co-ordinated action from Scotland to Devon and Cornwall will ramp up 
pressure on supermarkets and milk processors after several days of local 
protests by farmers who have been emptying supermarket shelves of milk – 
sometimes taking along their cows – and distributing it to charities.

David Handley, a farmer from Monmouthshire in south Wales who chairs the 
Farmers for Action <http://www.farmersforaction.org/> group that has been 
behind most of the trolley dash protests, said: “There’s a crisis. People are 
selling the core of their business just to pay bills and the banks. It’s also a 
crisis for the consumer. They wish to buy British but if we don’t address this 
situation that’s going to be taken away from them by corporate greed.”

Asda, Morrisons, Aldi and Lidl have been targeted because, unlike major rivals 
Sainsbury’s andTesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco>, they do not 
guarantee a price for milk that covers the cost of production.

Morrisons has said it would not negotiate with Farmers for Action while it is 
being targeted by protests.

Dairy farmers’ despair: ‘now milking doesn’t really make economic sense’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/16/dairy-farmers-milk-prices-economy>
The Bradford-based supermarket said it was disappointed by disruption in its 
stores but it had agreed not to seek further reductions in milk prices and 
would continue to talk with theNational Farmers Union 
<http://www.nfuonline.com/home/>. “We recognise that the current issue is being 
caused by a reduction in global demand for milk that has led to an oversupply 
in the UK and very difficult conditions for many dairy farmers,” a spokesman 
said.

The NFU said Morrisons needed to go further to develop long-term relationships 
with suppliers that would help support dairy farmers.

Handley said: “I think a line has been drawn in the sand, and am sure I speak 
on behalf of the majority of farmers, when I say we are not going to be bullied 
by British retailers.”

Global dairy prices have been falling for months as good weather has helped 
boost production just as demand has been dented by a Russian ban on importing 
dairy goods from Europe and a decline in sales to China.

But protests began in the UK this week after three major milk processors – 
Arla, First Milk and Dairy Crest – all said at the weekend they would cut the 
price they pay farmers. Farmers were paid an average 23.66p per litre in June, 
down 10% since January and a quarter lower than a year ago, according toAHDB 
Dairy <http://dairy.ahdb.org.uk/>, the British dairy organisation. Farmers say 
it costs them around 30p to produce each litre.

Fine supermarkets if they have unfairly squeezed milk suppliers, say MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/20/fine-supermarkets-unfairly-squeezed-milk-suppliers-mps>
They say they are particularly suffering because of a supermarket price war 
and a lack of capacity to process milk into other products during gluts.


“We are in no doubt that the current issues are exacerbated by factors unique 
to the UK,” said a joint statement by farmers’ unions in England, Scotland, 
Wales and Northern Ireland. “These include dysfunctional supply chains, [the] 
predominance of the major retailers and subsequent price war.”

The NFU says only 10% of dairy farmers are on contracts that track the cost of 
production and most are selling milk at a loss. Even the contracts backed by 
Tesco and Sainsbury’s, which promise to pay farmers at least the cost of 
production for liquid milk, do not cover other dairy products such as yoghurt 
or cream. The NFU has called for a meeting with government farming ministers.

A spokesman for Arla, which is a co-operative organisation, said it was “doing 
everything possible to help our farmer-owners to navigate through this 
increasingly tough situation in the best possible way”.

Dairy Crest <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup>, which is 
the process of selling its loss-making liquid milk processing business, said it 
had been forced to cut prices because the glut in the market meant it was 
having to process the milk into powder and cream.
 