
Dame Julia Peyton-Jones, who made her name as director of the Serpentine 
Galleries for 25 years, has become a mother for the first time at the age of 64.

Peyton-Jones, who announced she was stepping down from her post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/oct/30/serpentine-co-drector-julia-peyton-jones-to-step-down-25-years>
 in October 2015, told the Guardian at the time that she was planning to work 
independently in contemporary art and architecture, and embark on new projects. 
“I felt after 25 years this was a good time to hand over the reins to someone 
new,” she said.


One of her new projects, it turns out, is motherhood – Peyton-Jones now has a 
daughter, Pia. Areport in the Evening Standard 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/londoners-diary/londoners-diary-serpentines-julia-peytonjones-a-new-mum-at-64-a3442636.html>
 said she had told friends that she had been thinking about starting a family 
for some time and was “delighted” by her daughter’s birth.

The Standard quoted a friend of Peyton-Jones, Texan financier Robin Saunders, 
as saying: “This is the most exciting news! Julia will be a wonderful mother 
and role model for her daughter. I wish her happiness with Pia.”

Sara Richardson, who was Peyton-Jones’ PA from 2015 up until her departure 
from the gallery said onTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/saraminniemay/status/821430593250611201>: “Congratulations 
to Julia Peyton-Jones, my former boss and one of the most inspirational women 
I’ve had the pleasure of learning from. Baby Pia will learn so much from her 
and I am sure will follow in her footsteps as a trailblazing woman and icon.”

Peyton-Jones is currently living on the west coast of America but is expected 
to be moving back to the UK to raise her daughter.

The former artist, who lectured at the Edinburgh College of Art before 
becoming a curator at the Hayward Gallery in London’s Southbank centre, first 
joined the Serpentine in 1991 as the sole director, beforebeing joined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/mar/08/hans-ulrich-obrist-everything-i-do-connected-velocity-interview>
 byHans-Ulrich Obrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/20/hans-ulrich-obrist-tops-list-art-worlds-most-powerful-artreview-power-100>
 in 2006.

A known workaholic, she was a key force in building the reputation of the 
Serpentine, commissioning and showcasing groundbreaking exhibitions, education 
and public programmes and overseeing the £4m renovation under the patronage of 
Diana, princess of Wales, which was completed in 1998, after Diana’s death.

During her tenure, the gallery hosted works by Damien Hirst, Ai Weiwei, Yoko 
Ono, Gerhard Richter and Jeff Koons. Memorably, in 1995, Tilda Swinton slept in 
a glass box at the gallery aspart of Cornelia Parker’s performance piece, The 
Maybe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/may/18/cornelia-parker-interview>
.

In 2000 Peyton-Jones launched the annual Serpentine Gallery pavilion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/16/serpentine-pavilion-second-lives-zaha-hadid-toyo-ito-frank-gehry>
 project, where an architect who has previously never been commissioned to work 
in the UK is invited to create a temporary structure at the gallery.

She also oversaw the expansion of the Serpentine in 2013 into a second 
satellite building called theSerpentine Sackler Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/sep/25/serpentine-sackler-gallery-marquee-battling>
, which was designed by the lateDame Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/01/zaha-hadid-obituary> – 
one of her close friends.

Peyton-Jones was awarded an OBE in 2003 for services to art and a damehood 
last June 
<http://www.serpentinegalleries.org/sites/default/files/press-releases/julia_peyton-jones_press_release.pdf>
 as part of the Queen’s Birthday Honours list in recognition of her 25 years of 
service to the Serpentine.

However, it hasn’t all been plain sailing. In 2013 she and co-director Obrist 
werecondemned 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/news/serpentine-charity-boss-julia-peyton-jones-took-60-per-cent-pay-rise-9008868.html>
 for taking large pay rises at a time when the arts sector was facing cuts. 
Their salaries were found to be between £140,000 and £160,000.

In April last year Yana Peel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/07/serpentine-pavilion-2016-bjarke-ingels-minecraft-generation>
, co-founder of the Outset Contemporary Art Fund and chief executive of the 
debate forum Intelligence Squared, was named as the new CEO of the Serpentine 
Galleries, while Obrist became the sole art director.

 