
One man does not make a rugby club but, for those inside Leicester’s dressing 
room,the departure of Richard Cockerill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/02/leicester-tigers-may-miss-richard-cockerill>
 is a serious cultural shock. “It’ll be different and probably quieter … the 
swearing volume might be down,” says Dan Cole, reflecting on the downfall of a 
coach whom the England prop has known since the age of 16. “He’s always been 
here so it’ll be uncharted territory.” Notsince Dean Richards left in 2004 have 
Tiger emotions been so visibly torn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/the-breakdown-leicester-tigers-crossroads>
.

Leicester board at crossroads as old ways start to look like the wrong ones | 
Paul Rees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/the-breakdown-leicester-tigers-crossroads>
The way Cole tells it, the current playing squad also feel a twinge of guilt: 
“You do, because you are responsible for wins and losses on the field. As 
players you look back and think: ‘Could I have said or done more?’ You are 
tinged with a slight sense of guilt because, ultimately, we haven’t won a game 
and a man’s lost his job.” Leicester’s loyal tighthead is among the game’s most 
unflappable individuals but even he sounds shaken. The only slight consolation 
has been the chance to say a personal farewell to Cockerill this week: 
“Sometimes we have had people here who have been fired and you never see them 
again.”

Wallowing in self-pity, though, is never an option in the east Midlands. All 
anyone wants to hear is when, precisely, the old, indomitable Leicester will 
re-emerge? Are the club still a genuine force orhave their supposedly timeless 
qualities become a contemporary weakness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/leicester-tigers-and-northampton-saints-rugby-breakdown>
? As a senior player, local lad and tight forward, the 29-year-old Cole is all 
too aware of the lofty standards all Tigers must aspire to. “Leicester, for me 
growing up, was your [Martin] Johnsons, your ABC club, your Dean Richards, your 
Martin Corrys – big forwards, with a bit of flair in the backs occasionally. 
That was our identity. Being a front-row forward, that was bred into me. 
Unfortunately, that only gets you so far. One form of rugby will get you 70-80% 
of the way if you are really good at it but, to top it off, you need to be able 
do more things.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fdan-cole-leicester-tigers-richard-cockerill-aaron-mauger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb04fe4efaa2d9d504428bfcfdf79734623d26193%2F0_43_3405_2043%2F3405.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dan%20Cole%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20are%20tinged%20with%20guilt%20because%20a%20man%20has%20lost%20his%20job%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fdan-cole-leicester-tigers-richard-cockerill-aaron-mauger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dan%20Cole%3A%20%E2%80%98You%20are%20tinged%20with%20guilt%20because%20a%20man%20has%20lost%20his%20job%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fdan-cole-leicester-tigers-richard-cockerill-aaron-mauger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb04fe4efaa2d9d504428bfcfdf79734623d26193%2F0_43_3405_2043%2F3405.jpg>
 Aaron Mauger, left, has stepped in for Richard Cockerill since the latter’s 
sacking. Photograph: Brendan Moran/Sportsfile via Getty Images 
So what next? With the Cockerill years now colourful history, the board’s next 
move feels like a defining one. Sides like Saracens, Wasps, Glasgow and Exeter 
have left the Tigers choking on their exhaust fumes and the choice of two 
ball-sniffing opensides, Will Evans and Brendan O’Connor, to start against 
Wasps on Sunday, seems a pointed statement from Aaron Mauger, now in interim 
charge.“I’d be saying black and Cockers would be saying white,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/leicester-trouble-aaron-mauger-richard-cockerill>
 muttered Mauger this week and, from the outset, here is the selectorial proof.

Cole, of course, knows what it is like to embark down the road to redemption; 
the transformation in England’s fortunes since Eddie Jones was appointed just 
over a year ago has been profound. “We’ve all learned from Eddie,” says Cole, 
capped 69 times by his country. “If you want to buy in that’s fine; if you 
don’t, you’re out and he’ll bring someone else in.” A similarly ruthless streak 
was once the hallmark of the Tigers’ operation but Cole confirms the notorious 
training ground fights have grown rarer – “All these millennials, blame them” – 
as the professional game has evolved.

A bigger issue was the differing views of Mauger and Cockerill on how best to 
generate front-foot dynamism while staying faithful to Leicester’s traditions. 
“It’s not a bad thing to have different philosophies sometimes,” says Cole. “If 
you just have yes-men all the time you’ll only get one way but there have been 
times when Cockers wants it tighter and Maug wants it looser.”

The trouble at Leicester: ‘I’d be saying black and Cockers would say white’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/leicester-trouble-aaron-mauger-richard-cockerill>
So did the players, collectively, speak to the board about this confusion? 
Cole hesitates momentarily before replying. “I would say we played a part, as 
did everyone else in the club. People ask for your opinion and there is 
constant feedback with the board. So, yes, the players played a part but we 
didn’t have the ultimate say. There was some report that there was a players’ 
revolt but that wasn’t on the cards. That was never going to happen. It wasn’t 
as if you had one lot down one end [of the dressing room] and one lot down the 
other.

“The vast majority were here with one or two over there but the collective 
[message from] the senior players was on the same page.”

The upshot is that Mauger has survived but this is no happy-go-lucky Super 
Rugby franchise. “It’s not like we are going to throw out everything that
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> is about,” 
insists Cole. “We can’t just try to be the All Blacks. I don’t think Mauger 
wants that. I think he understands the history and the ethos of the place. He 
understands you need a decent forward pack but obviously he is a bit more 
back-focused. He’s been here a year and a half, we know what he is about. I 
don’t think it will be that hard for the players to pick that up and run with 
it. I don’t think we are weighed down by past histories.”

It all adds further fuel to this Sunday’s short trip to Coventry to face the 
high-flying Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/wasps-chase-home-record-new-laws-tackles>
. Who should Leicester recruit as Cockerill’s all-seeing replacement? The 
players would ideally like a say but accept that may not happen. “It’s not our 
ultimate decision,” says Cole. “We’ve either got to find a bloke that matches 
the club’s identity or can mesh with that and take us forward.” Might the 
former be someone like Johnson? “You’d have to ask him that. I am not the one 
ringing around trying to get a director of rugby.”

Whatever happens, the Tigers’ hunger still burns bright. “There has been a 
decline from the glory years,” says Cole. “If our aspiration is to win 
the Premiership, at this moment in time we are not good enough to do it. Part 
of this change is to make sure we pick up.

“As a player you grew up watching Leicester winning Premiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> and European titles and you 
want that for yourself. You watch Saracens do it and you are envious. You want 
that glory. As players you have to make a decision: whether you want to swan 
through life or commit to it and win things. This is a big club with a big 
fanbase, we have good players, some great players. As a player I want better 
than fifth.”
 