
Dario Gradi, the director of football at Crewe Alexandra – the club at the 
centre of football’s sexual-abuse scandal – has been suspended by the Football 
Association pending a top-level investigation.

Gradi, who has been at Crewe since 1983, including 24 years and more than 
1,200 games as manager, has been ordered to stay away from the sport while the 
relevant authorities look into his specific role in what the FA’s chairman, 
Greg Clarke, has described as the biggest crisis he can remember in the sport.

Gradi, who has an MBE for his services to football, was barred from Crewe’s 
home game against Crawley Town on Saturday and the suspension stops the 
75-year-old from taking part in any football-related activities until the FA’s 
investigations team has concluded its work.

“Following discussions with the Football Association, Crewe Alexandra Football 
Club can confirm that Dario Gradi is currently under an FA interim suspension 
from football,” read a club statement.

What is not clear is whether this refers to anything that has happened at his 
current employers, where Gradi has been described as “Mr Crewe” because of his 
long association with the club, or if it relates to claims that in his coaching 
days at Chelsea he visited the house of a 15-year-old youth-team player to 
“smooth over” a complaint of sexual assault against Eddie Heath, the chief 
scout who has been identified as a repeat offender in the 1970s.

Gradi, then in his early 30s, was the assistant manager at Chelsea and 
allegedly told the victim’s family that he knew Heath was “closer” to boys than 
he should have been. Chelsea never took any action against Heath and the FA’s 
independent inquiry, among a wide-ranging investigation expected to take many 
months, wants to interview Gradi about what the club knew, what they did about 
it and whether there was a cover-up.

That investigation will be led by Clive Sheldon QC, with the FA stating that 
the results will be made public, subject to legalities. Gradi has not commented 
on his suspension but he has always said he did not know of anything untoward 
at Crewe and the allegations involving Heath were put to him two weeks ago.

“Aside from denying any wrongdoing, it would be inappropriate and unfair on 
all parties to comment piecemeal through the media at this time in connection 
with historic allegations,” he said in a statement at the time. “Suffice to 
say, I will do everything within my power to assist all investigatory 
authorities into what is becoming a wide-ranging and important enquiry into 
historic sexual abuse.”

Crewe say they have opened their own independent investigation into how they 
have dealt with child sexual-abuse allegations but the club have repeatedly 
declined to answer any questions about who will be in charge of this process, 
how long it is likely to take and whether or not they intend to follow the FA 
by publishing the results.

Gradi discovered he had been suspended in the middle of last week but it has 
only just come to light and the club have yet to draw up an official response. 
When the Guardian contacted the Crewe chairman, John Bowler, a member of the 
board since 1979, he indicated there might be a statement on Monday, saying he 
would have “a chat with my staff.”

The news of Gradi’s suspension comes at a time when English football is 
reeling from what has been described as a “tidal wave” of revelations since the 
Guardian interviewed two former footballers, Andy Woodward and Steve Walters, 
about what had happened to them in the club’s junior set-up. The latest figures 
from the National Police Chiefs’ Council, released on Friday, say 98 clubs at 
professional and amateur level have been identified, along with 83 suspects, 
and there have been 639 referrals to Operation Hydrant following calls to the 
police and the joint FA and NSPCC hotline.

At the same time, the Scottish Football Association is facing calls to hold 
its own inquiry. Last week, Partick Thistle admitted firing one of their 
employees in 1992 over abuse claims. That employee also worked for Motherwell, 
who are holding their own investigation. This followed revelations concerning a 
former youth coach for Celtic, Hibernian and Falkirk who was charged last 
Wednesday with a child sex offence in Northern Ireland and has been remanded in 
custody.

John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister, said: “I think the SFA should 
recognise the extent of the actions that various clubs have taken individually 
to examine previous conduct in handling these issues. But I think the existence 
of that information is now so widespread the SFA has to consider setting up an 
independent inquiry that will satisfy that these issues have been properly and 
fully addressed by everyone in football.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%3A%20how%20the%20story%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%3A%20how%20the%20story%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video&media=>
Football sexual abuse scandal: how the story unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/08/football-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video> 