
A magnitude 6.7 earthquake near Indonesia has shaken people in the Northern 
Territory <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory>, but 
authorities say there is no tsunami threat to Australia.

Geoscience Australia confirmed tremors from the quake near the Banda Sea off 
Indonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> were felt in Darwin on 
Wednesday morning.

The quake occurred around 9am local Indonesian time with an epicentre 180km 
deep, and there were no immediate reports of damage. Indonesia’s disaster 
agency said residents in the south-west of the Moluccas island chain also felt 
the quake.

Queensland earthquake 'biggest in 20 years'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/18/queensland-earthquake-biggest-in-20-years>
The epicentre was 630km north-west of Darwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/darwin>, but Bureau of Meteorology 
senior forecaster Chris Kent, who is based in the city, said the quake lasted 
several minutes.

Local Andy Chandler was on a ladder in her kitchen in Coconut Grove doing some 
pre-Christmas cleaning when she felt the tremor. “Pots and pans started 
rattling and the whole house and everything started shaking,” she told ABC 
local radio.

Fellow Darwinian Bev Luke said she watched the Christmas decorations “do a 
dance” in her home, while Celeste Green said she felt the earth move under her 
feet. “My whole building just shook for about five seconds, so much that my 
pictures fell off the wall,” Green said.

Australia’s Northern Territory News said the quake was widely felt across 
Darwin and surrounding areas.

Angela Pattison said Howard Springs was “rocking and rolling” with the tremor. 
“The fish tank was a-sloshing and the cabinets were a-rattling and my chair was 
doing the four-legged jive!” she said.

Other Territorians felt it as far away as the Tiwi Islands, Yirrkala in 
Eastern Arnhem Land and in Katherine.

Dan Jaksa, senior seismologist at Geoscience Australia, said earthquakes 
happen regularly in the Banda Sea, which are often felt in the Top End. “In the 
past 20 years there’s been more than 140 over magnitude six in the region,” he 
said.

Jaksa said the shaking from the seismic waves travels more readily on the 
Australian tectonic plate than the Indonesian one.

How did New Zealand's earthquake happen? Was it two quakes in one?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/14/how-did-new-zealand-earthquake-happen-two-quakes-in-one>
“Most of the motion is on our plate. It was probably felt less in the 
immediate region where the epicentre is than it was in Darwin,” he said.

The Joint Australian Tsunami Warning Centre has ruled out a tsunami threat.

Jaksa said earthquakes at this depth don’t produce damaging surface waves 
because the fault is less likely to rupture the seafloor.

The Banda Sea lies on the Ring of Fire, an area where tectonic plates collide 
that is known for volcanic eruptions and about 90% of the world’s earthquakes. 
Indonesia experiences frequent seismic and volcanic activity.

Earthquakes <https://www.theguardian.com/world/earthquakes> are rare in 
Australia because the country doesn’t lie on an immediate tectonic plate 
boundary, but Jaksa said “never say never”.

“The biggest earthquakes that have occurred are in the Northern Territory,” he 
said.

Australia’s largest quake was a 6.6 magnitude in Tennant Creek in 1988, 
followed by a 6.5 tremor in Western Australia’s Meckering in 1968. The 
third-biggest was again in the Territory, when a 6.4 magnitude quake rattled 
the Simpson Desert in 1941.

Australian Associated Press and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report
 