
Data retention laws passed nearly two years ago on the grounds of an urgent 
need to combat terrorism have still not been successfully implemented, 
highlighting fundamental flaws in the “dysfunctional” legislation, advocates 
say.

By April internet service providers must have systems in place to retain 
customers’ metadata for a two-year period, but the law is still not 
operational, and experts warn its coverage may never be comprehensive.


Laurie Patton, the chief executive of the not-for-profit peak body Internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Australia, said not all of 
Australia’s ISPs were known to the Attorney General’s Department (AGD), and not 
all of them would necessarily be collecting and storing the metadata they were 
required to by the law.

Mandatory data retention: eight out of 10 telcos not ready for start of scheme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/13/almost-nine-out-of-10-telcos-not-ready-for-start-of-mandatory-data-retention>
ISPs – defined as “any person who supplies, or proposes to supply, an internet 
carriage service to the public” – are not required to be licensed, even under 
the new legislation, so the government does not know how many there are.

The Bureau of Statistics had recorded 66 ISPs with more than 1,000 subscribers 
as at June 2016. Internet Australia estimates there are at least 250, and 
perhaps more than 500.

The AGD has received applications from 210 ISPs for funding to help them meet 
the costs of compliance, of which 180 were approved. If Internet Australia’s 
estimate is accurate, that suggests there may be dozens of ISPs that are 
unknown to the department.

“But we don’t know, that’s the point,” Patton said. “We really don’t know. It 
could be 40, it could 50, it could be 100.

“It’s extraordinary that the government didn’t ask the obvious question right 
upfront: how many are we talking about?”

One small-scale provider, who did not want to be identified, said there were 
“plenty who couldn’t be bothered applying for the money because of the hoops 
which need to be jumped through”.


The list of 180 “eligible providers” granted funding by the department – 15 
withdrew their applications, and a further 15 were found to be ineligible – was
made public in August 
<https://www.ag.gov.au/NationalSecurity/DataRetention/Pages/Data-retention-industry-grants-programme.aspx>
.

Patton suggested the list defeated the law’s intended purpose of 
counter-terrorism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fmetadata-explainer-australia-explained-whistleblowing-brandis-abbott-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F17%2F1426569489376%2FPaul-Farrell-metadata-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Metadata%3A%20Australian%20government's%20data%20retention%20plans%20explained%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fmetadata-explainer-australia-explained-whistleblowing-brandis-abbott-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Metadata%3A%20Australian%20government%27s%20data%20retention%20plans%20explained%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F17%2Fmetadata-explainer-australia-explained-whistleblowing-brandis-abbott-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F17%2F1426569489376%2FPaul-Farrell-metadata-001.jpg>
Metadata: Australian government’s data retention plans explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/mar/17/metadata-explainer-australia-explained-whistleblowing-brandis-abbott-video>
“By a process of elimination, they’ve identified the ones that will be handing 
over their data. Anyone that’s not on their list – there’s your loophole.”

A senior figure within another ISP noted with frustration that the “crappy law 
… is literally trivial for anyone to work around” given that Google, as an 
overseas company, was not required to store metadata. “If you were the dumbest 
terrorist in the world and signed up for a Gmail address, you’re golden.”

He agreed with Patton’s assessment that attempting to comply with the law had 
proved a “nightmare”.


Though service providers were required to begin retaining metadata from 13 
October 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/13/easier-access-data-starts-here-mandatory-retention-begins>
, those with implementation plans approved by the AGD could take until 12 April 
2017.

Internet Australia had earlier warned that smaller, independent providers, 
particularly in regional areas, would struggle – and that costs would 
inevitably be passed onto the consumer.

“The legislation was so complex that even Telstra asked for extra time to work 
out what it all meant,” Patton said. A spokesman for Telstra said it was 
confident of meeting the April deadline.

PricewaterhouseCoopers estimated the cost of compliance to the industry at 
$738m over the first 10 years of operation. But Patton questioned how that 
figure was reached when the total number of ISPs was not known.


A pool of grant funding up to $128.4m had been made available to help ISPs 
comply with the act – $70m short of the $198.5m anticipated by the 180 
providers.


Patton said nearly 10 months after applications closed, many grant recipients 
had not yet been paid, leaving them “scrambling” to meet the April deadline. 
“The funding is nowhere near enough. They’re all out of pocket and they’re 
unhappy.”

The full burden of the scheme on the taxpayer was not clear because of the 
unknown cost of government agencies requesting and accessing the data from 
service providers, he said.

Easier access to your data starts here as mandatory retention becomes law in 
Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/13/easier-access-data-starts-here-mandatory-retention-begins>
Questions remained as to how those requests would even be overseen. “Our 
concern is that the legislation is fundamentally flawed, and drafted by lawyers 
who don’t understand how the internet works.

“Consumers will ultimately pay for a flawed piece of legislation … that was 
apparently urgently required, and had to be rushed through the parliament 
without a great deal of public debate.”

Internet Australia has resisted the Telecommunications (Interception and 
Access) Amendment (Data Retention) Act 2015 since its introduction in October 
2014, and made a submission to a parliamentary inquiry.

Academics and privacy advocates also questioned the basis on which it was 
founded, while the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner raised 
serious concerns about its implications for privacy laws.

The AGD had said it had been necessary to combat terrorism, with incomplete 
metadata “degrading the investigative capabilities of law enforcement and 
security agencies”.The bill passed on 26 March 2015. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/19/australias-new-improved-data-retention-laws-how-will-they-work>


David Vaile, the co-convenor of the cyberspace law and policy community at the 
University of New South Wales, told Guardian Australia that the benefits of the 
law “were not substantiated”, and claims about the data’s usefulness to 
agencies were not subjected to any “doubt or scepticism”.

John Stanton, the chief executive of Communications Australia, said the 
government had not provided evidence of a widespread trend of ISPs retaining 
less data, for shorter periods.

He said agencies and service providers had had a functioning relationship 
before the law change, and storing two years’ data was “disproportionate” when 
most requests were for that from within the last six months.

The AGD told Guardian Australia that the new legislation simply standardised 
the process and introduced safeguards to ensure its effectiveness. It said it 
continued to “collaborate with service providers to help them fully comply” by 
April.

The law is enforceable by the Australian Communications and Media Authority, 
and service providers may face fines and infringement notices for 
non-compliance.

Metadata: Australians’ phone and internet details accessed 334,658 times in 
2013-14
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/jun/19/metadata-australians-phone-and-internet-details-accessed-334658-times-in-2013-14>
Stanton had asked the AGD to “show some regulatory forbearance” towards ISPs 
that may not make the April deadline, given that it held some responsibility 
for the delays. “They’ve not committed to that. I hope certainly that they will 
behave reasonably when the time comes.”

He said there was some confusion around the scope of the law, and was in 
favour of at least a “tidy-up to get the definitions right and provide clarity”.

The parliamentary joint committee on intelligence and security will review the 
data retention scheme “within three years of [its] being fully implemented”. 
The AGD told Guardian Australia that the first annual report was currently 
being prepared.

 The Australian Communications and Media Authority confirmed in its annual 
report, published November 
<http://www.acma.gov.au/~/media/Research%20and%20Analysis/Report/pdf/ACMA%20Communications%20report%202015-16%20pdf.pdf>
, that no service providers had been referred for enforcement action on their 
data retention obligations.

When that was put to the senior ISP figure, he laughed. “Well, I’m not 
compliant. I haven’t really even started on the work.”
 