
The jazz clarinettist Dave Shepherd, who has died aged 87, was often billed as 
Britain’s answer to Benny Goodman, his instrumental facility, centred tone and 
driving attack comparable to that of his American idol. The sobriquet never 
rankled with Shepherd: he toured frequently with Goodman’s celebrated pianist
Teddy Wilson 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1986/08/01/obituaries/teddy-wilson-dies-pianist-and-leader-of-30-s-jazz-combos.html>
 and regularly put together whole quintet presentations (sometimes using other 
Goodman alumni) based on the maestro’s music. It was reported that Goodman 
himself once said: “He plays more like me than I do.”

If Goodman’s music was often technically demanding, it never seemed to daunt 
Shepherd, whose style and grace in playing was mirrored by his dapper, 
well-groomed appearance and easy bandstand manner. “Dave was the finest swing 
clarinettist in the country and perhaps, in the world,” said the trumpeterDigby 
Fairweather <http://www.digbyfairweather.com/>, a frequent associate, adding: 
“He was always the most handsome man in the band.” Indeed, it was reputed that 
Shepherd had once modelled for Brylcreem, when it was the trendiest of male 
hair preparations.

He was born in Walthamstow, east London, to Cecilia (nee Sadgrove), a 
machinist, and Joseph Shepherd, a semi-pro pianist who worked for the gas 
company. Dave adopted the clarinet aged 15 after seeing Freddy Mirfield’s 
Garbage Men, the group whose clarinettist was the youngJohn Dankworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/feb/07/sir-john-dankworth-obituary>. 
Shepherd was soon proficient enough to play at gigs with the trumpeterFreddy 
Randall 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/obituary-freddy-randall-1095956.html>
, while taking lessons from Randall’s clarinettist Bernie Izen and working as a 
shorthand-typist at the War Office.

His national service posting in 1947 was to the British Forces Network radio 
station in Hamburg. The army had taken over the state opera house for their 
studios and this allowed Shepherd to persuade the opera’s principal 
clarinettist to give him a weekly lesson in exchange for 10 cigarettes a go. 
Shepherd played with the BFN quintet, broadcasting twice a week and practising 
for several hours a day, this under the benign command ofCliff Michelmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/17/cliff-michelmore-obituary>
. As he said: “The army did a lot for my start in the jazz world.”

Shepherd resumed work at the War Office after demobilisation in 1949 and 
played aroundLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, sometimes fronting 
his own quartet while fitting in with any number of Dixieland-style bands. In 
1951, he joined the drummer Joe Daniels and his Hot Shots, then a highly 
popular group, and turned professional, making his recording debut the same 
year. Daniels’s well-organised Dixieland approach suited Shepherd and he stayed 
for three years, before moving on to play with Randall again, cementing a 
working relationship that was revisited often over the years.

Shepherd also recorded a pair of albums under his own name at this time. 
Despite this, and like a number of his contemporaries, he felt impelled in 1956 
to try his luck in New York, then the jazzman’s mecca, taking office jobs 
before the union allowed him to look for musical work. Back in Britain a year 
later, he became part of an all-star group known as the Jazz Today Unit, 
playing concerts with theGerry Mulligan 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-gerry-mulligan-1325265.html> 
quartet in April 1957. He considered this to be a career highlight, another 
being his presence as part of theDill Jones 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1984/06/26/obituaries/dill-jones-pianist-dies-at-60-expert-in-harlem-stride-style.html>
 quartet on the first-ever UK tour in May 1958 by the famous Jazz at the 
Philharmonic troupe withElla Fitzgerald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ella-fitzgerald> and Oscar Peterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/dec/25/1> as the star attractions.

It was during this time that Shepherd began to be heard frequently on BBC 
radio, his quartet often used on theJimmy Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/08/sir-jimmy-young-obituary> 
show, or on Round Midnight or Breakfast Special, and even on Music While You 
Work, his limpid clarinet tone and flair for melodic invention a welcome 
inclusion on these popular programmes. He also toured abroad, often in eastern 
Germany, played the Edinburgh, Nice and Montreux festivals, and began to work 
regularly from 1967 with Wilson, this taking in biennial UK tours but also a 
couple of visits to South Africa in 1973, including a concert in Soweto. By the 
1970s, he had linked up again with Randall, while still fronting his own 
Goodman-styled quintet.

In 1980, Shepherd was recruited by the impresario Peter Boizot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2002/nov/05/lifeandhealth.foodanddrink> 
as a founder member and leader of the PizzaExpress All Stars, a mainstream 
group that played residencies at the PizzaExpress jazz club in Dean Street, 
Soho, several times a week over the following three decades, often with star 
American guests. This was especially convenient for Shepherd as he now had a 
job with a film production company located nearby.

He moved to Hampshire in 1996, so travelled to London less often, but still 
carried on with the All-Stars until 2001, while fitting in dates with 
Fairweather’s Great BritishJazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> Band 
and playing solo gigs. He was back at Dean Street in February last year for the 
35th Anniversary reunion of the All-Stars, with Boizot on hand to cheer on his 
veteran proteges.

In 1966 he married his second wife, Mary Evans. She survives him, as does 
Rochelle, the daughter of his earlier marriage to the jazz vocalist Jo Searle, 
which ended in divorce.

• David Joseph Shepherd, jazz clarinettist, born 7 February 1929; died 15 
December 2016

 * This article was amended on 15 January 2017. Dave Shepherd was also 
survived by his daughter, Rochelle.  