
When David Bowie’s final album, Blackstar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>
, was released on 8 January, a great deal of energy was expended trying to 
unpick the lyrics. As on its predecessor, 2013’sThe Next Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/25/david-bowie-next-day-review>, or 
any number of classic Bowie albums fromHunky Dory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/moment-that-changed-me-david-bowie-hunky-dory>
 toStation to Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/sep/16/station-station-david-bowie>
, they were frequently dense and allusive: much attention was focused on the 
title track, which one of Blackstar’s backing musicians, saxophonist Donny 
McCaslin, claimed was about the rise ofIsis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, a suggestion Bowie’s spokesperson 
subsequently denied. Now, with the knowledge that Bowie was terminally ill 
during its making, the most striking thing about the album is how elegiac it 
frequently sounds. “If I never see the English evergreens I’m running to, it’s 
nothing to me,” he sang on Dollar Days. “Saying no, but meaning yes, this is 
all I ever meant, that’s the message that I sent,” ran the closing I Can’t Give 
Everything Away. Most arresting of all is Lazarus: “Look at me, I’m in heaven. 
I’ve got scars that can’t be seen, I’ve got drama can’t be stolen; everybody 
knows me now.”

David Bowie: legendary rock star dies of cancer aged 69 – latest updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/live/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-of-cancer-aged-69-reports>
Most people assumed that Lazarus was written from the viewpoint of Thomas 
Newton, the alien Bowie portrayed in Nicolas Roeg’sThe Man Who Fell to Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/14/man-who-fell-to-earth-review>: it 
was the title track of an off-Broadway musical based on the 1976 film. Now it 
feels suspiciously like Bowie writing his own epitaph, asserting his own fame, 
vast artistic importance and inimitability – for decades, other artists tried 
to copy David Bowie, but none of them were really anything like him – while 
wryly pointing out that, after nearly 50 years in the spotlight, he’d somehow 
managed to retain a sense of mystery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-man-who-thrilled-the-world-appreciation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda978281eb232da8aff7786d32a3983d51f6cfc%2F525_181_4173_2429%2F4173.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%3A%20the%20man%20who%20thrilled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-man-who-thrilled-the-world-appreciation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%3A%20the%20man%20who%20thrilled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-man-who-thrilled-the-world-appreciation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda978281eb232da8aff7786d32a3983d51f6cfc%2F525_181_4173_2429%2F4173.jpg>
 Something unknowable lurked at the centre … David Bowie at Hammersmith Odeon 
in 1973. Photograph: Ilpo Musto/Rex Features 
Dozens of books have been written about him, some of them hugely illuminating, 
but something unknowable lurked at the centre. Almost from the start, Bowie’s 
career raised questions to which a definitive answer seemed elusive. If he was, 
as he loudly claimed in 1971, gay, then what was the deal with the very visible 
wife and the son he’d just written a touching little song about? If he was, as 
hedramatically announced from the stage of the Hammersmith Odeon in July 1973 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-G1Uy0OkCw>, retiring – either from music, or 
from live performance, or from the character of Ziggy Stardust – then what was 
he doing back onstage in London three months later, belting outThe Jean Genie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yEmGQYCuc6M> in full Ziggy drag? How does 
anyone in the state Bowie was, by all accounts, in by 1975 – ravaged by cocaine 
to the point where he seemed to have genuinely gone insane; paranoid and 
hallucinating – make an album like Station to Station: not a messily compelling 
document of a mind unravelling, like the solo albums of his great idolSyd 
Barrett <https://www.theguardian.com/music/sydbarrett>, but a work of precision 
and focus and exquisitely controlled power that’s arguably his best? In a world 
of cameraphones and social media, how could anyone as famous as Bowie disappear 
from public view as completely as he seemed to between 2008 and 2013: moreover, 
how could anyone as famous as Bowie record a comeback album in the middle of 
Manhattan without anyone noticing or leaking details to the media? How does 
anyone stage-manage their own death as dramatically as Bowie appears to have 
done: releasing their most acclaimed album in decades, filled with strange, 
enigmatic songs whose meaning suddenly became apparent when their author dies 
two days later?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98An%20extraordinary%2C%20alien%2C%20otherworldly%20creature%E2%80%99%3A%20David%20Bowie%201947-2016%20-%20video%20tribute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98An%20extraordinary%2C%20alien%2C%20otherworldly%20creature%E2%80%99%3A%20David%20Bowie%201947-2016%20-%20video%20tribute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute&media=>
 Guardian writers pay tribute to Bowie. 
It was a dramatic end to a career that began inauspiciously. Bowie spent the 
60s trying to fit in with prevalent trends, something to which he was uniquely 
ill-suited: he didn’t make for a terribly convincing blues-influenced 
rock’n’roller, or hippy troubadour, or MOR singer-songwriter, just as two 
decades later, he wouldn’t make for a terribly convincing mainstream 
stadium-rock star, trapped in what he subsequently called “the netherworld of 
commercial acceptance”.

Tellingly, the first truly great song he wrote focused on the outsider: 
recorded at the height of Swinging London, 1966’sThe London Boys 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CIL5KDeLOJ0> offered up the era’s gloomy 
flipside, a monochrome drama of poverty, amphetamine psychosis, grimy bedsits 
and cafes. Even when he finally had a hit, with 1969’sSpace Oddity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cYMCLz5PQVw>, his success seemed far from 
assured. For all the song’s eerie brilliance, the public clearly thought of it 
as a novelty record, capitalising on the moon landings: they declined to buy 
its follow-up, The Prettiest Star, or the accompanying eponymous album. All 
along, however, Bowie was picking up ideas he would subsequently pull into 
focus. His then-manager Ken Pitt introduced him to theVelvet Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/velvetunderground>, whose distortion, 
avant-garde inclinations and transgressive subject matter would reverberate 
throughout Bowie’s career: you can hear echoes of their tumultuous sound in 
everything from the feedback-laden glam rock of 1973’s Aladdin Sane to the 
wilfully synthetic racket he conjured up on 1977’s Heroes to the sonic 
commotion of Blackstar’s’Tis a Pity She Was a Whore 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=03GN-duIY2A>. He tried to incorporate what 
he’d learned studying mime under Lindsay Kemp into his stage act, which kicked 
off a fruitful obsession with drawing ideas from other areas of the arts – 
films, theatre, literature, fashion – into rock music.

No matter how weird and alien you felt, you couldn’t be as weird and alien as 
Bowie and his bandmates

As the 70s dawned, he found the perfect musical foil in guitarist Mick Ronson 
and his songwriting got better and better – 1971’s Hunky Dory was as rich and 
brilliant a collection of songs as he ever wrote – but almost no one noticed. 
The closest Hunky Dory came to commercial success was whenOh! You Pretty Things 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pBQ-S6njQQw> made No 12, courtesy of a jaunty, 
prim cover version by Peter Noone <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oC9gM1Tu_Jg> 
– toothsome former frontman of the 60s least-threatening superstars, Herman’s 
Hermits – which was clearly some distance from the seismic rupture Bowie had 
predicted on the album’s opening trackChanges 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xMQ0Ryy01yE>: “Look out, you rock’n’rollers!” 

How he made them notice was via one of the most audacious gambles in rock 
history. Infatuated with the Velvet Underground’s world of drag queens and 
sneering, bitchy putdowns, Bowie seemed to realise that, for all the 
generation-gap-rendering shocks that British rock music had delivered over the 
preceding decade, it had never really dared touch on the subject of 
homosexuality. Beyond the thanks-but-no-thanks saga of the Kinks’ Lola, there 
were only glancing references, so oblique as to be the stuff of rumour rather 
than fact: See My Friend, also by the Kinks, the Beatles’ You’ve Got to Hide 
Your Love Away, Donovan’s To Try for the Sun.Tellingly, the journalist to whom 
he came out as bisexual, Michael Watts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/jan/22/popandrock.davidbowie>, didn’t 
seem to have been terribly convinced: “Mmmmmm,” he responded doubtfully, 
despite the fact that Bowie had already posed on the cover of 1970’s The Man 
Who Sold the World wearing “a man’s dress”, and larded the lyrics of The Width 
of a Circle andQueen Bitch <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ljv8xCt4Bq8> with 
intimations of homosexual encounters.

It didn’t matter. The interview drew enough attention that the launch of his 
next album and its accompanying character, Ziggy Stardust – the latter debuted 
a fortnight later in the unpromising environs of the Toby Jug pub in Tolworth – 
felt like an event. The momentum was electrified further byhis appearance on 
Top of the Pops in July 1972 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v342TST9tFw>, 
arguably the most celebrated three minutes of music television ever broadcast 
in the UK. Listen to a bootleg of Bowie performing live in Aylesbury the 
preceding year and he sounds nervous and uncertain; on Top of the Pops, he 
seemed imperious. There’s a touch of Lord Kitchener about the moment Bowie 
pointed down the camera as he sang the line: “I had to phone someone so I 
picked on you.” He looks like a man recruiting an army of teenage misfits. No 
matter how weird and alien you felt, you couldn’t be as weird and alien as 
Bowie and his bandmates looked: “You’re not alone, give me your hands, you’re 
wonderful,” he sang on the accompanying album.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv342TST9tFw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv342TST9tFw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dv342TST9tFw&media=>
It helped that Ziggy Stardust was the right record for the moment. The 
standard line is that glam rock represented a diversion from the misery of 
early-70s life, a glittery space-age dreamworld in which you could hide from 
rising unemployment, industrial unrest and terrorism. ButThe Rise and Fall of 
Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/mar/27/ziggy-stardust-david-bowie-plaque>
 is riven with dread and horror, mired in what the journalist Francis Wheen 
later called “the collective nervous breakdown” of the 1970s. Even at its most 
escapist, it underlined what you might be escaping from: “Tony went to fight in 
Belfast, Rudi stayed at home to starve,” opened the rock’n’roll fantasy of 
Star. As time wore on and Bowie became an ever-more influential and commanding 
figure –capable of reactivating other’s careers at a stroke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VkqQj8Z_aVY> – his music got more dense and 
apocalyptic. By the time of 1974’s Diamond Dogs, it sounded so decadent and 
diseased and sensational that it was hard to work out where Bowie could 
possibly go next.

As it turned out, he was just getting started on a series of musical shifts so 
brilliantly executed they seemed to drag the rest of pop music along in their 
wake. If his early 70s albums informed punk – a genre heavily staffed by kids 
who’d been galvanised by his 1972 Top of the Pops appearance – then the 
“plastic soul” and electronic experiments of his late 70s albums presaged a 
vast quantity of what happened after punk. Quite aside from his willingness to 
reinvent himself so dramatically, it seems a miracle his fans kept up – “it 
might as well have been a completely different artist”, said one fan who 
witnessed both the glammy, theatrical early dates and the funk-inspired later 
shows of the 1974 tour that finally made him a star in America – what was 
remarkable was how thoroughly Bowie could impose himself on different genres, 
how he could take other people’s ideas and twist them until they seemed 
entirely his own. 1975’sYoung Americans 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ydLcs4VrjZQ> was recorded at Sigma Sound, home 
of the luscious string-laden soul released on Philadelphia International, but 
it didn’t sound like a Philly soul record. Recorded with Brian Eno, 1977’sLow 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-m30aaI5Yf8> and Heroes were clearly in thrall 
to the music of German experimentalists Kraftwerk and Neu!, but they didn’t 
sound much like Kraftwerk or Neu!. They sounded like David Bowie, even though 
they sounded nothing like David Bowie had recorded before.

There was a lovely circularity about the release of 1980’s Scary Monsters (and 
Super Creeps) and its accompanying No 1 single,Ashes to Ashes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CMThz7eQ6K0>, at the height of the New 
Romantic movement he’d almost singlehandedly inspired: public confirmation that 
Bowie was the most important and influential artist since the Beatles. But the 
80s were to prove a more problematic decade than that suggested. His career in 
the 70s had been scarred by bad business deals: once he was out of a contract 
with Tony DeFries that entitled his former manager to 16% of his earnings until 
1982, Bowie seemed determined to make money. He succeeded – 1983’s Serious 
Moonlight tour sold 2.6m tickets – but, as he later admitted, his artistry 
suffered. Let’s Dance – released in 1983, and his biggest hit album with 7m 
sales – had its moments. The following year’s Tonight, however, did not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-man-who-thrilled-the-world-appreciation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e8dc73e2559262511ba0b909ef6af74aebed9ff%2F57_57_3292_4944%2F3292.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%3A%20the%20man%20who%20thrilled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-man-who-thrilled-the-world-appreciation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%3A%20the%20man%20who%20thrilled%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-man-who-thrilled-the-world-appreciation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e8dc73e2559262511ba0b909ef6af74aebed9ff%2F57_57_3292_4944%2F3292.jpg>
 The most important and influential artist since the Beatles … Bowie on stage 
in Paris, 1987. Photograph: Catherine Cabrol/Kipa/Corbis 
By the decade’s end, Bowie seemed aware that something had gone awry. He tried 
to kickstart his muse: by forming a heavy rock band, Tin Machine; by announcing 
that he would no longer play old material in concert; by reconnecting with 
collaborators who’d spurred him on in the past, including Brian Eno and Mick 
Ronson; by dabbling in the voguish dance genre of drum’n’bass. He occasionally 
made brilliant records – not least 1995’s impenetrable but rewardingOutside 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Outside_(David_Bowie_album)> – but nothing 
matched what he’d achieved in the 70s. Indeed, by the mid-90s, his real 
innovations seemed to be happening away from the recording studio: he released 
a download-only single in 1996, nine years before iTunes. He made himself 
available to fans on the messageboard of his website, foreshadowing the 
360-degree connectivity that artists are expected to indulge in in the age of 
Twitter and Facebook, and which he himself shunned completely in the years 
before his death.

By the early noughties, he seemed to be settling into the life of a heritage 
rock star: making well-received albums that knowingly referenced his past, 
playing classic albums in their entirety, seeming to tacitly acknowledge both 
the extent of his influence and that his greatest achievements were behind him. 
It’s a pragmatic approach that’s served everyone from Paul McCartney to Iggy 
Pop well, but it sat uneasily with Bowie. His music had never wallowed in 
nostalgia. It had been iconoclastic and antagonistic towards the past (“my 
brother’s at home with his Beatles and his Stones … what a drag”, he’d written 
on 1972’sAll the Young Dudes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bvZsssoryN0>): it 
was about the present, or better still, the future. Although his withdrawal 
into semi-retirement after 2003’s Reality was precipitated by emergency surgery 
on a blocked artery, it made a strange kind of sense.

Most observers assumed it was permanent. Instead, he suddenly reappeared in 
2013 withWhere Are We Now? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QWtsV50_-p4>. The 
song just appeared on the internet on his 66th birthday, without advance 
promotion or fanfare, its author declining to give interviews: in its own way, 
as audacious a move as the interview he gave the Melody Maker in 1972. The 
subsequent album, The Next Day, wasn’t a million miles removed from the albums 
he’d been making before his sabbatical – solid songwriting, lots of references 
to Bowie’s past, but its follow-up was something else entirely. On release, 
Blackstar sounded remarkably like the kind of confident, decisive break with 
his past Bowie kept turning out at the height of his powers: the thrillingly 
exploratory jazz-influenced sound had as little to do with the music on The 
Next Day as the soul of Young Americans had with the glam albums that preceded 
it. It sounded like a new beginning, but it was the exact opposite: it was a 
farewell, a puzzle, filled with clues no one picked up on, that would suddenly 
be solved by his death. David Bowie went out the way he spent most of his 
career: unknowable, one step ahead of everyone else.

Alexis Petridis’s pick of Bowie

There’s no point in trying to make a definitive 20-song Bowie playlist. 
There’s over half a century of wildly diverse work there: it isn’t going to be 
neatly summed up in 20 songs without glaring omissions, with whole areas of 
what he did left untouched. So this is an unashamedly personal selection, in 
chronological order.
 