
The Huddersfield Town manager, David Wagner, has pledged his future to the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship> club following 
speculation linking him with the Bundesliga side Wolfsburg.

Wagner, 45, was reported by various German news outlets on Monday to have been 
lined up as a replacement for the currentWolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> coach, Valérien Ismaël.

The Wolfsburg director Hans-Gerd Bode dismissed rumours earlier in the day 
that his club were set to appoint Wagner, who has now declared his commitment to
Huddersfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/huddersfield>.

“There have been a lot of rumours around my future in the media and although I 
don’t believe I should be the story, I cannot stay silent on this matter,” 
Wagner said in a club statement. “It is correct that there has been interest 
from a fewBundesliga <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bundesligafootball> 
clubs. They have obviously seen the way we are going at Huddersfield Town and 
the journey we have been on together over the last 12 months.

Bundesliga managers on edge before winter break as Red Christmas awaits | 
Raphael Honigstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/19/bundesliga-managers-on-edge-before-winter-break-as-red-christmas-awaits>
“It’s important for me to clarify that my focus is on moving forward at 
Huddersfield Town. We want to develop what has been a good season so far into a 
great one, with the staff, players and fans together as one.

“I ask our fans to keep up the superb support they have given the players all 
season, starting with the game against Nottingham Forest on Boxing Day. We are 
creating something special here.”

The former Borussia Dortmund reserve-team coach, appointed as Chris Powell’s 
successor at Huddersfield in November 2015, was linked with another Bundesliga 
side, Ingolstadt, in November. He was also among a list of possible candidates 
to fill the recent vacancies at the Championship sides Derby County and Aston 
Villa.

The Huddersfield chairman, Dean Hoyle, expressed his annoyance at the latest 
reports and said the German media had been disrespectful to the club.

“Huddersfield Town may not be a Bundesliga club or one that plays in European 
competition but make no mistake, we are a serious, proud, ambitious club with a 
rich history,” Hoyle said. “Perhaps this isn’t clear to some of our colleagues 
in the media in Germany considering the tone of some articles that were 
published over the last 48 hours.

Huddersfield’s David Wagner: ‘We had no electricity, no toilet, no beds and no 
mobile phones’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/huddersfield-david-wagner-no-electricity-no-beds-football-championship>
“We are not to be toyed with or dismissed out of hand. We have values and 
always conduct ourselves in the right manner; something that cannot be said for 
other clubs. I think David’s ongoing commitment to Huddersfield Town is 
testament to this club and its standing. He’s turned down several advances from 
Bundesliga clubs during his time here, the latest coming very, very recently.

“It is important to be clear on this. The day will come when David moves on, 
as is the case with every manager or head coach at every club in world 
football. However, that day is not upon us.”

Wagner, who worked under his good friend and former Mainz team-mate Jürgen 
Klopp during his time at Dortmund, steered the Terriers to safety in the 
Championship last season. He overhauled his playing squad in the summer, 
drafting in 13 new signings, and has quickly turned the club into play-off 
challengers. Huddersfield, who will attempt to win a fourth straight league 
game against Forest, are currently fourth in the Championship.
 