
This week, the supreme court of the United Kingdom will hear the government’s 
article 50 appeal in what promises, with its live TV coverage and internet 
streaming, to be the court’s most contentious and closely followed case since 
its establishment seven years ago.

At that time, there were many critics of the new court, which replaced the law 
lords as the country’s highest court. Chief among them was the then law lord
Lord Neuberger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/21/lord-neuberger-uks-top-judge-unveils-supreme-court-diversity-plan-retirement>
, who dismissed the court as the creation of a “last-minute decision over a 
glass of whisky”. He feared that the British constitution was being dangerously 
“muck[ed] around” and noted that there was a pronounced risk of “judges 
arrogating to themselves greater power than they have at the moment”.

Lord Neuberger appointed supreme court president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/jul/12/lord-neuberger-appointed-supreme-court-president>
David Neuberger, Baron Neuberger of Abbotsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/jul/12/lord-neuberger-appointed-supreme-court-president>
, appears to have since overcome his doubts about the supreme court, at least 
to the extent of becoming, four years ago, its president.

The sovereignty of parliament is the issue at the heart of the article 50 
case. Both sides lay claim, in different ways, to be defending it. The 
government insists that, as the parliamentary executive, acting on the will of 
people as expressed in the referendum onEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> membership, it has the right to invoke 
article 50 without a parliamentary debate and vote.

The government’s opponents, namely Gina Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/gina-miller-theresa-may-article-50-brexit-parliament-legal-challenge>
, Deir Tozetti Dos Santos and others, have argued that, as the referendum is 
not binding under existing law, the government is legally obliged to ratify the 
result with a vote in parliament.

Only parliament, they maintain, can remove the rights that parliament 
enshrined in the1972 European Communities Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
.

The high court agreed with Miller and co and, as a result, the three judges 
involved in that decision found themselves denounced on the front page of the
Daily Mail as “enemies of the people” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
 and as “judicial activists” by Ukip.

Suddenly, the British judiciary was in the dock, with public confidence in the 
constitutional role of our senior judges brought into question. Although the 
supreme court’s job is simply to interpret and pass judgment on the law, its 
president will be keen to demonstrate the disinterested position of his court.

And to combat any notion of a restrictive view, for the first time in its 
short history, all 11 justices of the supreme court will hear an appeal. The 
maximum is usually nine. The justices are not, as Neuberger has attested, a 
study in social diversity – they’re all white, nine out of 11 were privately 
educated and 10 out of 11 are men.

Gina Miller: the woman taking on Theresa May over article 50
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/gina-miller-theresa-may-article-50-brexit-parliament-legal-challenge>
Many legal experts are predicting an unambiguous government loss. Michael 
Zander, emeritus professor of law at the London School of Economics, wrote 
recently in the legal magazineCounsel 
<http://www.barcouncil.org.uk/media-centre/counsel-magazine/>: “The government 
could be looking at losing 11-0.”

Unlike in the US, where the politics of its supreme court justices are well 
known and, indeed, usually one of the reasons for their appointment, British 
justices maintain a far more neutral profile. Some of the 11, for example the 
deputy president,Lady Hale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/nov/06/lady-hale-supreme-court-ashamed-diversity-improve>
, andLord Kerr, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/27/chance-orderly-brexit-within-two-years-less-than-50-percent-lord-kerr>
 have a reputation for being staunch defenders of European human rights 
legislation. Others, such asLord Sumption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/jonathan-sumption>, have cautioned against the 
expansion of judicial power both in domestic and European courts.

But it’s not possible to draw a clear and definitive line between “liberals” 
and “conservatives”, let alone “friends” and “enemies” of the “people”. In any 
case, 11 justices is probably too large a number to fit on aDaily Mail front 
page. So if the government’s case is rejected, negative attention may focus on 
Neuberger.

It already has. Charles Moore, a former editor of the Daily Telegraph, has 
called on Neuberger (along with Hale)to recuse himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/attacks-brexit-judges-bad-democracy-law-lord-hope-article-50>
 on the grounds that he is not impartial. Moore drew attention topro-European 
tweets by Neuberger’s wife, Angela Holdsworth 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/18/supreme-courts-most-senior-judge-urged-to-stand-down-from-articl/>
, in which she derided the referendum as “mad and bad” and retweeted a Remain 
campaign message: “It seems unlikely that a PM could trigger Article 50 without 
Parliament’s approval.”

The supreme court’s conduct guide reminds justices “to bear in mind that 
political activity by a close member of a justice’s family might raise concern 
in a particular case about the judge’s own impartiality”. Neuberger’s spokesman 
responded to suggestions that Holdsworth’s tweets raised exactly that concern 
by noting that the president doesn’t confuse political views with points of law.

A better contender for the flouting of guidelines, perhaps, was Hale’s 
intervention. She suggested during a lecture in Malaysia that if the government 
lost its appeal, it might need “a comprehensive replacement” for the 1972 act, 
a move that would push back the government’s March deadline for enacting 
article 50 by several months.

Attacks on Brexit judges are bad for democracy, says former law lord
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/attacks-brexit-judges-bad-democracy-law-lord-hope-article-50>
Neuberger appeared to reprimand his deputy when he told a reporter that in 
general, “judges shouldn’t discuss cases we’re about to hear 
<http://spectator.com.au/2016/12/brexit-in-the-balance/>”. However, he stood by 
her fitness to sit. “We have taken an oath to decide cases according to the 
law,” he explained, “and if we don’t do that we’re not worthy of the name of 
judges.”

Neuberger has held that name for 26 years. He comes from a family of 
scientists and rabbis. His father was professor of chemical pathology at St 
Mary’s hospital in Paddington, London, and his uncle was a well-known rabbi.

He has two brothers who are professors of, respectively, medicine and 
immunology and his other brother, a professor of finance, is married to Julia 
Neuberger, the crossbench peer and first British female rabbi to have her own 
synagogue.

Neuberger studied chemistry at Oxford, though he has said that he was “not 
very good at science”.

His choice, he has said, was to go into finance or law and he decided on 
finance because law involved too many exams. He joined the merchant bank NM 
Rothschild, only to realise that he was “even less good at finance than at 
science”.

It’s not Neuberger’s fault that the legal obligations of a Leave vote were not 
clarified, nor that Miller filed her case

And so in 1974, aged 26, after four attempts at pupillage, he was called to 
the bar. An expert in property law, he took silk in 1987, became a recorder 
three years later and a high court judge in 1996. His ascendancy through the 
senior judiciary was vertiginous, becoming a lord justice of appeal in 2004 and 
then, the day after his 59th birthday in 2007, a law lord.

Law lords tend to rival the Chinese politburo in the gerontocracy stakes, so 
still in his 50s, Neuberger was by some way the youngest. Two years later, he 
became master of the rolls, the second most senior judge in England and Wales.

He has known previous moments in the spotlight. He was wrongly said to have 
supported the right of witnesses and defendants to wear veils when giving 
evidence, but actually holds the opposite view. In 2004, when a court of appeal 
judge, Neuberger reached a minority decision – in opposition to his fellow 
judges – disallowing evidence obtained by torture in third countries where the 
UK was not complicit in gaining the evidence.

If that stance identified him as a liberal, other decisions might suggest 
otherwise; in 2010, for example, he ruled that peace protesters should be 
evicted from Parliament Square. To look back over Neuberger’s rulings, his 
decisions are not easily filed under distinct political labels. Although judges 
must be free to decide on the law as it stands, Neuberger believes, and knows, 
that they must always remain subordinate to the government. After all, if the 
government doesn’t like a legal ruling it can draw up new legislation and 
change the law.

That’s the defining difference between the US and British systems: in America, 
it’s prohibitively difficult to overturn a supreme court decision. The benefit 
of the lower stakes in Britain is that we can afford to appoint our supreme 
court justices for their legal expertise rather than their political loyalty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fdavid-neuberger-brexit-judge-supreme-court-president-article-50-appeal-judgment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faee2b51a0977d79c631fc52a58975bc40d1ad1a6%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Neuberger%3A%20the%20judge%20with%20the%20nation%E2%80%99s%20eager%20eyes%20upon%20him%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fdavid-neuberger-brexit-judge-supreme-court-president-article-50-appeal-judgment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Neuberger%3A%20the%20judge%20with%20the%20nation%E2%80%99s%20eager%20eyes%20upon%20him%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fdavid-neuberger-brexit-judge-supreme-court-president-article-50-appeal-judgment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faee2b51a0977d79c631fc52a58975bc40d1ad1a6%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Lord Neuberger in 2013. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
It’s not Neuberger’s or any other supreme court or high court judge’s fault 
that the government decided to hold a referendum without clarifying the legal 
obligations of a Leave vote. Nor is it their fault that Miller decided to test 
the government’s legal position. That’s the nature of the law.

Given the legal merits of Miller’s case, and the government’s reliance on 
ancient and obscure prerogative powers, it would have taken a particularly 
slanted political position for the high court to have sided with the 
government. And the supreme court finds itself facing the same delicate 
situation.

Its judgment is not due until the new year. If, as expected, it backs the high 
court decision, Neuberger can look forward to a bucketload of opprobrium poured 
over his head on the front pages of several Brexit-supporting newspapers. But 
he can also look forward to retirement next year.

He’s already announced that he’s hanging up his wig in the summer – or he 
would be if he wore one. In the supreme court, justices’ wigs are deemed to be 
like political opinions: surplus to requirements.

THE NEUBERGER FILE

Born David Edmond Neuberger, 10 January 1948, in London, to Albert and Lilian 
Neuberger. He went to Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford. Married to 
Angela Holdsworth; three children.

Best of times His legal career has been one long upswing, so there are any 
number of highlights, but becoming the country’s youngest law lord may well 
stand out above the rest.

Worst of times Going by newspaper coverage, it could be next month (January), 
if the supreme court upholds the high court’s decision on Brexit.

What he says “A white, male, public-school judge presiding in a trial of an 
unemployed traveller from eastern Europe accused of assaulting or robbing a 
white, female, public-school woman will, I hope, always be unbiased. However, 
he should always think to himself what his subconscious may be thinking or how 
it may be causing him to act.”

What others say “After reading Lady Neuberger’s thoughts, one naturally 
wonders about Lord Neuberger’s. And that is exactly what ought not to happen 
when judges find themselves embroiled in a politically controversial case.” 
Charles Moore
 