
David Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis> has confirmed 
that the government may have to wait until January for a supreme court ruling 
on whether it can press ahead with the formal process of exiting the EU without 
a parliamentary vote.

The Brexit secretary told the House of Commons that the supreme court would 
hear the government’s appeal against last week’s high court decision early next 
month; but a judgment might not come until the new year.

Asked by Labour’s Angela Smith MP whether it could be January before a 
judgment is handed down, Davis said: “Yes, she is right in one respect, that it 
may come as late as early January. The expectation is that the case will be 
heard in the early part of December, and it will take two or three weeks I 
expect to get the judgment written up. But I think it is the proper role of 
government to wait and respect the judgment we get from the supreme court, full 
stop.”

A January ruling would leave a tight timetable for the government to win a 
parliamentary vote – particularly if, as Davis had previously suggested, it 
means passing a bill through both houses.

David Davis hits out at MPs wanting to 'wreck Brexit negotiation' – Politics 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/07/labour-wants-brexit-plan-but-will-not-block-artice-50-outright-starmer-says-politics-live>
In a robust statement delivered in the Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/07/labour-wants-brexit-plan-but-will-not-block-artice-50-outright-starmer-says-politics-live>
 in response to last week’s judgment, Davis insisted Theresa May would stick to 
her timetable of invoking article 50 before the end of March. He also 
reiterated that the government was determined not to allow its hands to be tied 
by revealing too much about its negotiating strategy to MPs.

“Parliamentary scrutiny, yes; telling the prime minister which cards to play, 
seeking to force her to disclose her hand to those she will be negotiating 
with, no,” Davis said.

He accused politicians including Nick Clegg and Owen Smith, who have said they 
will seek to amend any legislation triggering article 50, of trying to scupper 
Brexit, saying: “The whole approach is designed to wreck the negotiations.”

Davis was responding to the shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, who had 
claimed the government’s strategy, which was based on triggering article 50 
without recourse to parliament, was coming unstuck.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdavid-davis-parliament-will-not-dictate-brexit-talks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F976873f694f21ad2507b18042a6837107851e042%2F0_166_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Davis%3A%20supreme%20court%20may%20not%20rule%20on%20article%2050%20until%20January&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdavid-davis-parliament-will-not-dictate-brexit-talks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Davis%3A%20supreme%20court%20may%20not%20rule%20on%20article%2050%20until%20January&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fdavid-davis-parliament-will-not-dictate-brexit-talks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F976873f694f21ad2507b18042a6837107851e042%2F0_166_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Gina Miller gives a statement outside the high court after it ruled on her 
article 50 case. Photograph: Hannah Mckay/EPA 
“The government has approached its task in the wrong way, and its approach is 
now unravelling, and I’m afraid to say it’s now unravelling in the most 
divisive and ugly way,” Starmer said.

Starmer called for the government to disclose its position on a series of 
issues, including whether it wanted to remain within the customs union; and how 
it would maintain cooperation on security issues with the rest of the EU.

The Guardian view on Brexit ruling | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/the-guardian-view-on-brexit-ruling-the-response-to-the-courts-threatens-to-undermine-the-bedrock-of-a-democratic-society>
Davis said the government had already set out some principles of its approach, 
including control of laws, control of borders, and the “freest possible” trade 
in goods and services with the EU and elsewhere.

He said parliament would have ample opportunities to debate Brexit, including 
as MPs pass a planned great repeal bill next year. But he insisted it would be 
unhelpful to give more details of the government’s negotiating stance, and MPs 
and peers could not dictate the talks with the rest of the EU.

“We won’t achieve a good negotiation outcome if this is a negotiation being 
run by 650 people in this House of Commons, or nearly 900 in the other place. 
No negotiation in history has been run that way,” he said.

“If parliament insists on setting out a detailed minimum negotiating position, 
that will quickly become the maximum possible offer from our negotiating 
partners.”

Davis said the government still believed a parliamentary vote was unnecessary, 
and would take that argument to the supreme court. “We believe it is proper and 
lawful for the government to trigger article 50 by prerogative powers,” he said.

The Brexit secretary defended the independence of the judiciary in the face of 
thevehement backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/theresa-may-told-to-act-to-calm-brexit-mob-anger>
 of the past few days; and criticised attacks onGina Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/gina-miller-the-woman-behind-the-article-50-legal-challenge>
, who brought the case. “I can’t find words strong enough frankly to say how 
much I detest the attacks on her,” Davis said.

”And frankly from what I’ve heard about them – I haven’t seen them myself 
directly but from what I’ve heard about them – they sound to me to be 
effectively criminal attacks, because incitement of violence, threats of 
violence, racial abuse, are all crimes.”

On Monday, Miller spoke out against abusive messages she had received since 
launching the case, which she said included “the encouragement of sexual 
violence, physical violence and death threats”.


“I’m absolutely appalled because I think it’s a reflection of – as I’ve called 
it – the dark clouds gathering over the UK and it’s incredibly worrying that 
that’s a place we appear to be in,” she told the Press Association. “I think 
the belittling of me as an individual is definitely connected to me being a 
woman and a woman of colour.”

Miller said she was disappointed by the government’s decision to appeal 
against the high court decision, which she said was handed down by “three of 
the most respected … successful, independent judges in the country”.

She added: “I never thought I’d hear a British prime minister say that she was 
supreme and above the judges, I mean that is beyond anything I ever thought I’d 
hear the British prime minister say, and to me it confirms exactly why this 
case is so important.”

On Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/05/barristers-urge-liz-truss-to-condemn-attacks-on-brexit-ruling-judges>
, under heavy pressure to break her silence and meet her statutory obligations, 
the lord chancellor Liz Truss defended the independence of the judiciary, 
saying it is the “foundation upon which our rule of law is built”.

That did not go far enough, the former lord chief justice, Lord Judge has 
said. “The lord chancellor has a statutory obligation to do it. That is one of 
her functions, to defend the judiciary.

“And it was a little too late and not a lot. To say you believe in 
independence of judges is fine but it doesn’t actually address why this matters 
at a particular time,” he told the BBC’s Newsnight programme.

Lord Judge added that a planned march to be led by Nigel Farage on the day the 
supreme court hears the article 50 case poses a danger to the integrity of 
Britain’s institutions.


“I don’t think it makes any difference to the judicial decision but it does 
make a difference to public order. Let’s say, for the sake of argument, the 
supreme court decides the high court was wrong. It will undoubtedly be conveyed 
as a victory for the demonstrators. It won’t be, but that’s what will be 
conveyed. And if that is conveyed you’ve undermined the administration of 
justice.”

The supreme court is still awaiting a formal submission from the government’s 
lawyers setting out its application to appeal against the high court ruling.


On Monday, the Brexit referendum campaign chief Michael Gove said he backed 
the high court judges who had come under fire from some segments of the media. 
The former justice secretary said: “The high court judges who’ve ruled on 
article 50 are brilliant, thoughtful, wise and decent men – their judgment 
deserves respect.”

On Tuesday a court in Belfast will hear a separate application from Northern 
Ireland claimants who want to combine their challenge with the supreme court 
case. The Belfast claimants still have to obtain permission for their case to 
“leapfrog” over the appeal court stage directly to the supreme court.


Because the case raises so many issues about the relative powers of ministers 
and parliament, as many as 11 justices – an unprecedented number – are expected 
to sit on the supreme court panel. The case is provisionally scheduled for 7 
and 8 December, but additional days may yet be added.

The attorney general, Jeremy Wright QC, will again lead the government’s legal 
team in the article 50 hearing.

Later on Monday in the Commons the business secretary, Greg Clark, opened a 
separate debate on workers’ rights after Brexit. Clark pledged that all rights 
Britain’s workers currently enjoy because of EU membership would be protected 
and incorporated into UK law as part of the government’s great repeal bill.

“No one listening to this debate should think that we have any intention of 
eroding the rights that we enjoy in this country through our process of leaving 
the European Union, because in fact the opposite is true,” he said. “We will be 
using the legislation before this house to entrench all existing workers’ 
rights in British law, whatever the future relationship that the UK has with 
the EU.”

Protecting existing workers’ rights after exiting the EU was one of the key 
“red lines” Labour set out for assessing the government’s approach to Brexit.
 