
Fela Kuti – Upside Down

This speaks to me: I love the message of the song. To me, my country is the 
best country in the whole wide world, but we’re transitioning into a new 
government and everything takes time – there are a lot of things being cleaned 
up right now, so this record speaks to me about my country at the moment. I 
love the instrumentation and the way the song is delivered. I love the 
diversity of the rhythm and the melodies.
Boiler Room 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/BoilerRoom/embed.html> 
I wouldn’t say I grew up listening to Fela, but when I did get into music he 
was definitely one of the people who inspired me. He’s the pioneer of Afrobeat 
and I can hear his influences in music today. Apart from being a singer, Fela 
was an instrumentalist; every Fela record has his input in an instrumental 
section or in the melodies or the general feel of the song.


2face Idibia – African Queen 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_A0fWBHu9pM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_A0fWBHu9pM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_A0fWBHu9pM&media=>
I grew up listening to him. This was the first song I remember seeing on MTV. 
It brought so much hope to our lives and let us know we could also be on MTV 
one day, or that we could win an MTV award one day. It was just huge. Both 
artist and song were definitely part of me wanting to start making music: he 
made it clearNigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> can do things 
internationally. It’s crazy how that song mixes genres but sounds universal.

D’Banj – Oliver Twist
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCQP-etYU1ps&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCQP-etYU1ps>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCQP-etYU1ps&media=>
This song was huge. Like 2face, D’Banj is another person who made it to the 
charts worldwide. It’s a great record – it was one you heard everywhere you 
went. He’s signed to Kanye West’s label Good music and Kanye’s in the Oliver 
Twist video, which to me was a sign that Afrobeats could go international. When 
you have someone like Kanye West in your video it’s because he sees shit before 
it’s happening, man. He looks into the future, so he could see it coming. The 
internet also makes it so easy for people from different countries to discover 
new music.

Davido – Aye
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuZ-_HIoEBE8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuZ-_HIoEBE8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuZ-_HIoEBE8&media=>
If you ask me, after African Queen, Aye is the biggest song ever to come out of
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. It was a huge record and 
even now people still go crazy for it. It’s had more than 30m views on YouTube, 
which is the most I’ve had. I don’t know why people connected to it like they 
did – God just blessed me with it. It’s original – there’s no jewellery in the 
video, no naked girls, no cars, it’s just authentic, if you know what I mean. 
When I make my records, I make them naturally and it just depends what mood I’m 
in. I didn’t really have any motives with this song.

Wizkid – Ojuelegba
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ7QiLceJSLQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ7QiLceJSLQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ7QiLceJSLQ&media=>
It’s another big record. If you ask me, these songs are the biggest five 
tracks to come out of Africa.Drake was on a remix of this record 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kdDpr--__YY> as well, so that really pushed it 
out internationally. Again, it’s like the Kanye West situation – somebody who 
saw something before it broke and saw the potential to help move it on. Skepta 
appears on that remix, too, which I think is just evidence of how things happen 
nowadays. There’s no formula. There are no geographical boundaries. The song’s 
about Wizkid’s struggles at the start of his career and every artist goes 
through something like that. You just need that phrase “I told you so”. To be 
honest, people don’t believe in you until you make it. That’s the truth of life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Eh_1m0JhM0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Eh_1m0JhM0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Eh_1m0JhM0&media=> 