
When the R&B singer Dawn Richard abandoned the safety of the major-label 
machine to strike out on her own in 2011, she was gambling. All she’d managed 
to release under her own name was one promising but flawed mixtape. Soher 
announcement <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s_OicgJeHrY> that she intended to 
start her solo career with a concept trilogy of albums – despite lacking a team 
around her, let alone a record deal – was seen as overly ambitious. “Everyone 
laughed at me,” she recalls wryly.

In 2011, Richard was just another girl group refugee who talked a good game – 
Danity Kane <http://www.mtv.com/artists/danity-kane/>, formed by Diddy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/diddy> on MTV’s Making the Band in 2005, had 
scored two US No 1 albums before disbanding three years later. Since 
reinventing herself as D∆WN in 2015, she’s found acclaim in the underground 
dance world. But her true triumph is the visionary body of work she’s put 
together, vast in sonic, thematic and technological scope, that – having taken 
in medieval warfare, Norse and Greek mythology and feminist reimaginings of 
classic pop archetypes – has now culminated with the final instalment of the 
promised trilogy, the appropriately titledRedemption 
<https://dawnrichard.bandcamp.com/album/redemption>.


“It’s built to be jubilation and dance,” says Richard. “I wanted to make an 
album that sounded like a release of inhibitions, really getting away from the 
idea that you have to be anything other than in that moment.” Richard’s sound 
is defined equally by the number of ideas she packs into her songs and the 
shape-shifting, boundary-free nature of where she takes them: house beats segue 
into Afro-Cuban drums on Love Under Lights; lead singleRenegades 
<https://dawnrichard.bandcamp.com/track/renegades> is propelled by staccato 
grime rhythms; centrepiece LA transitions from synths straight out of an 80s 
thriller into swampy rock before winding up with a trumpet solo from New 
Orleans jazz musicianTrombone Shorty 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trombone_Shorty>. 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRXmxBSrTD34&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRXmxBSrTD34>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRXmxBSrTD34&media=>
That song – its title refers to both Los Angeles and Louisiana – is a 
homecoming for Richard, whose family was made homeless followingHurricane 
Katrina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/29/new-orleans-hurricane-katrina-ten-year-annivesary>
. While writing Redemption, she immersed herself in her home city’s musical 
history: “old zydeco, old bayou blues like Dr John”, the carnival culture of the
Mardi Gras Indians <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mardi_Gras_Indians> (for whom 
her great-uncle was a costumier) and New Orleans’second line tradition 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_line_(parades)>. “It’s when we dance in 
the middle of the street and play the horns,” she says. “People just sing in 
sheer joy. They celebrate each other with such genuine love.”


Most people think Grace Jones and David Bowie are on a different plane. Dawn – 
humbly – sees them as in reach

While delving into the past, Richard also felt herself pulled towards the 
future. Redemption’s predecessor, 2015’sBlackheart 
<http://dawnrichard.bandcamp.com/album/blackheart>, had been the album that 
catapulted her from lone-wolf status into the arms of the underground. Close 
collaborations followed withFade to Mind <http://fadetomind.net/> co-founder 
Kingdom (with whom she released theInfrared EP  
<https://soundcloud.com/fadetomind/sets/dawn-richard-infrared-ep>in May) and, 
for much of Redemption, the North Carolina producerMachinedrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/01/machinedrum-favourite-tracks>. 
Redemption will also be the first of Richard’s albums to be jointly released 
with another label, the London-based grime and garage imprintLocal Action 
<http://localactionrecords.co.uk/>. When its founder Tom Lea talks about her, 
it’s with a degree of awe: “Most people look at artists like Grace Jones and 
David Bowie and see them on a different plane, but Dawn – humbly – sees them as 
in reach.”

She’s also making forays into experimental new technology: working with 
YouTube on the platform’s first ever360-degree live performance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=55zzK_w_xjY> in April, and creating a 3D 
virtual reality universe with VR Playhouse for herNot Above That 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vBtlUl-Xh5w> video in June. 


“The point of me doing the type of music I was doing was to see it in 3D, 4D, 
VR perspective,” she says. “As you peel back the different layers of coding in 
VR, you can also peel the layers of plug-ins and live instruments back on the 
album. That was where I wanted to go.”

Richard had always planned for her trilogy’s narrative arc to conclude with a 
return to her roots, but the journey itself has been unpredictable, often 
painful and sometimes absurd.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZYDOUZzAbvE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZYDOUZzAbvE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZYDOUZzAbvE&media=>
Following 2013’s Goldenheart, Richard fell out with producer Druski, the 
musical partner with whom she’d intended to make the entire trilogy; a 
Kickstarter to fund Blackheart failed; and a year was given over to a doomed 
Danity Kane reunion that redefined girl group messiness. (It ended with punches 
thrown before even making it to an album release.) “That’s a good fuckin’ 
question,” laughs Richard darkly when asked why she had returned to the band. 
In the same year, her father had cancer and her grandmother died. “Man, it was 
a super-low,” she says. “It was crazy how low it was. But it made for some of 
the best material [Blackheart] I’ve done.”

The lessons Richard has learned haven’t just been emotional. As an independent 
artist, she’s relished the freedom of self-releasing the kind of music she 
wants. Self-funding it hasn’t been so easy, particularly when she faced so many 
rejections. “We’re having ideas that are so much larger than our pockets,” she 
says. “We’re doing nine visuals per album, and we’re held to the standard of 
any other artist. You have to work twice as hard, otherwise people say, ‘That 
looks cheap.’ Or, ‘She’s a flop.’ And you’ve got to create content every other 
day to keep people interested in a time when everything’s accessible and moving 
so fast.”

My plan didn’t sell to the machines of the world, but it sold to the artists, 
the passion players

Richard, who compares herself to a tech startup company, began studying 
accounting, investment and money management, and picked up an old animation 
sideline (Danity Kane had been named after an anime character she’d invented) 
for extra funds. She carried on knocking at doors, fleshing out her brand. “I 
wasn’t saying, ‘Look, here’s me as an artist and I can sing, can you support 
me?’” she says. “I was laying out an entire, full-drawn economic plan and 
saying, ‘Look, this is what we can attain.’ It didn’t sell to the mainstream or 
the machines of the world, but it sold to the artists, the passion players.”


She has had to be her own PR firm, her own agency, even her own stagehand. 
When she realised this year that she couldn’t afford to tour with her band and 
dancers as well as the 9ft neon triangle that formed her stage set, she took on 
that latter role. “I realised the way I can save costs is to build it and fix 
it and carry it myself. I brought along my screwdrivers and I set it up and 
took it down for each show myself. It’s hollow steel rods and a lightbox that 
carries the LED – two big cases I carried everywhere I went.”

It paid off: Richard points to her SXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> shows in March as a turning point 
after which doors began to open for her. “I had backaches every day, but I 
managed to give people a stadium-style show in dive bars – a show that was 
talked about for an indie girl with no label. It was fucking worth it.”


One year, on her birthday, Richard went skydiving. Now, she compares that 
adrenaline rush to what she’s felt over the past few years. “Anything that 
creates fear, I want to conquer it,” she says. “To create and do something no 
one else has done before – that feeling beats anything else I’ve felt.”

• Redemption is out now on Local Action/Our Dawn Entertainment.
 