
Deadmau5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/23/deadmau5-and-walt-disney-settle-mouse-ears-legal-dispute>
 is experimenting with an unlikely new marketing ploy: honesty. The EDM star 
has posted a series of messages telling fans that he dislikes his new “slapped 
together” album.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2010%2Fmay%2F28%2Fdeadmau5&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Morley%20meets%20deadmau5&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2010%2Fmay%2F28%2Fdeadmau5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Morley%20meets%20deadmau5&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2010%2Fmay%2F28%2Fdeadmau5&media=>
Video: Paul Morley meets deadmau5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2010/may/28/deadmau5> 
The producer, real name Joel Zimmerman, releases his eighth album – the 
thoughtfully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/20/deadmau5-album-title-goes-here-review>
 titled W:/2016ALBUM/ – on 2 December. In a string of posts on Twitter he 
unveiled his disdain for his new creation. “Don’t even like it,” he said. “It 
was like ... so fucking rushed / slapped together. But I mean ... hey, if you 
like it I wanna like it too, just don’t.”

Describing his situation as a “love/hate thing” he explained that there are 
two tracks that he likes from the new record – Snowcone and Whelk When – but 
added: “At least you don’t have to sit here and endure me constantly peddling 
shit. Buy this, out now, buy that, wahhh click here.”

When asked why he released the record, the musician replied:
dead mow cinco (@deadmau5) 
COZ I GOT FUCKIN MAD BILLS. https://t.co/E6ChMrF1GP <https://t.co/E6ChMrF1GP>
 <https://twitter.com/deadmau5/status/800216503614312448> November 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/deadmau5/status/800216503614312448> 
He said he was reluctant to put the record out but that someone “pushed” him 
to do it, and concluded: “Maybe it’s time ... to just sit down, and work on 
this fabled ‘album I like’ thing I’ve been wanting to do for the past 10 years.”

Deadmau5, who rose to fame at the peak of EDM and dubstep’s crossover into the 
mainstream, has previously been vocal about the costs of touring and studio 
time. Following his charting on Forbes’ 2012 highest paid list,he said 
<http://www.spin.com/2012/10/deadmau5-beefing-madonna-dave-grohl-one-direction/>
: “I had to call my manager and say, ‘Yo! Where’s the other 10?’ Sure, we’ve 
seen $20m in the past two years, but that’s gone back into the studio, into 
tours – they cost up to $10m alone. It’s money in, money out for all of us, but 
the list makes us look like a bunch of overpaid dicks.”
 