
By 2030, Canada intends to see its greenhouse gas emissions  
<https://www.ec.gc.ca/GES-GHG/default.asp?lang=En&n=02D095CB-1#BR-Sec3>fall 30% 
from the 2005 levels of 749 megatonnes. To get there, the country expects its 
businesses to play an important role in a new plan that will include a program 
to make companies pay for their carbon emissions.


Under the new government, led by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, Canada expects 
to unveil a carbon pricing program as early as this fall. “We’re going to make 
sure there is a strong price on carbon right across the country,”Trudeau said 
during a TV interview 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/trudeau-carbon-tax-provinces-1.3686769> last 
week.

The announcement of a carbon pricing program represents a dramatic departure 
from the previous administration under Stephen Harper, who championed the 
expansion of the country’s oil industry and sidelined climate change causes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/16/canada-election-stephen-harper-fossil-fuel-backfires>
. The current emissions reduction goal in Canada – 30% by 2030 – came from the 
Harper era and fallsfar below 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/15/canada-reneges-emissions-targets-tar-sands-production>
 those set by the European Union and the US.

Carbon pricing can be an effective weapon against global warming 
<http://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2016/06/27/carbon-pricing-a-no-brainer-for-climate-change/>
. But it’s also a concept that historically has drawn a lukewarm reception from 
businesses, which tend to fight its financial impact on them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fcanada-emissions-climate-change-justin-trudeau-corporate-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5876db1ed60e12353841019863a1b21ae5b23a12%2F0_0_1101_847%2F1101.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dear%20corporate%20Canada%3A%20it's%20time%20to%20pay%20for%20your%20part%20in%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fcanada-emissions-climate-change-justin-trudeau-corporate-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dear%20corporate%20Canada%3A%20it%27s%20time%20to%20pay%20for%20your%20part%20in%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F28%2Fcanada-emissions-climate-change-justin-trudeau-corporate-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5876db1ed60e12353841019863a1b21ae5b23a12%2F0_0_1101_847%2F1101.jpg>
 Data: Government of Canada. Illustration: Ucilia Wang/The Guardian 
The two most commonly used carbon pricing systems are carbon tax and the 
so-called cap-and-trade. A tax would simply set a price for each ton of 
greenhouse gas emitted. A cap-and-trade will set limits on the amount of 
emissions that businesses can release and give them permits for the allotted 
amount. Those that emit above their limits will have to buy permits from 
companies that pollute below the limits.

Carbon pricing programs typically focus on regulating heavy polluters such as 
power plant owners, oil refineries, big factories and airlines.

Around 40 countries and more than 20 cities, states and regions are putting in 
place or already have a price on carbon, which translates to 12% of global 
emissions and an annual value of $50bn,according to the World Bank 
<http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2015/09/25053834/state-trends-carbon-pricing-2015>
. The European Union runs the world’s largest cap-and-trade program 
<http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/index_en.htm>, launched in 2005, which 
involves 31 countries and covers 45% of its greenhouse gas emissions. The US 
Congress attempted to create a carbon pricing program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/jul/23/us-senate-climate-change-bill>
 after Barack Obama became president but failed to gain enough support.

The business community is typically reluctant to support any taxes or policy 
that will cost them money. For example, the carbon tax levied by the province 
of British Columbia,Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, has 
drawn criticism from cement makers, who contend that the tax hurts their 
ability to remain competitive and gives cement exporters from China and the US 
an unfair advantage because they don’t have to pay the tax.


Carbon emissions: here's what we can do to hit 'science-based targets'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/23/science-based-targets-ghg-emissions-carbon-climate-change-environment>
But a study from researchers at Duke University and the University of Ottawa 
that looked at the effect of British Columbia’s carbon tax on its overall 
economy concluded that it had “little net impact”.

Carbon pricing could become more widely used as nations start to figure out 
ways to achieve the goal of the Paris climate agreement to keep temperature 
increases at below 2C. That likelihood has prompted some businesses to band 
together to try to and shape carbon pricing legislation. One such effort in 
Canada comes from theCarbon Pricing Leadership Coalition 
<http://www.carbonpricingleadership.org/leadership-coalition/>, which lined up 
20 Canadian companies as members earlier this month, including Air Canada and 
IKEA Canada.

At least 435 firms, including Microsoft, Google and BP have voluntarily set 
their own internal price on emissions, up from 150 companies in 2014, according 
to the Carbon Disclosure Project 
<https://www.cdp.net/cdpresults/carbon-pricing-in-the-corporate-world.pdf>, 
which works with businesses to measure their greenhouse gas emissions. 
Assigning values to their own emissions can help businesses better manage 
environmental risks, make investment decisions to reduce them and get ready for 
legislation on carbon pricing.

Policymakers hope carbon pricing will also spark innovations that lower 
emissions, such as technology to capture pollutants from power plants before 
they get into the atmosphere.

John Stackhouse, a senior vice president at the Royal Bank of Canada, the 
country’s biggest bank and a new member of the Carbon Pricing Leadership 
Coalition, said carbon pricing is good for ensuring a business’s longevity.

“There’s a strong consensus among Canadian business that carbon pricing can 
actually be a business friendly approach to better managing the planet’s carbon 
resources,” Stackhouse said.

Can you put a price on nature? A Californian nonprofit thinks it can
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/13/value-of-nature-earth-genome-environment-sustainability>
Whether a carbon pricing program will be effective in Canada will depend 
largely how the government structures the program and sets the prices. The 
government has yet to reveal much about the program, though it’s likely that it 
will set a minimum carbon price that provinces must meet, and each jurisdiction 
will be allowed to decide what type of pricing scheme they will follow, said 
Mark Thurber, associate director of the Program on Energy and Sustainable 
Development at Stanford University.

Trudeau’s carbon pricing program won’t be the only one within Canada. Four of 
the country’s 10 provinces either already have a carbon pricing scheme in 
place, or are in the process of introducing one. Having a national program on 
top of regional efforts, which run on different rules, could draw protests from 
businesses and the regional governments, said Benjamin Dachis, associate 
director of research at the CD Howe Institute, a Canadian public policy 
thinktank.

“Outsiders need to remember the immense power of provincial governments here,” 
Dachis said. “There are deep questions about what the federal government needs 
to do on top of or in place of provinces.”

Carbon prices vary considerably  
<http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/Climate/State-and-Trend-Report-2015.pdf>
around the world, from less than $1 per tonne of emissions in countries such as 
Mexico to $130 per tonne in Sweden, with 85% of countries pricing carbon at 
below $10. Thurber believes Canada will set the price at around $15 per tonne.

“It’s been pretty well established that that’s a level that drives some 
abatement activities but the economic impact is fairly minor,” he said. “It’s 
big enough to be meaningful but it’s not going to cripple them in the 
slightest.”

The business community hopes the government will craft a business-friendly 
program, said Stackhouse. Transparency is critical, he said, especially in 
setting clear prices and the rules for how they might increase in the years 
ahead.

“Consumers and shareholders, as well as regulators, have a greater awareness 
of the carbon risks to the economy. We don’t think that level of interest is 
going to decline,” Stackhouse said.
 