
Trying to guess how history will judge an era in pop is a famously tough call. 
Nostalgia twists and distorts what actually happened. Stuff that seemed hugely 
important then isn’t always what seems important years on: stars get forgotten, 
hits vanish from memory, emphasis is subtly shifted to reflect subsequent 
changes in tastes or to fit a wider narrative that wasn’t apparent at the time. 
Even so, it seems a fairly safe bet to say that when people look back on 2016, 
they will think about death.

Death was the year’s big breakout star. The charts were full of it: posthumous 
hits choked up the Top 40; the success of the year’smost unexpected No 1 album 
– Viola Beach’s eponymous debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/31/viola-beach-debut-album-posthumous>
 – was down to the band and their manager’sdeaths in a car crash five months 
previously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/15/viola-beach-deaths-swedish-police-examine-car-and-barrier>
. No meticulously planned stealth release, with its carefully cultivated air of 
surprise and concealed impact date, was as surprising asDavid Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-at-the-age-of-69>
 orPrince’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-dead-music-superstar-57>. 
December’s traditional pop story – about the race for the Christmas number one 
– was completely eclipsed by the death of George Michael. It was what people 
talked about: more column inches were occupied, more covers given over, more 
social media posts posted and blogs blogged about pop stars dying than about 
those who lived, even Beyoncé or Kanye West.

There were articles publicly mourning dead pop stars and articles examining 
the nature of publicly mourning dead pop stars that posited theories that 
people were grieving not for the stars themselves or even for what they 
represented, but for their own lost youth, transfixed by Starman on Top Of The 
Pops or snogging to Careless Whisper at a local disco or – if they were too 
young to remember the late star’s glory days firsthand – for a mythic, 
imaginary, perfect pop past they never knew: the weird result of rock music’s 
obsession with its own history over the past 25 years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Singer%2C%20songwriter%2C%20pop%20superstar%3A%20George%20Michael%20dies%20aged%2053%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Singer%2C%20songwriter%2C%20pop%20superstar%3A%20George%20Michael%20dies%20aged%2053%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary&media=>
A traditional pop narrative of talent cruelly snatched away by premature demise 
... George Michael at the Live Aid concert in 1985. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/dec/26/george-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary>
Photograph: PA/PA Wire 
There was even a mini-industry in pieces telling people to stop publicly 
mourning dead pop stars. The kernel of truth in said pieces – that some of the 
tributes were mawkish and overblown, and others smacked of nothing more than a 
desperate desire to join in (“We salute you Rocket Man!!!” offered Ticketmaster 
UK’s Twitter feed during the Brits’ Bowie tribute) – was overwhelmed by the 
fact that they were always the work of the kind of columnist who evidently 
loves no music as much as the sound of their own voice.

“No one needs to hear Station to Station twice,” snorted Giles Coren, as if 
Station to Station were a legendarily terrible Bowie album, rather than one 
made at the peak of his powers and that most people consider to be among his 
best: the feeling that Coren hadn’t actually heard Station to Station once, let 
alone twice, was difficult to avoid.

For all the talk of 2016 as an extraordinary year for pop deaths, there is an 
argument that it was more or less ever thus. Death has loomed over pop almost 
from the minute that pop began: rock’n’roll had been a mainstream phenomenon 
for barely two years when Buddy Holly and Richie Valens died in February 1959. 
In a world without social media as an outlet, public grief for pop stars took 
on weird forms. There is a theory that the late 50s/early 60s vogue for “death 
discs” – hit songs in which the protagonist or their partner or both died, such 
as Tell Laura I Love Her, Johnny Remember Me, Teen Angel – was a sublimated 
mourning of Holly, Valens, Eddie Cochran et al.

There was another spasm of morbidity in pop in the early 70s, the years 
immediately after the deaths of Jimi Hendrix, Janis Joplin, Brian Jones and Jim 
Morrison, when the charts played host to a succession of latterday death discs 
– from Bloodrock’s DOA to Hot Chocolate’s Emma – and some of the 60s originals 
became hits again. You might have thought the Twitter tributes and the vigils 
and the wonky Bowie murals were a bitde trop and vulgar, but they look like the 
height of restrained good taste compared with, say, going out and buying Danny 
Mirror’s I Remember Elvis Presley, a Europe-wide hit on which a rotund Dutchman 
in a fringed jacket did an impersonation of Presley a matter of weeks after his 
death in 1977.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-dies-music-career-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20his%20extraordinary%20career%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-dies-music-career-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%3A%20a%20look%20back%20at%20his%20extraordinary%20career%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fprince-dies-music-career-video&media=>
Prince, 7 June 1958 – 21 April 2016.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/apr/21/prince-dies-music-career-video>
Photograph: Richard E. Aaron/Redferns 
Still, 2016’s deaths felt exceptional, and not merely in their profusion. 
Plenty of legendary artists have died in recent years – from Lemmy to Lou Reed, 
Whitney Houston to Amy Winehouse – but you would have to stretch back to the 
death of Michael Jackson in 2009 to find a comparable cocktail of stardom and 
epoch-defining influence to that possessed by Bowie andPrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince>.

Their deaths, and the manner in which they were mourned, seemed markedly 
different to Jackson’s, perhaps because they were bolstered by social media, 
still in its relative infancy when Jackson died (Facebook had 305m users in 
2009 and more than 1.6bn in early 2016; Twitter’s servers crashed on the night 
of Jackson’s death because more than 100,000 tweets were sent in an hour 
containing his name, but by the time of Prince’s death, an average of 21m 
tweets were sent per hour on a normal day). Or perhaps it was because Jackson’s 
life and career appeared to have been falling apart for years – fans had 
grieved for the passing of the exuberant kid who sang ABC and the genius who 
stole the show peforming Billie Jean at Motown’s 25th anniversary long before 
he actually died – while Bowie and Prince were in the midst of renaissances.

Rumours about the state of Bowie’s health had circulated for some time – the 
Flaming Lips had even recorded a song titledIs David Bowie Dying? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aE__wlvTVg8> in 2012 – but they had been 
strenuously denied when he returned to recording withThe Next Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/25/david-bowie-next-day-review> in 
2013. He had also just released his best album in decades and seemed very 
present in popular culture at the time of his death (as, curiously, did George 
Michael, who hadn’t released a studio album since 2004, but who died at the 
time of year when Last Christmas by Wham! becomes an inescapable presence on 
the radio and blaring out of shops). There had never been any suggestion that 
anything was wrong with Prince: his live shows in 2015 seemed like the work of 
an artist at the top of his game, not a man in chronic pain who had become 
addicted to opioids as a result.

In fact, nothing in pop history could really prepare you for the way Bowie 
died. In the past, rock stars who knew they were dying made music that 
addressed the fact before they did –Queen’s Innuendo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g2N0TkfrQhY> is packed with songs that seem to 
allude to the fact that Freddie Mercury is not long for this earth;Warren 
Zevon’s final album The Wind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/sep/12/popandrock.shopping7> ends with 
a song called Keep Me In Your Heart. But unless you’re the kind of person who 
believes the conspiracy theories about the continued existence of Tupac Shakur, 
Elvis Presley or Jim Morrison, no one had stage-managed their death quite like 
this: the hugely acclaimed, but apparently impenetrable new album, the contents 
of which suddenly pulled into focus three days after its release with the news 
of his death; the trail of clues left in the accompanying videos and the 
album’s sleeve; the way fans were forced into detective work, proposing 
different meanings for Blackstar’s title. His death would have been an event 
anyway, but Bowie carefully made it a bigger event still, without turning it 
into a circus. There was something almost joyful about it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleonard-cohen-talks-about-his-musical-legacy-and-jokes-about-his-health-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Talking%20about%20his%20musical%20legacy%2C%20Leonard%20Cohen%20jokes%20about%20his%20health%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleonard-cohen-talks-about-his-musical-legacy-and-jokes-about-his-health-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Talking%20about%20his%20musical%20legacy%2C%20Leonard%20Cohen%20jokes%20about%20his%20health%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fleonard-cohen-talks-about-his-musical-legacy-and-jokes-about-his-health-video&media=>
Leonard Cohen, 21 September 1934 – 7 November 2016. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-talks-about-his-musical-legacy-and-jokes-about-his-health-video>
Photograph: Antonio Olmos for the Observer 
But if Prince’s death was the most shocking, and Bowie’s the most spectacular, 
thenLeonard Cohen’s passing in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-obituary> was the 
most telling. The traditional narrative of a pop-star death is that of George 
Michael: of talent cruelly snatched away by a premature demise, usually 
accompanied by lurid speculation about what had been going on in their private 
lives. The one thing pop stars never did was die of old age. But Cohen was 82, 
a pretty good innings by anyone’s standards: a few weeks before he passed away 
in his sleep, he told an interviewer he was “ready to die”. And that’s the kind 
of pop star death of which we’re going to see more. We’re 60 years away from 
the rock’n’roll explosion – as far away from Heartbreak Hotel and Blue Suede 
Shoes as they were from the premiere of La Bohème and Mahler’s Third Symphony – 
and half a century has passed since 1966, arguably the pivotal year in the 
development of 60s pop.

It seems faintly miraculous that any of the architects of the former are still 
alive, but they are: Little Richard is 83, Jerry Lee Lewis is 81, Chuck Berry 
is 90, and his first album in 36 years is due for release in 2017. The 
architects of the latter are now into their 70s: you didn’t have to be a cynic 
or incredibly ghoulish to sense that impending mortality was a factor in people 
paying up to $1,599 for tickets to this year’s Desert Trip festival that 
brought together the Rolling Stones, Neil Young, Pink Floyd’s Roger Waters, the 
Who, Bob Dylan and Paul McCartney. Whether we become increasingly immune to pop 
legends passing away, or whether 2016’s outpourings of grief become a regular 
occurrence, remains to be seen.

As the leader of Earth, Wind & Fire – not just a singer, but a songwriter, 
arranger, producer and bandleader –Maurice White 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/05/good-time-the-greatest-moments-of-maurice-white-and-earth-wind-fire>
has a claim to be one of the most important people in pop history, leading his 
band to the forefront of successive movements in black music: funk, disco, 
electronic R&B.He died on 4 February, aged 74 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/04/earth-wind-fire-founder-maurice-white-dies-age-74>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdeath-stars-musics-greatest-losses-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4760bd1af8c8d64b8a2c15f71926551eb4277ca4%2F0_193_3543_2250%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20stars%3A%20music%E2%80%99s%20great%20losses%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdeath-stars-musics-greatest-losses-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20stars%3A%20music%E2%80%99s%20great%20losses%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdeath-stars-musics-greatest-losses-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4760bd1af8c8d64b8a2c15f71926551eb4277ca4%2F0_193_3543_2250%2F3543.jpg>
 Maurice White, 19 December 19 1941 – 4 February 2016. Photograph: Rob 
Verhorst/Getty Images 
And let us not forget

Merle Haggard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/06/merle-haggard-dead-country-music-icon>
, by contrast, offered little in the way of good times, lyrically at least. He 
pioneered the Bakersfield sound, a Californian take on country that didn’t 
descend into Laurel Canyon introspection, but considered the plight of 
struggling working Americans to a hard-country backing that made him a 
geographically distant but artistically close cousin of the outlaw country 
artists in Texas. Haggard died on 6 April, his 79th birthday.

Equally important in their own fields were the pioneers of ska and prog. 
Prince Buster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/08/prince-buster-obituary-ska-musica-jamiaca>
(above), who died on 8 September at the age of 78, was one of the great legends 
of Jamaican music, and someone whose music gained a second life when he became 
one of the inspirations for the 2 Tone movement in the late 70s. Not only was 
Madness’s huge early hitOne Step Beyond 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N-uyWAe0NhQ> a Prince Buster cover, the band 
also named themselves after one of his songs .

The theatrical excess of Emerson, Lake and Palmer, meanwhile, might have been 
one of the causes of punk, but they bestrode prog like cape-wearing, 
knife-wielding, concept-developing superheroes, and even those who never cared 
for them should consider the work ofKeith Emerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/13/keith-emerson-obituary> (who 
died on 11 March, aged 71) andGreg Lake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/08/greg-lake-obituary> (7 December, 
69) recorded with the Nice and King Crimson respectively before filing them in 
the not-for-me pile.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdeath-stars-musics-greatest-losses-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a240afec8a0b389b0be58e0522786ad17f7a09%2F421_631_2266_2266%2F2266.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20stars%3A%20music%E2%80%99s%20great%20losses%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdeath-stars-musics-greatest-losses-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20stars%3A%20music%E2%80%99s%20great%20losses%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fdeath-stars-musics-greatest-losses-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2a240afec8a0b389b0be58e0522786ad17f7a09%2F421_631_2266_2266%2F2266.jpg>
 George Martin, 3 January 1926 – 8 March 2016. Photograph: John Dove/Abbey Road 
Studios 
And that is still barely scratching the surface of the year’s fallen greats. 
Congolese music lost a giant inPapa Wemba (24 April, 66); Sir George Martin, 
who was so crucial to the Beatles, died on 8 March, aged 90;Glenn Frey of the 
Eagles, whose Their Greatest Hits (1971-1975) is the sixth-bestselling album of 
all time, passed away on 18 January, aged 67;Rod Temperton, who went from 
working in a frozen food factory in Grimsby to writing megahit after megahit 
for Michael Jackson, died in October, aged 66.

Every kind of music lost heroes. Hip-hop saw the tragically early deaths of 
Phife Dawg(above) of A Tribe Called Quest (22 March, 45) and Prince Be of PM 
Dawn (17 June, 46). R&B legendOtis Clay died on 8 January, aged 73, his death 
utterly overshadowed by Bowie’s two days later. Funk lost the greatBernie 
Worrell of Parliament/Funkadelic (24 June, 72) and folk saw the departure of 
the brilliant fiddlerDave Swarbrick of Fairport Convention – whose obituary had 
first been printed, much to his surprise, years earlier, on 3 June, aged 75.
Mose Allison, one of the greats of jazz, was 89 when he passed away on 15 
November.

Let us remember, too, those figures from the edges and the backrooms who 
contributed so much to music. People such asAlan Vega of Suicide, who showed 
the punks what confrontational really meant (16 July, 78). OrScotty Moore, the 
guitarist on those great early Elvis cuts (28 June, 84). OrDavid Mancuso, whose 
impeccable taste and style shaped generations of DJs and clubbers alike (14 
November, 72). OrChips Moman, the producer who also co-wrote two of soul’s 
greatest songs: Do Right Woman, Do Right Man and The Dark End of the Street (13 
June, 79).

And all this without mentioning Sharon Jones or Vi Subversa or Paul Kantner or 
Colin Vearncombe or Pete Burns or Bobby Vee, or many, many more. It was a sad, 
sad year for music.

Michael Hann
 