
Munster’s head coach Anthony Foley died due to a heart condition which led to 
a build-up of fluid in his lungs, a French coroner has said. An autopsy has 
revealed that Foley, 42,whose body was found in his room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-ireland-rugby-union>
 at the team’s Paris hotel before their scheduled European Champions Cup game 
against Racing 92 on Sunday, “had a heart rhythm disorder that caused an acute 
edema of the lungs”, according to www.rugby365.fr.

The coroner said Foley’s death could be “linked to a heart problem”, while 
further toxicological tests are ongoing and results are “expected in several 
weeks”.

Anthony Foley, a Munster legend to his core and ‘proper rugby bloke’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/anthony-foley-munster-man-ireland-death>
Munster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/munster> confirmed Foley’s body 
would be flown home on Wednesday, with his funeral to take place in County 
Clare on Friday.

“Anthony’s family have confirmed that his remains will be flown home to 
Shannon airport, from where they will be brought to his family home in 
Killaloe, Co Clare,” a statement on the club’s website reads. “They will lie in 
repose at St Flannan’s Church, Killaloe, from 1pm to 8:30pm sharp on Thursday 
evening. People intending on paying their respects to Anthony are asked to 
attend early. House afterwards is private.

“Funeral Mass will take place at 12 midday on Friday at St Flannan’s Church, 
with Church reserved for family and friends only. A special area will be set 
aside to facilitate media outside the church, near speakers.

“Burial afterwards will be at Relig Nua Cemetery, Killaloe. Family flowers 
only.”

Tributes and messages of sympathy flooded in from across the world of sport 
following the announcement of Foley’s death. He played 62 times forIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> as a back-row forward, led Munster 
to their first European Cup victory in 2006 and was central to the province’s 
repeat success two years later. He scored 39 tries for his province and made 86 
appearances in European competition before taking on backroom roles from 2009. 
He was named head coach in 2014.
 