
This week we have been investigating the role and impact of cars in cities: 
congested roads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2014/jul/07/most-congested-cities-europe-america-in-pictures-traffic-jams>
,urban motorways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/08/congestion-roads-hell-urban-motorways>
,creative reuse of carparks and petrol stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/09/multistorey-car-park-us-designer-micro-apartments-affordable-housing>
 and how some cities arediscouraging car ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/10/helsinki-shared-public-transport-plan-car-ownership-pointless>
. What does the future hold next for urban transport?

We invited our readers to participate in a debate on whether streets should be 
pedestrianised and cars banned from city centres. We had four experts on hand 
to answer questions: David Sim, creative director ofGehl Architects 
<http://gehlarchitects.com>; Paul Watters, head of roads policy at the AA 
<http://www.theaa.com>; Adam Greenfield, senior urban fellow at LSE Cities 
<http://lsecities.net/about/whos-who/centre-staff/#p-greenfield-adam>; and 
Patricia Brown, Director of urban affairs consultancy, Central, who wrote a 
piece earlier this week onwhy the car must "no longer be king" in cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/07/in-a-successful-modern-city-the-car-must-no-longer-be-king>
.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> Guardian contributor
patricialondon  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> 11 
July 2014 11:49am <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38037995>
Hello, I am the author of the piece on Monday about the changing nature of 
cities. I look forward to contributing to this online debate.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> Guardian contributor
adamgreenfield  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> 11 
July 2014 11:58am <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38038357>
Hi Patricia! Loved the piece. I contributed yesterday's piece on Helsinki's 
plan to rethink public transit, and I too am looking forward to digging in to 
this knot of issues.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> Guardian contributor
adamgreenfield  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> 11 
July 2014 12:09pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38038849>
I should say a bit about who I am so folks have some context. Broadly speaking 
I come from a technological perspective — my first book, "Everyware," was on 
the colonization of everyday life by information processing, and I've continued 
to write about these issues in "Urban Computing and its Discontents" and 
"Against the smart city."

But I've also worked in the sector, as among other things Nokia's head of 
design direction for service and user-interface design, and I like to think my 
skepticism regarding technological solutionism is intimately informed by this 
experience.

In general, I strongly believe in pedestrianizing cities wherever possible, 
but I'm not an absolutist on the question — and despite my skepticism, I think 
networked information technologies will have a significant role to play in 
developing new, cleaner, safer and more *urban* forms of urban mobility.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515794> Guardian contributor
DavidSimGehl  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515794> 11 July 
2014 12:05pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38038665> 
Hello my name is David Sim.
I am Creative Director at Gehl Architects, based in Copenhagen.

I suppose I was asked to participate because Gehl Architects focus on the 
pedestrian experience – which has been – and still is – often forgotten in the 
planning process.

I think the question posed by our friends at the Guardian is of course a bit 
of a provocation – I mean car-free is a bit extreme. But if the question helps 
us talk about this … let’s get going!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515794> Guardian contributor
DavidSimGehl  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515794> 11 July 
2014 12:08pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38038771> 
Saying that I don't own a car. 
I grew up driving everywhere and where the car was the epicentre of family 
life but moving to Scandinavia has changed that.
It's not about not having a car - though that does save me a huge amount of 
money which I can spend on other stuff.
It's about having great alternatives.
It's about having walkable and bike-able streets and an integrated 
transportation system.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> Guardian contributor
PaulWatters  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> 11 July 
2014 12:07pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38038762> 
Hi Paul from the AA here.

We don't think cars should be banned form cities - but perhaps they can become 
redundant in cities as seems to be happening organically.

LEDLAMP <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/ledlamp/public> comments:

Anyone who has walked along the Marylebone road would agree that as long as 
motor vehicles are powered by the internal combustion engine we cannot improve 
the quality of life in big cities like London. They are noisy and dangerous to 
other street users. They produce soot particulates, noxious gases and 
greenhouse gases.

I often go to London but eschew the tube and motorised traffic. Instead, I 
mostly walk with the aid of a small London A-Z, taking all the side roads and 
walking through parks. Walking is quick and easy and amazingly interesting, 
discovering out of the way restaurants and pubs and quietly observing the 
architecture. Away from the main roads the air is much fresher and it is quiet. 
Yet there is still so much going on. Think of the walk along the South Bank.

The other day, I was in Carleton House Terrace at the Royal Society. I left 
and walked down the Mall, across Trafalgar Square which is a beautiful spot but 
thoroughly ruined by the traffic. It is somewhat improved by the pedestrianised 
section in front of the National Gallery, however, thanks to Ken Livingstone.

I walked on up the Strand and left into the Aldwych, Kingsway, Southampton Row 
and right into Guildford Street past Great Ormond Street Hospital. There you 
find yourself in quiet Corams Field and Brunswick Square Gardens. When you 
finally emerge on the Euston Road, opposite St Pancras, you realise just how 
unpleasant cars and lorries have made our lives.

I believe London and all big cities can never be great places to live, work or 
play until we replace this outdated mode of transport. We now have plenty of 
alternatives such as electric vehicles but, best of all, I love the experience 
of walking in the city and only then, as Will Self often remarks, can you 
properly experience it.

As Lewis Mumford once said, ‘Restore human legs as a means of travel. 
Pedestrians rely on food for fuel and need no special parking facilities.’
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> Guardian contributor
patricialondon  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> 11 
July 2014 12:00pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38038441>
Sounds great. I ran the organisation that initiated what became 'Legible 
London' - the blue 'wayfinding' signs and finger posts. Our vision was to 'give 
people the confidence to get lost safe in the knowledge you can be found 
again'. At the time London had no consistent mapping or signs so visitors and 
(some) Londoners stuck to the main streets - which are not so great because of 
the car dominance. In fact, it was also a safety issue as some places were so 
overcrowded pick pockets had a field day.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> Guardian contributor
adamgreenfield  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> 11 
July 2014 12:05pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38038644>
I tend to agree fairly strongly, but would add that as far as I'm concerned, 
the problem isn't even simply the internal combustion engine. You could replace 
every vehicle on the road with a clean, near-silent electric equivalent and 
many of the issues presented by the car would still remain.

For example, the appalling rate of injuries and fatalities every society in 
the world is apparently content to absorb as the cost of automotive freedom; 
for example, the ways in which (as you've pointed out) high-speed vehicular 
traffic makes public space inimical to the pedestrian; for example, the degree 
to which traveling by car deprives the rider of the sense of the city.

These are all design issues, design challenges, and I believe that they can 
and must be addressed in the development of new modes of personal 
transportation. The car, particularly the privately-owned car, strikes me as 
simply a hundred-year plateau in the evolution of human mobility.

Chris Michael <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/chrismichael/public> asks:

Hi David, to build on your idea of the car as epicentre of family life – isn't 
ferrying the kids around on public transit impractical? I don't know many 
families who don't eventually cave and buy a gas-guzzler. Walkable and bikable 
doesn't work if you've got three kids under 5. What's the solution?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515794> Guardian contributor
DavidSimGehl  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515794> 11 July 
2014 12:18pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039264> 
OK family life - a good point.
Many families here, do thrive without a car. The combination of cargo-style 
bikes, pram and family friendly public transport and generous family-orientated 
ticketing can help.

A recent study here showed that children who cycle or walk to school perform 
better academically than those driven. The active children arrive at school 
alert while the driven children are passive.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3187289> MariaAM  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3187289> 11 July 2014 12:26pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039618> 
We've struggled with the decision to keep our car. We don't really need it 
most days (cycle/walk/bus to work and nursery with our son). When we do need a 
car for longer journeys, the issue is a safe car seat. We currently use a 
rear-facing seat (good to 4 years old) that can't be easily lugged around, 
which makes using a car share difficult (our nearest one is several blocks 
away), and we refuse to compromise our child's safety by using a forward facing 
rental car seat of unknown history and use. The problem would only be worse if 
we had more than one child.

We ask:

We had two pieces this week from Zoe Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/08/london-toxic-oxford-street-polluted-boris-johnson>
 andKen Livingstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/11/boris-johnson-pollution-thousands-london-dying-prematurely-drivers>
 following the news that London's Oxford Street is the most polluted place on 
earth. The diesel engines of buses have been blamed - so are banning cars not 
the answer? Should we strive instead for electric vehicles?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> Guardian contributor
adamgreenfield  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> 11 
July 2014 12:15pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039140>
As I've mentioned above, I tend to think that the problems with cars extend 
beyond the internal combustion engine. We can start with the thought that 
replacing every such engine with a clean, quiet electric drivetrain would 
simply displace the pollution elsewhere, until and unless all power is 
generated via nonpolluting, renewable means...
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3947659> Rochdalelass  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3947659> 11 July 2014 12:23pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039467> 
Yes, definitely. Not everyone is young and or fit enough to walk distances 
especially pushing their way through crowds.
It's always those who are who thinks that everyone should run, cycle or use 
public transport. Better to go to the real problem and sort that out, pollution 
caused by the combustible engine. We need to move on to a new technology.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1405651> hooopla  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1405651> 11 July 2014 12:32pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039965> 
Pollution isn't the only problem from traffic. Cars have come to dominate our 
environments: It is hard to find anywhere away from background traffic noise. 
Streets are fenced off to stop pedestrians encroaching on car space. Parked 
cars litter empty space. And yes, there is pollution.

Town centres are dying because local councils want so much income from parking 
fees that shoppers stay away.

Most people don't have a car. That's a fact. A sizeable minority of people 
don't have access to use someone else's car. We need to recognise that this 
problem is caused by a minority, not "everyone"

We need to find transport solutions so inviting, enjoyable, affordable and 
well-planned that people will not choose to use cars. The best way to do that 
will vary, but I suspect that mostly it is a matter of reclaiming public 
transport from the elderly, the smelly and the poor, making it the most 
attractive option for those who can choose. But getting the pricing right will 
help.

Where I live there is no bus to the nearest town. The bus fare to the next 
nearest town is £2 each way. It costs me just 40p in fuel to go in my car 
instead. Where is the sense in that?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10009533> Captainstegs  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10009533> 11 July 2014 12:52pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38041079> 
Switching to a new technology, e.g. replacing combustion engines with electric 
motors, won't resolve the congestion though and the elderly and infirm who 
can't afford motor vehicles will still need to push their way through crowds.
By banning most motor vehicles from some/all city roads the space can be 
opened up to widen pavements, better for mobility scooters and to ease the 
crowds, and segregated cycle lanes can be installed, safer for cyclists of all 
ages and abilities. Meanwhile those with disability badges could still be 
allowed access for their vehicles. Access no longer choked up by all the other 
millions of vehicles swarming in and out of the cities.

A city that restricts motor vehicles would be easier to navigate by people of 
all ages and abilities.

debs515 <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/debs515/public> asks:

I love the idea of 'making the car redundant'- but the reality is is that lots 
of us need some form of powered transport - becuase of heavy bags, kids, 
health/disability issues etc. I wish people who make these lovely statements 
would consider those of us for whom walking/cycling is actually pretty 
difficult.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> Guardian contributor
adamgreenfield  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> 11 
July 2014 12:25pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039570>
I wouldn't assume that they haven't! : . )

I myself have terrible knees — walking too far, as much as I love it, is 
acutely painful for me, and sometime I have trouble even stepping down from a 
curb (or kerb, I guess). So while of course I can't speak for anyone else, I 
can tell you that anything I design fully accounts for the needs of people with 
limited mobility. I believe the city is for everyone.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> Guardian contributor
patricialondon  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> 11 
July 2014 12:32pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039963>
re cars becoming redundant; we currently need vehicles to make our economy 
work. It is possible to manage demand and encourage change, such as The Crown 
Estate's consolidated freight system in Regent Street, designed to reduce the 
number of delivery vehicles.

Personally, I describe myself as a cycling, walking, taxi taking, bus hopping, 
tube regular, train using, car driver. The beauty of most big cities is about 
the level of choice. I have changed my habits so dramatically over the past 
decade, but it is very convenient (and time efficient) to aggregate my 
shopping, dry cleaning, garden centre trips in one swoop and in a car. So 
systems that make the choice easy will win out.

Living as I do in central London, it has been fascinating to watch the switch, 
in part hastened by congestion charging. My bus journey is often shared with a 
window cleaner on his way with bucket, etc, as well as a plasterer and a possie 
of parents taking kids to school. TfL has now got to manage that complexity of 
use, however. which is another story!

thorndoc <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/thorndoc/public> comments:

I really do not understand why people drive in city centres. I live in London 
and I can see nothing but relentless misery for motorists. Yet the huge cost of 
motoring and snail's pace speed they get around at still doesn't seem to put 
people off. I think the only thing that will make people review their method of 
travel in city centres is some sort of extra charge or tax. The only thing 
people seem to respond to is a shock in the wallet!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> Guardian contributor
PaulWatters  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> 11 July 
2014 12:33pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040044> 
The London charge has done nothing for congestion as when you look at traffic 
in the centre it is everything but the private car there (almost). Also the 
revenue raised has been helpful but who's to know an equivalent sum was not 
then sliced from the GLA grant to TFL.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3648580> Guardian staff 
Chrismichael  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3648580> 11 July 
2014 12:45pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040709> 
The London charge has done nothing for congestion

But surely what the congestion charge HAS done has allowed much more room for 
buses, taxis and other shared vehicles, thus allowing far more people to use 
the city centre?

Mikeyc74 <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/mikeyc74/public> says:

I live in Bath. Its a pretty compact city surrounded by seven hills. However 
much of the city centre is full of cars - whether moving or parked. It was a 
city planned for an age before cars and cars have almost totally taken the city 
over. It would be great to get some of the cars out of the city, perhaps have 
more one way streets and look at other ways of getting people into the city and 
out again. One of my friends has suggested the use of cable cars (a la Rio 
style) which could work nicely with the topography of the place. There is a 
danger of congestion permanently having a negative impact on a city which is 
very much on the human scale and should be for people to wander and enjoy the 
green spaces, independent shops and wonderful architecture. The local authority 
is trying to people first but always comes up against so much resistence and 
has to do stuff by stealth. How do we get the balance right so that we avoid a 
scenario where people play second fiddle to traffic?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> Guardian contributor
patricialondon  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> 11 
July 2014 12:39pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040336>
Bath is interesting as they are really trying with several good initiatives. 
But it is in Bath where a friend pointed out that her mobility impaired father 
can't easily visit the new pedestrian shopping area, since the drop off point 
is so far away from the main shops he has expended his energy before he gets to 
them.

So yet again, it comes back to balance. For me, this is a stark reminder about 
empathetic planning in cities - it's easy to herald the cycling car free city, 
but we have different needs at different stages of our lives.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4662733> Mikeyc74  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4662733> 11 July 2014 1:07pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38041957> 
Exactly. We need to cater for all users so that you have access for all. There 
is a need for a big vision that helps the people of the city move around easily 
and effectively without too much of a detrimental impact on the quality of life 
in the city.

shelltune <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/shelltune/public> suggests:

Build huge park and ride car parks outside the city centre with regular buses 
(or better yet monorails, segregated from the remaining main traffic flow) into 
the centre, and you have a deal
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3968567> Jazzactivist  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3968567> 11 July 2014 12:26pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039640> 
But what about the people who live in the areas where you want to build park 
and ride facilities? Most people choose to live outside cities and large towns 
because it is less congested and built on! Building big park and ride 
facilities here would just shift the pollution, noise and congestion onto those 
people.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3032092> somewhatsceptical  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3032092> 11 July 2014 12:33pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040005> 
Oxford is a great example of a city that seems to have done huge amounts along 
those lines... and, as reported above, is often terribly gridlocked.

Chris Michael <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/chrismichael/public> asks:

Just on a slightly different note, what about the cultural value of a car? As 
a rite of passage, as a beautiful aesthetic object, as the centrepiece of 
community (as with Harley-Davidson riders)? Do we want to kill the love of cars?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> Guardian contributor
PaulWatters  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> 11 July 
2014 12:30pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039877> 
Agree we should not loose our love of cars but perhaps this is getting harder 
in cities where they cannot be fully enjoyed or used to potential.
Finding a place to keep one and keep it safe is difficult.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> Guardian contributor
adamgreenfield  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> 11 
July 2014 12:31pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039921>
So, nobody loves cars more than I — nobody. The sensuality of an E-type, the 
elegance of a Citroen DS, the raw power of a GTO or a '69 Charger: these are 
all powerful emotional touchstones for me.

But I no longer believe that my *desire* for these things can be reconciled 
with my other prerogatives. And I mean that personally, before we even start 
talking about collective or social impacts. *I* don't want to bear the burden, 
the expense or hassle of ownership, and licensure, and regulation, and 
insurance, and parking (ad infinitum). Other options are just pragmatically 
better and more satisfying, on every axis.

And you know what? It turns out that I *love* getting around on the bus. 
London's bus service is fantastic! I only very rarely find myself more than 
100m from a bus stop, the buses come with pleasing regularity, and it's 
fantastic to watch the city go by from the upper deck. As someone who's lived 
and gotten around in New York, San Francisco, Seattle, Seoul, Tokyo and 
Helsinki, I've gotta tell you, this is a great accomplishment. Despite all my 
deep love for the car, it just can't hold a candle to the freedom and other 
benefits I enjoy as a rider and satisfied TfL customer.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3968567> Jazzactivist  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3968567> 11 July 2014 12:34pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040105> 
It's not just the aesthetics of a car, but it is also culturally important in 
that it provides a private space that is like an extension of your home. Inside 
a car you can have familiar things around you, listen to music or the radio or 
books without having to wear earpieces, or can just enjoy the silence etc. For 
many people, being stuck alone in a car in traffic is the only time they get 
some (enforced) peaceful personal time! A car is like a protective bubble, 
whereas sharing the space on public transport with lots of other people you 
don't know isn't.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> Guardian contributor
adamgreenfield  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13508419> 11 
July 2014 12:48pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040840>
Consider, though, that we increasingly live in such "epistemic bubbles," where 
nothing challenges us in our complacency, where we're surrounded only and ever 
by things we're already comfortable with. I happen to believe — and I 
understand that not everyone will share this viewpoint — that this isn't what 
cities are for.

Within reason, I think we ought to be exposed to things which are not quite as 
we would have them. It's the only way we ever learn to negotiate the use of 
shared spaces with people who are different from us, and I think it makes us 
better citizens, better neighbors, better human beings. If you'll forgive me, 
though, a "private space that is like an extension of your home...[where] you 
can have familiar things around you" just doesn't do that for us, and I do 
believe it's undermining our collective ability to live with one another in 
public.

ajchm <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/ajchm/public> comments:

Until public transport is cheap, frequent, reliable and goes where you want to 
go it is pointless even debating the future of the car in this way. I need to 
get a present today, I could take the bus for £4.50 return or I can drive and 
pay £1.40 to park for an hour, £2.50 for two hours - no contest really. Then 
there's the fact the buses stop at 10.30pm, don't start til 9.30 on sundays and 
are only every half an hour day / hour in eves and weekends. Now the kids are 
off the economics of driving are even more stacked in the car's favour as 
unlike in London, it £2 each way for a child over 5 and under 16, adults fare 
after that. Oh and the car doesn't mean taking two buses and travel 10 miles to 
get to the shopping centre 4 miles away!
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11310708> thorndoc  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11310708> 11 July 2014 12:34pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040079> 
You have forgotten the cost of fuel, car depreciation, vehicle excise duty, 
insurance, MOT, wear and tear, repairs and servicing into the calculation of 
your cost of a car journey. To make real comparisons the total cost of running 
a car needs to be taken into account.
Not to mention the cost of the stress of sitting in traffic jams on your 
health!

Here are some more of your comments that added to the debate:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13516082> FrancesZaida  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13516082> 11 July 2014 12:37pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040256> 
I don't know about getting rid of cars altogether, but I think that shared 
space can work really well. I'm in Kyoto and (certainly off the main roads) 
cars, people on scooters, pedestrians, and cyclists all share the same space. 
It seems to work well - cars don't go fast and parents can carry their children 
around on their bikes. Using multiple forms of transportation on the same road 
just doesn't seem to be a problem.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11683751> Michael Chilcott  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11683751> 11 July 2014 12:36pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040202> 
It's very easy to sit and say 'ban cars', and it's a view that I have some 
sympathy with. I live in Oxford UK and it's often snarled up with traffic.

However, so often the people who say 'ban cars' are talking from the 
privileged position of being able-bodied, in good health and so on. A move to 
ban cars in city centres would have to take into account those who don't have 
the luxury of full health and mobility. We need to be careful about talk that 
excludes the disabled, for whom a car ban would be a nightmare even in a city 
as small as Oxford.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10171108> Themardler  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10171108> 11 July 2014 12:32pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38039952> 
Well I only know a few cities intimately and they are small cities.And I 
rarely drive in them. And if I lived and worked in one of them day to day life 
without a car would be easy- until I wanted to go somewhere just a few hundred 
yards off the bus routes ( yes I can cycle but not all olds and people with 
kids can) or visit places outside of the city. Similarly it would be a real 
pain if I could not drive from my home to visit friends who live in the 
city-finding somewhere to park on the edge of a city on a bus route when buses 
are running-not easy. Car less cities sound a fine idea for the young or 
childless whose lives are completely within a city.Not so great to deprive city 
dwellers of the right to own a car and use it to get out of the city nor for 
their visitors. Unless every major route has 24 hour car hire establishments I 
can't see how city dwellers could be expected to do it.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13123721> Arlene Decker  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13123721> 11 July 2014 1:03pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38041690> 
Electric car sharing schemes like the Blue-car scheme in Paris, which is going 
to be rolled out in London soon, I think is a great idea to help reduce 
emissions and encourage people to think about cars differently. My other 
thoughts on making London more pedestrian friendly and car free is this: Ban 
private vehicles from the centre, maybe up to zone 2/3 (maybe more). Salary the 
taxi drivers and drop taxi fares so they are affordable to more people for 
necessary journeys . Service vehicles could be allowed in to the no car zone 
providing they pay for a permit which allows them to enter. All the while 
improving the public transport system to be more complete with better east/west 
links (particularly in south London!). It would be a big change but would still 
allow for the iconic black cab to have a place in public London life. 
Futhermore I would add that if London is serious about being car free, it is 
going to have to drop the prices of travelling on public transport.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4352709> FLeghorn  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4352709> 11 July 2014 12:50pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040944> 
I live in Bristol, have run a company here for 30 years, brought up 3 kids and 
have never bothered to learn to drive. I cycle, walk and taxi - (buses are too 
badly run in Bristol to bother with! )
Most people still react with a degree of disbelief that you can live happily 
in a (hilly) city without a car, and I stress that its not a statement, more 
the fact that cars mean nothing to me and frankly at 53 I can't be bothered to 
start learning now!
Of our staff of approx 40, about 60% cycle or walk to work - thats something 
I'm happy about.
I'm happy to support a gentle and pragmatic reduction of car access in our 
cities, but it has to be linked with acceptable, visible alternatives - what I 
can't support is political point scoring, ego and posturing (and boy, do we 
have that in Bristol) too many schemes are half baked and not linked to city 
wide regeneration, isolated cycleworks create a false sense of security and we 
really need to move away from the 'paint on the road' mentality and implement 
physical segregated infrastructure.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3306712> BigBear2  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3306712> 11 July 2014 12:51pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040974> 
I'm all in favour of getting cars out if cities and it works in places like 
Norwich which has one of the largest pedestrianised areas in the UK, and they 
started earlier. It is possible for a family with children to manage without a 
car, my daughter her husband and two children live there and do very well 
without one. I would like to move further into Manchester and rely on its 
excellent public transport.

What we have to do is reduce the ownership of cars as well as restricting 
where they can go. Most cars stand idle most of the time. Car clubs work very 
well and should be encouraged everywhere. Or, cars available to rent more 
casually like bikes. The presence of heavy traffic in cities makes them 
unpleasant for everyone, including the drivers. The nature of London's road 
system makes this worse as you are forced to walk by traffic so much.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3181766> Pfutsch  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3181766> 11 July 2014 12:46pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38040741> 
Allowing things to take their course is not a viable strategy: As we have seen 
in London, Beijing, Mexico City or Rome, a city can be choking on fumes and 
gridlocked, but people will still sit in their cars rather than take a bus or a 
train.

Considering the almost universal concern about passive smoking, I can't 
understand how car pollution is deemed acceptable given that it affects 
children, old people and non-drivers indiscriminately.


Let's take a bold step: ban all private cars in towns except those powered 
100% by electricity!

And some final thoughts:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> Guardian contributor
patricialondon  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13501300> 11 
July 2014 1:07pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38041909> 
We have to plan our cities very carefully to get balance and go back regularly 
to ensure what we created still works.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> Guardian contributor
PaulWatters  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> 11 July 
2014 12:54pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38041171> 
It is clear from the debate that there are mixed views perhaps because we are 
in fact all road users and use a multitude of modes if we can - choosing the 
best to suit our needs at the time. We need to make this choice easier and more 
seamless.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> Guardian contributor
PaulWatters  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13515741> 11 July 
2014 1:04pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/38041739> 
I don't think we need to ban cars from cities as they are already being 
replaced by other transport choices. Cars must continue to be 'allowed' for 
those who need the mobility or through choice. As we've heard its no fun owning 
a car in a city - there is a price!

The live debate is now over: many thanks to our readers for contributing, as 
well as our participants Adam Greenfield, Patricia Brown, David Sim and Paul 
Watters. Remember to look through the comments below the line for the full 
version of the discussion and feel free to add your thoughts.
 