
A few minutes before 10pm every Friday night, young people rush into the bars 
and clubs of Maiduguri, timing their arrival perfectly to avoid the nightly 
curfew. Once inside, revellers stay dancing until the checkpoints reopen after 
dawn.

Here in the birthplace of Boko Haram, a group that has waged a brutal 
insurgency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/nigerias-president-muhammadu-buhari-says-he-will-trade-boko-haram-prisoners-for-chibok-girls>
 in north-east Nigeria since 2009, killing an estimated 20,000 people and 
displacing more than 2 million, a sense of normality is slowly returning after a
concerted army campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/nigeria-says-boko-haram-commanders-killed-airstrike-wounded-abubakar-shekau>
.

As people from across Borno state have fled to urban areas and camps to escape 
the frequent terror attacks, Maiduguri hasmore than doubled in size 
<http://www.unocha.org/nigeria/about-ocha-nigeria/about-crisis> and has become 
home to tens of thousands of young people hoping to rebuild their lives.

The nation’s new president, Muhammadu Buhari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/muhammadu-buhari>, a former general, was 
elected last year on a promise to clean up the military and quash the 
insurgency. In the past 15 months, army forces have beaten the terror group 
back from strongholds in remote villages and towns across the state.

As a result the El-Kanemi Warriors, the local football team, have felt safe 
enough to play home matches in the Nigerian football league for the first time 
in two years. The University of Maiduguri has started holding graduation 
ceremonies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fclubbing-birthplace-boko-haram-maiduguri-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6415a0a48f1d22750182e439b449eeed485f0e26%2F0_0_4960_2976%2F4960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Defiance%20on%20the%20dancefloor%3A%20clubbing%20in%20the%20birthplace%20of%20Boko%20Haram&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fclubbing-birthplace-boko-haram-maiduguri-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Defiance%20on%20the%20dancefloor%3A%20clubbing%20in%20the%20birthplace%20of%20Boko%20Haram&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fclubbing-birthplace-boko-haram-maiduguri-nigeria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6415a0a48f1d22750182e439b449eeed485f0e26%2F0_0_4960_2976%2F4960.jpg>
 The El-Kanemi Babes, a feeder team to the Warriors, prepare to play after 
years kept off the pitch due to security concerns. Photograph: Fati Abubakar 
Fati Abubakar, 30, a photographer who has been capturing everyday life in the 
restive state and posting images on herBits of Borno Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/bitsofborno/> account, believes a sense of normality 
is returning. “Borno has always been known for having the most flamboyant and 
colourful weddings,” she said. “The insurgency slowed it, but now it’s back in 
full force. Everyone is eager to experience them again.”


Sunday Yuguda, 32, known as DJ X-Mix, has been playing in Maiduguri for a 
decade. He made his name at the city’s Lake Chad Club, where he played hip-hop, 
Fela Kuti and a fusion of several dancehall-influenced styles now called 
Afrobeats.

“Before Boko Haram <https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/boko-haram>, Maiduguri 
was a happening place,” he said. “It was so social that you could wake up at 
2am, leave your house and find an open bar at that time. But now the number of 
people coming to clubs has reduced because nobody wants embarrassment from the 
security at checkpoints.”

Nightlife is now returning. The Sahara nightclub on the edge of the city is 
seeing its numbers swell. “People troop in a lot,” Yuguda said. “Especially on 
Wednesdays and Fridays, when women get free entry. We play music till 2am or 
3am again.”

Sally Hayden, an Irish journalist who was reporting from Maiduguri in May, 
said she saw patrons start “clubbing on Saturday afternoon so they have enough 
time before the curfew. Others opt to stay until sunrise the next day.”

Younger clubbers go to Hot Bites, a stone’s throw away from the heavily 
guarded palatial residence of the former state governor Ali Modu Sheriff. 
There, urged on by pop music from Tekno, Wizkid and Mr Eazi, young Christian 
men dance with Kanuri and Shuwa Muslim women, a scene that offers a different 
view of a city usually described in news reports as “the frontier of [African] 
jihad”.

Though the state of Borno is largely conservative and Muslim, like anywhere in 
the world, young people have found a way to break rules set down by their 
parents.


Khadeejah, 21, a recent graduate of Maiduguri University, who gave only her 
first name, regularly goes clubbing. “Many of the girls here told their parents 
they are having sleepovers with their female friends,” she said. “Then they 
come clubbing and change to more revealing outfits that they drop somewhere 
within the premises.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fclubbing-birthplace-boko-haram-maiduguri-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc00ca0cfb52a600bbecdfa268e51b0bac579afb8%2F0_221_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Defiance%20on%20the%20dancefloor%3A%20clubbing%20in%20the%20birthplace%20of%20Boko%20Haram&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fclubbing-birthplace-boko-haram-maiduguri-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Defiance%20on%20the%20dancefloor%3A%20clubbing%20in%20the%20birthplace%20of%20Boko%20Haram&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fclubbing-birthplace-boko-haram-maiduguri-nigeria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc00ca0cfb52a600bbecdfa268e51b0bac579afb8%2F0_221_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A dance competition at Sanda Kyarimi zoo in Maiduguri, as people enjoy the 
first Eid al-Adha with no curfew. Photograph: Fati Abubakar 
Khadeejah and her friend Falmata, 24, begin the weekend with a trip to buy 
drugs for the partying ahead. “You have to be high before you go and club,” 
said Falmata.

In August, the National Drug Law Enforcement Agency in Borno state announced 
that it hadconfiscated 20 tonnes of drugs  
<https://www.bellanaija.com/2016/08/ndlea-seizes-20-tonnes-of-illicit-drugs-from-87-suspects-in-borno/>
in Maiduguri over two years, a figure exacerbated by the 22 nearby camps for 
internally displaced people, where drug use is also prevalent.

For this reason, Thierry Laurent-Badin, the director of programmes for 
humanitarian food aid group Action Contre la Faim, is cautious about 
proclaiming that the city is back on its feet.


“While Maiduguri seems, on the surface, to be slowly getting back to life, it 
is important to understand that the city’s population has more than doubled 
over the past four years,” he said. “The related trauma of displacement will 
have a long-lasting impact on individuals and communities.” He said much of the 
population was “extremely vulnerable to exploitation.”

But Abubakar stressed that for the first time in years, there were no attacks 
on the Eid al-Adha celebrations in September, which had a profound effect on 
local people.

“This year was a beautiful experience, because for the first time in years, 
there was no shutdown of the town for fear of attacks, so people were very 
excited, especially children,” Abubakar said.
 