
The news that India is introducing a new tax on car sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/india-introduces-car-sales-tax-to-combat-pollution>
 to help combat severe air pollution and congestion problems has unsurprisingly 
been decried by the country’s car industry.


The chair of India’s largest car manufacturer, Maruti Suzuki, says the tax “is 
going tohurt the industry 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/budget-2016/union-budget-2016/Budget-2016-Wheels-get-hotter-as-Jaitleys-infrastructure-tax-jacks-up-car-prices/articleshow/51201707.cms>
, and will impact growth and affect job creation”. Following the announcement, 
shares in Maruti Suzuki traded more than5% lower 
<http://in.reuters.com/article/india-budget-autos-idINKCN0W21SB>.

But others have celebrated the move, recognising that business as usual cannot 
continue in a country home to thefour most polluted cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/02/where-world-most-polluted-city-air-pollution>
 in the world. “Once Indians owning cars was seen as a sign of economic 
success. Now this sort of tax is seen as Indians being responsible,” a senior 
research fellow at a Delhi-based thinktanktold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/29/india-introduces-car-sales-tax-to-combat-pollution>
 the Guardian.

The tax comes on the heels of the Delhi government’s unprecedented step this 
winter of imposing an emergency “odd-even” license platenumber rule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/delhi-car-ban-licence-pollution-smog>
 to restrict private car use to alternate days.

Reports of extreme air pollution in Delhi and other Indian cities are nothing 
new. The World Health Organisationestimates 
<http://www.oecd.org/env/the-cost-of-air-pollution-9789264210448-en.htm> that 
more than 600,000 people die each year as a result of outdoor air pollution in 
India. Much less discussed is the fact that not all residents are equally 
affected, nor equally responsible.

As the rich get richer everyone else gets less happy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/16/inequality-happiness-rich-getting-richer-poor-wellbeing-life-satisfaction>
Delhi’s low-income residents – who don’t travel by car – bear the brunt of the 
city’s toxic air. This is partly because of where they live. A 2011 study found 
levels of suspended particulates to be generallyhigher in the city’s poorer 
neighbourhoods 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305750X1100060X>.

The poor also spend more time outdoors, where pollution is most intense. A 
study in the scientific journal Atmospheric Environment reports thatmen from 
low-income households <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3068847/> 
spend on average about seven hours outdoors daily, compared to virtually zero 
for those at the top of the income scale.

What’s more, affluent households can afford air conditioning, better nutrition 
and better healthcare, all of which insulate them, to some extent, from dirty 
air.

Some of the highest pollution exposures are inflicted on those who make their 
living on the streets, including traffic police and drivers of three-wheeled 
auto-rickshaws. These rickshaws have been converted to compressed natural gas, 
a cleaner fuel source, as a result of a 1998 supreme court ruling in a case 
brought by environmental advocates.

Many of Delhi’s cars, by contrast, continue to burn particulate-heavy diesel. 
Researchers have measured concentrations of hazardous ultra-fine particles on 
the city’s arterial roads that are eight times higher 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231011005206> than those 
recorded on rooftop monitors just a kilometre away

The health impacts on residents are becoming more and more evident. Children’s 
developing bodies are especially susceptible to long-term harm. A 2008 study 
for India’s Central Pollution Control Board reported that more than two-fifths 
of Delhi’s schoolchildren havereduced lung function 
<http://cpcb.nic.in/upload/NewItems/NewItem_123_children.pdf>, damage that is 
likely to be irreversible.

The good news is that there is rising demand from India’s citizens for cleaner 
air, coupled with greater willingness of Delhi’s populist Aam Aadmi (roughly 
translated as common man) government, elected a year ago, to respond.Delhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> needs ambitious, longer-term policies 
to tackle root causes of the problem. These must include not only steps to halt 
the exponential growth in car traffic and diesel trucks but also huge new 
investments in public transportation, tougher pollution controls on the 
smoke-belching power plants and brick kilns that ring the capital’s perimeter, 
and measures to reduce the clouds of dust from construction debris and road 
traffic.


The best thing a business could do for the environment is shut down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/28/climate-change-capitalism-business-emotions-heathrow-protest-short-term-profits>
Beneath the headlines, Delhi’s air pollution is not only a public health 
disaster; it is a classic case of environmental injustice. The city’s affluent 
classes reap the lion’s share of the benefits from the activities that poison 
the air, while less privileged residents bear most of the human health costs. 
This fateful disjuncture – and the inequalities of wealth and power that lie 
behind it – has posed the single biggest impediment to addressing the problem.

It remains to be seen whether the authorities in Delhi can muster the 
political will to go beyond stopgap emergency measures and launch the policies 
that are desperately needed to safeguard the public interest in a clean 
environment against the private interests of the polluting classes. WillIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, often hailed as the world’s largest 
democracy, be able to overcome the oligarchy that rules its air? The poor who 
bear the heaviest air pollution burdens wish they could hold their breath long 
enough to find out.

 * James K Boyce <https://www.umass.edu/economics/boyce> teaches economics at 
the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Aseem Shrivastava is a Delhi-based 
writer and co-author ofChurning the Earth: The Making of Global India 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/churning-the-earth.html>.
 