

Authorities in Delhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> are considering 
shutting schools in the sprawling Indian capital as a bout of toxic smog 
stretches into a second month.

The megacity, already the world’s most polluted by some measures, has been 
sufferingrecord levels of pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/02/where-world-most-polluted-city-air-pollution>
 which exceed recommended WHO guidelines by between 15 and 30 times.

The smog, a combination of exhaust from cars and lorries, dust, smoke from 
fires and industrial output which is intensified by cold temperatures, is 
predicted to last for months to come.

India unveils global solar alliance of 120 countries at Paris climate summit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/india-set-to-unveil-global-solar-alliance-of-120-countries-at-paris-climate-summit>
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> has taken one of the hardest 
public lines at the climate change talks now reaching a climax in Paris, and in 
the lead-up to them. The country was notably late in submitting its national 
plan on curbing emissions, which focused on renewable energy and invoked the 
legacy of Mahatma Gandhi.

Narendra Modi, the Indian prime minister, has publicly argued that it would be 
“morally wrong” to let rich countries off the hook for their historical 
emissions. This line has been continued by India’s negotiating team at the 
talks.

Levels of pollution in Delhi have been consistently higher than in Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/02/where-world-most-polluted-city-air-pollution>
, where officials have ordered avirtual shutdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/beijing-smog-city-shuts-down-amid-red-alert>
 to prevent harm and cut soaring pollution levels.

Authorities in Delhi have struggled to formulate a coherent strategy to tackle 
the problem which has been building up over years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fdelhi-considers-shutting-schools-as-toxic-smog-continues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdceeb5ebd1e82f1906edb1ed0325b8462adaa2ae%2F0_401_4740_2845%2F4740.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delhi%20considers%20shutting%20schools%20as%20toxic%20smog%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fdelhi-considers-shutting-schools-as-toxic-smog-continues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delhi%20considers%20shutting%20schools%20as%20toxic%20smog%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fdelhi-considers-shutting-schools-as-toxic-smog-continues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdceeb5ebd1e82f1906edb1ed0325b8462adaa2ae%2F0_401_4740_2845%2F4740.jpg>
 An woman has her face covered to protect from pollution and dust in Delhi, 
India. Photograph: Tsering Topgyal/AP 
Last week the chief minister of Delhi, Arvind Kejriwal, announced a scheme t 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/delhi-car-ban-licence-pollution-smog>
o cut traffic, and thus pollution, by allowing cars with licence plates ending 
in odd and even numbers to drive only on alternate days. Two coal-burning power 
stations have also been shut.

“We will only take decisions after consulting schools. We have 2.6 million 
children in Delhi schools,they are big stakeholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/24/indian-children-fall-victim-to-delhis-appalling-pollution>
. There has been a proposal to shut schools between 1 to 15 January. We are 
considering it,” Manish Sisodia, Delhi education minister,told local media 
<http://www.ndtv.com/delhi-news/delhi-schools-may-shut-from-january-1-15-as-city-tries-odd-even-plan-1253817>
.

Studies in Delhi have shown the smog is causing irreversible damage to the 
health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/03/delhis-air-pollution-causing-health-crisis-so-what-can-be-done>
 of millions of children in the city, many of whom walk to school along busy 
roads at peak times for pollution. Many schools have already restricted 
outdoors activities.

Kejriwal said earlier this week that he had been waiting to improve public 
transport before restricting car use but the acute pollution of recent weeks 
had made swift action essential.

The poor record of authorities enforcing headline measures has made many 
observers sceptical that these new efforts will have any effect.

A ban on diesel vehicles more than 10 years old descended into chaos earlier 
this year, with traffic jams at checkpoints, and was effectively withdrawn. 
Around 70,000 trucks cross Delhi every night because successive governments at 
state and national level have failed to construct bypasses. Attempts to 
increase the numbers of buses have failed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fdelhi-considers-shutting-schools-as-toxic-smog-continues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64fbdff808d3f665c9b431c8678e143734a8b580%2F0_0_4000_2662%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delhi%20considers%20shutting%20schools%20as%20toxic%20smog%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fdelhi-considers-shutting-schools-as-toxic-smog-continues%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delhi%20considers%20shutting%20schools%20as%20toxic%20smog%20continues&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fdelhi-considers-shutting-schools-as-toxic-smog-continues%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64fbdff808d3f665c9b431c8678e143734a8b580%2F0_0_4000_2662%2F4000.jpg>
 Commuters clog a busy artery in southern Delhi. Photograph: Roberto 
Schmidt/AFP/Getty Images 
Where is the world's most polluted city?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/dec/02/where-world-most-polluted-city-air-pollution>

Growing consciousness of the problem in the capital, and in heavily polluted 
cities across the emerging power has begun to impact on politicians however.
“Clean air is a human right,”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/05/indian-minister-promises-acute-air-pollution-world-health-organisation>
environment minister Prakash Javadekar, one of the Indian negotiators in Paris, 
told the Guardian earlier this year.


India has opposed the inclusion of a 1.5C temperature limit – which many of 
the poorest nations want – in the draft text prepared in Paris.

Delhi, along with China and Saudi Arabia, prefer a ceiling of 2C, which would 
allow them to burn fossil fuels for longer.

But India’s hard line has been counterbalanced by a strong focus on technology 
and energy. On the first day of the talks,India unveiled a global solar alliance
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/30/india-set-to-unveil-global-solar-alliance-of-120-countries-at-paris-climate-summit>
 of 120 countries to promote the technology.

 