
All schools in Delhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> have been 
ordered to take a “mandatory summer vacation” from 11 May amid a heatwave that 
has swept the city.

Officials say temperatures will continue to rise in the coming weeks, after 
reaching 44C (111F) on Monday – the hottest day of the year so far.

Indian drought 'affecting 330 million people' after two weak monsoons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/india-drought-affecting-330-million-people-weak-monsoons>
Schools in other parts of India have already been forced to close 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/education/odisha-school-holidays-extended-till-april-26-due-to-heatwave/>
 because of heatwaves and a drought that hasaffected 330 million people across 
India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/india-drought-affecting-330-million-people-weak-monsoons>
.

Delhi’s state-run schools finish for the summer on 10 May anyway, but private 
and municipal schools’ term dates vary. Many schools’ end-of-term tests will 
now need to be rescheduled.


Nav Bharti public school was due to break up for the summer on 18 May. Its 
headteacher, Sanjay Bhartiya, said the government’s decision would cause a 
scheduling nightmare. “We had cycle tests and unit tests scheduled for the 
second week of May, so now all our schedule will be disturbed,” he said.

“We are going to follow the government’s order, there is no alternative right 
now. But in the school calendar, one week matters a lot. We understand the 
government’s concern over the heatwave but this abrupt decision will definitely 
affect us.”

Madhulika Sen, headteacher at Tagore International school, Vasant Vihar, which 
will lose three working days because of the government’s order, was less 
forgiving. “Where the temperature is concerned, the government schools have no 
infrastructure – no fans, no back up for electricity, drinking water. They 
can’t handle the heatwave, so it makes sense for the government schools to be 
closed.”

“But I don’t know why private schools have been affected because we have all 
the infrastructure – many schools even have air conditioning. The government 
just doesn’t want to make it sound as though children in government schools are 
finishing earlier than private school students,” she said.

For some though, the decision is a practical one. Madhurie Singh, the founder 
of a school comparison website who has two children, said: “The most important 
thing is health. Distances in Delhi are huge, and kids can spend an hour or 
more travelling to school.

“Over a period of time, the climate is changing, and perhaps it is time to 
look at how the school year can be restructured around that change.”


Extreme weather is becoming increasingly common in India. Last year, hundreds 
of people died in floods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/03/india-army-struggles-to-rescue-survivors-as-flood-death-toll-nears-270>
 in the southern city of Chennai.

The heatwave is adding to the woes of millions of people who are suffering 
from drought. Weak monsoons for the last two years have forced hundreds of 
migrantsto leave their ancestral lands in search of water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/27/india-drought-migrants-head-to-cities-in-desperate-search-for-water>
 in the cities. Rural parts of the country have been hit the worst, with 
farmers suffering from poor harvests and no clean water to drink or wash.

The scarcity of water has caused political tensions, with states in northern 
India battling over control of rivers. 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/All-you-need-to-know-about-Satluj-Yamuna-Link-canal/listshow/51452138.cms>
 Armed guards have been deployed at dams to protect what is becoming an 
increasingly precious resource.


Earlier this year, rioters in the state of Haryana cut off the water supply to 
Delhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/22/india-caste-protesters-accept-offer-to-end-riots-and-water-crisis>
 until the government met their demands to change their caste status.


India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, has promised long-term solutions to 
drought during election rallies, but so far, government efforts to provide 
relief to the millions of people in drought-hit regions have been slow and 
ineffective.

 