
Delhi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi> faces a water crisis after 
caste protests ended in rioting and arson on Sunday that shut down a key supply 
and killed 12 people.

Thousands of troops with shoot-on-sight orders were deployed on Saturday in 
Haryana state after week-long protests turned violent, with rioters setting 
fire to homes and railway stations and blocking highways.

The Indian capital’s water supplies were hit after media reports said mobs 
forced the closure of a canal in Haryana that takes water to the capital’s 
treatment plants.

Protests to continue at Indian university after student leader's arrest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/15/jawaharlal-nehru-university-kanhaiya-kumar-student-arrest-india>
Delhi’s chief minister, Arvind Kejriwal, announced water rationing throughout 
the city, and said all schools would be closed on Monday to conserve supplies. 
New Delhi gets about 60% of its water from the neighbouring state.

“Water to be equally rationed amongst all. Pl save water. Schools closed 
tomo,” Kejriwal said on Twitter.

At least 12 people have been killed and about 150 injured in the state since 
Friday, up from an earlier toll of 10, Haryana additional chief secretary P.K 
Das said.

One person was killed amid gunfire on Sunday and another died in a clash 
between two protesting groups, he said, without giving details.

The Jat rural caste is leading the protests, demanding quotas be set for Jats 
for highly sought-after government jobs and for university places. Caste 
members say they are struggling to find places despite India’s strong economic 
growth.

Talks were held in Delhi between Jat leaders, national home minister, Rajnath 
Singh, and the Haryana government run by the Bharatiya Janata party (BJP).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Findia-sends-thousands-of-troops-to-quash-riots-in-haryana-northern-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bf3cf112c02552513909e3a95ff600fc4e10cae%2F0_72_3391_2035%2F3391.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delhi%20faces%20water%20rationing%20crisis%20and%20school%20closures%20as%20caste%20protests%20rock%20Indian%20state&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Findia-sends-thousands-of-troops-to-quash-riots-in-haryana-northern-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delhi%20faces%20water%20rationing%20crisis%20and%20school%20closures%20as%20caste%20protests%20rock%20Indian%20state&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Findia-sends-thousands-of-troops-to-quash-riots-in-haryana-northern-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bf3cf112c02552513909e3a95ff600fc4e10cae%2F0_72_3391_2035%2F3391.jpg>
 Demonstrators from the Jat community sit on top of a school bus as they block 
the Delhi-Haryana national highway on Saturday. Photograph: Adnan Abidi/Reuters 
Haryana BJP leader Anil Jain said the state government had now agreed to the 
community’s demands. “We have decided in the meeting that Jats will be given 
reservation through a law in the next assembly session,” Jain said after the 
talks.

Jat leader Jaipal Singh Sangwan said they would decide on Monday whether to 
call off the protests.

India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> reserves places for lower 
castes to try to bring victims of the country’s worst discrimination into the 
mainstream. But the policy causes resentment among other communities, who say 
it freezes them out.

Shops were again torched on Sunday and protesters carrying weapons rampaged in 
the streets despite the extra troops, many of whom were sent into the state to 
try to quell the violence.

Police officer Hari Om said in Kalanaur in Haryana’s Rohtak district, the 
epicentre of the violence: “A mob attacked the police post in Kalanaur town and 
set it on fire. Twenty shops adjacent to the post and a school were also 
gutted.”

“The clashes are ongoing and we had to use firearms to break up the 
protesters.”

An AFP photographer said he saw mobs, some armed with swords and sickles, 
running through the streets in Rohtak and trying to stop the media taking 
pictures.

Earlier he saw at least a dozen gutted buildings including a school in the 
town of Sampla five kilometres (three miles) from Rohtak city.

Protesters maintained blockades of roads into Haryana, television footage 
showed. Hundreds armed with sticks halted vehicles along one key route which 
was also blocked with fallen trees.

One of India’s largest carmakers, Maruti Suzuki, suspended operations at its 
two Haryana plants after the protests disrupted supplies of components, a 
spokesman said.

Jats are the single largest community in Haryana, with nearly eight million 
members, and are traditionally a farming community. They have been angered by 
comments in recent weeks by a BJP leader who opposed reservations for them.

Hundreds of trains in the state have been cancelled or diverted since Friday, 
an official said. “Ten small and big railway stations have been burnt. The mobs 
set fire to rail engines and bogies,” railways spokesman Neeraj Sharma said.

The latest protests echo caste violence that swept the western state of 
Gujarat in August 2015, leaving several dead.

That state saw weeks of protests by the Patidar or Patel caste, who demanded 
the same treatment afforded to lower castes.

Reuters and Associated Press contributed to this report

 