
Denmark is awaiting a formal request from Seoul to extradite the daughter of 
Choi Soon-sil, the woman at the centre of the huge corruption scandal that has 
led to the impeachment of South Korea’s president,Park Geun-hye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/park-geun-hye>, authorities have said.

Chung Yoo-ra was arrested early on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/daughter-of-south-koreas-female-rasputin-arrested-in-denmark>
 in the northern Danish city of Aalborg after South Korean police requested 
Interpol’s help when she failed to return home for questioning about her 
alleged ties to the scandal.

The 20-year-old, a former member of the national equestrian team, was with 
three other adults and a child when she was detained on charges of being in
Denmark <https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark> illegally, police and 
prosecutors said, and would be detained “until the issue of extradition is 
decided upon”.

Park was impeached last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/half-a-million-south-koreans-celebrate-impeaching-of-president-park-geun-hye>
 by the South Korean parliament amid public fury over investigators’ claims 
that she conspired to allow Choi, her longstanding confidante, to extort 
companies and meddle in state affairs, including appointments of top officials.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-facing-impeachment-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20faces%20impeachment%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-facing-impeachment-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20faces%20impeachment%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-facing-impeachment-video&media=>
South Korean president Park Geun-hye faces impeachment – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/09/south-korean-president-park-geun-hye-facing-impeachment-video>
The scandal, which has left Park fighting for her political life four years 
after she became South Korea’s first female president, has drawn hundreds of 
thousands of protesters on to the streets of Seoul for weekly demonstrations.

Chung, who trained in dressage in Germany and won a gold medal at the 2014 
Asian Games, is suspected of taking advantage of her mother’s four-decade-long 
relationship with Park to win special treatment from Seoul’s prestigious Ewha 
Womans University, which admitted her at the expense of other candidates with 
better qualifications.

Wanted in South Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> for 
alleged criminal interference in connection with her academic record as well as 
other unspecified charges, Chung’s emergency extradition was now being sought, 
Lee Chul-sung, head of the Korea National Police Agency, told a media 
conference in Seoul.

The foreign ministry in Seoul had been working to cancel Chung’s passport for 
some time, Lee said, adding that Danish police had 24 hours to secure evidence 
she was staying illegally in Denmark. The two countries have an extradition 
treaty.

The corruption scandal centres on accusations that Park and Choi granted 
favours to South Korean companies in exchange for their “donating” nearly $70m 
to non-profit foundations controlled by Choi, who has become known as South 
Korea’s “female Rasputin” for the influence she allegedly wielded.

One particular focus of the investigation is the claim that the electronics 
giant Samsung sought favours from Choi and Park – such as the support of the 
state pension service in a major shareholder vote last year – in return for 
funding some of their initiatives.


Also part of the inquiry is Samsung’s involvement in Chung’s riding career, 
which the firm is alleged to have bankrolled in order to curry favour. Korea’s 
JTBC television, which said one of its journalists tipped Danish police off to 
Chung’s presence in the country, reported that Chung told officials she was in 
Denmark “for equestrian-related work”.

Danish police are currently holding five people in custody, including Chung, 
two men in their late 20s, a woman in her 60s and a child born in 2015, police 
sources told Reuters. Chung is known to have a young son.

Lee Kyung-jae, a lawyer representing Choi and Chung, said the daughter would 
cooperate. “When Chung Yoo-ra returns, I will ensure that she fully cooperates 
with the special prosecution’s investigation,” he told the Yonhap News Agency.

Chung’s arrest came a day after Park, whose father ruled the country for 18 
years after seizing power in a 1961 coup, broke a month-long silence over her 
alleged role in the influence-peddling scandal, denying all wrongdoing and 
rejecting the accusations against her as “a fabrication and a falsehood”.

Park, 64, said she had been “completely framed”, without going into further 
detail. The embattled president, whose impeachment must be confirmed or 
overruled by the constitutional court by June, has apologised for 
“carelessness” in her relations with Choi.

The confidante, the daughter of a controversial religious figure who was close 
to Park until his death in 1994, is awaiting trial on charges including 
coercion and abuse of power. She has denied all wrongdoing.

Park’s last public appearance had been on 29 November, when she offered to 
step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/south-koreas-president-calls-on-parliament-to-arrange-her-exit>
 if parliament could agree on a way for her to leave office. Opposition 
parties, joined by some members of Park’s Saenuri party, led a motion for her 
impeachment on 9 December.

Park, whose executive powers have been handed to an acting president, prime 
minister Hwang Kyo-Ahn, will become South Korea’s first democratically elected 
leader to be forced out of office early if at least six of the constitutional 
court’s nine justices support her impeachment, with a presidential election 
held within 60 days.

But if at least six judges are opposed, her presidential powers will be 
restored and she could limp on until the end of her term in February 2018.








 