
Civil servants in the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills are 
giving British companies the all-clear to press ahead with contracts even 
though they are likely to lead to human rights abuses, the foreign affairs 
select committee will be told on Tuesday.

The all-party committee is investigating whether the Foreign Office has 
downgraded its commitment to defending human rights in favour of a more 
commercial and trade-driven approach.

MPs on the committee decided to hold the brief inquiry after Sir Simon 
McDonald, permanent secretary at the Foreign Office, said human rights no 
longer had the “profile” within his department they had in the past.

Amnesty International, due to give evidence to the committee, claims a 
little-knownUK National Contact Point 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/uk-national-contact-point-for-the-organisation-for-economic-co-operation-and-development-oecd-guidelines-for-multinational-enterprises>
 (NCP) in BIS has been charged with handling any complaints that a private 
sector contract conflicts with the UK’s human rights commitments.

It says the panel of civil servants is “unqualified to make complex human 
rights judgments and lacking the resources to properly investigate claims put 
to them”.

The NCP is a non-statutory body but has to judge human rights complaints under 
guidelines for multinationals prepared by the OECD.

Amnesty claims the system of handling complaints is “inconsistent, unreliable, 
biased towards businesses and out of kilter with the standards it is supposed 
to uphold”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fdepartment-business-bis-failing-uphold-human-rights-commitments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4456458f6a725db2acd1bd73d8b2627a71dd1b9%2F0_31_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Department%20for%20Business%20'failing%20to%20uphold%20human%20rights%20commitments'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fdepartment-business-bis-failing-uphold-human-rights-commitments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Department%20for%20Business%20%27failing%20to%20uphold%20human%20rights%20commitments%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fdepartment-business-bis-failing-uphold-human-rights-commitments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4456458f6a725db2acd1bd73d8b2627a71dd1b9%2F0_31_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 The NCP partially accepted a complaint against Formula One for organising a 
race in Bahrain. Photograph: Hamad I Mohammed/Reuters/Corbis 
The group found that 60% of human rights complaints in the past five years 
have been rejected without full investigation, leaving individuals and whole 
communities at greater risk of abuse. A further 12% have been referred to other 
NCPs that exist in 45 other countries. It was also taking more than six months 
on average for a complaint to complete its initial assessment, and longer 
complaints can take as long as two years.

Amnesty also claims the UK insists that complainants put forward a level of 
evidence higher than that required by the OECD guidelines and higher than that 
which the companies are required to provide in their defence.

Some complaints are rejected at the initial assessment stage simply because 
the evidence is in the public domain, the group said. The NCP has no power to 
require compensation or enforce a change in a company’s conduct.

Human rights groups condemn steep rise in UK arms sales to Saudis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/human-rights-groups-condemn-steep-rise-in-uk-arms-sales-to-saudis>
Peter Frankental, Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> UK’s business and 
human rights expert, said: “Of the 25 human rights complaints in the last four 
years, only one was fully accepted by the NCP – this was against the technology 
company Gamma, which was selling surveillance software to Bahrain that was used 
to target human rights activists, some of whom were alleged to have been 
arrested and tortured.

“The NCP recommended that Gamma participate in best business practice schemes 
and make its communications more transparent, and that it provide remedy for 
victims of abuses in which its products played a role.”

Six cases were partially accepted, including one against Formula One for 
organising the race in Bahrain in the midst of ongoing human rights violations, 
which the complainants – Bahrain Watch and Americans for Democracy and Human 
Rights inBahrain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bahrain> – said would lead 
to further abuses.

A complaint against G4S found the company “technically in breach” of human 
rights guidelines for providing equipment used at Israeli military checkpoints 
and in prisons, which the complainant – Lawyers for Palestinian Human Rights – 
said contributed to serious human rights violations, including against children.

The Liberal Democrat foreign affairs spokesman, Tom Brake, said “Strict 
monitoring of the human rights impact of UK companies’ activities abroad is 
essential for company and UK PLC credibility.

“This scrutiny cannot be left to unqualified civil servants. The National 
Contact Points must now rethink who conducts its investigations and switch to 
using staff experienced in handling human rights issues.”

 