
Most art is open to interpretation. But given the seismic status of 2016 in 
terms ofpolitical upheaval and bloodshed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/what-a-2016-of-a-year-never-again>
 – it’s no surprise many music videos have arrived with more than an essence of 
the apocalypse about them.

Earlier this year I wrote about the ways in which music videos had taken on 
strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/28/how-pop-music-video-got-weird-again>
 and often surreal narratives, a flourish which reflects both the temperament 
of the creatively liberated times and also the competitive requirement of 
making an album launch an “event”. On reflection, art was simply reflecting 
life, a sense of foreboding and dread running throughout.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNUC2EQvdzmY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNUC2EQvdzmY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNUC2EQvdzmY&media=>
Many chose to mirror the political quagmire – exposing the powers that control 
the globe as evil dictators. DJ Shadow’s video for Nobody Speak, featuring the 
vitriolic, eviscerating presence ofRun the Jewels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/22/banksy-interviews-run-the-jewels-dismaland>
, was directed by Sam Pilling and produced by Pulse Films. Its narrative 
follows a global summit, its representatives involved in an unflinching verbal 
battle before a physical fight breaks out and the men are seen grappling one 
another like cannibalistic monkeys. It ends with one man atop a table, holding 
the American flag, prepared to skewer his enemy through the chest, stopped only 
by the cleaning lady who interrupts his act of mania with a look of pitying 
contempt.

There was no scramble for power in Jamie XX’s Gosh video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hTGJfRPLe08>, however. Casting an eye into a 
grim, Romain Gavras-created future world controlled by a vacant, emotionless 
autocrat, its cinematic shots show an army of devoted followers who bow and 
salute as if they were a robotic army. The tension is whipped up by frenetic 
samples of jungle and drum and bass, a futuristic soundscape which matches the 
stark, spooky footage captured in Hangzhou in China’s Zhejiang province.

Arriving ahead of the Brexit referendum, Radiohead’s comeback came in the form 
of Burn the Witch, a song with stress-inducing momentum. The video for the song 
references both Camberwick Green and The Wicker Man, and while the group are 
secretive about its meaning, it looks as if it was influenced by British, or 
maybe even global tensions, and perhaps is even a comment ononline public 
shaming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/15/publicly-shamed-jon-ronson-is-shame-necessary-jennifer-jacquet-review-think-before-you-tweet>
 and/or rightwing rhetoric (Trump’s “lock her up” chant springs to mind).
Pitchfork 
<http://pitchfork.com/thepitch/1133-decoding-the-politics-in-radioheads-burn-the-witch-video/>
 described it as “a pointed critique of nativism-embracing leaders across the 
UK and Europe”, and it was certainly a timely launch during a period in which 
feelings of insularity, identity and fear were prevalent across the world.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyI2oS2hoL0k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyI2oS2hoL0k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyI2oS2hoL0k&media=>
Homages to horror films appeared in videos, too: Quba Tuakli mirrored the 
bleak and brutalist sound ofRocks FOE 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fiThDBVZ0gE>’s Law 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fiThDBVZ0gE> with a startling black and white 
video. On a housing estate, a police officer is chased and force fed black (or 
possibly blood red) liquid, a thick poison which emits from the eyes of a 
female sacrifice and generally makes a gloopy, satanic mess of the pavement.

Grimes’s self-directed video for Kill V Maim 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2EJMd7ZN7w> was also an end-of-days 
imagining. Set in an abandoned city, it shows the last surviving humans as a 
gang of cyber-goth warriors. She and her Sin City via manga cartoon-inspired 
friends wreck havoc in underground train stations and clubs.

Austra’s Utopia <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7rzmhbiKUo0> and Voodoo in My 
Blood <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ElvLZMsYXlo> by Massive Attack featuring 
Young Fathers were two videos that presented technology as an ominous enemy. 
The first employed a speaker-styled black box which isolates its users and 
leaves them eating maggots – all vaguely possible, all very Black Mirror. The 
second, meanwhile, sawRosamund Pike  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/23/rosamund-pike-interview-a-united-kingdom>
trapped in an underpass and entranced by a floating ball. So entranced that she 
ends up face against the floor, in agony. Time for a digital cleanse, perhaps.

And what better way to mourn the demolition of the planet and environment 
through war and human destruction, than enlisting one of nature’s most 
exquisite creations: Naomi Campbell. DuringAnonhi’s Drone Bomb Me 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aUEoic7ro_o>, the supermodel weeps into the 
camera (an intense and intimate format employed by Anonhi throughout her
Hopelessness campaign <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQ0BxhMfijg&t=142s>). 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUdfQuX0Z6fk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUdfQuX0Z6fk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUdfQuX0Z6fk&media=>
Thankfully some found the humour in the sadness. Scottish alt-pop hermit 
Pictish Trail offered a warped myriad of apocalyptic symbolism in his brilliant 
video for After Life. In it he plays a monk, a poncho-wearing evangelist, a 
superhero, the grim reaper, a red puffy man and himself. An explosion of 
imagery, a chaotic collage of crappy graphics and scream faces represent the 
horrific overwhelm of the modern world. It’s the stuff MTV’s 120 minutes was 
made for.

Let’s end on a (slightly) more soothing note, with another video from 
Radiohead’sA Moon Shaped Pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/08/radiohead-a-moon-shaped-pool-review>
.Daydreaming <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TTAU7lLDZYU>, directed by Paul 
Thomas Anderson, follows Thom Yorke as he walks into various rooms looking lost 
and confused, before curling up in the foetal position somewhere dark and 
hoping everything will be OK. Something I think we can all relate to at the end 
of 2016.
 