
Every year for the past decade, democracy has declined around the world. At 
the same time authoritarian rule is on the march. In all regions of the world 
democratic reformers are losing a global battle against savvy despots and 
counterfeit democrats – the wolves in sheep’s clothing who pretend to be “of 
the people, by the people, and for the people”, but are really none of the 
above. We might have already surpassed “peak democracy”, the high-water mark of 
political freedom around the world.

Donald Trump, Peter Thiel and the death of democracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech>
Donald Trump’s rise to the White House will now accelerate the decline of 
democracy, perhaps irreversibly. While his election is correctly seen as a 
uniquethreat to American democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech>
, the much more lasting victims of America’s vote will be those fighting around 
the world for a meaningful voice in their politics – from the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo to Belarus, from Uzbekistan to Thailand. With Trump in 
the Oval Office, ordinary citizens living under despotism will find their 
already weak voices muted, their plight ignored.

We don’t know exactly what Trump’s foreign policy will entail. But we do know 
four crucial facts. First, the past 18 months in America represent an extremely 
effective advertisement to the world against democracy. Few people in other 
nations looked at that endless campaign and thought: “I wish we had that here!”

Second, Trump’s signature foreign policy line of his campaign was that he 
would put “America First”, a slogan that has its roots in American Nazi 
sympathisers <http://bobrowen.com/nymas/americafirst.html> who favoured 
isolationism before Pearl Harbor.

Third, we know Trump isn’t that bothered by authoritarian rulers and their 
practices.

And finally, we know the west is splintered, more than ever since the cold 
war, on how it handles Russia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdictators-world-donald-trump-victory-russia-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d2314c610819a2bf443d0c60ad9174b706b6407%2F0_19_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dictators%20around%20the%20world%20will%20delight%20in%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20victory%20%7C%20Brian%20Klaas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdictators-world-donald-trump-victory-russia-drc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dictators%20around%20the%20world%20will%20delight%20in%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20victory%20%7C%20Brian%20Klaas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fdictators-world-donald-trump-victory-russia-drc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d2314c610819a2bf443d0c60ad9174b706b6407%2F0_19_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines says he and Trump will get along 
because Trump ‘has not meddled in the human rights’. Photograph: Lean Daval 
Jr/Reuters 
The combination of these facts is very bad news for those who relentlessly 
believe in, and tirelessly fight for, democracy in their respective societies. 
For democracy to spread, leaders and their citizens must believe it is worth 
adopting. At the end of the cold war, there was a surging belief that we were 
approaching “the end of history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/21/bring-back-ideology-fukuyama-end-history-25-years-on>
”, a moment when all countries would gravitate toward liberal democratic rule. 
Today that idea seems almost laughable. As a result of that lost faith in 
democracy as a concept, authoritarian regimes are now hiding behind the broken 
shards of western democracy as a pretext to justify their iron-fisted rule. In 
May, for example, a general in Thailand’s military junta told me: if Donald 
Trump is what democracy looks like, don’t sign us up for it. Too many people 
will buy into this line of thinking, and democracy’s retreat will accelerate 
accordingly.

Worse, though, the west’s already checkered support for democracy is now 
likely to be replaced by a drastically pared-down diplomatic approach. Trump 
sees diplomacy as an economic deal; winners are those with trade surpluses, and 
losers are those with deficits. That’s a fundamental misunderstanding of 
foreign policy, a misunderstanding that sees a long-term commitment to 
promoting democracy as a mere waste of money. As western funds to support 
democracy begin to decline, the rug will be pulled out from underneath those 
brave pro-democracy reformers who are counting on us in the dark authoritarian 
realms of the world.

Bring back ideology: Fukuyama's 'end of history' 25 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/21/bring-back-ideology-fukuyama-end-history-25-years-on>
Not only that, Trump is sending a clear authoritarian signal to the rest of 
the world. Last Decemberhe said 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/donald-trump-praises-saddam-hussein-s-approach-terrorism-again-n604411>
 of theworst chemical attack by a state on civilians 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/march/16/newsid_4304000/4304853.stm>
 in modern history, which left up to 10,000 Kurds dead: “Saddam Hussein throws 
a little gas, everyone goes crazy. ‘Oh he’s using gas!’” When Trump normalises 
state atrocities orsuggests that Putin is a normatively good leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/27/trump-putin-agent-fan-president-russia>
 simply because he is strong, that signal is not lost on the 100-plus countries 
that are stalled somewhere between dictatorship and democracy. Those leaders 
take their cue for what is acceptable – and what will elicit diplomatic 
consequences – from the White House. If they have been listening to Trump, 
despotic leaders will begin to believe that they can get away with quite a bit 
more brutality.

Moreover, some African despots – like Joseph Kabila 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/02/joseph-kabila-reluctance-cede-power-democratic-republic-congo-brink>
 of the DRC – have hinted that they just needed to cling to power long enough 
to see President Obama replaced by Trump. In Kabila’s view, Trump won’t care 
too much if an African leader violates term limits and overstays his time in 
power. Sadly, Kabila probably is right.

Others, like President Duterte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/08/philippines-duterte-harry-the-would-be-president-accused-of-using-death-squads>
 of the Philippines, are already crowing publicly about the new illiberal order 
in the United States. Duterte has been referred to as a Filipino Trump for his 
populism, but his regime has already committed roughly 3,000 extrajudicial 
killings under the pretext of a crackdown on drugs. Duterte was one of the 
first to congratulate Trump on his “well-deserved victory”. When Duterte was 
asked whether the two men would get along, he simply replied that he thought 
they would because “he [Trump] has not meddled in the human rights”.

And even if none of these dire predictions comes to pass, it is clear that 
there are sharp differences between Washington and Europe, and cracks between 
London and Brussels. That alone is good news forVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>. And Syria’s President Assad 
hailed Trump’s victory as “promising” and called him a “natural ally”. He is 
right to celebrate, because it is obvious that working closely with Russia 
requires selling out the principles of liberal democracy and human rights.

And that, unfortunately, is where Trump’s Art of the Deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/11/donald-trumps-the-art-of-the-deal-the-movie-review-johnny-depp-funny-or-die-adam-mckay>
 diplomacy may be most perilous. When push comes to shove, democracy is a 
bargaining chip that Trump is all too willing to sacrifice. The darkest decade 
for global democracy since the end of the cold war is about to get a lot darker.
 