
J Mascis and Murph, the nuclei of Dinosaur Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/dinosaurjr>, slouch in their swivel chairs 
and reiterate their gladness that their next record is coming out on an 
internationally respected major label.

“It’s more like a solid foundation,” sighs J. “You know you’re going to be 
there for a little while; they have money which they’ll probably give to you 
and they won’t hold out on you. The people I’m dealing with now seem a lot more 
honourable.”

J Mascis review – grunge godfather discovers his acoustic side
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/09/j-mascis-review-scala-london-dinosaur-jr>
“It’s more diverse, too,” adds Murph, optimistically. “I like the fact that 
people in this office could be listening to something mainstream along with us. 
Any diversity appeals to me; I don’t like segregating things. With the 
independents it was hard because they were just into independent things, but 
we’ve always listened to all kinds of music. It’s nice to be in a situation 
where all kinds of music are coming in.”

“And Bugs Bunny!” chips in J.

In case you haven’t heard, Dinosaur Jr – one of the world’s top “underground” 
rock acts – have kissed goodbye to the independent record scene and are now 
signed up with Warners. Their first single, a remix of their 7in for Sub Pop 
entitled The Wagon, should be out on the Blanco Y Negro label as you read this, 
and their sublime new Green Mind album is scheduled for early March. Things are 
finally cooking for J and Murph; all they have to do now is find a bass player 
to replace the departed Donna – and get the video for The Wagon in the can. 
They’ve settled on shooting a “claymation”, a complicated animation process 
that involves much modelling of gooey gunk into the boys’ carefully plotted 
story line.

“It doesn’t have a story,” grins J.

“None of our songs do,” explains Murph, patiently.

“This new stuff is interesting because I only play on three of the tracks and 
J does everything else: all of the instruments and everything. So it’s 
definitely unique because that hasn’t been done before.” Does this imply that 
Green Mind is the product of a couple rather than a fully-fledged working band? 
“We’re just like this as a basis,” explains J. “We’ve tried out a lot of 
different components and we always come back to this conclusion.” While the 
search is on for a suitable bass player, an upcoming tour with no less a deity 
than Jane’s Addiction is on the cards, so someone has to be found.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxbNmTyDhIas&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxbNmTyDhIas>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxbNmTyDhIas&media=>
Why is it such a headache to find a bassist?

“I don’t know; I guess the bass is such a stupid instrument.”

Why stupid? “Not many people are drawn to play the bass. A lot of people have 
the urge to bang drums and guitars, to get out in front of the girls to play 
solos, but who wants to play bass?”

“And it’s really hard,” adds Murph with a touch of seriousness, “to find 
someone who can give you something that’s both emotional and musical; it’s very 
hard to find that combination.”

“Yeah,” agrees J. “We just want somebody that’s got their own personality, 
their own identity and can sing … that would be good.”

To date, Dinosaur Jr have had two permanent bass players. When the band formed 
as Dinosaur, J switched to guitar from drums, in order to make way for Murph 
(whose previous drumming job had been with a hardcore band called All White 
Jury). At that time their bass player was one Lou Barlow, and together the trio 
recorded a couple of albums (most notably the wonderful You’re Living All Over 
Me) before changing their name at the request of a hippy band, who’d been doing 
the gig circuit as the Dinosaurs.

Born again as Dinosaur Jr, they delivered the record that scored them instant 
recognition – the still astonishingly sonic Freak Scene 45. Soon after came the 
rather muddled Bug, and a trip to Europe which, when completed, saw the 
departure of Lou (apparently not too amicably) to continue work with his 
Sebadoh band project. Lou’s departure left a hole that was only partly plugged 
by ex-Screaming Trees bassist Donna, who hammered away magnificently on the 
Dino’s version of the Cure’s Just Like Heaven – a version that received the 
thumbs-up seal of approval even from weird Uncle Bob himself.

Alas, Donna’s career as bass player for Dinosaur Jr was brief and, for a time, 
it looked as though the band were in limbo. J formed Dinosaur Jr Mark II during 
1990 with Don Fleming and Jay Spiegel to record The Wagon for Sub Pop, a 
successful experiment that was abandoned soon after the record hit the stores.

Now it’s back to J and Murph. “We were hanging out with these guys from 
Manchester and J knew all these Oi! lyrics. They were really taken aback,” 
laughs Murph. “They said, ‘How come you know all this stuff? This ishardcore 
skinhead music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/mar/18/oi-cockney-rejects-garry-bushell-interview>
!’” That’s what I get for asking Dinosaur Jr (in a roundabout way) what kind of 
music they listened to in their misspent youth. “I got this one magazine that 
Sounds put out called Punk’s Not Dead! I got that and I thought, yeah! All 
right! There was a Punk Top 100 chart in it and I had every record,” admits J 
proudly.

According to Murph, it was at about this time that J adopted the skinhead 
look, to the astonishment of his classmates. “People had no clue,” laughs Murph 
at the memory of J’s shaved skull and Doc Martens. “They were just like … Where 
is he getting this from?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDqIXcMFbNUk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDqIXcMFbNUk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDqIXcMFbNUk&media=>
“It was just punk music,” explains J about his Oi! fixation, “but it was a 
little faster. Hardcore was coming in, too, and that appealed to me, because 
the stuff they were singing about – little kids’ problems with titles like My 
Cereal’s Getting Soggy – I could relate to. I used to tell people about the 
bands I liked, the 4-Skins or something, and they’d say: ‘Oh, you’re fascist!’ 
I didn’t know anything about them; it was just a punk rock record. You don’t 
know anything about the British National Front, you just see bald guys looking 
mean.”

You knew all the bad groups, J. “Yeah,” he grins wickedly. “I just picked up 
Skrewdriver’s White Power single. You’ve gotta stare Satan in the face, y’know. 
You can’t let him scare you.” At the same time Murph was listening to hardcore 
and, more enthusiastically, to 70s jazz fusion music. “In high school I was 
listening to some punk but I was also into the Mahavishnu Orchestra, Chick 
Corea and Billy Cobham. I always thought those two were real busy sounding. 
I’ve seen Billy Cobham four times in the last year and I’m always trying to get 
beats down from his playing. Why I liked hardcore and jazz fusion was because 
both were pushing it to the brink. When I heard hardcore I heard the drums and 
started realising it would be really hard to play that fast. That’s when I 
started getting into it. It became a real challenge to see whether I could 
achieve that.”

Murph remembers another high-school musical influence, which involved J 
playing drums for a jazz workshop project. “They used to have a lot of times 
when they’d play in the cafeteria while we were eating lunch. They’d be playing 
a jazz standard where everybody would take a solo, and J would just totally 
break out into something wild. I was really into that, because it was so 
totally unexpected. I would often skip classes to hear the jazz workshop 
playing in the cafeteria.”

J has fond and funny musical memories of his college days: “I was in a 
percussion ensemble at college and that was one of the most intense things I’ve 
been involved in. We did a concert where we had a narrator and this big 
backdrop of a weird face. It was this whole sick poem about a guy in a cemetery 
called The Night of the Bocard. This guy was reading a really scary story and 
we’re just banging away. My dad would come to those gigs and my mom would tell 
me later: ‘Dad said no one else in the band had their hair sticking up like 
that.’ At one show this really sick guy, who was really pissed off, came up to 
me and said, ‘Why don’t you comb your hair or something? This is a concert’. I 
said, ‘Hey man, I did comb my hair!’, and he goes – would you believe? – ‘Like 
a white person!’ … That was really weird.”

J mostly concentrates his energy on playing guitar with Dinosaur Jr, though he 
can still be heard playing drums on records like the debut EP of Gobblehoof, a 
band which has roots in Dinosaur Jr’s early Amherst years. Given the choice, 
though, which instrument does J most enjoy playing?

“Drums are much better,” he decides, immediately. Do you treat your guitar 
like a drum? “That’s the way I try to play it,” insists J. “I used to get lot 
of amps and play really loud so at least it felt like something. You can’t get 
any dynamics with it, that’s why I like to have pedals to make it louder.

“The electronics bother me too – having to plug it in and having things 
failing all the time. If you play it really loud through one cabinet and one 
really loud amp it pushes out a jet of air that hits you in the back of your 
legs. I wear earplugs because it’s unbelievably loud, but at least that way I 
can feel it.”

As Green Mind 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/albumreviews/green-mind-19910627> will 
demonstrate, this latest cycle in Dinosaur Jr’s rockin’ evolution is their most 
adventurous yet. J and Murph have climbed back on the wagon and are rolling 
your way.

You’ll feel it when it hits you.
 