
With 1.1m cars a day, the 35 kilometres of the Boulevard Périphérique are the 
busiest inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Paris’s inner 
ring road runs around the French capital, following the city’s administrative 
boundaries almost perfectly and connecting the city proper and itsbanlieues, or 
suburbs.

Since its inauguration in 1973, the périphérique – measuring 40 to 60 metres 
wide and composed of up to six lanes – has been a concrete belt around Paris, 
making all too real what should have remained an invisible administrative 
boundary. This has reinforced the insurmountable contrast between Paris and the 
city’s adjacent municipalities, adding a physical dimension to political 
borders and separating theParisiens from the rest of France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.

Architect Richard Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/richard-rogers>, who designed a 
strategic plan for the city <http://www.rsh-p.com/projects/grand-paris/#>, 
said: “I don’t know of any other city where the heart is as detached from its 
limbs.” A number ofstudies 
<http://www.apur.org/note/evolution-voies-rapides-autoroutes-urbaines-grand-paris-etude-trame-viaire-coeur-agglomeration?nocache=1>
 published this year byAtelier Parisien d’Urbanisme 
<http://www.apur.org/sites/default/files/documents/voies_rapides_autoroutes_urbaines_trame_viaire.pdf>
, the public agency in charge of urban studies, qualify almost the wholepériphé
rique as a “challenge for urban integration”.

As a result, on the first day of 2016, the Métropole du Grand Paris will come 
to life. The MGP aims to deliver a “more integrated development” toParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> and its suburbs, by creating a new 
metropolitan governance.


Paris’s boundaries ​​are defined by its fortifications – displaying a rather 
medieval approach to city planning

The City of Paris and its 2.3 million inhabitants will be merged with its 
petite couronne (“small crown”, or inner suburbs), adding about 4.6 million 
residents and an extra 128 local authorities to form a new metropolitan 
institution: the Grand Paris.

Where New York, Berlin and London have successfully created metropolitan 
governments, can Paris overcome its inner boundary, and convince inhabitants of 
Paris proper and the suburbs that they are allParisiens? And to achieve this, 
should it sacrifice thepériphérique, the city’s most prominent physical and 
symbolic boundary?

The roots of the division between Paris and its suburbs run much deeper than 
the building of the road in the 1970s. To understand the significance, we need 
to go back to the fall of Napoleon. In March 1814, the Battle of Paris saw the 
defeat of the Napoleonic troops and Prussian forces storming the capital city.

Consequently, King Louis-Philippe and French prime minister Adolphe Thiers 
decided to transform Paris into a fortress and protect the city from any 
further intrusion, ordering construction of city fortifications in the 1840s. 
Completed in 1844, the message was clear: Paris’s boundaries were to be defined 
by its fortifications – displaying a rather medieval approach to city planning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435142827196%2Fa26bb22c-0eae-4734-b63d-70b9814783ee-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris's%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city's%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris%27s%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city%27s%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435142827196%2Fa26bb22c-0eae-4734-b63d-70b9814783ee-1020x612.jpeg>
 Informal settlements mushroomed within the fortifications’ no-building zone. 
Photograph: gallicalabs.bnf.fr 
Consisting of a thick wall, 10 metres high and protected by a wide ditch, the 
ramparts were also granted a 250-metre wide non-building zone. Yet, as the 
fortifications lost military relevance and became obsolete only decades after 
their completion,informal settlements mushroomed 
<http://cediasbibli.org/opac/index.php?lvl=notice_display&id=73628> within the 
“Zone”, housing the Parisian proletariat.

The destruction of the fortifications was in the pipeline as early as 1882, 
but only started in 1919 and was completed in 1929. To put this into 
perspective, Berlin destroyed its last fortifications in 1740; London in 1760.

In Paris, the defunct fortifications were replaced at the beginning of the 
1930s by a grand scheme of social housing. Yet the Zone remained untouched, 
full ofzonards (still a deprecating term for someone from a deprived area who 
loiters suspiciously) and their insalubrious housing.

While the idea of an orbital road around Paris emerged in the 1920s, it was 
only in 1956 that the construction of thepériphérique started. It addressed the 
increase in inner-city car use, and similar schemes were designedin cities 
around the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/08/congestion-roads-hell-urban-motorways>
. The zone was cleared, its inhabitants evicted andthe périphérique was 
inaugurated in 1973 
<http://www.ina.fr/video/caf97513012/pierre-messmer-inaugure-le-boulevard-peripherique-video.html>
, after 17 years of building work.

Cutting across the city, the périphérique’s viaduct structure is omnipresent 
in the working-class neighbourhoods of north-east Paris, but in well-off areas 
– such as Vincennes in the east, and Boulogne in the west – it discreetly 
passes underground as a tunnel. In the main, though, a formidable ring of 
concrete now stands where fortifications once did. London has its green belt, 
Paris its concrete one.

A formidable ring of concrete stands where fortifications once did. London has 
its green belt, Paris its concrete one
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435143329970%2F1775cdde-8b64-4ca5-a68a-f9ec75431b51-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris's%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city's%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris%27s%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city%27s%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435143329970%2F1775cdde-8b64-4ca5-a68a-f9ec75431b51-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The construction of the périphérique in 1956 addressed the increase in 
inner-city car use. Photograph: Justinien Tribillon 
To explore the physical boundary created by the road, we must meet the people 
who have a direct relationship with it. All along thepériphérique, the 
entrances to Paris are still namedportes, as they are located where the 
fortifications’ gates used to stand. Walking from Porte Dorée to Porte de la 
Chapelle, I encounter various types of transition between Paris and itsbanlieues
. In some places, the transition is smooth and painless: the tunnel of thepériph
érique allows Parisians to easily access the Bois de Vincennes – one of Paris’s 
“green lungs”, which sits outside the boundary but is under Paris’s 
jurisdiction. Where Paris connects with the well-off cities of Saint-Mandé and 
Vincennes, several effortless transitions are in place, allowing residents to 
move easily from one area to another, as resident Dorothée confirms.

In 1932, Dorothée’s in-laws moved into a housing block built in the place of 
the fortifications; she moved into the flat herself in 1969, as thepériphérique 
was being completed. Living on the edge of the 12th arrondissement, she is 
within walking distance of Saint-Mandé and Vincennes. “In other spots, such as 
Porte de Montreuil, it’s really different – there is a real break between Paris 
and [those suburbs]. But here, we are well connected. There’s a real 
continuity.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435072981127%2Fbb148eaa-b8a6-4fde-ae7f-dbb40e0ff9cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris's%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city's%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris%27s%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city%27s%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435072981127%2Fbb148eaa-b8a6-4fde-ae7f-dbb40e0ff9cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The compact and humble houses evoke rural France 
The Porte de Montreuil, a few kilometres up the périphérique, offers a starker 
contrast between Paris and the adjacent environs of Montreuil and Bagnolet. The 
roundabout, which connects the area with thepériphérique by means of four 
access roads, is empty of almost any pedestrian or bicycle – and, although the 
Rue d’Avron on the Paris side and the Rue de Paris on Montreuil’s side are very 
busy thoroughfares, they do not connect.


Bénédicte, a Montreuil resident, describes the périphérique as a “ditch 
between Montreuil and Paris”. While thepériphérique running below the 
roundabout leaves a wide void between the two areas, how it is built – its 
height, architectural style and condition – on each side of the road reveals 
another level of divide.

In Montreuil and Bagnolet, alongside glossy new office buildings sits the 
traditional suburban housing stock: 19th-century houses that are one or two 
storeys high. With its compact and humble houses, sometimes left in ruins, the 
streetscape evokes rural France, not the core of the wealthiest region in 
Europe. An unlikely vision when you consider that Paris is among the biggest 
property markets in the world.

Here you might be only 60 metres away from the capital, but you are not in 
Paris any more. Cross thepériphérique and the value of properties drops by half 
<http://www.meilleursagents.com/prix-immobilier/ile-de-france/>, from €6,300 
per sq metre in the 20th arrondissement to €3,800 per sq metre in Bagnolet. Yet 
it has good transport connections, with line 3 of the Métro stopping here, 
plenty of buses to Paris, and docking stations for both Autolib’ and Vélib’: 
the self-service car- and bicycle-sharing systems launched by the City of Paris.

As I continue my orbital journey along the périphérique, the divide between 
Paris and itsbanlieues changes many times. A few hundred metres further, I have 
to face the Bagnolet Interchange – Paris’s very own spaghetti junction. A few 
kilometres later sits the Porte des Lilas: here the road has recently been 
covered, creating a whole new district and a new way to move between Paris and 
the adjacent town. A couple of kilometres later, arriving at Porte de la 
Chapelle, the contrast is even more pronounced.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435074623017%2Fdc1537e1-e3d8-4ed3-8366-edb0a6afa5ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris's%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city's%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris%27s%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city%27s%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435074623017%2Fdc1537e1-e3d8-4ed3-8366-edb0a6afa5ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Parc de la Butte-du-Chapeau-Rouge was recently resdesigned, but the divide 
remains. Photograph: Justinien Tribillon 
But there is not only negative feeling for the périphérique. Carla, a resident 
of the 19th arrondissement of Paris who works in the nearby town of Colombes, 
and her colleague Aude, who lives in Saint-Ouen right outside thepériphérique, 
explain that “not all the points of passage on thepériphérique are the same. 
For instance, at the Porte Montmartre there are always people, even in the 
middle of the night. It is always full.”

I am very aware of the Paris-banlieue divide, probably because I grew up here: 
that’s a very Parisian attitude

While some parts of the périphérique remain a hostile environment for 
pedestrians, it seems the residents close to the road have found ways to cope 
with the concrete beast. Sophie, who lives on the edge of Paris’s 18th 
arrondissement, says “the break between Paris and thebanlieue is visible. It’s 
physical. For instance, the cycle path between Paris and Saint-Ouen stops at 
the Porte Montmatre, where thepériphérique starts.” Yet, Anis, from the 17th 
arrondissement, says: “Thepériphérique, it’s like a rampart, like a wall – but 
more or less invisible.” Bénédicte from Montreuil adds: “Thepériphérique is 
both a connector and the separation between Paris and its suburbs.”

Talking with the residents, I realise there is much more to this than just an 
urban design issue. While the road and its 1.1m daily cars does not help, the 
reconnection between the city’s heart and its limbs might require more subtle 
intervention. Perhaps the last wall that will bring down the “invisible 
rampart” is in fact a psychological one.

Marko, from Clichy, and Bénédicte believe the banlieue is a myth. Bénédicte, 
who moved to Montreuil in the 1990s after a lifetime in central Paris, adds 
that Montreuil was a “compromise”: “My husband [who did not grow up in Paris] 
had no prejudice about the suburbs. Meanwhile,I am very aware of the Paris/
banlieue divide, probably because I grew up here: that’s a very Parisian 
attitude.”

Marko and Anis were interviewed in 2013 by citizen collective and NGO Métropop’
 <http://metropop.org/> for its project titled My Neighbourhood, My Heritage. 
Antoine Le Pessec, its president, tells me Métropop’s objective is to question 
representations of thebanlieues, to work on social prejudice, and to accompany 
Parisians and suburbanites towards founding a genuine Grand Paris. Beyond 
redesigning political institutions or thepériphérique, the real challenge is in 
people’s heads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435145769015%2F9d44b796-2813-4d60-a40e-cc81ab29ccdc-2060x816.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris's%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city's%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dirty%20boulevard%3A%20why%20Paris%27s%20ring%20road%20is%20a%20major%20block%20on%20the%20city%27s%20grand%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fring-road-paris-peripherique-suburbs-banlieue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435145769015%2F9d44b796-2813-4d60-a40e-cc81ab29ccdc-2060x816.jpeg>
 ‘Something needs to be done to undermine the overwhelming presence of the ring 
road.’ Photograph: Justinien Tribillon 
From 1 January 2016, Bagnolet, Montreuil, Vincennes, Saint-Ouen, Colombes, 
Paris and more than 100 other municipalities will form the Métropole du Grand 
Paris. For the first time since 1860, we will witness an institutional attempt 
to move Paris beyond its own boundaries, beyond thepériphérique. Yet, in six 
months’ time, the road will still be standing, untouched and unchallenged.

Projects – of uneven quality and relevance – to get rid of the périphérique 
have regularly appeared in the media since the 1990s. Some parts have been 
covered, making the transition between Paris and the adjacent municipalities 
smoother. Yet a total coverage of thepériphérique has never been seriously 
contemplated – it would be immensely costly – and nor has its destruction, as 
the city struggles with managing its car traffic.

America wakes up to walking: 'Think of it as a patriotic duty'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/22/america-wakes-up-to-walking-us-pedestrianisation>
Yet plans announced in May by Mayor Hidalgo to pedestrianise inner-city urban 
motorways along the Seine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/06/paris-mayor-plans-to-pedestrianise-seine-anne-hidalgo>
 were, until recently, seen as ludicrous and unrealistic. They follow up on a 
similar successful scheme implemented by formerMayor Bertrand Delanoë 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jan/06/france.jasonburke> in 2013, 
which was met at the time with fierce opposition from pro-car lobbies. Why 
can’t the challenges of thepériphérique be met with similar panache? 

This iconic road remains an eyesore, as well as a major health hazard for the 
hundreds of thousands who live close to it. And, surely, dedicating hundreds of 
hectares in a central location to a single road is a lost opportunity in a city 
where land is scarce.

The main divide between Parisiens and banlieusards, however, remains a 
psychological one. While redesigning and reinventing thepériphérique is 
certainly part of the solution, it is Parisians’ perceptions that must change 
if the ghosts of Paris’s historic fortifications are to be eradicated for good.

 * Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion  