
Arriving at Liverpool Street station on a quiet afternoon, Ben Holt, who has 
cerebral palsy, found that only one platform offered a step-free route out, and 
he was on the wrong side of the tracks. “With no one around to help me out, I 
had to help myself,” he said. Risking a hefty fine, he stopped the escalator in 
order to walk up it, sweet-talking the station staff who were waiting at the 
top.

Ben will soon be boarding the Tube once again to tackle escalators, stairs and 
more, in an attempt to complete theTube Challenge 
<http://www.thetubechallenge.com/> by visiting all London Underground stations 
in a single run.

Travelling through 270 stations and 26 London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> boroughs would be a mammoth task for 
anyone - but now imagine that only 24% of those stations are accessible to you. 
That is precisely what Ben will be thinking when he’s speeding through the 
250-mile network, stopping at each station to take a photograph, in an attempt 
to break the current 16 hour, 20 minute record. Regardless of whether or not he 
beats that time, if Ben makes it all the way to his final stop at Epping 
station, he will have set a record as the first disabled person to complete the 
challenge.
 Ben Holt aims to travel through 270 stations - less than a quarter of which 
are fully accessible 
London’s 151-year old transport network provides mobility, independence and 
freedom to 1.2 billion passengers a year, but still often fails many disabled 
and elderly travellers through outdated and inaccessible designs, such as 
stairs, narrow doorways and wide gaps between the train and the platform. This 
lack of mobility withinTransport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for 
London’s (TfL) system is not simply a matter of inconvenience; mobility is 
access to education, employment, leisure and an independent lifestyle.

With changes to disability benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/19/benefits-disability-cuts-welfare-changes>
 alongside austerity cuts to TfL, campaigners feel that the city is losing 
sight of its commitment to inclusive transport, which it boldly vowed to 
deliver alongside the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games. Earlier this month, 
Paralympian Hannah Cockroft challenged London mayor Boris Johnson to spend one 
working day travelling by wheelchair on the Underground network -he refused 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/boris-johnson-refuses-to-accept-london-wheelchair-challenge-from-hannah-cockroft-9773382.html>
.

While travel apps like CityMapper currently lack the technology to cater for 
varying accessibility needs, TfL’saccessibility guides 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/forms/12387.aspx> provide a solution to the subterranean 
maze. Until 1993, fire regulations prohibited the use of wheelchairs on the 
underground, and althoughretrofitting has begun 
<https://www.tfl.gov.uk/travel-information/improvements-and-projects/step-free-access>
, slow progress leaves many stations stuck in limbo. Not every hurdle can be 
anticipated, and frustrations are faced every day by disabled travellers across 
the city - one case is highlighted in this‘race the tube’ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hF2O3pweqSU> challenge.

In 2010, a major step-free upgrade of six Tube stations was scrapped due to 
“pressures on TfL’s finances”, and the£20m already invested 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/london/8441638.stm> in the project was 
wasted. This came as a serious blow in light of a commitment made in 2006, when 
TfL promised to makeone third of Tube stations step-free by 2013 
<https://www.tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2006/march/one-third-of-tube-stations-to-be-accessible-by-2013>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F29%2Fdisabled-man-tube-challenge-london-underground-accessibility%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F28%2F1414506019683%2Fc8f1df6e-82de-410e-975a-96637f1770c7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disabled%20man%20takes%20on%20Tube%20challenge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F29%2Fdisabled-man-tube-challenge-london-underground-accessibility%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disabled%20man%20takes%20on%20Tube%20challenge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Foct%2F29%2Fdisabled-man-tube-challenge-london-underground-accessibility%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F28%2F1414506019683%2Fc8f1df6e-82de-410e-975a-96637f1770c7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A staircase at Stanmore Tube station. Photograph: Keith Erskine/Alamy 
A year on from the promised delivery date and only 66 stations are ‘step-free’ 
- with around half of those providing fully level access from the street to the 
train, and many still have tomind the 30cm gap 
<http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/step-free-tube-guide-map.pdf> 
into the carriage. Since the 2006 pledge was abandoned, TfL now promises to 
make “at least 28 more” Tube stations step-free by 2024. If this target is met, 
disabled and elderly travellers will still have to wait another 10 years before 
they have access to one in three stations on the Underground network.

Transport for All (TfA) <http://www.transportforall.org.uk/> director Faryal 
Velmi acknowledges that the journey to an accessible Underground system is a 
long one - especially when it involves upgrading a piece of Victorian 
infrastructure - but when building new stations, accessibility should take 
centre stage. In 2019, the long-awaited Crossrail project is due to open, but 
up until a few weeks ago, seven of the 38 stations on the route were set to 
remain inaccessible.

“You can’t build something costing £15bn without making it fully accessible to 
all”, says Velmi, who organised a day of action last year that brought 150 
campaigners together outside Crossrail’s Canary Wharf offices.

TfA estimated that it would cost 0.2% of the £15bn budget to make those seven 
stations step free, and Crossraildeclared a completely accessible 
<http://www.crossrail.co.uk/news/articles/mayor-and-transport-for-london-announce-step-free-access-for-all-london-crossrail-stations>
 network earlier this month. Just one day after TfA’s victory,the mayor 
announced 
<https://www.tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2014/october/-75m-fund-to-take-step-free-access-to-next-level>
 a £75m step-free improvement fund, promising to install lifts at “around a 
dozen” stations over the next decade.

As the network improves and becomes more accessible to passengers, vast areas 
of the city once unreachable by the Tube open up, increasing mobility and 
giving disabled and elderly travellers the freedom that is taken for granted by 
many commuters every day. Intermediary improvements, likemanual boarding ramps 
<https://www.tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2012/september/manual-boarding-ramps-to-be-retained-at-key-tube-stations-after-the-games>
, bridge the gap between transport immobility and independence while travellers 
hold out for a fully accessible system.

In the meantime, Ben is gearing up to face all 270 stations in order to 
highlight the Underground’s inefficiencies and to set the disabled world 
record. He hopes that in taking on the challenge he will change people’s 
perceptions of disabled travellers, and will inspire confidence and 
independence in those who feel let down by TfL.

“This is my day and I’m not going to give up,” said Ben. “We are capable of 
doing anything we want, even if it’s going to take more effort. I’m tired of 
feeling like a nuisance when I ask for help on the Tube.”
 