
A woman’s refusal to move a pushchair with a sleeping baby from a bay on a bus 
used by wheelchair passengers – causing a disabled man to have to leave the 
vehicle – is at the centre of a test-case legal battle in the court of appeal.

Three appeal judges are being asked by a bus operator to decide whether 
wheelchair passengers should have priority over all other passengers to use the 
space as a matter of law.

The judges heard that First Bus Group had a policy of “requesting but not 
requiring” non-disabled travellers, including those with babies and pushchairs, 
to vacate the space if it was needed by a wheelchair user.

But a judge at Leeds county court ruled that the policy was discriminatory and 
in breach of a duty under theEquality Act 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/equality-act-2010> to make reasonable 
adjustments for disabled people.

The ruling was made in the case of Doug Paulley, a wheelchair user from 
Wetherby, West Yorkshire, who was denied access to the bus after the woman with 
the sleeping baby refused to move.

Paulley, 36, won £5,500 in damages against First Group, after the judge, 
Recorder Paul Isaacs, declared that the company should have taken measures to 
ensure he was not at a disadvantage when he tried to get on the bus.

The judge said it had been parliament’s decision to “give protection to 
disabled wheelchair users and not to non-disabled mothers with buggies”.

On Tuesday Martin Chamberlain QC, for First Group, appealed against that 
ruling. He said it was an example of a long-running problem on public transport 
that had produced conflicting court decisions and bus operators were now 
seeking legal clarity.

First Group had appealed because of their need to know “what they are legally 
required to do and how”, he said.

“It will be obvious that [First Group] are much more concerned with the wider 
effect of Mr Recorder Isaac’s judgment on its policies, customers and staff 
than on the relatively modest [damages] sum awarded in this case,” Chamberlain 
said. The case also affected “the expectation of disabled people to be able to 
access public transport”.

Chamberlain told the appeal judges, Lady Justice Arden, Lord Justice Lewison 
and Lord Justice Underhill: “The problem with the adjustment required by the 
recorder in this case is that it requires a rigid policy of priority for 
wheelchair users over all other passengers, irrespective of their legitimate 
need to use the same space.”

The requirement “unnecessarily encourages confrontation and is unenforceable”, 
he said, and it was not in the interests of disabled people or passengers in 
general.

Paulley’s defence of the Isaacs decision is being funded by the Equality and 
Human Rights Commission.
 