
Civil war. Climate change. Starvation. Natural disaster. Terrorism. The causes 
are many, the results are grimly familiar for tens of millions of people 
displaced from their homes around the world and forced to find shelter and food 
often thousands of miles away, in unfamiliar, sometimes unwelcoming regions. 
Such is the prospect faced by communities around the globe in 2017, as this 
series of remarkable photographs for theInternational Organisation for Migration
 <http://www.iom.int/> (IOM) – the United Nations agency – by its staff 
photographer, Muse Mohammed.


Images of the Displaced
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/dec/31/the-displaced> 
Data collected by the UN reveal that there are 65.3 million displaced people 
worldwide, matching the population of the UK. Most are displaced within their 
country’s borders and 21.3 million fled as refugees.

The UN said in a major report that wars and persecution have driven more 
people from their homes – some to locations within their own countries, others 
across borders to communities that may reject them – than at any time since its 
records began. They are fleeing within and from countries as far apart asPapua 
New Guinea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea>, Yemen, South 
Sudan, Nigeria and Cambodia. Many are children: in 2015, children made up 51% 
of the world’s refugees. Many were separated from their parents or travelling 
alone.

The average length of displacement is just over 10 years and for those 
displaced by conflict, the figure rises to 17 years. Whether they build 
makeshift homes or find themselves living with host communities, these living 
arrangements almost never serve as a long-term solution and were never meant to 
do so. The UN report noted that, on average, 24 people were forced to flee 
during each minute in 2015. This figure is four times more than that of decade 
earlier, when six people fled during every 60 seconds.

“Millions of men, women and children have been uprooted and forced to move as 
the world faces an unprecedented series of simultaneous, complex and protracted 
crises along an ‘arc of instability’ extending from the western bulge ofAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> to the Himalayas,” the report made 
clear.

“Nowhere has this been felt as acutely as in the Mediterranean,” said the 
IOM’s director general, William Lacy Swing. “Last week the IOM recorded, on 23 
December, the year’s 5,000th migrant death by drowning in the Mediterranean.”

Papua New Guinea


 Many islanders suffer from hunger and a lack of clean water as a result of 
the climatic effects of the El Niño  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/05/what-is-el-nino>weather 
system. In 2017, the harvest is not expected to yield crops until the end of 
the year, and limited access to clean drinking water, irrigation and storage 
facilities, as well as hazards such as droughts, floods and landslides, are 
expected to disrupt the community’s recovery efforts.The Pacific nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> is also peppered by dozens 
of small-scale, local conflicts over land ownership, tribal differences and 
compensation, all adding to a sense of vulnerability. Despite these challenges, 
Mike and Alice (main image, top) built themselves a house in Killerton several 
years ago. They were displaced when a flood tore through their village in 2007. 
Before the waters could reach them, Mike and a few villagers managed to saw his 
home in half and move it out of the path before repairing it again. They 
continue to live in the same house.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b214542a028890c5630c6da5bc0c750935a9ea7%2F0_191_5760_3649%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b214542a028890c5630c6da5bc0c750935a9ea7%2F0_191_5760_3649%2F5760.jpg>
 A woman and her child pose in front of their house made of cardboard in the 
Farm Centre Internally Displaced Persons camp in Maiduguri, Nigeria. 
Photograph: Muse Mohammed/IOM 
Nigeria

 In the Lake Chad basin area of northern Nigeria, 3.6 million people are 
directly affected by the insurgency by the Islamist terror groupBoko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram>. Attacks and regional insecurity 
have displaced 2.6 million, both internally and into neighbouring countries. An 
additional 1 million refugees have been able to return home since August 2015. 
But many remain displaced, living in camps and host communities across the 
region. Borno State hosts the most internally displaced persons (IDPs), along 
with Adamawa and Yobe; more than half of them are children. The need for food 
is increasing along with non-food items, such as blankets. A woman and her 
child (above) pose in front of their house made of cardboard in the Farm Centre 
IDP camp in Maiduguri. Constructed using any materials available, the shelter 
will be unable to withstand the rainy season. Like many IDPs, this family fled 
their village in north-east Nigeria because of Boko Haram attacks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e6f4f788acc6dd0e91ef77d881f774e877bd8c%2F0_0_5294_3529%2F5294.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6e6f4f788acc6dd0e91ef77d881f774e877bd8c%2F0_0_5294_3529%2F5294.jpg>
 Having fled the war in Syria, Zonan and Mustapha’s family live in a former 
stable for horses which they share with other families in Salinufra, Turkey. 
Photograph: Muse Mohammed/IOM 
Syria

Five years into the civil war in Syria more than 13.5 million people are still 
in need of humanitarian assistance inside the country, including 6.5 million 
internally displaced, the biggest IDP population in the world. In addition, 4.2 
million Syrians have taken refuge in the five neighbouring countries of 
Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Iraq and Egypt. The pace of displacement has remained 
relentless, despite various attempts at ceasefires. Well over 1.2 million 
people have been displaced so far this year, many for the second or third time. 
According to recent UN figures, 2.7 million Syrian refugees have sought safety 
in Turkey. Among them are Zonan and Mustapha’s family who live in a former 
stable in Salinufra, Turkey (above). Each family in the stable has a single 
stall intended for one horse with no heating, water, or electricity. Originally 
from Kobane over the border, the families fled to escape the war inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. They have lived in the stable for 
six months.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0621e48a24674aa1d6cc3bf75ef71e2ee1731b21%2F0_0_5535_3690%2F5535.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0621e48a24674aa1d6cc3bf75ef71e2ee1731b21%2F0_0_5535_3690%2F5535.jpg>
 Tin and Naing win live on a small boat which they travel throughout the Delta 
region in Myanmar. Photograph: Muse Mohammed/IOM 
Myanmar

While tens of thousands of Rohingya Muslims have fled to neighbouring 
countries to escape military operations that have left many dead, there are 
many other long-standing and complex reasons for migration. Limited livelihoods 
and poor socio-economic conditions have forced many to leave, with better wages 
and a demand for less skilled labourers in neighbouring countries acting as 
pull-factors. Heavy monsoon rains in June, July and August of 2015, followed by
cyclone Komen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/03/lethal-floods-continue-to-engulf-south-asia-burma-india>
, caused extensive floods and landslides in several parts of Myanmar, affecting 
1.6 million people, with 333,000 displaced. Tin and Naing Win (above) live on a 
small boat in the delta region. The former gardeners once had a home on land 
but it was destroyed when a cyclone ravaged the area in 2008. Since then, they 
have not been able to afford to rebuild their home so they live on a small boat 
from which they sell fish paste to make a living.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc27848214266bfaedd76bf04c0756c1bbcd39c03%2F0_0_5321_3548%2F5321.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc27848214266bfaedd76bf04c0756c1bbcd39c03%2F0_0_5321_3548%2F5321.jpg>
 Roumkun lives with her daughter and grandchildren in a shelter built by her 
son in 2005 along an uncompleted railway in Poipet, Cambodia. Photograph: Muse 
Mohammed/IOM 
Cambodia

 Porous borders, poverty and its geographic location make Cambodia a major 
point of origin, destination and transit for irregular migrants. People 
trafficking is still a huge concern in the country and surrounding region. 
Recent trends have shown that more and more Cambodian men areabused and 
exploited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/18/cambodian-villagers-sue-us-thai-firms-human-trafficking-forced-labour-claims-walmart-shrimp>
 in the regional fishing industry, having been trafficked through neighbouring 
countries and ending up stranded further abroad. Roumkun (above) lives with her 
daughter and grandchildren in a shelter built by her son in 2005 along an 
uncompleted railway in Poipet. They came from a small village hoping to travel 
to Thailand but became trapped near the border while trying to cross. Now they 
rely on money sent by her children who made it successfully to Thailand. With 
the government planning to complete the railroad and evict the informal houses, 
Roumkun is not sure of her future, or of that of her children and grandchildren.



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda5109f7b2a8ceafce4245bfb10333012aa72fba%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda5109f7b2a8ceafce4245bfb10333012aa72fba%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Peter Lall lives in a destroyed building in Abyei, a contested territory 
between Sudan and South Sudan. Photograph: Muse Mohammed/IOM 
South Sudan

Ever since a struggle between political rivals plunged South Sudan into 
conflict in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/23/south-sudan-state-that-fell-apart-in-a-week>
, an estimated 50,000 to 100,000 people have died and more than 3 million have 
fled. More than 200,000 people are sheltering in UN protection sites, while 
others have fled to remote areas or stayed in informal settlements. Having left 
their homes with few belongings, displaced people rely on aid agencies. The 
World Food Programme estimates that 4.6 million people will face severe hunger 
this year. Peter Lall above lives in a destroyed building in Abyei next to the 
site where his father died during an attack on the town. Sarah Nyan Gan Makuei 
(below) fled from a UN protection site to Malakal following fighting in the 
camp. Her disability meant she was forced to stay behind when her husband took 
their six children to Juba.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d747a10c5e2cd794bbfacb8c42ed8ad0036b65e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Displaced%3A%20faces%20of%20some%20of%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%2063%20million%20people%20fleeing%20disaster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffar-from-home-60-million-people-displaced-un-war-climate-change-terrorism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d747a10c5e2cd794bbfacb8c42ed8ad0036b65e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Sarah Nyan Gan Makuei, who fled from a UN protection site in South Sudan. 
Photograph: Muse Mohammed/IOM  