
Last October, police in Islington began handing out on-the-spot fines to 
drivers caught breaking the 20mph limit. The London borough was the first to 
impose blanket 20mph speed restrictions in 2013, following trials on its most 
dangerous roads. Now Transport for London (TfL) hasannounced that it will pilot 
<http://www.tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2015/march/tfl-outlines-new-sites-for-potential-20mph-speed-limits>
 20mph limits on some of its busiest routes, as part of a commitment to driving 
down the number of people who die or are seriously injured in road accidents in 
the capital.

Implicit in all of this is the idea that 20mph speed limits actually work. To 
reduce casualties they have to reduce speed, but not everyone agrees that they 
do. Asked whether he thinks Islington’s 20mph speed limits have made any 
difference, Aidan Farrow, a member of IslingtonCycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> Club who cycles thousands of 
miles on the roads every year, says he doesn’t think so. “My experience is that 
they’re ignored by many drivers,” he says. “I don’t think they’re enforced and 
I don’t think that drivers realise they’re there a lot of the time.”

Statistics collected by the council do suggest traffic has slowed, but only 
marginally. Before 20mph limits were introduced, 85% of the traffic on 
Islington’s main roads was travelling at an average of 28mph. After the limits 
were introduced, this average decreased by just 1mph to 27mph. However, before 
and after surveys covered less than a year all told. Results fromBristol 
<http://www.brighton-hove.gov.uk/content/parking-and-travel/travel-transport-and-road-safety/safer-streets-better-places>
 andBrighton’s 
<http://www.brighton-hove.gov.uk/content/parking-and-travel/travel-transport-and-road-safety/safer-streets-better-places>
 pilots of 20mph limits tell a similar story, with daytime speeds in Bristol 
dropping by around 1mph to an average of 23mph. In Brighton, the council saw a 
1mph decrease a year after 20mph speed limits were introduced in 2013, although 
the average speed of traffic on central roads was already 20mph.

I don’t think 20mph zones are enforced – I don’t think drivers realise they 
are there a lot of the time
Cyclist Aidan Farrow 
Farrow’s feeling is that the limits would be broken less often if they were 
better designed to carry traffic at 20mph and he may not be far off the mark. 
The type of restrictions most councils are now considering are cheaper, 
sign-only limits - as opposed to “zones” incorporating traffic-calming 
features. After reviewing the evidence, the authors ofa 2014 report by Steer 
Davies Gleave 
<http://www.20splentyforus.org.uk/UsefulReports/20mph_Steer_Davies_Gleave.pdf> 
for the London Borough of Merton found better evidence for zones reducing speed 
and collisions than for sign-only limits. However, a2014 review 
<http://jpubhealth.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2014/09/28/pubmed.fdu067.abstract>
 published in the Journal of Public Health found “convincing evidence” from 10 
studies for both 20mph zones and limits in reducing speeds and accidents.

Collecting the evidence is problematic in the first place, as Ian Roberts, an 
injuries expert at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, points 
out. “In the perfect world, what we might do is take the whole of Britain and 
randomly allocate parts to have 20mph zones, or not, and that would be the best 
possible evidence,” he says. “You can do that for treatments in the NHS – you 
can randomise one patient to receive treatment or not – but it’s very difficult 
to randomise areas of Britain to different transport policies. So for most 
policy decisions you have to settle for less than the best.”

As far as Roberts is concerned, there is already good enough evidence – for 
policy purposes anyway – to show that 20mph zones will reduce serious injuries 
if they reduce car speeds. But what’s most convincing, he says, is the basic 
physics. A car hitting a pedestrian at 20mph will cause less damage than at 
30mph or 40mph because it carries less energy into the collision. There are even
models <https://www.toi.no/getfile.php?mmfileid=13206> that predict more 
precisely the risk of death associated with different speeds. However, the 
predictions will only pan out if everyone actually drives at the lower speed 
and Roberts has doubts about the effectiveness of 20mph limits without 
traffic-calming measures.

So are councils still considering zones? According to Brighton and Hove 
Council, some phase one areas of its 20mph programme covered pre-existing 20mph 
zones and it will seek to introduce further measures on streets where speeds 
might not improve. That said,results from the council’s 20mph programme 
<http://www.brighton-hove.gov.uk/content/parking-and-travel/travel-transport-and-road-safety/safer-streets-better-places>
 already look promising: casualties are down 12% from an average of 372 in 
2010-2013 to 327 in 2013-2014 and, so far, no one has been killed in a 
collision on the affected roads. On the other hand, it’s hard to come to solid 
conclusions based on data from a single year, especially compared to years in 
which there was on average only one road death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fdo-20mph-speed-limits-actually-work-london-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432720905268%2Fda5120c9-623f-47bb-8bfd-669b9185abb4-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%2020mph%20speed%20limits%20actually%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fdo-20mph-speed-limits-actually-work-london-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%2020mph%20speed%20limits%20actually%20work%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F29%2Fdo-20mph-speed-limits-actually-work-london-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432720905268%2Fda5120c9-623f-47bb-8bfd-669b9185abb4-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A 20mph speed limit sign in Kemptown, Brighton. Photograph: Edward Simons/Alamy
To add to the evidence on 20mph limits, the Department for Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> has now commissioned a three-year, 
£715,000 study on their effectiveness, which will bring together data from 
different regions as well as new research carried out on the roads. Results are 
due in 2017.

Meanwhile, in Bristol, a pilot 20mph programme has already been extended 
city-wide in a £2.3m sign-only scheme. But driving instructor Julie Roberts 
worries that blanket 20mph limits are contributing to dangerous driving on 
certain roads. “We’re being overtaken or we’re experiencing aggressive 
behaviour from other road users,” she says. “We need to find ways to change 
driver attitudes so that they understand that 20mph is seen as the appropriate 
speed in urban areas.” She thinks change will be slow without any street 
furniture to support the signs.

It’s not just about improving safety and reducing casualties, though. Lucy 
Saunders, who works as a public health specialist for TfL, says it should be 
just as much about encouraging people out of their cars to lead more active 
lifestyles by walking and cycling. However, she admits it’s not easy to prove 
that 20mph schemes have these wider health benefits. “I think if you did some 
data collection now and then went back in 10 years to those same streets, you 
might be able to see some differences, but over that 10-year period you’re 
probably going to have changing norms across the whole of society – changes in 
vehicles, changes in investment in cycling infrastructure – so it will be hard 
to say ‘Oh, you know, it’s 20mph signs that made the real difference.’”

A subscriber to the health and fitness benefits of active transport, Farrow 
says cycling in Islington is “a no-brainer”, despite the potential risks. “I’m 
nowhere near the point where I wouldn’t do it because I thought it was 
dangerous,” he says, despite having been involved in a few minor incidents 
himself. Incidentally,a study of 53 cycling fatalities 
<https://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/pedal-cyclist-fatalities-in-london.pdf>
 that occurred in London between 2007-2011 found that around half were crashes 
involving HGVs where speed was not a major factor. However, speed seems more 
likely to have been a contributing factor when cars were involved.

Elsewhere in Europe, Paris 
<https://worldstreets.wordpress.com/2014/05/21/paris-to-limit-speeds-to-30-kmhr-over-entire-city/>
 and Milan have announced plans to introduce 30kph (19mph) speed restrictions. 
Spain has gone further - recent changes to the country’s road traffic laws mean 
that 30kph limits will soon apply in most urban areas. The plans are supported 
by the European Transport Safety Council, which advises the European commission 
and has called for lower speed limits across all residential areas. In the US, 
New York City hasreduced its default speed limit from 30mph to 25mph 
<http://time.com/3568281/nyc-speed-limit/> and other US states look to be 
following suit.


End of the car age: how cities are outgrowing the automobile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
As for whether 20mph limits work, it depends how you define “work”. There’s no 
question that if it was a straightforward choice between being hit at 30mph, 
and being hit at 20mph, you’d plump for 20mph every time. But if you get hit on 
a road with a 20mph limit, where’s the guarantee that it will be at 20mph? 
Reducing casualties depends on drivers reducing their speed and that appears to 
be happening – ironically – quite slowly.

Hayley Birch writes on science and the environment from Bristol, UK

Do you live in a 20mph zone? Share your experiences and thoughts about its 
success in the comments below
 