
The German parliament passed without much fuss legislation in October that 
vastly expanded the surveillance powers of the country’s intelligence agencies.


That it went through the Bundestag so easily was surprising given the still 
raw history of surveillance in Germany; first by the Nazis and then the 
near-blanket coverage of East Germany by its then intelligence agency, theStasi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/27/stasi-officers-still-employed-east-german-secret-police-archives>
. Nowhere else in western Europe is the issue of protection of privacy felt as 
strongly as in Germany.

But the intelligence agencies managed to override privacy concerns, citing the 
string of terrorist attacks in France, Belgium and Germany itself. The cabinet, 
in response to theBerlin attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/21/berlin-attack-police-suspect-christmas-market-live-updates?page=with:block-585ab35ee4b06265ff0d5739#block-585ab35ee4b06265ff0d5739>
, agreed on Wednesday to a bill that would extend the use of CCTV to shopping 
centres, sports arenas, car parks and other public areas.

Berlin Christmas market attack: a graphical guide to what we know so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-christmas-market-attack-a-graphical-guide-to-what-we-know-so-far>
Does the Berlin attack make the case for increased surveillance? The attack at 
one level fails to make the case for mass surveillance. Privacy campaigners are 
not opposed to intelligence agencies and the police targeting suspects: that is 
what they are supposed to do and what they have always done. What privacy 
campaigners oppose is blanket surveillance of everyone, and argue that the 
Berlin attack did not require it: the suspect,Anis Amri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-attack-suspect-anis-amri-under-monitoring-since-january>
, was already known to the security services through traditional forms of 
intelligence.

In almost every terrorist act since the 9/11 attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/9-11-the-10th-anniversary>, those 
responsible were already on the radar of the intelligence agencies: the Boston 
bombers, the killers of Fusilier Lee Rigby in London, the attackers in Paris 
and Brussels. And now, Amri, the Tunisian being hunted by intelligence agencies 
across Europe as the prime suspect for the Berlin attack.

Amri had been on a watchlist since January and under covert surveillance for 
several months. The intelligence agencies also knew he possessed various fake 
IDs and had links withIslamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>. 
But for a still undisclosed reason the intelligence agencies lost track of him.

Privacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> campaigners would argue 
that instead of wasting resources gathering and sifting through the volume of 
data being accumulated through mass surveillance, the resources would be better 
allocated in providing more personnel for targeted surveillance.

One of the biggest problems facing all intelligence agencies is that mounting 
surveillance on an individual such as Amri, including tapping his phone, 
requires an enormous number of staff. Intelligence agencies are coy about exact 
figures, but on average surveillance of just one person might require 25 to 40 
people. The agencies have to make hard decisions about who they will watch full 
time and they make mistakes – as the British intelligence agencies did in the 
Rigby case.

UK security agencies unlawfully collected data for 17 years, court rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/uk-security-agencies-unlawfully-collected-data-for-decade>
Richard Barrett, who was head of counter-terrorism at the UK’s foreign 
intelligence agency MI6, told BBC Radio 4 that it was understandable how some 
people slipped through the net. He said there were 7,000 live cases inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> – people suspected of being in 
touch with extremist groups and worthy of investigation – of whom 550 were 
“really extreme potential terrorists”. He said: “As you can imagine, that is an 
almost impossible number to control.”

It is nearly impossible for the agencies to get it right time after time. This 
is because they are having to deal not just with suspects such as Amri but the 
“lone wolf” – an individual who has not attracted attention but who mounts a 
spontaneous attack after watching propaganda from groups such as Isis.

Al-Qaida <https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> plotters focus on 
spectacular terrorist attacks such as bringing down planes. Isis has opted so 
far for low-tech attacks and its recent propaganda has encouraged lone wolves, 
even suggesting using trucks.

Raffaello Pantucci, director of international security studies at London’s 
Royal United Services Institute, said of the Berlin attack: “Clearly, there has 
been an intelligence failure.”

He said Germany was pretty good at human intelligence – gathering information 
on the ground – but not as good as the National Security Agency in the US or 
the UK’s GCHQ at intercepting bulk communications. German intelligence relies 
on both of those countries sharing information with it.

When the row over the NSA tapping of Merkel’s phone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/23/us-monitored-angela-merkel-german>
 broke in 2013, there were howls of protest from German politicians. The German 
intelligence agencies, as beneficiaries of some NSA data, did not protest too 
strongly but instead sought to use the row to leverage the NSA into providing 
it with even more data.

Those who support mass surveillance, in particular the retention of digital 
data, would argue that the the Berlin attack justifies this approach. The New 
York Times reported US officials as saying that Amri had researched how to make 
bombs online and had contacted Isis at least once. The surveillance agencies 
would cite this as demonstrating the value of being able to access vast amounts 
of data that can be thoroughly searched.

Cooperation in an international manhunt is relatively straightforward but 
European countries sharing intelligence is not in general. While the US and UK 
– and to a lesser extent Germany and France – have high levels of 
intelligence-sharing, Europe-wide cooperation is patchy. Countries such as the 
UK are reluctant to share intelligence with smaller European countries, fearful 
that sources might be compromised.

While the UK would almost certainly pass on information if it thought an 
attack was imminent, less urgent information will often not be shared with 
countries with smaller intelligence agencies. After every European attack, 
there are calls for an organisation to be created that is more effective than 
Interpol and the other European agencies: a European CIA or FBI. But this has 
not been followed through and, given the differing capabilities of agencies 
acrossEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, creation of such 
an agency appears unlikely.
 