
Tis almost the season of joy, mince pie overdose and a now traditional, yet 
bizarre, dash of controversy. WhatChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> would be complete without 
it?

Fifty reasons to love Christmas | Daisy Buchanan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/24/fifty-reasons-to-love-christmas>
While the weather is turning frosty and the festive season draws close, some 
panicky employers are being advised tochill out by David Isaac 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/christmas-celebrations-suppressed-fear-offending-ehrc-david-isaac-a7441896.html>
, chair of the Equalities and Human Rights Commission. Isaac suggests they 
shouldn’t go overboard in avoiding religious sensibilities at Christmas and 
that they should adopt a “common-sense approach”. Sounds reasonable enough.

This comes after news that some business owners are fearful of sending 
Christmas cards, that cinema chains havebanned an advert containing the Lord’s 
Prayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/nov/24/lords-prayer-row-can-cinemas-really-ban-adverts-church-of-england-dcm>
 for fear of offending non-Christian audiences, and that employees are being 
vetoed from calling a Christmas tree a Christmas tree. It’s like we’ve entered 
a politically correct Nightmare Before Winterval.

But at least it’s not quite 1647 when puritans banned the holiday entirely 
<http://www.olivercromwell.org/faqs4.htm>.

The paranoia of offending sensibilities whips up negativity quicker than you 
can say “Swedish Christmas lights”. Yes, that fake story about Swedenbanning 
public Christmas light displays 
<http://www.inquisitr.com/3648019/fact-check-did-sweden-just-ban-christmas-lights-to-appease-muslim-immigrants/>
 “to avoid offending Muslim immigrants” went viral across social media with 
more than 43,000 reactions, creating more anger at the alleged intolerance of 
Muslims. The real story was that Christmas lights would be banned from being 
placed on poles this year in Sweden for safety reasons.

This fake story is indicative of the strained times we are trying so hard to 
survive. However well-meaning these particular employers are trying to be, 
their PC-driven fears could harm the very minorities they are desperately 
trying not to offend. The last thing we need is another “Muslims ate my 
hamster”-type headline. I’m all right, honestly, my faith is still intact even 
while uttering the words “Christmas tree”, I don’t break into a cold sweat on 
hearing the Lord’s Prayer – which I’ve known by heart since childhood –and to 
let you in on a little not-well-kept secret: quite a few of us non-Christians 
love Crimbo.

Invitations for halal turkey dinners over the Christmas period have already 
started WhatsApping their way in from Muslim families. My first Christmas card 
is nearly always from my organised atheist friend. And my Sikh mate is giving 
me the gift of watchingRogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story> – what better 
present could a Sikh buy a Muslim for Christmas. Amazon ad, eat your heart out.

In fact, Christmas as we know it now already has a history of 
multiculturalism. The turkey itself was supposedly brought to the UKthrough 
trade with Native Americans 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-humber-20672110>. Decorating the 
Christmas tree is a German custom and waspopularised here in the 19th century 
by Prince Albert <http://www.bbc.co.uk/victorianchristmas/history.shtml>. 
Gift-giving at the winter solstice was a Roman tradition. Stockings apparently 
came about through the Dutch tradition of hanging out their clogs for 
Sinterklaas – St Nicholas (who by the by was born in modern-day Turkey). And 
that’s without mentioning that Jesus was a Middle Eastern Jew.

And this year, to put the angel on top of the tree, we have Bake Off’s Nadiya 
Hussain cooking up a festive feast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/22/nadiya-hussain-attenborough-bbc-radio-festive-feast>
 as part of BBC Radio 2’s Christmas lineup.

Traditions bring people together and strengthens us as a society. When 
Christian, Jewish, Sikh and agnostic friends marked Eid festivities at home 
with me earlier this year, it didn’t mean they were confused, but that they 
wanted to acknowledge its importance to me, as well as dive into some Eid grub. 
Sharing in the Shabbat rituals with Jewish friends or wishing Hindu friends a 
happy Diwali won’t make me lose a sense of who I am, but enriches my own sense 
of faith and makes me appreciate the broad religious and cultural landscape of 
Britain.

Forgive me, trendy holiday cynics: Christmas brings me great joy | Mikki Halpin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/23/forgive-me-trendy-holiday-cynics-christmas-brings-me-great-joy>
But of course, there are non-Christians who won’t feel comfortable with 
saying, “Happy Christmas”, or with being in a nativity play, and that’s totally 
fair enough and up to them. They shouldn’t be treated like weirdos, nor should 
they be labelled with that grating word, “intolerant”.

Yet if employers take unnecessary preemptive measures in assuming their 
non-Christian employees will get mortally offended by calling a massive tree 
put up at Christmas a Christmas tree, it turns up the heat on an already 
volatile climate, and does a lot of members of religious minorities – such as 
me – no favours. For me, Christmas, like many faith traditions, is about the 
values of compassion, hope, giving, family and joy, as well as, of course, 
special-edition food. So I’ll still send Christmas selfies with the turkey, and 
wish goodwill to all souls, if that’s OK. And wish everyone who celebrates it, 
marks it or widely acknowledges it, a very merryChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>.
 