
In three phone calls with key Asian leaders this week, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has once again upended 
expectations. We may now indeed have a radical break in the US approach to the 
region.

The first of these, with Nawaz Sharif from Pakistan, came with a detailed text 
of the conversation released by the Pakistani prime minister’s office. He is 
reported to havelavished praise on Sharif  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/terrific-guy-fantastic-country-trump-pakistan-nawaz-sharif>
and the country more generally in what appears to be Trump’s typically 
solicitous approach to relationship building.

While not making any specific commitments or promises the detail of the call 
revealed by thePakistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan> government 
makes life difficult for the US given how much time and effort it has put into 
improving its relations with India and may prompt unrealistic expectations in 
Islamabad.

Then in a call with the Philippines’ president, Rodrigo Duterte, the 
president-elect is reported to haveendorsed Duterte’s anti-drug campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/philippines-rodrigo-duterte-donald-trump-white-house-invite>
 that has unleashed lawless vigilantism in which more than 5,000 people have 
died.

This was the source of the breakdown in US-Philippines relations, with Duterte 
famously calling Obama a “son of a whore” for criticising his approach. While 
Trump’s endorsementmay mend fences with thePhilippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines>, it flies in the face of 
America’s decades-long commitment to human rights and the rule of law.

Then to cap it off Trump took a highly publicised phone call 
<http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/front/archives/2016/12/03/2003660473> from the 
relatively new Taiwanese president, Tsai Ing-wen. Since the US recognised the 
People’s Republic of China and ended diplomatic ties to Taiwan in 1979, no US 
president or president-elect has met or spoken to a Taiwanese president.

In so doing Trump has inflamed cross-Strait relations – Beijing is blaming 
Taiwan for instigating the call 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/china-donald-trumps-taiwan-phone-call-complaint-us>
 – and cast doubts over the direction of US-China policy. Indeed some believe 
that this could presage the end of the “one-China policy” and herald a new cold 
war.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20dismisses%20Trump%20call%20with%20Taiwan%20as%20%E2%80%98small%20trick%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20dismisses%20Trump%20call%20with%20Taiwan%20as%20%E2%80%98small%20trick%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fchina-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video&media=>
China dismisses Trump call with Taiwan as ‘small trick’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/03/china-dismisses-trump-call-with-taiwan-as-small-trick-video>
There is much uncertainty about just what these conversations entailed, who 
prompted them – Trump tweeted that the call came fromTaiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> but it could only have occurred with 
his team’s cooperation – and what policy import they will actually have.

There is a risk in overstating their importance, it is early days and these 
were short calls. But there does appear to be a thread to these conversations, 
particularly with Taiwan, that under Trump the US will adopt a hard-nosed 
realpolitik posture in Asia and that he is content to break with Washington 
orthodoxy even as it comes with real risks.

But the calls also display an inexperienced foreign policy team that is 
handling itself clumsily and causing problems that will give the new 
administration headaches. In the case ofChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, depending on how Beijing chooses to 
respond, that headache could be severe. Equally, the calls are ceding a lot, in 
narrative terms, to the foreign leaders using calls to frame relations with the 
US in advantageous ways. That the US is allowing itself to be used in this way 
in striking.

Transition between administrations is always a difficult time in US foreign 
policy. Based on the signals being sent this week, the Trump administration has 
ambition but also has much to learn about the complexities of managing the 
foreign dealings of the world’s most powerful country. It will be an 
interesting four years.

Nick Bisley is executive director of La Trobe Asia and professor of 
international relations at La Trobe University, Australia.
 