
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has threatened 
to reimpose sanctions on Cuba that had been lifted by the Obama administration, 
but has provided no details or explanation.

The threat came – like many of the president-elect’s statements since his 
upset victory on 8 November – in the form ofa tweet 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/803237535178772481>, that raised 
more questions than answers.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
If Cuba <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cuba> is unwilling to make a better 
deal for the Cuban people, the Cuban/American people and the U.S. as a whole, I 
will terminate deal.
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/803237535178772481> November 28, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/803237535178772481> 
The tweet, coming two days after the death of Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies>
, appeared to restate threats made during the election campaign to reverse the 
opening to Havana made by the Obama administration over the past year, 
including an end to the travel ban, the resumption of commercial flights and 
the relaxation of some trade restrictions.

Trump aides threaten hard line as Cuba steps into the unknown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/trump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown>
Some analysts said they did not expect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/trump-aides-threaten-hard-line-as-cuba-steps-into-the-unknown>
 Trump to rescind the executive orders that relaxed the half-century embargo on 
Cuba since Castro came to power, citing the pro-business lobby in the 
Republican party and Trump’s own commercial instincts.

However, conservative Cuban Americans – including Mauricio Claver-Carone, a 
hardline member of Trump’s transition team – have said the regime run by Raúl 
Castro, Fidel’s brother, is just as repressive, and argue that some or all of 
the sanctions should be reinstated.

Reince Priebus, whom Trump has appointed as his White House chief of staff, 
said that Trump would reverse US policy on Cuba if there are not greater 
political reforms.

“These things need to change,” Priebus told Fox News on Sunday. “This isn’t 
going to be one way. I think the president-elect has been clear on this.”

Ana Quintana, a policy analyst at the Heritage Foundation who advocates a 
tougher policy towards the Cuban government, said: “All the indications are 
that he will roll back many of the executive actions – if we look at the 
appointments to his transition team, like Claver-Carone, who is a very vocal 
advocate against the opening, and rightfully so.”

“Trump’s business sense and business acumen will overwhelmingly draw him to 
roll back on the opening,” Quintana added, saying that some other foreign 
companies who have started doing business in Cuba recently have had their 
assets confiscated.

Peter Harrell, a former undersecretary of state for counter-threat financing 
and sanctions, said: “Trump and others are talking less about rolling back 
sanctions, as much as demanding things from Cuba to avoid rolling back.”

Landmark Miami-Havana flight is subdued affair after Castro's death
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/landmark-miami-havana-flight-fidel-castro>
However, in the absence on concessions from Havana, Harrell predicted the 
incoming administration could cut back aspects of the Obama policy initiative 
that involved dealing directly with the Cuban government.

“There are some deals with Cuban entities with links to the military and with 
government entities. I think these would be higher on the chopping block than 
people-to-people exchanges,” said Harrell, now an adjunct senior fellow at the 
Center for a New American Security. It will be hard, though not impossible, to 
roll back the easing of travel restrictions which seem to have pretty broad 
support.”

On Monday, the airline company JetBlue made the first commercial flight from 
New York to Havana 
<http://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/NYC-JetBlue-1st-Commercial-Flight-to-Cuba-Departs-JFK-Airport-Fidel-Castro-403335306.html>
 in more than a half century, and American Airlines flew itsfirst service from 
Miami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/landmark-miami-havana-flight-fidel-castro>
.
 