
Donald Trump’s Indonesian business partner, a billionaire developer and media 
mogul, has announced he might run for president in Indonesia’s 2019 elections.

“If there is no one I can believe who can fix the problems of the country, I 
may try to run for president,” Hary Tanoesoedibjotold the Australian 
Broadcasting Corporation. 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-02/donald-trump-indonesian-business-partner-wants-run-for-president/8156716>

“Not for myself, for the country,” he said, adding that the nation of about 
260 million people needs “a leader with integrity who can bring a solution for 
the country”.

Trump spokesman on Russia: president-elect already getting 'wins' abroad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/donald-trump-vladimir-putin-russia-hacking-sean-spicer>
Known locally as Hary Tanoe, the tycoon is building two Trump developments – a 
100-hectare, six-star luxury resort on the coast of Bali and a resort outside 
Jakarta with a championship golf course designed by former world No 1 Ernie 
Els. The resort will have 300 villas and adjoin a theme park.

Both projects are due to be completed while Trump is in office.

Unlike Trump before his presidential run, the 50-year-old has already delved 
deeply into politics. Tanoe made a failed attempt in 2014 to get the nomination 
for vice-president and has since set up his own political party, United 
Indonesia,using Twitter <https://twitter.com/Hary_Tanoe> and appearances on his 
TV stations as a platform.

His company, Global Mediacom, also known as MNC Group, saw stocks rise 
significantly when Trump won the election in November.

Tanoe said he has “access” to Trump although it was limited and most of his 
contact regarding the joint developments was with the president-elect’s adult 
children; Donald Jr, Eric and Ivanka. “Each of them has different roles. Don Jr 
has responsibility for the overall project, Eric the design and golf, and 
Ivanka more of detail – the fit-out of the hotel,” he said.

Vast foreign business interests held by an incoming president have been 
flagged as a potential conflict of interests, especially if the ventures are 
linked to businesspeople with aspirations for power.

In Indonesia’s last election, Tanoe threw his support behind former general 
Prabowo Subianto, who went on to lose to Joko Widodo, meaning Trump’s biggest 
financial stake inIndonesia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> is 
run by a political adversary to the country’s leader.

And Tanoe has already arranged for two controversial Indonesian politicians to 
meet Trump. The first was Setya Novanto, the speaker of the House of 
Representatives who was at the centre of a $US4bn corruption scandal in 
Indonesia. He denies all allegations.

The second was Fadli Zon, the deputy speaker, who is close to Indonesian 
religious hardliners who have been pushing for Jakarta’s governor to be jailed 
for blasphemy.

Jakarta's violent identity crisis: behind the vilification of 
Chinese-Indonesians
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/25/jakarta-chinese-indonesians-governor-ahok>
Governor Basuki Tjahaja Purnama, known by his nickname Ahok, is fighting a 
racially charged attempt to prevent him from winning a second term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/jakarta-governor-ahoks-blasphemy-trial-all-you-need-to-know>
 next month by Islamists who are against a Christian Indonesian of Chinese 
heritage being in power.


But Tanoe, also a Chinese Indonesia Christian, said the country was ready for 
a leader of any background. “The majority of the people are more realistic. 
They want to see a leader who can bring solutions,” he said.

He blamed the president, known as Jokowi, for not responding “quickly enough” 
to quellprotests in that capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/jakarta-protests-muslims-against-christian-governor-ahok>
 that saw roughly half-a-million people rally against Ahok on 2 December. “The 
issue is more with President Jokowi. He has to show his leadership is firm 
enough to make people calm down.”
 