
When we learned recently that Brits lead the way in Europe for charitable 
generosity 
<https://www.cafonline.org/about-us/publications/2016-publications/caf-world-giving-index-2016>
despite being steeped in years of cuts, austerity and rising inequality, it was 
a welcome piece of good news in a bad year. According to the annual World 
Giving Index 2016, compiled by the Charities Aid Foundation (CAF), the UK is 
the most generous of all the European countries.

Worldwide, the US comes out even better: ranking 2nd compared with the UK’s 
8th position out of 135 countries.

But it hasn’t all been good news. UK dropped two places year on year in the 
overall Caf international poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/oct/25/uk-global-giving-index-lags-myanmar>
(which pulls together survey data on cash donations, volunteering and helping 
strangers). Meanwhile, CAF’s separateUK Giving Survey for 2015 
<https://www.cafonline.org/about-us/publications/2016-publications/uk-giving-report-2015>
 revealed that the number of people who said they had donated to charity over 
the previous 12 months from the year before had fallen from 70% to 67%.

There may be many reasons for a country’s fluctuations in philanthropy, 
ranging from seasonality to tougher financial climates. However, when it comes 
to the US, something very interesting has been occurring that warrants 
attention. Evidence suggests the nature of charitable giving is altering 
dramatically as a result of rapid rises in the concentration of wealth and the 
corresponding surge in inequality.

A report by the Washington-based Institute for Policy Studies (IPS) – Gilded 
Giving: Top HeavyPhilanthropy <https://www.theguardian.com/society/philanthropy>
 in an Age of Extreme Inequality, published last month, sheds much-needed light 
on the profound consequences a higher concentration of giving by fewer, richer 
individuals could have for the charitable sector and for wider society.

Pulling together data on various types of donations ranging from small amounts 
given by average citizens to large sums directed at philanthropic foundations 
by the seriously well off, the report found charitable contributions overall 
had surged in the US in the last decade. No bad thing, you might say. However, 
questions need to be asked about where the cash is coming from and where it 
ends up.

The researchers found that itemised charitable contributions from the top 1% 
of US society – those earning roughly $500,000 (£400,000) or more a year – 
leapt by 57%. For those earning $10m or higher, it was up by 104%. Yet 
donations from people at the lower end of the earnings scale fell significantly 
from between 2003 and 2013, by 34% for those on less than $100,000.

These dramatic shifts mirror the intensifying concentration of wealth and 
growing economic vulnerabilities in wider society. The report lays out a 
spectrum of potential implications. As charities come to rely more heavily on a 
small number of very wealthy donors, fundraising efforts may become more skewed 
towards these individuals. There may also be an increased bias towards the pet 
projects of these donors and “a potential for mission distortion”.

UK is Europe's most generous country but still lags behind developing world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/oct/25/uk-global-giving-index-lags-myanmar>
In terms of wider society, charitable giving for the broader public good could 
be undermined if donations increasingly go to a narrower band of causes (for 
example, large endowments going to private educational institutions or the arts 
rather than being spread more evenly across smaller local charities). There is 
a danger, too, that money ends up being held by foundations that do not spend 
it. According to the report: “Risks to the public include tax-avoidance 
philanthropy, the warehousing of wealth in the face of urgent needs, and the 
increasing use of philanthropy as an extension of power and privilege 
protection.”

The US has offered generous tax deductions for larger charitable donations for 
many years and not surprisingly the wealthy use these. Compared with the UK and 
Europe, it also has an especially strong tradition of philanthropy through 
large grant-making foundations set against the backdrop of a weaker social 
safety net. But as the IPS report makes clear, we cannot afford to be 
complacent about how the acceleration of wealth inequalities might reshape the 
landscape.Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> and 
philanthropic activities are an important part of the social fabric and often 
address needs neglected by the state. However, philanthropy is not a substitute 
for progressive taxation and fewer, larger donations are not conducive to a 
diverse, dynamic and pluralistic charity sector.

Mary O’Hara writes on social affairs and is the author of Austerity Bites
 