
When Donald Trump swears at the inauguration that he will “faithfully execute 
the office of president of the United States, and will to the best of my 
ability, preserve, protect and defend the constitution of the United States”, 
he will becommitting a violation of constitutional magnitude. 
<https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/gs_121616_emoluments-clause1.pdf>

The electoral college: why it exists, how it works and can it stop Trump?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/how-the-electoral-college-works-donald-trump>
 The US constitution flatly prohibits any “Person holding any Office of Profit 
or Trust under [the United States]” from accepting “any present, Emolument, 
Office, or Title, of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign 
State”.


Known as the emoluments clause, this provision was designed on the theory that 
a federal officeholder who receives something of value from a foreign power can 
be tempted to compromise what the constitution insists be his exclusive 
loyalty: the best interest of the United States. The clause applies to the 
president and covers even ordinary, fair market value transactions with foreign 
states and their agents that result in any profit or benefit. That a hostile 
government has gotten its money’s worth from our president is obviously no 
defense to a charge that he has abused his office.


 Trump’s continued interest in the Trump Organization and his steady stream of 
monetary and other benefits from foreign powers put him on a collision course 
with the emoluments clause. Disentangling every improper influence resulting 
from special treatment of Trump’s business holdings by foreign states would be 
impossible. The American people would be condemned to uncertainty, leaving our 
political discourse rife with accusations of corruption. These problems are 
exacerbated by the fact that Trump has regularly declined to make his business 
dealings or tax returns transparent.

Thus a specter of skewed incentives will haunt a Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> presidency. 


While much has changed since the constitution was written, certain premises of 
politics and human nature have held steady. Among them is that private 
financial interests can subtly sway even the most virtuous leaders. As 
Alexander Hamilton wrote in Federalist 22: “One of the weak sides of republics, 
among their numerous advantages, is that they afford too easy an inlet to 
foreign corruption.” The framers sought to avoid these ends by avoiding these 
beginnings, writing a broad ban on potentially corrupting foreign influence 
into article I of our nation’s charter.

By imposing clear limitations, the clause avoids situations in which the 
American people must search for hints of improperly motivated presidential 
favoritism toward selected foreign powers, or of foreign attempts to seduce the 
American president into compromising our national interest for his private 
profit.


 With Trump, this search has already begun. His global business empire creates 
ideal conditions for ongoing violations of the emoluments clause. Mere weeks 
beforeTrump spoke by phone  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/trump-angers-beijing-with-provocative-phone-call-to-taiwan-president>
with the president of Taiwan – a dramatic departure from America’s “one China” 
policy – a businesswoman associated with his conglomerate reportedlyarrived in 
Taiwan 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/02/us/politics/trump-speaks-with-taiwans-leader-a-possible-affront-to-china.html>
 to inquire about major new investments in luxury hotels. Trump’s businesses owe
hundreds of millions to Deutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/dec/01/donald-trump-business-interests-conflicts>
, which is currently negotiating a multibillion-dollar settlement with the US 
Department of Justice – a settlement that will now be overseen by an attorney 
general selected by and serving at the pleasure of Trump.

 In his last public press conference, Trump called on Russia to hack Hillary 
Clinton and release her personal emails. Recently, both the FBI and CIA 
determined that the highest levels of Russia’s government in fact ran acovert 
operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/qa-russian-hackers-vladimir-putin-donald-trump-us-presidential-election>
aimed at helping Trump’s campaign, making his victory in the electoral college 
more likely.

 The bottom line is simple: Trump stands to benefit personally, in innumerable 
and largely hidden ways, from decisions made daily by foreign governments and 
their agents. History teaches that leaders with divided interests cannot be 
counted on to faithfully serve those who elected them.


The framers understood this lesson. The emoluments clause was forged of their 
hard-won wisdom. No relic of a bygone era, it is a profound expression of 
insight into the nature of the human condition and the preconditions of 
sovereign self-government.


Electoral college rebels speak out on a last-ditch hope to stop Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/electoral-college-faithless-electors-donald-trump>
Trump’s shifting proposals for addressing his multifarious conflicts of 
interests are simply inadequate. If he retains an ownership interest in his 
empire, his personal bottom line is necessarily affected by everything his 
business does, whether or not he is at the helm.


Nor is a supposedly “blind trust” involving control of Trump’s assets by his 
adult children remotely sufficient. It is inconceivable that he could avoid 
discussing with them at least some matters relating to his policies and their 
business ventures, or that he could avoid noticing and caring about their 
interactions with foreign nations.


So even full divestment of his personal ownership and control of the Trump 
Organization is no remedy for his emoluments clause violation: it is often to 
the prince and not the king that special favors are done.

 Because Trump would take office in blatant violation of the constitution, the 
electoral college would be fully justified in concluding that he is unsuited to 
the presidency. As Justice Robert Jackson wrote 64 years ago, electors must be 
considered free to vote their conscience.

 If Trump deliberately declines to cure his continuing violation of the 
emoluments clause upon entering office, Congress has both power and 
responsibility to enforce the constitution. It would be well within its rights 
to impeach and remove him for engaging in “high crimes and misdemeanors”.

 Short of that awesome step, Congress might set lasting, bipartisan precedent 
by requiring all presidents to divest assets that risk conflicts of interest 
and to place the proceeds in a truly blind trust, and by creating a private 
cause of action explicitly allowing competitors disadvantaged by the 
president’s acceptance of unlawful benefits to file emoluments clause suits 
against the president in his personal capacity.

 The looming constitutional shadow cast by a Trump presidency poses a 
frightening risk to our national security and gravely disserves the people of 
the United States.
 