
This tumultuous election season is deserving of a soundtrack, one that 
captures the chaos of conflicting values that is ripping the country apart at 
the seams.

Enter American Band 
<http://www.npr.org/event/music/496689769/first-listen-live-drive-by-truckers-american-band>
, the 14th album byDrive-By Truckers <http://www.drivebytruckers.com/> that 
deftly captures the mood of this country over recent years. It’s a lean set of 
songs that serve as an urgent rallying cry against the divisiveness played out 
on the streets of Ferguson, Baton Rouge and Dallas, but also on the 
presidential campaign trail where rhetoric has become lighter fluid stoking the 
flames higher.

Defiant guitar riffs open the album to the story of Ramon Casiano 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1981/05/06/us/leader-of-rifle-group-affirms-that-he-shot-bot-to-death-in-1931.html>
, the 15-year-old Mexican boy killed by the former head of the National Rifle 
Association in 1931, and continues with the killing ofTrayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/14/trayvon-martin-george-zimmerman-trial>
 – “If you say it wasn’t racial when they shot him in his tracks / I guess that 
means you ain’t black,” Patterson Hood sings on What It Means – as well as 
revisiting the tensions created by the the endless war on terror and recurring 
racial violence back home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaQQB7rkZZmk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaQQB7rkZZmk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaQQB7rkZZmk&media=>
The band has been here before. In 2001 the Truckers laid their claim for 
immortality withSouthern Rock Opera 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/southern-rock-opera-mw0000660406>, a double 
album that pronounced southern identity as more complex than Confederate flags 
and racial scorn. Instead, Hood reimagines the southern experience through the 
eyes of a kid from Alabama who uses music as a conduit to greater things. As 
the title suggests, the songs are epic, the guitars are plentiful, and the 
references proudly regional. The album was widely praised, not just for its 
literate storytelling, but also for how it reclaimed southern rock from the 
state fair circuit ofLynyrd Skynyrd cover bands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/apr/05/southern-rock-passion-marred-racism>
.

“People kept telling us what a terrible idea it was and it would be the end to 
our promising young career, but it felt right to us. We had a vision it was 
going to be and we followed it,” he says. “Turned out it worked.”

Hood, too, is a child of Alabama. He grew up outside of Muscle Shoals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/21/muscle-shoals-alabama-documentary>
, home to the famed recording studio where his father, David Hood, served as a 
member theMuscle Shoals rhythm section 
<http://www.allmusic.com/artist/the-muscle-shoals-rhythm-section-mn0001352027/biography>
, playing bass on hundreds of recordings by Aretha Franklin, the Staple 
Singers, Etta James, Bobby Womack and Wilson Pickett. At an early age the 
younger Hood broke from the sports culture of north Alabama and turned to 
writing for refuge. It ignited a passion for politics. In the third grade he 
turned in a paper aboutWatergate <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/watergate>
 that suggested that President Nixon “should be tarred and feathered and tried 
for treason”. The teacher sent him home.

“To me, the political is personal. Because it’s not a sporting event where, at 
the end of the day, the team clocks out and moves on. There are very real 
things that that happen,” he says.

Yet this album almost didn’t. By late 2015 the band planned to take this year 
off after an extended touring regimen followingEnglish Oceans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/27/drive-by-truckers-english-oceans-review>
, their record from the previous year. Hood had relocated his family to 
Portland while Mike Cooley, his main collaborator, remained in Georgia aiming 
to write his first solo record. Soon enough the headlines laid both plans to 
rest: police overreach, street protests, the mainstreaming of the far right. 
“Songs started coming for both of us,” he said. Over three days in November the 
band cut nine of them; another three days in January finished the job.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmY0qOCUy27Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmY0qOCUy27Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmY0qOCUy27Q&media=>
One of the revelations of American Band is how this isn’t a record that can be 
easily plastered on a protest sign or blasted at a rally. The songs go deeper 
in that they tell stories with human faces and personal testimony. For that 
reason no other band than this one can claim the mantle to the golden years of 
Bruce Springsteen. On Ever South, Hood traces his people’s journey from Ellis 
Island to Appalachia where, once tormented as outsiders, they became the 
tormentors under the revival tent of Christian fervor.

Another song connects the dots back to the fallout from 9/11 when in 2001 
Clear Channel Communications, now iHeartMedia, released a list of 165 songs, 
including John Lennon’s Imagine, for a suggested airplay ban 
<https://www.rt.com/usa/358957-911-clear-channel-memo/> because they were 
“lyrically questionable” in contradicting the thirst for war. On Once They 
Banned Imagine, Cooley sings of the same frenzy continuing today: “With or 
against, something been out to get us / and it looked like something finally 
did.”

For a band known for long shows and double albums – a consequence of there 
being three songwriters in the lineup – American Band is surprisingly lean and 
concise, with the 11 songs clocking in at about 45 minutes together. That was 
intentional, Hood says, to cater to the attention spans of those people who 
need to hear it the most. With so much talk in the media about southern white 
males clinging to the Republican presidential candidate, Donald Trump, there is 
a silent caucus representing those, like Hood, who are white middle-aged men in 
the south who consider him anathema to the republic.

“That is a big reason why this record exists. I am as truly in his demographic 
as you can get and I don’t want anyone for a second to think that SOB speaks 
for me,” he says. “Alabama is a red state, but there are people who feel 
otherwise there. There’s no shortage of people who feel that way, but they’re 
not the ones being heard because they are not as loud. There needs to be more 
middle-aged southern dudes saying that black lives matter.”

American Band is also a statement on the state of the Truckers, which, besides 
Cooley and Hood, include bassist Matt Patton, multi-instrumentalist Jay 
Gonzalez and drummer Brad Morgan. This is the band’s 20th year and the record 
is evidence that the urgency the band sparked in its first half thrives today. 
Much of that has to do with Hood’s 31-year relationship with Cooley that, 
contentious at times, stands on its contradictory strengths, not just in 
songwriting but also in musical flourishes, like how Cooley’s guitar spikes 
Hood’s quieter songs with gnarly guitar licks, and the same in reverse.

The band will tour on the record through late February and then another month 
in Europe before returning again come summer. By then the US will have a new 
president, which will make the record more relevant, no matter the outcome. 
“Our families got back behind this record now, which is wonderful,” Hood says. 
“That tells us we’re doing something we’re supposed to be doing.”
 