
Near the tiny farming villages of Rashwan and Abu Mishfa in the Nile Delta – 
the kind of villages where you might see a girl tugging on the harness of a 
recalcitrant water buffalo as she leads it out to graze, or a mule-drawn cart 
loaded with animal feed – is a scrappy lake, the haunt of innumerable egrets. 
Under this lake, and surrounding fields and houses, lie the remains ofNaukratis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/26/ancient-egypts-version-of-hong-kong-is-unearthed-by-british-team>
, a city established by Greeks as a trading port in around 620BC. It is here 
that aBritish Museum excavation 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/research_projects/all_current_projects/naukratis_the_greeks_in_egypt.aspx>
 is under way, and some of the archaeologists’ most intriguing discoveries in 
the city – which you might think of as a kind of Hong Kong of the ancient world 
– are about to form part of amajor exhibition 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/whats_on/exhibitions/sunken_cities.aspx>.


It takes an effort of imagination to conjure this place back to its ancient 
flourishing before its abandonment in the seventh century. But once it was a 
city with perhaps 16,000 inhabitants, full of temples to gods such as Hera, 
Aphrodite and the Dioskouroi (Castor and Pollux), and dominated by a vast 
sanctuary dedicated to the Egyptian deity Amun-Ra, from which a sphinx-lined 
avenue led to the Canopic branch of the Nile, which long ago flowed here.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy7jiCNNchGU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy7jiCNNchGU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy7jiCNNchGU&media=>
 The Hong Kong of the ancient world … a 3D animation of Naukratis. Video: Grant 
Cox/Alexandra Villing/Ross Thomas/Naukratis Project/Trustees of the British 
Museum. 
There was also a Hellenion, a sanctuary dedicated to all the gods of the 
Greeks: an early expression of pan-Hellenic identity from the politically 
independent city-states that, according to the historian Herodotus, jointly 
founded the city at the invitation of the pharaoh. The Greek temples started 
off as simple affairs, sacred enclosures with outdoor altars, but pedimented 
structures were built once the Greeks had learned the knack of building 
colonnaded temples from the Egyptians. Surrounding the sanctuaries were 
mud-brick houses several storeys high, some with dovecotes on their roofs. The 
same kind of conical pigeon houses can be seen in the villages today.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90e95a52734d2fb2ebf46c71f0bc990fb36e556%2F0_0_8621_4101%2F8621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt's%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt%27s%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd90e95a52734d2fb2ebf46c71f0bc990fb36e556%2F0_0_8621_4101%2F8621.jpg>
 Colossal … a five-metre pharaoh found at Naukratis’s sister port, 
Thonis-Heracleion. Photograph: Christoph Gerigk/Franck Goddio/Hilti Foundation 
All Mediterranean traders who had dealings with Egypt – not just Greeks, but 
also Phoenicians, Cypriots, Levantines – were obliged to come to Naukratis to 
trade their oil and wine and pay their tax, sailing more than 40 miles inland 
down the Nile viaThonis-Heracleion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/aug/02/ancient-egyptian-artefacts-thonis-heracleion-canopus-paris>
, a sister port at the mouth of the river on the Mediterranean. (That port was 
overwhelmed in antiquity by the encroaching sea: impressive finds have been 
made by marine archaeologists, which can also be seen in the British Museum 
exhibition.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc39084d2895622f5391775dfe077213a7c739168%2F0_228_7087_4252%2F7087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt's%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt%27s%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc39084d2895622f5391775dfe077213a7c739168%2F0_228_7087_4252%2F7087.jpg>
 A bronze Pharaoh in akhepresh crown at Thonis-Heracleion. Photograph: 
Christoph Gerigk/Franck Goddio/Hilti Foundation 
After the traders had done their deals, there was entertainment to be had: 
Herodotus tells us that Naukratis was famous for its excellent courtesans. 
Charaxos, the brother of the poet Sappho, came here on trading trips from 
Lesbos and so completely lost his heart to the beautiful Rhodopis that he 
bought her her freedom; she became fabulously rich.

Ross Thomas 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/about_us/departments/staff/greece_and_rome/ross_iain_thomas.aspx>
, who is directing the dig, walks me round the excavations, just a couple of 
days into the 2016 season, their fifth. No monuments remain, nor yet a whiff of 
the gorgeous Rhodopis, and yet the past is palpable. He points out a 
jalabiya-clad man sitting outside his house on a classical column base; and the 
recently ploughed fields are full of ancient potsherds. Ashraf Abdel-Rahman, a 
local official of the Supreme Council of Antiquities, picks up a piece. Thomas 
gives it a casual glance. “Fourth-century BC mushroom amphora, imported,” he 
says, with impressive taxonomical ease, and chucks it back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1397cc18319ab72c311ce5c16817cd6255666244%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt's%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt%27s%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1397cc18319ab72c311ce5c16817cd6255666244%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 ‘So this is Naukratis!’ … British Museum archaeologists following in the 
footsteps of Flinders Petrie at Naukratis. Photograph: British Museum 
We meet Ben Pennington 
<http://www.southampton.ac.uk/geography/postgraduate/research_students/bp1g14.page>
, a geoarchaeologist who, with young Egyptian trainees, is sinking an auger 
nine metres below the surface in order to glean information about the area’s 
ancient topography and environment. In another field, Eleanor Maw is in charge 
of a team surveying fields using the technique ofmagnetrometry 
<http://www.pastperfect.org.uk/archaeology/magneto.html> – “basically, a 
non-invasive way of looking at what’s underneath”, she explains, through which 
she can chart the outlines of the old mud-brick tower houses. Another team is 
digging in a pair of trenches that may pinpoint the entrance to the Hellenion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45fedd0e4ebda7fa1abefd720b6809040fb1885a%2F0_0_4856_7313%2F4856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt's%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt%27s%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45fedd0e4ebda7fa1abefd720b6809040fb1885a%2F0_0_4856_7313%2F4856.jpg>
 Lying in state … the statue of a Ptolemaic pharaoh travels through the streets 
of Alexandria. Photograph: British Museum 
Yet another group, perhaps most excitingly, is working at the edge of where 
the Nile once flowed. Naukratis has been partially excavated before, first by 
the greatFlinders Petrie <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Flinders-Petrie> 
in the 1880s. (He realised he’d stumbled across the city when he read a Greek 
inscription saying so – it was built into the house he was staying in. “I 
almost jumped as I read,” he wrote in his journal. “So this is Naukratis!”). 
The course of the river, however, was established only by Thomas’s team, and he 
is excited at the prospect of discovering the quayside and, perhaps, 
well-preserved boat remains. It is highly possible, for the site is 
waterlogged, providing the anaerobic conditions that slow the decay of wood.


Today, though, the haul is potsherds from the sixth century BC. Most of them – 
bright reddish, sandy to the touch – are locally made Egyptian wares. There are 
also Greek mortaria – bowls for pounding ingredients into sauces – and all 
manner of wine amphorae from the east Greek world, the Hellenic cities on what 
is now the west coast of Turkey. Thomas and his colleague from the British 
Museum,Alexandra Villing 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/about_us/departments/staff/greece_and_rome/alexandra_villing.aspx>
, sort through them. Petrie and his Victorian successors tended to ignore the 
Egyptian pottery finds, leading to a skewed vision of what kind of cultural 
texture this city might have had. Ross and Villing suspect the interaction and 
cultural exchange between people here was richer and more complex than had been 
believed. “It’s not a Greek colony,” says Thomas. “It’s a mixed community.” 
(The other matter over which Flinders Petrie discreetly drew a veil was the 
vast number of little terracotta figures of Harpocrates, the child of Isis and 
Osiris, that he found around the city. The figurines had comically vast and 
engorged phalluses, associated with the god’s role in ensuring the land’s 
fertility.)

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkyH70bZrGL0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkyH70bZrGL0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkyH70bZrGL0&media=>
 Hidden depths … IEASM underwater excavations at Abu-Qir Bay, Egypt. Video: 
Roland Savoye/Franck Goddio/Hilti Foundation  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e66cde3889146c485c7bdb66e37eb01e5d0b04d%2F0_0_2376_4015%2F2376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt's%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt%27s%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e66cde3889146c485c7bdb66e37eb01e5d0b04d%2F0_0_2376_4015%2F2376.jpg>
 ‘Kallias dedicated me to Aphrodite’ … the sixth-century hunter and his 
piglets, a Naukratis find. Photograph: Trustees of the British Museum 
There is no more impressive evidence of the cultural encounters that occurred 
at Naukratis than in theEgyptian Museum, in Cairo, 
<http://www.sca-egypt.org/eng/mus_egyptian_museum.htm> which Villing and I 
visit together. We are looking for a statue. Pass it by and you’d probably take 
it for another pharaoh: the four-metre-tall figure has an Egyptian ruler’s 
kilt, rigid arms and left foot striding forward. He’s not one, though: he was 
erected in the temple of Amun-Ra in Naukratis in around 300BC (a generation 
after Alexander’s conquest), and his name, according to the hieroglyphs on his 
back, is Horemheb. So far, so Egyptian, but the inscription goes on to tell us 
in no uncertain terms that “I am a Greek” – and that his father was Krates, a 
very Hellenic name, and his mother was the Egyptian-sounding Shesemtet.

There is a lot of this intriguing cultural mingling in Egypt, and it runs 
right through to the Romans. In the catacombs of Kom el-Shoqafa in Alexandria, 
a Roman family is buried in an elaborate tomb arranged like a pedimented temple 
with niches for the sarcophagi, which are decorated with flower garlands and 
tragic masks – altogether very classical. But the pediment is carved with 
Egyptian falcons, the Roman couple are depicted as Egyptian from the neck down 
(another kilt and striding left leg) and the relief carvings above their tombs 
are of Egyptian scenes, including Anubis presiding over a mummification. 
Nearby, in the sanctuary below the temple of Serapis – a Greek-friendly version 
of Osiris – the Roman emperor Hadrian dedicated an extraordinary, lifesize 
bronze bull representing the Egyptian god Apis. A replica is in situ, but the 
original can be seen in theBritish Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum> exhibition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fdbecb0e2d6ac0f20359dd1bf1a0f85da9a93dc%2F0_147_5906_3544%2F5906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt's%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt%27s%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fdbecb0e2d6ac0f20359dd1bf1a0f85da9a93dc%2F0_147_5906_3544%2F5906.jpg>
 Fish food … a third century pharaoh head on the ocean floor at 
Thonis-Heracleion. Photograph: Christoph Gerigk/Franck Goddio/Hilti Foundation 
Sometimes it’s bewildering even to attempt to follow these cultural and 
religious currents as they eddy and flow around the Mediterranean. A pottery 
object excavated by Petrie in Naukratis, which is about to tour to museums 
around the UK, also tells a complex tale. “He’s a mid-sixth-century figure of a 
man carrying bow and arrows, with two hares and two boar piglets on his 
shoulders,” explains Thomas. “He’s wearing a Cypriot cap, an Egyptian kilt and 
a shirt. The inscription says, ‘Kallias dedicated me to Aphrodite’. We think 
the dedicator was probably an east Greek.” In other words, it was made in 
Cyprus in an Egyptian style, where it was bought and inscribed probably by a 
Greek trader from Ionia (now Turkey), and then dedicated in a Greek temple in 
Egypt. There’s a story that comes from the second- and third-century AD author 
Athenaeus, born in Naukratis, which chimes uncannily accurately with the 
journey of that votive figure. He tells of a Greek trader from Naukratis who, 
on his way back toEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, bought a 
figurine of Aphrodite from Paphos on Cyprus. On the way home, he was caught up 
in a storm and prayed to the goddess. She answered him: the storm calmed and a 
myrtle bush miraculously sprouted on board. When he arrived in Naukratis, he 
dedicated his figurine at the temple of Aphrodite and hosted a feast, the 
guests crowned with myrtle wreaths.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facc2dbb30c5f2de27a331d5209aa44ecd3dd698a%2F0_0_7087_4724%2F7087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt's%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drowned%20worlds%3A%20Egypt%27s%20lost%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F15%2Fdrowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facc2dbb30c5f2de27a331d5209aa44ecd3dd698a%2F0_0_7087_4724%2F7087.jpg>
 On show … the two-metre statue of the Apis Bull. Photograph: Christoph 
Gerigk/Franck Goddio/Hilti Foundation 
In the Naukratis of 2016, there’s a breath of excitement: Ashley Pooley’s 
team, working at the ancient riverbank, has found some wood, preserved here in 
the mud since the sixth century BC. It’s not a stern or a prow, but it’s 
something; perhaps, they think, part of a quayside boardwalk. Not bad for day 
two in the field – and a hopeful sign that the fertile black soil of Egypt has 
more and more knowledge to impart.

• Sunken Cities: Egypt’s Lost Worlds 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/whats_on/exhibitions/sunken_cities.aspx> is at 
the British Museum, London, 19 May-27 November.
 