
There are night mayors across cities in Europe now, in Paris, Amsterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/21/night-mayor-amsterdam-holland-mirik-milan-night-time-commission>
, Zurich, Toulouse. In August, Sadiq Khan advertised for London’s version, 
which he would call a “night tsar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/22/london-sadiq-khan-night-tsar-club-closures-24-hour-city-fabric>
”. The post was part-time, two-and-a-half days a week, £35,000 salary, and 
would have the responsibility of turning London into a 24-hour city. With the 
advent ofthe night tube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/20/london-night-tube-meet-people-travelled-first-night-sadiq-khan>
, there was to be a push for a “night-time economy”. More than 180 people 
applied. Around 10 of those had been invited to apply. In October, Khan called 
one of those 10, Amy Lamé – performer, presenter, writer and host ofthe 
long-running cabaret club night Duckie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/nov/20/duckie-20-years-of-britain-london-strangest-greatest-club-night>
 – to tell hershe’d got the gig 
<http://www.cityam.com/252935/sadiq-khan-has-announced-his-new-night-czar-amy-lam>
. She promised a “fact-finding mission” of the city’s bars and clubs. As public 
positions go, this one sounded like it could be fun.

Lamé has been in the job for just a month, and has already had her tax affairs 
scrutinised (she immediately changed them), hadold Tory-bashing tweets 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-38001732> dredged up (she 
apologised for any offence caused), and been accused of being little more than 
window-dressing for a complex role she is not qualified to do. For someone 
whose public career began with a one-woman comedy show called Gay Man Trapped 
in a Lesbian’s Body, and who presented a show called Gaytime TV, the sudden 
scrutiny and need for diplomacy that comes with a political position must be 
jarring.

A night tsar is born: who is Amy Lamé?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/shortcuts/2016/nov/04/amy-lame-londons-new-night-tsar>
Not only that, she is facing a near-impossible job. The night tube is being 
rolled out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/07/jubilee-line-joins-londons-busier-than-expected-night-tube>
, which is good news for people who need to travel to work at night, but there 
is an argument that, for party-goers and clubbers, it’s a train line that now 
leads nowhere. Across the UK, going out is starting to look like a declining 
pastime: a Guardian survey in March revealed thatyoung people now prefer a 
night in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/24/id-rather-chill-in-and-relax-why-millennials-dont-go-clubbing>
, because clubbing is too expensive, too impersonal, too stressful, too tiring. 
In the last decade, London has lost 40% of its music venues and 50% of its 
nightclubs.

No matter how much Khan and Lamé talk up the idea of the night-time economy, 
the reality can be seen by anyone who finds themselves out and about after 2am:
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> is nowhere close to being a 
24-hour city. Most after-hours clubs have been replaced by expensive luxury 
flats and chain restaurants. Khan may be in charge now, but Boris Johnson’s 
legacy has not been shaken off yet.

When we meet over a temperate fizzy water, Lamé is friendly but seems worried 
about saying the wrong thing. She’s more circumspect than her brash TV and 
radio persona might lead you to expect. Aptly, she’s a “night bird”, happy to 
keep going until 3am, but in this job – which transpires not to be part-time, 
so much as “five, six, seven days a week” – she is doing long days and early 
starts.

Lamé is 45 and moved to London from New Jersey when she was 22, mostly, she 
thinks, inspired by her favourite bands, the Smiths and Depeche Mode. Her 
accent is a clipped, transatlantic half-and-half. Her first job in the city was 
at a lesbian community cafe called First Out, in Covent Garden, where she 
worked for five years. It closed down in 2011 due to a combination of 
unaffordable rents and the Crossrail works that havetorn up much of the 
surrounding area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/07/crossrail-st-giles-arewell-london-last-wild-corners>
.

LGBT venues in particular have been closing at an extraordinary rate; Lamé is 
keenly aware of this, having run a successful campaign to save Duckie’s home, 
theRoyal Vauxhall Tavern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/09/london-gay-pub-royal-vauxhall-tavern-given-grade-ii-listing>
, from developers. “But it’s what you value and what is important to community 
cohesion. I would say LGBT spaces are priceless and we have to preserve them, 
just like we have to preserve other spaces.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fdrugs-developers-diplomacy-london-night-tsar-amy-lame-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84cc7c43bf81c9f1cb87509d5f52cf853dfacef9%2F0_145_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drugs%2C%20developers%20and%20diplomacy%3A%20London%20night%20tsar%20Amy%20Lam%C3%A9%20on%20the%20challenges%20of%20the%20job&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fdrugs-developers-diplomacy-london-night-tsar-amy-lame-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drugs%2C%20developers%20and%20diplomacy%3A%20London%20night%20tsar%20Amy%20Lam%C3%A9%20on%20the%20challenges%20of%20the%20job&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fdrugs-developers-diplomacy-london-night-tsar-amy-lame-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84cc7c43bf81c9f1cb87509d5f52cf853dfacef9%2F0_145_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Lamé with mayor Sadiq Khan on the day her appointment as night tsar was 
announced. Photograph: Victoria Jones/PA 
But a vibrant and diverse nightlife may be at odds with the profit margins of 
the glass-walled new-builds that have replaced many of the city’s venues. Is 
her focus culture or the economy? Can she do both? “It may be more economically 
beneficial for a development company to build luxury flats than keeping a pub 
going, but actually, when you tot up how many jobs are supported by the 
night-time economy – one in eight jobs – there are economic benefits to keeping 
people in a locality.” She cites Dalston, in east London, as an example of 
people flooding into an area for its nightlife, and spending money in its 
shops, restaurants, takeaways and taxi firms.

But much of east London has undergone a crackdown by the Metropolitan police 
on what they term “alcohol-related crimes”, which has left proprietors in “a 
constant panic” about whethertheir licenses could be revoked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/26/fight-for-britains-nightlife-police-council-strangling-night-time-economy>
. Dalston was deemed a Special Policy Area in 2014, to tackle “anti-social 
behaviour and noise”, despite 84% of people surveyed there opposing the 
measure. This year saw the closure of two of its best venues,Passing Clouds 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/passing-clouds-protesters-handed-major-boost-to-save-dalston-live-music-venue-a3379626.html>
 and theDance Tunnel 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/dalston-club-dance-tunnel-announces-shock-closure-but-owners-hope-for-better-venue-a3226601.html>
. There is a risk that London could end up with a sanitised, palatable kind of 
nightlife, rather than the real deal – and something similar is happening 
across the country. “I can’t pretend that this isn’t a tricky issue,” Lamé 
says. “I want to make sure everyone in London has the kind of nightlife that 
they want, whether it’s raving til 4am or getting a good night’s sleep.”

One of the ways she aims to help people sleep was part of Kahn’s mayoral 
manifesto: a principle called “agents of change”, which says that if property 
developers build near clubs or venues, it is their responsibility to make sure 
the sound-proofing is sufficient. The Curzon cinema in Mayfair, for example,is 
at risk of closure 
<http://www.timeout.com/london/blog/worried-about-the-curzon-soho-closing-now-the-curzon-mayfair-is-under-threat-091516>
 after 80 years owing to noise potentially seeping into the new flats that are 
being built above it. Lamé says the scheme has already been successful in 
Elephant and Castle, where flats were built next to the Ministry of Sound club 
with provisions for extra noise. It’s a sensible idea. Will it be compulsory? 
“Well. In a few years, that is the hope. It will take a little while to get 
that in place. But the developers I’ve spoken to have been very receptive.”

End of the party: how police and councils are calling time on Britain’s 
nightlife
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/26/fight-for-britains-nightlife-police-council-strangling-night-time-economy>
In August, following the separate drug-related deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/fabric-london-nightclub-close-weekend-deaths-teenagers>
 of two teenagers, the superclub Fabric had its license suspended by Islington 
council; it waspermanently closed in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/london-nightclub-fabric-close-permanently-licence-revoked-drugs>
, in part due to what the council called a “culture of drugs”. Following a 
campaign to save the club, supported by many in the music world, and by Khan, 
an agreement was reached last month by whichthe club would reopen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/fabric-nightclub-to-reopen-under-strict-new-licensing-conditions>
 with strict new measures in place. These include a ban on under-19s on some 
nights, “covert surveillance” inside, lifetime bans for anyone caught with 
drugs and “enhanced searching procedures and controls”.

Lamé says she is “thrilled” that Fabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fabric> has reopened. “It’s really good news 
for the night-time economy.” Even with such strict rules? “They wouldn’t have 
signed up to them if they didn’t feel they could adhere to it.” Had she been in 
charge when it was closed down, she says, her hope is that it would not have 
reached crisis point in the first place. “Obviously lines of communication had 
severely broken down, between police, owners, punters and the council. My role 
is to be able to get everybody around the table and talk these things through. 
Everybody wants to have a safe night out. It’s tragic those boys died. I would 
never want anything like that to happen ever again, and we have to do 
everything we can to prevent that.”

But is it really the responsibility of the venue to stop its punters taking 
drugs? Lamé shifts a little in her seat. “Drugs are illegal,” she says, toeing 
the line. “Drugs are illegal and the police do everything they can to ensure 
everyone has a safe night out. Fabric is clear – they released a statement 
saying there is no such thing as taking drugs safely.”

The fact is, though, that people on nights out do sometimes take drugs. The UK 
has the highest cocaine use 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/uk-city-named-cocaine-capital-8089019> 
among young people in Europe. Ecstasy and LSD useis increasing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/23/ecstasy-and-lsd-use-reaches-new-high-among-young>
 year on year. It is another juggling act for a night tsar to work out whether 
it is possible to have a frank conversation about drugs in a climate where she 
is already, a month in, so heavily scrutinised. “It is a fact of life, and if 
we ignore it we’re ignoring something that’s a huge part of society. I’ve had 
some very productive conversations with the police in my first few weeks in the 
job.” But, she says delicately, it’s important for her not to take sides. “It’s 
just as important that I listen to police as to people who do want to go out 
and rave and take various substances. And that those voices are heard in 
balance – until now that maybe hasn’t been the case.”

Lamé is a long-time Labour party member. She spent the night before her 
wedding at an LGBT event at 10 Downing Street, when Gordon Brown was prime 
minister, and unsuccessfully stood for Labour candidate selection in 2014 in 
Dulwich and West Norwood. She is cautious about discussing the current state of 
the party, calling it a “big family with room for lots of different 
personalities” but will point out that Labour is in “an incredibly strong 
position in London at the moment. Sadiq’s mandate is enormous.” That isn’t 
reflected outside of London, I say. “Yes, but we’re in London.”

What of the semi-serious post-Brexit suggestion floated by some Remain 
supporters thatLondon should splinter off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/jul/11/the-case-for-a-more-independent-post-brexit-london-is-gaining-strength>
 into its own state? “We’ve seen the benefits of having people from all over 
the world in this city. It’s one of the things that makes us so strong, so 
vibrant, so successful. There is this disconnect in a way, because as Londoners 
we appreciate that and then you go outside of London and a huge majority of 
people voted for Brexit and are anti-immigration or want curbs on it. It’s a 
debate we have to have, but for Londoners I think it’s particularly difficult 
because we just see the great benefits of multicultural society.”

When Lamé was first appointed, Gareth Bacon, a Conservative member of the 
London Assembly, quoted several of her old tweets, in which she called George 
Osborne a “cunt”, Ruth Davidson “Tory scum” and said “Ding dong the witch is 
dead” on the day Thatcher died. Lamé has been largely diplomatic and by the 
book in our conversation so far, but she is crisp when I bring it up today. 
“I’ve apologised, profusely,” she says, looking exasperated. She has also 
deleted the tweets. “I’ve never lived my life like I was preparing to do a job 
in public service. But now, I won’t be tweeting like that any more. I’ve 
apologised to the people who were offended.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fdrugs-developers-diplomacy-london-night-tsar-amy-lame-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F880c94e88ae1b743d15a8e07fdd3743f735596ad%2F0_0_640_427%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drugs%2C%20developers%20and%20diplomacy%3A%20London%20night%20tsar%20Amy%20Lam%C3%A9%20on%20the%20challenges%20of%20the%20job&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fdrugs-developers-diplomacy-london-night-tsar-amy-lame-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drugs%2C%20developers%20and%20diplomacy%3A%20London%20night%20tsar%20Amy%20Lam%C3%A9%20on%20the%20challenges%20of%20the%20job&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fdrugs-developers-diplomacy-london-night-tsar-amy-lame-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F880c94e88ae1b743d15a8e07fdd3743f735596ad%2F0_0_640_427%2F640.jpg>
 Amy Lamé on stage at Duckie, the cabaret and performance art group she helped 
found 
Much of the criticism levelled against her by Conservatives has been wrapped 
up in the implication that she is a famous face in a ceremonial position 
without the expertise necessary to handle the “economy” part of the “night-time 
economy”. It was initially reported that the tsar would also take over the
London Night Time Commission 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/arts-and-culture/vision-and-strategy/london-night-time-commission>
; the roles now appear to have been split. “The Night Time Commission is a 
group of stakeholders that work across the night-time sector. And I will be a 
part of that. I will definitely be a part of that. I’m just not going to chair 
it,” she says. “People have made a really big deal about this, but I don’t feel 
like it was much of an issue to be honest.”

Well, it implies that you won’t have any real power. “I have 21 years’ 
experience of running my own nightclub, on the front line of the night-time 
economy. I’ve worked for the last three-and-a-half years and chaired a 
community organisation to save our local pub. Some of the things the Tories 
have been saying I just don’t recognise, because my experience on the frontline 
is copper-bottomed.”

The brutality of the shift from club night to City Hall was expected, but 
there have been times when the toxicity of the political world has been 
surprising. “I’ve had death threats, I’ve had rape threats,” she says, sadly. 
“Someone sent me a tweet that said: ‘I hope you get raped to death by Muslims.’ 
With a smiley face at the end. It’s shocking. Block, report, block, report. You 
have to build resilience to be a woman in the public eye in 2016.”

Lamé says she’s optimistic that she can make London’s nightlife better. I tell 
her I think she’s facing an impossible task. “I’m not going to sit here and 
pretend it’s easy. It isn’t. But I love London at night so much. Growing up in 
America, but living here for the last 24 years, I have a kind of optimistic 
cynicism. It’s all the cynicism of being British with the optimism of being 
American.”

After all, she came to London for its nightlife, to live in the place she’d 
heard Morrissey singing about. “All I wanted to do was dance until the small 
hours and be with my friends and have a few drinks and soak all that up.” And 
she’s still doing it – she’s off to DJ at the Labour Women’s Network Christmas 
party tonight, and Duckie, which started in 1995, still happens every Saturday. 
“After 21 years! It doesn’t lose its potency.”
 