
This image is a day-time photograph of Palm Jumeirah taken by NASA Commander 
Leroy Chiao from aboard the International Space Station in 2005. Jumeirah was 
the first of a series of new islands off the coast ofDubai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dubai> designed to add hundreds of 
kilometres of private coastline to the city.

The islands were developed through a process of dredging sand from the floor 
of the Persian Gulf and spraying it to form shaped land masses. This photo was 
taken as work on the land mass itself was being completed and in advance of the 
start of construction of villas and hotels that would house 65,000 people. It 
was featured in various newspapers and websites shortly after it was taken.


What only becomes obvious from the heightened perspective is that the island 
is constructed in the shape of a palm tree (the crescent around the perimeter 
serves as a barrier). The spacebourne vantage point reveals the landscape in 
both the pictorial and geographic senses. Palm Jumeirah’s positioning, of 
course, enacts a rather simple visual pun in which the palm tree pretends to 
grow out of Dubai’s main coastline.

For Dubai’s real estate holding corporation, Nakheel Properties, this distinct 
shape, which they claimed in their marketing campaigns is visible from the moon 
(which is difficult to confirm), was a key selling point. It is difficult to 
tease out how substantial of a role it played in the pricing of villas and 
other properties on Jumeirah prior to the onset of Dubai’s 2009 crisis. 
However, it is clear that the island’s value as real estate and elite 
socio-economic status are intertwined with its qualities as a picture.

But why was this transformation of land into symbols visible from space, but 
for the most part only accessible to the majority of us non-astronauts via 
photographs, so resonant? A landscape intervention at this scale is remarkable 
in and of itself, but beyond this, it signifies a breakdown in cultural 
distinctions between land and media.

The shaping of the island itself was aided by the passage of signals between 
the boats that sprayed the sand and the global network of GPS satellites that 
provided location data to the required precision. The island is dotted with 
mobile phone masts that are designed to appear as palm trees. While these kinds 
of examples are by no means unique to Palm Jumeirah, the shape of the island 
seems to amplify their significance to contemporary and future changes in the 
built environment.

Ben Campkin <http://www.twitter.com/BenCampkin> is the author of Remaking 
London: Decline and Regeneration in Urban Culture (IB Tauris, 2013) 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/remaking-london.html>, director of UCL’s Urban 
Laboratory <http://www.ucl.ac.uk/urbanlab>, senior lecturer in the Bartlett 
School of Architecture and co-editor ofUrban Pamphleteer 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/urbanlab/research/urban-pamphleteer>.

Mariana Mogilevich is a historian of architecture and urbanism and Mellon 
Fellow in architecture, urbanism and the humanities at Princeton University.

Rebecca Ross <https://twitter.com/handsinmachines> is a graphic and 
interaction designer and urban historian, senior lecturer at Central Saint 
Martins School of Art and Design and co-editor ofUrban Pamphleteer 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/urbanlab/research/urban-pamphleteer>.

Find out more about the project at Picturing Place 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/urbanlab/research/picturingplace> and on Twitter 
#picturingplace.
 