
A Dutch woman who has lived in the UK for 24 years, and has two children with 
her British husband, has been told by the Home Office that she should make 
arrangements to leave the country after she applied for citizenship after the 
EU referendum.

The story of Monique Hawkins highlights the practical difficulties faced by 
millions of EU citizens concerned that they will not have the right to stay in 
Britain post-Brexit.

 Hawkins had considered applying for citizenship before but decided not to as 
it did not confer any rights beyond her current EU rights. However, after the 
referendum she changed her mind, fearful that those rights would be diminished 
after Britain leaves the EU.

European citizens marrying Britons do not automatically qualify for UK 
citizenship under current rules and Hawkins was concerned that if she did not 
apply she would be forced “to join a US-style two-hour immigration queue” while 
the rest of her family “sail through the UK passport lane”.


Brexit: 1m EU citizens in Britain 'could be at risk of deportation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-eu-citizens-living-britain-risk-deportation-3-million-campaign-european-union>
In order to get citizenship, she first had to get a “permanent residency” 
document, which involves an 85-page application form.

Hawkins said the Home Office had overlooked vital information in her 
submission – she was unable to supply an original of her Dutch passport because 
her father had recently died and she needed her passport to continue to travel 
to the Netherlands to support her mother.

However, the department not only rejected her application but sent her a 
letter which took no account of her right to be in the country irrespective of 
their decision. “As you appear to have no alternative basis of stay in the 
United Kingdom you should now make arrangements to leave,” the letter said.

When she phoned the Home Office to discuss the decision communicated to her in 
October, four months after her application, she was told her case could not be 
discussed on the phone or by email. Hawkins said her treatment by the Home 
Office was as absurd as a “Monty Python” sketch.


In a written complaint, Hawkins said the worst aspect about the process was 
the inability to contact anyone. She wrote: “I do not believe there is any 
other business, organisation or even legal process in the world that would 
treat its customers/clients/applicants in this manner.”

The software engineer, from Surrey, said she never once thought she would be 
deported but said her experience highlights the absurdity of the Home Office 
permanent residency process.

She was told that under the rules she could not talk to anyone about her case 
and after making her written complaint she received a letter saying her 
complaint did not qualify as a complaint under Home Office guidelines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fdutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef2690616e214604b0dc335bfba31101305a190b%2F3_145_4510_2706%2F4510.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dutch%20woman%20with%20two%20British%20children%20told%20to%20leave%20UK%20after%2024%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fdutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dutch%20woman%20with%20two%20British%20children%20told%20to%20leave%20UK%20after%2024%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fdutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef2690616e214604b0dc335bfba31101305a190b%2F3_145_4510_2706%2F4510.jpg>
 A European Union passport. Photograph: Aflo/Rex/Shutterstock 
She also protested that while the Home Office would not discuss her case with 
her personally, it was willing to respond to her MP Dominic Raab, who 
intervened on her behalf.

She has now written to appeal, but says in her complaint: “I am now left 
totally in limbo. I do not know how long to wait for a reply. I do not know 
whether my application will be reopened or not.”

She was told the reason for the rejection was because she had not included her 
original passport.

In her complaint, Hawkins points out that she included a solicitor-approved 
photocopy of her passport – which is permissible under the rules – plus a 
covering letter to explain why she could not be without her passport for the 
four to six months it takes to process.

She said the application form included a box for reasons for not including a 
valid passport as long as it was due to circumstances beyond your control. 
“Clearly my father dying did not qualify in the Home Office’s eyes as beyond my 
control,” said Hawkins.

Hawkins’s complaint also states that her covering letter for her original 
application said that she would provide her original passport once the case 
worker assigned to it needed to see it.


EU citizens in Britain post Brexit vote: ‘I feel betrayed, not at home, sad’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/01/eu-citizens-in-britain-post-brexit-vote-feel-betrayed-not-at-home-sad>
Hawkins, who is a software developer and the daughter of a former oil company 
executive, lived in several countries as a child and says the UK is the only 
place she feels she can call home. She studied maths at Cambridge University 
and settled in the UK in 1992. She lives in Surrey and has two children, aged 
15 and 17. “I always used to feel I had no roots. Because of my dad’s 
background we used to move every five years. This is the first time I’ve laid 
down roots,” she said.

“I had a massive shock following the referendum. I felt very stressed and 
suddenly felt walking down the street that the place didn’t want me any more. 
That feeling began to subside, but I thought I should apply for citizenship.”

The application form, which includes a “flummoxing” requirement to list every 
absence from the UK in the past 24 years, took an entire weekend to complete, 
she said. “It is important to realise that in applying for permanent residency 
I am not gaining a right, I am only getting a document stating a right I 
already have,” she said.

Her husband, Robert, raised another issue: that Europeans married to Britons 
do not have an automatic right to citizenship. “As a British citizen, I had the 
expectation that marrying someone from abroad would automatically give them the 
right to become a British citizen. That seems to be the case unless your wife 
happens to come from theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” 
he said.

Hawkins, who has resubmitted an application for permanent residency, said she 
believed  her case drew attention to the “discrimination against EU/UK 
marriages”. The British spouse cannot sponsor their EU partner and the EU 
spouse has to apply on their own merits. If they have not worked and are 
supported by their spouse, they may not meet the selection criteria.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Four-obsession-with-good-immigrants-breeds-intolerance-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20obsession%20with%20'good%20immigrants'%20breeds%20intolerance%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Four-obsession-with-good-immigrants-breeds-intolerance-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20obsession%20with%20%27good%20immigrants%27%20breeds%20intolerance%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Four-obsession-with-good-immigrants-breeds-intolerance-video&media=>
Our obsession with ‘good immigrants’ breeds intolerance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/oct/19/our-obsession-with-good-immigrants-breeds-intolerance-video>
The Home Office said: “The rights of EU nationals living in the UK remain 
unchanged while we are a member of the European Union. EU nationals do not 
require any additional documents to prove their status.”

It said Hawkins’s application could not be progressed because the original ID 
was missing. It said since October, applications could be submitted online and 
it had also launched an express passport check-in servicein 58 local councils 
around the country 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/european-passport-return-service>, 
including one 10 miles from Hawkins’s home.

Hawkins’s case is just one of many similar experiences of EU citizens panicked 
into applying for permanent residency. German aerospace executive Lars Graefe, 
who has lived in the UK since 1998, and is married to a British woman, said he 
received a similar “make-preparations-to-leave” letter from the Home Office.

He couldn’t surrender his passport because he travels every week and made a 
complaint because he too thought he satisfied the provision for not including 
original documentation.

“The point I raised in my complaint was about the process. Even if they 
couldn’t verify I was German, I still qualify to remain. Clearly the Home 
Office don’t know how to deal with EU citizens. If you were in the private 
sector and treated customers like this you would be sacked,” he said.
 