
Even the most adamant supporters of the war on drugs agree that it is failing. 
At a major UN summit on drug policy earlier this year, many member states 
argued forcefully fora more balanced and humane approach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/un-summit-global-war-drugs-agreement-approved>
. But there’s one anti-drug crusader who refuses to face the facts. For the 
past six months Rodrigo Duterte, president of the Philippines has waged one of 
the world’s most vicious counter-narcotics campaigns.

Duterte campaigned for president with a pledge to clean up the drug menace for 
good. Within days of winning the election he launched a scorched earth approach 
targeting anyone suspected of being involved in consuming or selling narcotics. 
During his inaugural address on 30 June, the one-time mayor of Davao city vowed 
to “slaughter these idiots for destroying my country”.

And kill them he has. The national police estimates that more than 6,000 
people were assassinated by law enforcement, paramilitaries and vigilantes 
since 1 July 2016. The police say that at least2,000 people were shot and 
killed by officers 
<http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/philippines-duterte-police/>
 in “self defence” during anti-drug operations. Around 33 people are killed for 
every one person injured, making this the most deadly drug war ever. Another
38,000 people have reportedly been jailed 
<http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/philippines-duterte-police/>
, fuelling a crisis in the country’s overpopulated prisons.

The president exults in the bloodbath. He recently boasted of killing suspects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/philippines-president-rodrigo-duterte-personally-killed-criminals>
 during his time as mayor, saying in “Davao I used to do it personally”, 
suggesting that summary executions are tolerated at the very top.

The president claims to have “cleaned up the streets” of Davao during his 
roughly two decades in power, calling it one of the world’s safest cities. 
Although the city is certainly cleaner and features new legislation that 
improves crime reporting, claims of public safety are vastly overstated. Indeed,
publicly available data on crime 
<http://www.philstar.com/nation/2016/04/02/1568394/murder-rate-highest-davao-city-pnp>
 shows the city posted thehighest rates of murder 
<http://www.philstar.com/nation/2016/04/02/1568394/murder-rate-highest-davao-city-pnp>
 and second highest rates of rape in the country between 2010-2015.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Frodrigo-dutertes-drug-war-in-the-philippines-is-out-of-control-he-needs-to-be-stopped%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfe4ce653deaf628372a8583ef4985c0f0308b04%2F0_4_4496_2697%2F4496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Duterte's%20drug%20war%20in%20the%20Philippines%20is%20out%20of%20control%2C%20he%20needs%20to%20be%20stopped%20%7C%20Robert%20Muggah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Frodrigo-dutertes-drug-war-in-the-philippines-is-out-of-control-he-needs-to-be-stopped%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Duterte%27s%20drug%20war%20in%20the%20Philippines%20is%20out%20of%20control%2C%20he%20needs%20to%20be%20stopped%20%7C%20Robert%20Muggah&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Frodrigo-dutertes-drug-war-in-the-philippines-is-out-of-control-he-needs-to-be-stopped%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfe4ce653deaf628372a8583ef4985c0f0308b04%2F0_4_4496_2697%2F4496.jpg>
 Inmates in an overcrowded police jail cell in Manila, Philippines. Photograph: 
Dondi Tawatao/Getty Images 
Duterte has a nasty habit of playing fast and loose with the facts. In a bid 
to give credence to his drug war, his team exaggerates and invents data. For 
example, Duterte inflated the estimated number of drug users in the country, 
stating that there arecurrently 4 million users 
<http://www.philstar.com/news-feature/2016/12/16/1654043/are-there-4-million-drug-addicts-philippines>
 – with as many as 10 million projected by 2020. Yet the country’s owndrug 
authorities <http://www.ddb.gov.ph/> contend that the number of users of hard 
drugs is much lower.The prevalence rate for drug use by Filipinos is actually 
closer to 2.3% 
<https://www.unodc.org/documents/wdr2015/World_Drug_Report_2015.pdf> (pdf), 
roughly half the global average. Inflammatory rhetoric and dodgy data have real 
world consequences. Not only can they incite violence, but they also determine 
the shape of government policy.

Yet Duterte’s tough on crime bombast goes down well with Filipinos. His use of 
Visayan slang (rather than just Tagalog or English) marks him as one of the 
people, and hisapproval ratings are topping 85% 
<http://cnnphilippines.com/news/2016/10/12/pulse-asia-rodrigo-duterte-86-percent-performance-trust-ratings.html>
, though this is typical for first year presidents. Nevertheless, there are 
signs that the opposition is beginning to rally, with some senatorscalling for 
his impeachment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/philippines-senators-duterte-impeached-killing-confession>
. His authoritarian tendencies are also starting to worry civil liberties 
experts: at apress conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/philippine-president-elect-says-corrupt-journalists-will-be-killed>
 he responded to one question by saying “just because you’re a journalist you 
are not exempted from assassination”, and last month hethreatened to kill human 
rights activists 
<http://time.com/4584478/dutere-threatens-to-kill-human-rights-activists/> 
because of their criticism of his crackdown on crime.

Duterte is upending the country’s international image. On the one hand, he has 
undermined the prospect of a serious and evidence-based strategy to prevent 
drug abuse problems, including of “shabu”, a highly addictive methamphetamine 
with dangerous side effects. His dragnet collapses users of a wide range of 
drugs with devastating effect, including violating basic human rights. This 
kind of impunity cannot be tolerated.

It may be time to consider divesting from companies that are directly and 
indirectly fuelling the massacre of Filipinos

But foreign governments are noticeably quiet about Duterte’s bloody campaign. 
TheWhite House recently condemned statements by the president 
<https://sports.yahoo.com/news/white-house-criticizes-dutertes-deeply-troubling-vigilantism-comments-193521688.html>
 but is reluctant to take action for fear of jeopardisingthe visiting forces 
agreement 
<http://www.philstar.com/headlines/2016/12/17/1654344/duterte-threatens-scrap-vfa-after-us-led-mcc-defers-aid-grant>
 and other geo-strategic priorities in the region. For his part, US
president-elect Trump speaks admiringly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/philippines-rodrigo-duterte-donald-trump-white-house-invite>
 of Duterte’s antics. In addition to cozying up with China, Duterte recently 
threatened to withdraw from the UN in response to criticism of his drug war. 
Soon after, the UN special rapporteur on extrajudicial killingscancelled a visit
 <http://www.manilatimes.net/dfa-chief-wants-apology-un-rapporteur/302250/> to 
the country after the president imposedunprecedented conditions 
<https://globalnation.inquirer.net/150824/un-expert-urges-duterte-govt-reconsider-demands>
 on her visit.

There are signs that human rights specialists are beginning to fight back. 
Religious 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-20/philippine-church-alarmed-by-police-killings-after-election/7527850>
 andcivil society groups are already mobilising 
<http://interaksyon.com/article/134570/human-rights-advocates-organize-network-against-killings-in-the-philippines>
 to push back against the state-sanctioned killings. The Philippines former 
secretary of justice and chair of the Commission on Human Rights, Leila de 
Lima, is one of the president’smost vocal critics 
<http://time.com/4603123/leila-de-lima-philippines-opposition-duterte-drug-war/>
. Outside of the Philippines, theUN special rapporteur on the right to health 
<http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20388&LangID=E>
 called for drug dependency to be treated as a public health issue and the 
decriminalisation of consumption. What’s more, the 18-memberUN committee on 
economic, social and cultural rights 
<http://cnnphilippines.com/news/2016/09/29/un-committee-probes-state-of-human-rights-in-philippines.html#.V-4iboZtMHA.twitter>
 took Duterte to task for the massacre of suspects.

Blindfolded and hosed with water: drug rehab in the Philippines – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/oct/28/blindfolded-hosed-with-water-drug-rehab-philippines-in-pictures>
Bolder action is needed. The international criminal court could start by 
treating the situation in the Philippines as a “crime against humanity” and 
opening an investigation. The chief prosecutor has alreadyexpressed she is 
“deeply concerned” about the violent crackdown on drug users and suspected 
dealers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/philippines-drug-crackdown-warning-icc-rodrigo-duterte>
. The president responded with characteristic bravado, describing foreign 
lawyers as “idiots” and thethreats as “bullshit” 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/r-philippines-duterte-describes-western-threats-of-icc-indictment-as-bullshit-2016-11>
. The UN security council can also refer the situation to the ICC in order to 
investigate the president and other senior officials involved in the killing.

The international community can also consider economic sanctions. Duterte has 
told worried businesses to “pack up and leave 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/r-philippines-duterte-describes-western-threats-of-icc-indictment-as-bullshit-2016-11>
”, claiming that the Chinese would happily take their place. Perhaps foreign 
businesses should take his advice. The European, American and Nordic Chambers 
of Commerce would do well to revisit the compatibility of their investments and 
shareholder concerns with systemic violations of human rights. It may be time 
to consider divesting from companies that are directly and indirectly fuelling 
the massacre of Filipinos.

Foreign governments should also consider withdrawing their aid to the 
Philippines if no change of direction materialises. The US started taking steps 
in this direction. After voicing their alarm with the president’s alleged 
involvement in assassinations, theUS Millennium Challenge Corp deferred renewal 
of a poverty reduction programme 
<https://www.ft.com/content/30346a18-c34a-11e6-9bca-2b93a6856354> “subject to a 
further review of concerns around the rule of law and civil liberties”. An 
earlier $434m (£353m) dollar package expired the month before Duterte’s taking 
office. Other aid agencies should follow suit. Duterte will no doubt brush it 
off, but it’s time to show that short-term financial imperatives should not 
trump human rights.

Robert Muggah is research director of the Igarapé Institute and SecDev 
Foundation.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 