
The Philippine president, Rodrigo Duterte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rodrigo-duterte>, has announced his 
“separation” from the United States, saying it has “lost” and he has realigned 
with China as the two agreed to resolve their South China Sea dispute through 
talks.


Duterte made his comments in China, where he is visiting with at least 200 
business people to pave the way for what he calls a new commercial alliance as
relations with the US, a longstanding ally, deteriorate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/07/philippines-defence-minister-says-military-can-cope-without-us-aid>
.

His trade secretary, Ramon Lopez, said $13.5bn (£11bn) in deals would be 
signed.

Duterte’s efforts to engage China, months after a tribunal ruling in The Hague 
over South China Sea disputes in favour of the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/philippines-wins-south-china-sea-case-against-china>
, mark a reversal in foreign policy since the 71-year-old former mayor took 
office on 30 June.

“America has lost now,” Duterte told Chinese and Philippine business people at 
a forum in the Great Hall of the People, attended by the Chinese vice-premier, 
Zhang Gaoli.

Obama’s failed ‘Asian pivot’ leaves China ascendant | Simon Tisdall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/obama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant>
“I’ve realigned myself in your ideological flow and maybe I will also go to 
Russia to talk to [president Vladimir] Putin and tell him that there are three 
of us against the world – China,Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/philippines> and Russia. It’s the only way,” 
he added.

“With that, in this venue, your honours, in this venue, I announce my 
separation from the United States,” Duterte said to applause. “I have separated 
from them. So I will be dependent on you for all time. But do not worry. We 
will also help as you help us.”

China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has pulled out all the stops 
to welcome Duterte, including a marching band complete with baton-twirling 
bandmaster at his official welcoming ceremony outside the Great Hall of the 
People, which most leaders do not get.


The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, meeting Duterte earlier in the day, called 
the visit a “milestone” in ties. He told Duterte that China and the Philippines 
were brothers and they could “appropriately handle disputes”, though he did not 
mention theSouth China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> 
in remarks made in front of reporters.

“I hope we can follow the wishes of the people and use this visit as an 
opportunity to push China–Philippines relations back on a friendly footing and 
fully improve things,” Xi said.

Following their meeting, during which Duterte said relations with China had 
entered a new “springtime”, China’s vice-foreign minister, Liu Zhenmin, said 
the South China Sea issue was not the sum total of relations.

Philippines secret death squads: officer claims police teams behind wave of 
killings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/philippines-secret-death-squads-police-officer-teams-behind-killings>
“The two sides agreed that they will do what they agreed five years ago, that 
is to pursue bilateral dialogue and consultation in seeking a proper settlement 
of the South China Sea issue,” Liu said.

China claims most of the energy-rich South China Sea, through which about $5tn 
in ship-borne trade passes every year. Its neighbours Brunei, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, Taiwan and Vietnam also have claims. In 2012, China seized the 
disputed Scarborough Shoal and denied Philippine fishermen access to its 
fishing grounds.

Liu said the shoal was not mentioned and he did not answer a question about 
whether Philippine fishermen would be allowed there. He said both countries had 
agreed on coastguard and fisheries co-operation, but did not give details.

Duterte’s tone towards Beijing is in contrast to the language he has used 
against the US, after being infuriated by its criticism of hisbloody war on 
drugs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/philippines-drug-crackdown-warning-icc-rodrigo-duterte>
. He hascalled US president, Barack Obama, a “son of a whore” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/son-of-a-whore-was-not-meant-to-be-personal-duterte-tells-obama>
 and told him to “go to hell” while alluding to severing ties with the old 
colonial power.

China has welcomed the Philippines’ approaches, even as Duterte has vowed not 
to surrender any sovereignty to Beijing, which views the South China Sea Hague 
ruling as null and void. China has also expressed support for his drug war, 
which has raised concern in western capitals aboutextrajudicial killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/duterte-says-children-killed-in-philippines-drug-war-are-collateral-damage>
.




 