
The England captain, Dylan Hartley is free to lead England in the Six Nations 
Championship after receiving a six-week ban for hisstiff-arm tackle on 
Leinster’s Sean O’Brien last Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/northampton-leinster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
. The Northampton hooker, however, will be extremely short of match practice if 
he is selected to start against France at Twickenham on 4 February.

A slightly longer suspension would have put Hartley’s Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> participation in severe doubt 
but he is now available to play again from 23 January. If he does lead out 
England against the French, however, he will have had only six minutes of 
competitive action in the previous two months, having previously had limited 
rugby this autumn because of a bad back.

England captain Dylan Hartley is one thuggish act away from career oblivion | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/14/dylan-hartley-england-six-week-ban-six-nations>
The Rugby Football Union has already made clear it has no moral objection to 
Hartley returning as captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/dylan-hartley-eddie-jones-england-captain>
 but the head coach, Eddie Jones, now has a delicate balance to strike. Should 
Saracens’ Jamie George play well between now and the end of next month, it will 
be hard to argue on pure playing grounds that Hartley is a better bet to face 
France. On the other hand England have just won 13 games in a row with Hartley 
in charge, not the worst advert for his leadership qualities.

With the game’s governing body World Rugby confirming stricter penalties for 
reckless high tackles will come into effect in the new year, Hartley has reason 
to be grateful for small mercies.

A three-man independent disciplinary hearing in London decided his offence 
should merit a mid-range entry point, rather than a top-end sanction, and also 
deducted a week for his guilty plea. His chequered previous disciplinary record 
counted against him, however, with two weeks added to the starting punishment 
of five weeks.

It means the 30-year-old Hartley has now racked up 60 weeks of suspensions in 
his career, far in excess of most of his contemporaries. Despite previous bans 
for biting, gouging and butting, however, Jones saw him as the ideal man to 
help restore a bit of edge to England’s pack and England’s perfect year had 
also enhanced his candidacy for the captaincy of next year’s British and Irish 
Lions squad.
BT Sport Rugby (@btsportrugby) 
Dylan Hartley is banned for six weeks after being sent off for this incident 
on the weekend.#ChampionsCup <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ChampionsCup?src=hash>
https://t.co/H9C0S6SbnB <https://t.co/H9C0S6SbnB>
 <https://twitter.com/btsportrugby/status/809096272833609729> December 14, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/btsportrugby/status/809096272833609729> 
Being chosen by Warren Gatland to lead the Lions would now appear improbable, 
unless he can rebound from this setback to steer England to a second successive 
Six Nations grand slam and convince everyone that the O’Brien episode was 
merely a blip. For all the support he has received from Twickenham – “We 
recognise what Dylan has done over the last 12 months … his disciplinary 
performance in an England shirt has been exemplary during those games,” 
stressed the RFU’s chief executive, Ian Ritchie – putting him in charge of next 
summer’s tour to New Zealand might not be a universally popular appointment 
among the other three home nations.

Eddie Jones under no pressure to drop Dylan Hartley, says RFU chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/13/dylan-hartley-eddie-jones-england-captain>
Hartley has a much better disciplinary record for his country than his club, 
however, and it is Northampton who must again do without him for their 
remaining three European Champions’ Cup fixtures against Leinster, Castres and 
Montpellier, as well as their Premiership games against Sale, Gloucester and 
Bristol over Christmas and the new year.

If Jones does decide Hartley has had insufficient game time to start against 
the French there would be three main candidates for the run-on England 
captaincy in Owen Farrell, Maro Itoje and Mike Brown. Farrell has been 
described as ready for the responsibility by his director of rugby at Saracens, 
Mark McCall, while his club-mate Itoje has already captained England Under-20s. 
A fourth possible contender, Billy Vunipola, is currently unavailable having 
been ruled out of the entire championship through injury.
 