
“I’m afraid to wake up one morning,” says Glenn Frey, “and find I’m not 
happening any more … You always want things to come faster, but they never do.”

Flying around his Howard Johnson’s hotel room, Frey flashes an embarrassed 
grin and tries to remember if he took his vitamins. Finding them on the 
dresser, he gulps an assorted handful, sloshes them down with water and flops 
on the bed with a frown.

“It makes me think of the whole desperate attitude again,” he says with a 
lazy, LA-via-Detroit drawl. “I’ve always felt there’s nowhere to go but down 
once you’ve reached the top, so I want to take just the right amount of time 
getting there.”

He jumps off the bed, opens a bag and tries to find a phone number.

“I mean, shit, here I am on the road in LA, my home! All my furniture’s in 
storage, I’m on the streets and … yeah, I’m real aware of that. I want to stay 
sharp as long as I can. Christ knows, Joni Mitchell has been an inspiration. It 
can be done. Youcan go further. You don’t have to fizzle out at 27.”

Frey, 66, pulls the drapes to get a breath of smoggy/fresh air and watches the 
freeway traffic.

“You always want things to come faster, but they never do,” he sighs. 
“Actually, they seem to be going fast enough now.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpRQ1qkGxoR0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpRQ1qkGxoR0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpRQ1qkGxoR0&media=>
Frey is tired and he knows it. Looking decidedly thinner, his already hollow 
facial features more sharply defined than ever, he mirrors the pressure borne 
by theEagles <http://eagles.com/> since September when they began three months 
of unsuccessful recording in London with Glyn Johns (producer of their first 
two albums) before switching to Bill Szymczyk and the LA Record Plant for 
another try, this time successful.

During the LA sessions, the band left manager Elliot Roberts for fireballing 
industry upstart Irving Azoff. Then they added a fifth Eagle as On the Border 
neared completion.

Don Henley: Cass County review – peppery country music from sometime Eagle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/don-henley-cass-county-review> 
Now with a week already under their belts, the Eagles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/eagles> (Frey, vocals-guitar-piano; Bernie 
Leadon, banjo-guitar-vocals; Randy Meisner, bass-vocals; Don Henley, 
drums-vocals; and new addition Don Felder, guitar-mandolin) have two and a half 
months of touring ahead to promote the new album.

Neither Frey nor the band have had a chance to relax, but that’s the way they 
want it – a marked change from the sporadic touring that followed the release 
of their first two albums. Now the Eagles are taking their music to the people 
and Frey is sitting in a San Fernando Valley hotel room explaining the various 
changes, the biggest of which was leaving producer Glyn Johns.

“I just think it was time for a change,” says Frey carefully, adding he didn’t 
want to say “anything derogatory about Glyn. We’re still friends.”

Although he cited the “need to do something more challenging,” he maintained 
there was no dissatisfaction with either of Johns’ two efforts – at least for 
him.

“There were no flies on either album,” he laughed. “Bill and Glyn are similar 
to each other in their own elements, but Szymczyk is a premierAmerican 
rock’n’roll producer/engineer.”

And, as drummer Henley added two weeks later, relaxing in the afternoon sun 
before a concert at the University of California in Santa Barbara, “We just 
wanted to sound American instead of English.”

The reasons, however, run deeper, with noticeable frustration on both sides.

According to Henley, “Glyn thought we were a nice, country-rock, semi-acoustic 
band, and every time we wanted to rock’n’roll, he could name a thousand British 
bands that could do it better.”

He also described the basic differences in sound between the two producers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds1C9UBp9zN8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds1C9UBp9zN8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds1C9UBp9zN8&media=>
“There’s a lot less echo with Bill, for one thing. There’s more of a raw and 
funky presence. Glyn had a stamp he put on his records which is a deep echo 
that is really smooth like ice cream.” There are, however, two Johns tracks 
intact on the album, Best of My Love and You Never Cry Like a Lover, both 
written by Henley (“He did a good job on those, they needed that sound”) and 
singer/songwriter friend John David Souther, who ascribes the change to the 
“Eagles’ desire to get more of a live, thin sound on the albums.”

Randy Meisner, the band’s soft-spoken bassist, felt the recording locale had a 
profound effect on their failure to complete On the Border in England. “You 
can’t settle things out inside you when you’re staying together,” he asserted. 
“You need to be alone in your own home.”

“We couldn’t think over there,” Henley concurred. “We couldn’t create. We were 
too busy trying to find a good restaurant.” This, in spite of the fact that the 
first two albums were done there – successfully.

“We had more freedom in the studio with Bill,” said Frey.

Glyn Johns, talking in Los Angeles just two days after Eagles left him, 
reacted this way: “The six weeks in the studio were a disaster area, but I will 
sit here and tell you that it had nothing at all to do with me. I certainly got 
frustrated on some occasions, and pissed [off] because they wouldn’t grab the 
situation by the balls and get on with it. I don’t believe in kid-gloving 
artists.”

Johns, a brilliant, hard-working producer, claimed he was ready to give the 
band more of a say in the studio, but admitted they weren’t comfortable in 
England, “physically or mentally. There were a lot of hang-ups, individually 
and with each other. But what it boils down to is they weren’t ready to make 
another record.”

But the passage of time has eased the pain of separation, and Frey is most 
complimentary toward Johns. “We learned tons and tons from Glyn. How to cut 
through a lot of bullshit in arranging songs and how to shape them up real fast 
in the studio. He helped us take professional attitudes and mould them into 
professional recording artistry. He also taught me a lot about myself.”

The acquisition of Don Felder on lead guitar has also been a major 
breakthrough – both in recording and performing. He makes the Eagles a 
five-piece country band by playing mandolin, allows Leadon to take up 
instruments heretofore confined to studio overdubs and, by playing occasional 
rhythm guitar, lets Frey pound the keyboards.

“I’ve been a Don Felder fan for about a year and a half,” says Frey, brimming 
with excitement. “Ever since I heard him playing in a dressing room in Boston 
one night. I saw him at a concert in LA and asked if he’d come down and put 
some slide on Good Day in Hell, but with every take he just blew us all away. 
If he isn’t Duane Allman reincarnate, I don’t know who the fuck is.” Felder was 
backing David Blue at the time, but after a short conference, the band asked 
him to join and his presence prompted Meisner to reflect wistfully, “I feel 
better than ever since he’s joined. It’s much fuller onstage now.”

Back in LA, Frey offered some personal observations on his co-members.

“I love to say this,” he nodded, cracking a smile. “Bernie and Felder are 
proud guitar players and to me, and I don’t mean to make their work 
comparative, but respectively, they’re carrying on the work of Clarence White 
and Duane Allman. Don Henley is like a rock, besides the fact that he’s the 
best singer I’ve ever worked with. Randy is the perfect ribbon for the package. 
He adds all the top and all the bottom, singing like a lark and giving that 
growly, Nebraska, R&B-oriented bass feel to the country stuff.”

“Glenn’s role is Detroit gutter,” joked Meisner in return.

“He adds the grease,” said Henley. “He’s all action and he moves more than any 
of us trying to get people off. [Maybe that’s why he’s called the Teen King.] 
Glenn’s got a real positive ego and he’s not afraid to do things even though 
sometimes he does them wrong. He pulls us all through because he’s the 
catalyst.”

The Eagles might have liked fame and fortune a bit sooner, but with 
On the Border being a tight mixture of country, ballads and the much-desired 
rock’n’roll, and with its promising performance in the marketplace, the rewards 
should come soon enough. They’ve already purged themselves of disenchantment 
with the business and controls on artistic freedom in the Desperado album, 
written during their “pain period”, in the guise of a bunch of cowboy songs. 
Now that they’re being thrust into the spotlight, concern for image becomes an 
important factor.

“We don’t go in for glitter or glam rock,” said Henley. “We don’t wear gorilla 
suits or aqualungs. Ultimately the music survives and that’s what we’re most 
interested in. It will establish the image for you without even working at it.”

But still, they’re definitely working at it.
 