
30. The inaugural EastEnders Christmas (1985)

The BBC didn’t think it was right to darken the nation’s Christmas Day with a 
visit to Albert Square the soap’s first year.Cut to Boxing Day 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EGevEfFY9iw> and Pete was busy frisking Kathy 
Beale.

29. Dirty Den spends Christmas in prison (1988)

Cosying up with Queenie, Squeaky and all his pals, he was sorely missed.

28. Bobby finds out he killed Lucy (2015)

The most lumbering storyline of modern soapdom. In more chaotic news, Phil was 
out drink-driving, Stacey gave birth at the nativity and Fatboy got bumped off 
by mistake.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQoEOtnJIhow&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQoEOtnJIhow>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQoEOtnJIhow&media=>
27. Little Mo and raging Trevor (2001)

Never has the word “gravy” sounded so sinister. Trevor’s abuse of Little Mo 
plunged new depths when she arrived home late for Christmas dinner and he 
pushed her face in it. Too horrific for the festive season, hence its low 
ranking.

26. Christmas at the Fowlers (1992)

Arthur spent Christmas Eve trimming Mrs Hewitt’s bush, a drunk-driving Pat 
mowed someone down and the Fowlers ruled.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuvQ5uBclAMU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuvQ5uBclAMU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuvQ5uBclAMU&media=>
25. Sean paternity shocker (2008)

Because the best place to hide your DNA test results is in a Christmas 
cracker. And lo, the news that Sean wasn’t Amy’s dad was revealed. Elsewhere, 
Nick returned with a hearty “Merry Christmas, Ma.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJMhQorA5fGc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJMhQorA5fGc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJMhQorA5fGc&media=>
24. Pauline drops dead after a row with Sonia (2006)

Stepping through the snowy scene of Albert Square after a tongue-lashing from 
Sonia,Pauline sank to the ground and died under the communal tree 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QqKMaqzSPuA>. That’s a Debbie Downer of a 
Christmas, even by ‘Enders standards.

23. The oldies take over (1987)

Charming scenes of Ethel, Dot and Lou reminiscing about the days of “a nut and 
a tangerine” and Pat in a Christmas hat trying to make a move on Dirty Den – 
who then turned up with a present for his and Michelle’s lovechild. Those were 
the days.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqofKvRNcJyQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqofKvRNcJyQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqofKvRNcJyQ&media=>
22. Cindy Beale gatecrashes Christmas (1997)

The Beale Christmas lunch was interrupted by the return of Ian’s ex – and like 
a scrunch-dried Kate Moss,saucy Kaff locked lips with Alex the vicar 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wr393q77GuM>.

21. Kate and Alfie’s farewell (2005)

“Let’s go, Mrs Moon <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BgVlwN2Unw8>.” Alfie 
fired up the Ford Capri, drove through the snow and swept Kat and her 
leopardskin fur away.

20. Frank Butcher’s Christmas Day comeback (1995)

Pat shacked up with car dealer Roy and lived happily ever after once Frank 
disappeared. That is, until her beloved Fraaaaaaank turned up like the ghost of 
Christmas past.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbidPX006sp0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbidPX006sp0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbidPX006sp0&media=>
19. Phil flogs the pub (1999)

Sherry-soaked Phil sold half the Queen Vic to dodgy Dan for a fiver, while Ian 
Beale and his fiancé Mel prepared to ring in what was then known as Y2K witha 
doomed wedding <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k4m_tQFY5U4>.

18. Cindy baby shocker (1989)

Homewrecking legend Cindy had a Boxing day baby … but it wasn’t her husband 
Ian’s.

17. The post-Sharongate Christmas (1994)

Grant and Sharon’s marriage was on the rocks after he discovered she’d done 
the double with his brother Phil, and they headed for a festive divorce.

16. Aidan tries to jump off a towerblock (1993)

In festive desperation, E-scoffing teen Aidan lurked at the top of a block of 
flats <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=39qfR7Qawf8> until girlfriend Mandy came 
to rescue (screech at) him.

15. Grant and Sharon’s wedding (1991)

The groom sported a none-more-90s floral waistcoat and serenaded his bride 
with You’ll Never Walk Alone. She did, many times. To temper the short-lived 
joy, Mark Fowler told his parents he was HIV positive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYnNfS5hgU28&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYnNfS5hgU28>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYnNfS5hgU28&media=>
14. Mel sleeps with Phil (2000)

A true nightmare before Christmas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bPCI2Z_Bu5s>
 for the former Mrs Ian Beale.

13. The Carter takeover (2013)

A vintage year <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SXaf9q5sbXY> with the arrival 
of Mick (Danny Dyer) and his gobby brood, like a Christmas gift to the nation. 
And evil Janine spent Christmas where she belonged: locked up.

12. Alfie and Kat’s happy ever after (2003)

A break from tradition: both a happy Christmas and a wedding day that didn’t 
end in bloodshed.Gawd bless ’em 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yFRsH0Ext7w&list=PLryuHaPzNhNrb7o0Dh8ehygDyOAtaDvbA&index=2>
.

11. The burning B&B (2011)

Lovable postie Masood and Phil were trapped in the bed and breakfast while 
Zainab screamed outside. It was her controlling new husband Dr Yusef who 
started it, and indeed burned to death in it. Textbook festive misery.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpVzyQ2bqVuo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpVzyQ2bqVuo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpVzyQ2bqVuo&media=>
10. Derek Branning dies (2012)

“I. Am. Derek. Branning! <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u4i4UUtf3eQ>” And 
with these words, Kat’s lover had a heart attack and died. Oh, and Max 
Branning’s secret wife turned up just as he was about to marry Tanya.

9. Goodbye, Jamie Mitchell (2002)

While Little Mo was marrying Billy, lovable Mitchell boy Jamie was in hospital 
after being run over by Martin.Jamie’s spleen gave way with Sonia at his bedside
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZHpUtU2SUhw> in sad, sad scenes. 

8. Janiiiiiiiine on the rampage (2010)

Mistress of manipulation <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EEuBEbWa0dU> Janine 
stabbed herself and blamed Stacey, who fled the Square and jetted off to 
freedom. But not before doing the whole threatening-to-jump-off-the-roof trick.

7. The death of Tiffany (1998)

Forget Christmas – 1998 was all about New Year’s Eve when Frank Butcher ran 
Tiffany over and killed her. Walford roads: laced with festive danger.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm19Zer-UPpE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm19Zer-UPpE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm19Zer-UPpE&media=>
6. Dennis and Sharon’s affair is exposed (2004)

Sharon made a heavy breathing declaration of love for Dennis over the 
Christmas dinner table. Cue: slappy fight with his fiancé Zoe, smashing of 
crockery.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvyYdGE-n41g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvyYdGE-n41g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvyYdGE-n41g&media=>
5. Bianca has a baby in the pub (1998)

The Queen Vic ain’t no stable, but a Christmas miracle was born when Walford’s 
answer to Mary, Bianca, gave birth to baby Liam in the pub whileRickaaaay 
looked on <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bzGbFRbpFIc>.

4. Max and Stacey’s DVD-gate (2007)

Stacey and Bradley thought they were watching their wedding video as the 
family opened their presents, but alasthe clip contained a bombshell scene 
<https://youtu.be/f949uafKpCc> of Max unzipping the blushing bride’s wedding 
dress.

3. Archie’s last Christmas (2009)

It ain’t a proper East End Christmas without a murder. Evil Archie Mitchell 
was bludgeoned with the Queen Vic bust on Christmas night 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rl7jPZFfY6M>. Whodunnit? Stacey, who pretty 
much got away with it.

2. Mick finds out Dean raped Linda (2014)

In one of the finest moments of recent EastEnders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eastenders>, Mick went full Danny 
Dyer and shoved Dean through the Christmas dinner table for raping his missus. 
Then came the big reveal, when Shirley dropped the bombshell that they were, in 
fact, brothers. Proper naughty!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuqfS40MavuE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuqfS40MavuE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuqfS40MavuE&media=>
1. Den’s divorce paper doof-doof (1986)

Poodle-haired landlady Angie Watts and her husband Den played a blinding 
two-hander when he revealed he knew she’d been lying about her terminal 
illness. A whopping 30 million people watch him serve her with divorce papers 
on Christmas day.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCcqqJc4xYxQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCcqqJc4xYxQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCcqqJc4xYxQ&media=>
Is your favourite moment missing? Come on in and tell us. In the words of 
Stacey at this beautiful festive time: “Who wants a go? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4nLr9k03A7c>”
 