
Despite poor trade data hitting mining shares, the UK market is moving higher 
after its recent weakness.

Budget airline easyJet is leading the way, up 38p to £14.54 after analysts at 
RBC moved from underperform to outperform and raised its target price from 
£14.50 to £15.00 ahead of its half year results on Tuesday.

Inmarsat is also higher, recovering 21.5p to 834p following its recent profit 
warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/may/06/ftse-falls-ahead-of-us-jobs-data-with-inmarsat-and-intercontinental-on-the-slide>
, while holiday firmTui has risen 24p to £10.24 despite Deutsche Bank cutting 
its target price from £13.45 to £13.20 while raising its forecast for the 
company’s euro quoted shares.

Another broker upgrade, from Jefferies, has lifted medical group Smith & Nephew
 by 25p to £11.61. In a buy note, the broker said:

Smith & Nephew has rebalanced away from hips/knees and now has leading 
positions in higher-growth segments. Trading at a 17% sector discount, the 
market has overstatedCJR reimbursement 
<http://www.odtmag.com/contents/view_breaking-news/2016-03-31/congressmen-introduce-bill-to-delay-implementation-of-cjr-model>
 risk and undervalued a 150 basis points uplift in organic growth atop a leaner 
cost base. Beyond 12% earnings per share compound annual growth rate, there is 
upside optionality from capital deployment and M&A. China is a key second 
quarter risk but we expect second half inflection, reducing overhangs and 
facilitating re-rating. We upgrade our price target to £13.75 (from £10.44)

Overall, ahead of a key Eurogroup meeting on Greece, the FTSE 100 is up 23.21 
points at 6148.91.

But a fall in Chinese imports and exports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/08/chinese-economy-exports-fall-by-2-and-imports-by-11-in-april>
 has pushedAnglo American down 40p to 609.4p and Antofagasta 21.6p lower at 
419.9p. Seven of the top ten FTSE 100 fallers are mining companies.

Pearson is down 5p at 815p as Liberum issued a sell note following its recent 
update:

We have updated estimates for Pearson post-2015 results and their first 
quarter trading update. Our overall view remains the same.Pearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson> is the most structurally 
challenged stock within the large cap European media space relative to its 
multiple, and management guidance of £800m 2018 estimated operating profit will 
be difficult to achieve. Reiterate sell with a reduced target price of 435p 
(from 450p).

Among the mid caps positive trading updates have lifted G4S, up 14.1p to 
198.4p, andGreggs, 55p better at £11.23.
 