
Eddie Jones will not come under any pressure from Twickenham to drop Dylan 
Hartley after the England captain last weekreceived the third red card of his 
career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/northampton-leinster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
, six minutes after coming on to the field as a replacement for Northampton 
against Leinster at Franklin’s Gardens.

Hartley faces a disciplinary panel in London on Wednesday, charged with 
striking Sean O’Brien who, after being treated on the field, was taken for a 
head injury assessment which he failed. The offence carries a minimum ban of 
two weeks, and can rise to eight or more depending on the level of 
premeditation determined by the three‑man panel.

England’s next match is on 4 February. If Hartley, who has one of the worst 
disciplinary records of any player in Britain, were to receive an eight-week 
ban, he would be free to play again on the day of the game. “Eddie will select 
his squad, his team and his captain based on who is eligible,” said Ian 
Ritchie, theRugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> chief executive. “He 
and I talk about matters on a regular basis, not just Dylan, but it is 
primarily a matter for him.

Dylan Hartley gives England an edge but may struggle not to go over it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/25/dylan-hartley-england-captain-eddie-jones>
“Let us see what happens [on Wednesday] but we recognise what Dylan has done 
over the last 12 months. His disciplinary performance in an England shirt has 
been exemplary during those games. You weigh it in the perspective of what’s 
happened and his contribution to the team and squad in the last 12 months. His 
demeanour and all the things he has done mean that I think we should support 
Dylan.”

Asked whether he anticipated concern about image from England’s sponsors 
should Hartley continue as captain, he said: “No, I don’t think so. If you look 
at what the squad has done on and off the pitch during the last 12 months, and 
Dylan has been the leader of that, they have been tremendously good with 
sponsors, the community game and very giving of their time with charities.

“His leadership credentials are very strong and we should recognise the fact 
that Eddie’s judgment has been really good. The disciplinary process will take 
its course and we will see what happens.

“The hearing is independent and we will accept what they come up with. There 
is a continuous look at the tariffs and rules around tackling and what we do 
around that to make sure that we look at concussion seriously. I do not have an 
issue with any of that. It is right that there should be more severe penalties 
for areas around the head and the panel will do what they need to.”

The RFU is also monitoring the case of another Northampton player, George 
North, who returned to the field against Leicester this month after passing a 
head injury assessmentdespite appearing to be knocked out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/northampton-george-north-concussion-leicester-premiership-rugby>
 after being taken out in the air. A concussion review group is investigating 
the club’s handling of the affair.

European Rugby Champions Cup: talking points from the weekend's action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/12/european-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points-from-the-weekends-action>
“The group is reviewing all the evidence and will come up with some thoughts 
by, I hope, the end of the week,” Ritchie said. “It is the correct process to 
have put in place and there is no concern about the time it is taking because 
you have to make sure all the evidence is analysed. I think the timeframe has 
been reasonable. Their intention is the end of the week, although things can go 
adrift at times, and it is reasonable to say that it is being dealt with as a 
matter of urgency.

“Their findings will not be shuffled under the carpet and nor should they be. 
We have to make sure this is seen as a priority. It will be given media 
prominence and I have no issue with that. Concussion is a major challenge to 
the game and we need to make sure we get this right.

“I do not want to magnify one individual case but it is the right opportunity 
to see if there are broader lessons and principles that could be learned. It is 
an issue that needs addressing and there will be no public relations smoothing 
when we know the findings. The review group can make this a full disciplinary 
matter and if that is something that needs to be put forward, it should happen 
in my view, but I am not prejudging if there should be a next phase.”

Ritchie said discussions over the global calendar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/14/rugby-union-global-season-northern-southern-hemisphere>
 would carry on into the first three months of the new year. “The key issues 
are around the summer. It is the perennial balance between economics and player 
welfare. We need to look at the number of matches players play, but economics 
mean some teams want to play more. The seasons will not be aligned and we are 
in a place where the Six Nations will stay where it is as well as the November 
internationals and it is how you deal with the matters in between.”
 