
Eddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones> is ready to push 
forward with plans to call up the Ospreys flanker Sam Underhill in the “next 
few months”, despite potential disquiet from Premiership clubs.

Wales tour squad puts Warren Gatland on collision course with French clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/10/wales-tour-squad-warren-gatland-french-clubs-rugby>
Underhill this month ruled out playing for Wales on residency grounds in the 
future, insisting that he wanted to play for England at senior level after 
captaining the under-18s. Jones is believed to be keen to involve the 
19-year-old in the autumn Tests this year and perhaps even the summer tour of 
Australia as the head coach seeks a long-term solution to England’s issues at 
openside.

However, the stumbling block is the Rugby Football Union’s policy of picking 
players based in England, a frustration for many during the World Cup with the 
Toulon flankerSteffon Armitage left out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/16/england-miss-steffon-armitage-nick-abendanon-world-cup>
 of the squad by Stuart Lancaster.

The RFU can call up players – based outside of England – in “exceptional 
circumstances” and Jones is hoping the fact that Underhill is studying 
economics at university in Cardiff, while playing forOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys>, fulfils that criteria.

“He’s [Underhill] been playing very well for the Ospreys,” Jones said. “We’ve 
still got the situation that he’s playing outside of England and we have to 
sort that situation. I think we’re coming to a resolution and there’s no doubt 
he’ll be selected in the England squad in the next six months.”

Armitage could well be back in Jones’s thoughts if speculation of Wasps’ 
interest in him is true. “If he comes back and manages to get in the Wasps 
side, which is going to be difficult to do, if he gets fit and wants to play 
for England, then we’ll consider him,” Jones said. “He’s certainly a talented 
player.”

Jones believes the summer tour will give him a better understanding of where 
England are in world rugby as he looks to his ultimate goal of taking his side 
to No1 in the rankings. Asked if he would consider his tenure a failure if he 
did not achieve that, Jones replied: “Oh 100%. The reason the RFU appointed me 
is to change the England national team. And the resources and the number of 
players we have here, demands that England should be No1 in the world. There’s 
no reason we shouldn’t be No1 in the world and that’s what we’re working 
towards. It’s all set up for England to do well in Japan [at World Cup 2019].

“It would be great for us to be on the second of November in 2019 at the 
Yokohama Stadium in the World Cup final, and that’s where we’re aiming to be.”

Maro Itoje: ‘Disappointments sharpen the desire – Saracens want to go all the 
way this year’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/09/maro-itoje-saracens-racing-92-european-rugby-champions-cup-final>
Jones also picked out the Worcester-bound centre Ben Te’o 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/22/worcester-sign-ben-teo-leinster-new-zealand-born-england-qualified>
 as a player who could feature for England, backing the rugby league convert to 
succeedwhere Sam Burgess failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/05/sam-burgess-bath-return-rugby-league-union-england-rfu-stuart-lancaster>
 and become a long-term success after crossing codes. “Ben Te’o’s definitely a 
possibility,” Jones said.

“You speak to people in Australia and they talk of him as a demi-god, so those 
sorts of players if they have the right attitude can come across to rugby and 
have an immediate impact. And he’s one of those guys that could do that.

“I think Sam was in a difficult situation where he was playing two positions. 
If Sam came across to union again and he was put in the situation where he 
specialised in one position, I’m sure the outcome would be very different.” 
Jones is also keen Jonny Wilkinson continues his coaching role with England.

“I’ve had a couple of chats to Jonny. He is very keen to continue. He likes to 
work behind the scenes. He is the most humble guy in the world. The effect he’s 
had on Owen [Farrell] and George [Ford] had been significant.

With Henry Slade coming into the squad, there’ll be another guy to work with.”
 