
Eddie Jones does not believe that the introduction of bonus points in the Six 
Nations this year will make any difference to the style of play <> of sides in 
the tournament as he works to ensure that England set a fast pace in their 
opening match against France at Twickenham.

Jones will be without at least three forwards for the start of the tournament 
with the Vunipola brothers and Joe Launchbury injured, whileChris Robshaw is 
unlikely to be available 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/englands-chris-robshaw-could-miss-six-nations-with-shoulder-injury>
 for the opening two rounds at least because of a shoulder problem. George 
Kruis will not play for Saracens this month because of a cheekbone fracture and 
the captain, Dylan Hartley,returns from suspension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/14/dylan-hartley-england-six-week-ban-six-nations>
 after the conclusion of the European Champions Cup pool stage in two weeks.

Jamie George: ‘Dylan Hartley talks to people because he’s a good captain’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/jamie-george-england-saracens-hooker-dylan-hartley-six-nations>
“Teams were frightened of losing in the opening two rounds of the Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> last year,” Jones says. “They 
played well within themselves and did not want to take any risks, but the 
quality was much better on the final two weekends.

“We want to change that. The last time England played well in the first round 
was against Wales in 2006. Before that you go back to the great side of 
2001-03. Otherwise, England have stumbled and got a close victory.

“I want us to go out there and set a benchmark in the first game. The Six 
Nations is a unique competition because of the intensity of the rivalry. If we 
can get the rugby to a great level, it will become the greatest tournament in 
the world.

“I don’t think bonus points [which are being trialled in this year’s 
tournament] will have any influence. I have coached for 20 years and it has not 
had one iota of influence on how I have gone about things. If you play good 
rugby, you secure a bonus point; if you don’t, you don’t.”

Jones, who gathered his squad in Brighton last Monday and Tuesday, says he is 
not concerned about the style of play in the Premiership where,Saracens and 
Wasps aside, teams have been inconsistent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/wasps-chase-home-record-new-laws-tackles>
 this season. “I don’t care how clubs play, that is their business,” he says. 
“It is all about the skill level of the players: someone who is skilful can 
play any way he wants. I don’t control that so there’s no use me worrying about 
it.

“I don’t look at the styles and say: ‘That’s a good style, that’s a bad style, 
that will help us develop players, that won’t’. It’s inconsequential. We’ve got 
the time with the players that we have and we’ve got to make them as good as we 
can.”

At the start of the season, the Australian demanded that his England players 
show their Test class for their clubs. “Some have done so, but environment 
dictates performance in a lot of ways,” he says. “It has been harder for guys 
playing in struggling teams, but Courtney Lawes has gone back to Northampton 
and played well, so has Tom Wood and Teimana Harrison the same. And then there 
is Owen Farrell. It does not matter what jersey he has on. He could be playing 
in the back yard against his little sister and he’d play the same. That is the 
sort of player we want.”
 