
What next for England?

Eddie Jones described England’s Six Nations success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/england-win-six-nations-grand-slam-france-match-report>
 as a step up and nothing more, not carried away by winning a tournament that, 
with Ireland rebuilding, Wales remodelling and France revisiting the past, did 
not pass as vintage.

As Guy Novès noted on Saturday night, England were a cut above the rest who, 
with the exception of Italy who look as if they could do with the threat of 
relegation to infuse them with some purpose, were close to each other. The 
devil was in Jones’s attention to detail and the new coach bounce, which worked 
for Wales in 2008 and Ireland a year later, which transported the World Cup 
hosts from the agony of autumn to the succour of spring.

Eddie Jones hits road to demand clubs buy into his England revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/21/eddie-jones-clubs-england-revolution-henry-slade>
Jones was not triumphal in victory, aware that bigger hurdles lie ahead, 
starting with the three-Test summer tour to Australia. He has already bagged 
his countrymen about England’s prospects, mischievouslyforecasting a 3-0 series 
win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/20/eddie-jones-england-three-nil-australia-tour>
 ahead of what should be some lively verbal jousting with his former Randwick 
team-mate, Michael Cheika who, as Jones was to do with England, turned the 
Wallabies intochampions of their hemisphere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/08/nic-white-the-hero-as-wallabies-finally-overcome-all-blacks>
 in his first year in charge.

England have won only three Tests in Australia since they first played there 
in 1963. Jones was involved in two, both in 2003, because he was coaching the 
Wallabies at the time. The other camein Sydney in 2010 under Martin Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jun/19/australia-england-match-report>, 
England’s last Test down under. The other 14 matches ended in defeat, but as 
the three successes came in the past seven games there, history is not firmly 
set against them.

England’s five matches in the Six Nations have been dissected in Australia, 
for example 
<http://www.theroar.com.au/2016/03/23/spiro-will-jones-england-defeat-the-wallabies-no/?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+theroar%2Frugby-union+%28The+Roar+-+Rugby+Union%29>
, and impressed is perhaps not quite the word, not that there was much 
deference shown there to the men in white when they arrived for the 2003 World 
Cup. Jones will know what to expect and this week got in his retaliation first.

Jones knows England will have to improve in all areas and that his side does 
not bear comparison with the 2003 side, the previous year when the grand slam 
was won, not least because that team was at the end of its cycle whereas this 
year’s model has just hit the road. There was an emphasis in theSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> on turning the strengths of 
opponents into weaknesses, particularly in the final three matches, and without 
the greater ambition of the previous year when England played with a style they 
were to jettison in the World Cup, there were fewer mistakes.

England conceded an average of more than 12 penalties a match, prepared to 
infringe wilfully, not least when they were under pressure in Paris. A yellow 
card against Wales nearly cost them at the end and they got away with two 
against Ireland, but they are unlikely to survive with as high a penalty count 
in Australia. They were defensively loose at times, scrambling effectively, and 
France in particular found holes without being able to take advantage.

England will have the advantage of a warm-up match before the tour, with Wales 
visiting Twickenham for the third time this season at the end of May. The game 
will be played the day after the Premiership final and, based on the matchday 
23 at Stade de France, Jones will lose at least four players if Northampton and 
Exeter are competing for the title (although that would also deny the head 
coach the chance to pick Henry Slade) and a maximum of 10 if Saracens and 
Harlequins are involved.

Australia will go into the first Test cold with their previous match the World 
Cup final against New Zealand at the end of October. One argument for the Six 
Nations being slow to get into gear is that the teams have not played for a 
while, although all the preparation that went into the World Cup weakened it 
this year, and when England went to New Zealand two years ago with a weakened 
team for the first Test at Eden Park (the venue for Wales’s opening match 
against the All Blacks in June) because players from the Premiership finalists 
Saracens and Northampton were not considered, theywere beaten by a late try 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jun/07/all-blacks-england-first-test-match-report>
.

Only seven of the 23 players involved that day featured in this year’s Six 
Nations campaign, a number that rose to 11 in the second Test when England were 
able to pick from full strength. Yet Jones inherited the bulk of his squad from 
his predecessor, Stuart Lancaster, adding a bit of dog and cuteness.

Lancaster has maintained his silence since losing the England job after the 
World Cup inquest. He would have had mixed emotions watching the Six Nations: 
pride at the performances of players he gave their first caps offset by a 
general lack of recognition of the part he played in the team’s success. The 
World Cup defeat to Wales did not define his four-year reign, it merely cost 
him his position. Jones had less of a building job than Lancaster did in 2012, 
getting into minds rather than looking for new bodies.

RFU’s sizeable miscalculation over Joe Marler indicates a sport in denial | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/mar/24/rfu-joe-marler-sizeable-miscalculation-sport-denial>
Such is sport, but there is little danger of England imploding as Wales did 
after winning the 2005 grand slam when some players felt that too much praise 
was given to the then head coach, Mike Ruddock, who like Jones enjoyed a clean 
sweep in his first Six Nations campaign, and not enough to his predecessor, 
Steve Hansen. It created a poisonous atmosphere that cost Ruddock his job the 
following year and left Wales in freefall until Warren Gatland was summoned 
from New Zealand.

Jones talked this week about the need to go up another level against 
Australia. This year’s Six Nations largely showed why none of its teams made 
the semi-finals of last year’s World Cup and the potential quality of the 
Wallabies’ attacking play was something England did not come up against, and 
the same goes for New Zealand-bound Wales.

The Six Nations teams should be in it together. The tournament has so much 
going for it, not least an audience with a seemingly insatiable appetite, but 
attacking skills are lacking with each match scarred by basic mistakes. There 
should be a combined effort by the six to raise standards and better equip 
themselves to take on the Rugby Championship sides, and one area where the rest 
could follow England is in the greater onus Jones has put on his players to 
make decisions. England will only get better under him and it is up to the rest 
to respond.

• This is an extract taken from the Breakdown, the Guardian’s weekly rugby 
union email.To subscribe, just visit this page, find ‘The Breakdown’ and follow 
the instructions <https://profile.theguardian.com/email-prefs>.
 