
With the Six Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> 
Championship just a month away England are in danger of kicking off the 
tournament lacking more than half their starting pack. Eddie Jones, the England 
head coach, has confirmed Wasps’ Joe Launchbury will miss the start of the 
championship with the Vunipola brothers, Chris Robshaw and George Kruis also at 
risk of missing the opening fixture against France on 4 February.

New initiative to tighten up tackle law may be rugby’s big-bang moment | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/03/new-tackle-law-rugby-union-world-rugby>
Given the suspended Dylan Hartley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/14/dylan-hartley-england-six-week-ban-six-nations>
 will be seriously short of match practice before the France game at 
Twickenham, Jones may yet have to oversee a major forward reshuffle, 
particularly if Robshaw and Kruis are absent. Robshaw has aggravated a shoulder 
joint injury, Kruis is recovering from a fractured cheekbone and Launchbury has 
a strained calf. With James Haskell still awaiting his Premiership comeback, 
only Dan Cole and Maro Itoje from Jones’sseries-winning pack in Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/australia-england-match-report> 
last summer are injury-free.

England are fortunate to have plenty of depth in most positions but should 
Cole or Itoje pick up a knock this month the pool of England forward talent 
really will be tested. “People say relax and enjoy the job,” said Jones, who 
has been presiding over a twoday squad gathering in Brighton. “You never relax. 
Every day you wake up you’re hoping someone else doesn’t get injured.”

Typically, though, Jones is busily making contingency plans. He is keen to try 
Itoje 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/19/maro-itoje-england-rugby-autumn-internationals-south-africa>
 in the back row in the not too distant future and will also have no qualms 
about rushing Hartley back into his team if the Northampton hooker proves his 
fitness during England’s pre‑Six Nations training camp in Portugal.

“He’s got to come in to Portugal fit and ready to go,” Jones said of Hartley. 
“He’s doing all the right things at the moment and, if he keeps on doing that, 
there’s no reason why he won’t be starting hooker and captain. He is on a 
stringent fitness programme now ... he ate turkey and broccoli for Christmas 
dinner! He’s got to train bloody hard ... if he does, he’s going to put himself 
in a great position to be in the 23. If he’s in the 23, he’ll be captain.”

With so much other uncertainty swishing around there are obvious reasons why 
Jones would prefer Hartley to lead his team out against France, regardless of 
the fact his senior hooker will have played just 128 minutes of Premiership 
rugby in 2016‑17 by the end of January.

Saracens, at least, remain optimistic that Kruis will be fit in February but 
the outcome of a scan on Robshaw’s shoulder problem has yet to be disclosed. 
“Chris is a massive ‘glue’ player who does the unseen work,” said Jones, fresh 
from a seasonal break in his native Australia. “He is a really strong, 
consistent player and is a massive leader for us in an informal sense.”

Whoever plays, the squad have already been warned that easing gently into the 
Six Nations Championship is not an option. Jones hasseen what has happened to 
Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/leicester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report>
, English football’s dominant side in 2016, and does not want to see a similar 
decline from a team who finished last year with a 100% Test record.

“We addressed it at the first meeting,” Jones said. “We went through the 
example of what’s happened to Leicester and do we want that to happen to us? 
We’ve come up with some strategies we believe will help us overcome any 
complacency and keep pushing forward.

“You don’t defend a Grand Slam, you’ve got to win it again. That’s why we’ve 
got to be absolutely daring going into this Six Nations. We want to be a side 
that has the courage to play our sort of rugby from the very first game of the 
tournament. We want to create more attacking threats and be more creative. How 
we’re going to do that is going to be ‘The England Way’. We’ll get better at 
how we do it.”

Jones has also emphasised the revised tackle laws to his players, with 
sanctions for high ‘hits’ set to increase from this week onwards: “There is 
going to be a period where red and yellow are going to be very popular colours 
and you’ve just got to be able to cope with that.”
 