
Eddie Jones has warned England’s record‑equalling players they will be 
summarily dropped if they allow their standards to slip next year. Jones is 
also insisting they start their 2017Six Nations title defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/england-win-six-nations-scotland-france>
 with more collective intent than last season when he felt they were too 
fearful of possible failure.

Having presided over England’s first unbeaten calendar year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 since 1992, Jones has already told his squad that anyone easing off between 
now and their next game against France at Twickenham on 4 February risks being 
jettisoned. “We’ve had a bit of a chat about the fact that if you don’t keep 
performing you won’t be in the team. If players aren’t hungry and you see it in 
their performance they won’t be here. We have enough depth to change the squad 
if we need to.”

Magic moment from Mako Vunipola set England’s unstoppable train in motion | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/04/mako-vunipola-england-eddie-jones-australia-autumn-internationals>
With Maro Itoje and others set to be available having missed the autumn 
series, Jones also wants to see the entire team readjust their sights upwards 
in the Six Nations: “There’s a tipping point in the team when you get six, 
seven, eight players with that absolute desire to want to do well. If you’re 
not in that group you tend to fall out. That’s how great teams keep on getting 
better.

“We haven’t got that tipping point yet but we’re moving towards it. Being an 
outsider to the Six Nations last season I thought there was an absolute fear of 
losing rather than wanting to win. What we want to do in thisSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> is go out there and win it.”

To collect back-to-back grand slams, Jones believes England’s set-piece work 
will need sharpening but is not focusing on whether the team’s 14-game run can 
be extended into a world record for a Tier One nation. “The only thing I’m 
interested in now is winning the Six Nations and to win the Six Nations we need 
more consistency in our set piece,” Jones said.

“I want to have the most dominant scrum. I don’t have hope. ‘Hope’ is a bad 
word … it’s like people saying: ‘I was hoping to see you.’ It means they don’t 
really want to see you.”

He is also confident England will send a big contingent of players on the 
British & Irish Lions tour to New Zealand next summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/04/england-ireland-scotland-wales-rugby-lions>
, in addition to the forwards coach Steve Borthwick.

“I don’t have a target but if we’re travelling well we should have close to 15 
players in there,” Jones said, suggesting his players would be less affected by 
nerves if the Six Nations boiled down to an Anglo-Irish showdown against a 
strong Ireland side in Dublin. “We’ve had two big games this year where the 
result mattered a lot and we’ve made the same mistakes twice. I expect the 
third time it happens we won’t.”

Ben Youngs also said England are not yet satisfied after rounding off their 
year with a 37-21 success against Australia. “We want to keep going,” the 
scrum-half said. “We’ve got 14 wins now but there’s nothing at the end of that. 
There’s still plenty to go for this side.

“Eddie always says he wants us to be the No1 team in the world and so do the 
players. We’ll continue to do whatever we need to do to try and get there.”
 