
Edin Dzeko never did turn into Marco van Basten at Manchester City. That is 
what some predicted would happen when hejoined from Wolfsburg for £27m in 
January 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/jan/05/edin-dzeko-transfer-manchester-city>
 having scored 66 goals in 111 appearances for the German club. Aged 24, he 
appeared to have the strength, speed and skill to become a world-class 
centre-forward. Van Basten’s image adorned Dzeko’s bedroom walls growing up in 
Sarajevo and, in the Bosnian’s own words, he was “very flattered” to be seen as 
a modern-day version of the Dutch legend upon his arrival.

As is often the case in football, however, the hype failed to match reality, 
and while Dzeko hardly bombed at City – he scored 72 goals across 
four-and-a-half seasons, helping the club win two Premier League titles – he 
failed to match the loftiest of expectations that surrounded him.He joined Roma 
on loan in August 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/12/edin-dzeko-roma-loan-manchester-city>
 and it is telling that City were more than happy for the deal to become a 
long-term one within two months. In with a bang, out with a whimper.

But if that was then, this is now, and having taken his time to settle in 
Italy Dzeko is once again a player catching the eye and causing a fuss. He has 
12 goals in 16 games this season, making him Serie A’s joint top scorer, and on 
Saturday evening is seen by Roma supporters as key to their chances of taking a 
giant stride in their pursuit of a first league title in 16 years. The
Giallorossitravel to Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> 
for a battle between first and second. Win and Roma cut the gap to the leaders, 
and champions, to one point with more than half of the campaign left to play. 
For Dzeko, now aged 30 and plying his trade in the country where Van Basten 
shone so brightly, this feels like a defining moment.

Radja Nainggolan strikes to give Roma the edge as Juventus's closest 
challengers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/13/radja-nainggolan-strikes-to-give-roma-the-edge-as-juventuss-closest-challengers>
“Maybe I needed some time [to settle] but now I feel I have learned so much 
aboutSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>,” Dzeko said 
in a recent interview with Corriere della Sera. “The defenders, the stadiums 
and the club. I feel I understand them now.”

In the same interview it was pointed out to Dzeko that his manager, Luciano 
Spalletti, wants him to be morecattivo – naughtier, dirtier – on the pitch, to 
which he replied: “If you miss two chances is that because you haven’t been 
dirty or aggressive enough? To me beingcattivo means that you have to use all 
the chances you get and that you have to concentrate all the time. And I am 
learning to do that. This is who I am. I was born this way .”

For Roma that is no bad thing given Dzeko’s scoring return and all-round 
contribution, using his 6ft 3in frame to get hold of and keep possession, 
allowing team-mates suchas Radja Nainggolan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/13/radja-nainggolan-strikes-to-give-roma-the-edge-as-juventuss-closest-challengers>
, Diego Perotti and Mohamed Salah to get forward and join him in causing harm 
in the opposing area. And it has worked, with that trio having scored three, 
five and eight goals respectively.

That is not all down to Dzeko but he is clearly pivotal in more ways than one 
for aRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> side with the Scudetto in 
their sights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fedin-dzeko-roma-serie-a-jeventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52b708aaff2acb337e8fd770d3ba11226e588d45%2F0_90_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edin%20Dzeko%20settled%2C%20thriving%20and%20a%20key%20part%20of%20Roma%E2%80%99s%20tilt%20at%20Juventus%20%7C%20Sachin%20Nakrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fedin-dzeko-roma-serie-a-jeventus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edin%20Dzeko%20settled%2C%20thriving%20and%20a%20key%20part%20of%20Roma%E2%80%99s%20tilt%20at%20Juventus%20%7C%20Sachin%20Nakrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fedin-dzeko-roma-serie-a-jeventus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52b708aaff2acb337e8fd770d3ba11226e588d45%2F0_90_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Edin Dzeko is greeted by fans at Rome Fiumicino airport after joining Roma in 
2015. Photograph: Telenews/EPA 
That was far from the case during Dzeko’s early days in Rome, when his 
finishing was so poor his nickname among the Stadio Olimpico faithful became 
EdinCieco – Edin the blind. Between mid-November 2015 and February 2016 he went 
almost 12 hours without scoring and against Palermo on 21 Februarycontrived to 
miss the target from a position practically on the goal line 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3IqMeWAtKW0>.

All that has changed, however, and before on Saturday evening’s encounter 
Dzeko can take great heart from having secured three more goals from the same 
number of league games played as Gonzalo Higuaín,the man Juventus spent £75.3m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/26/gonzalo-higuain-moves-napoli-juventus>
 to acquire this summer.

As Dzeko also told Corriere della Sera, the experience of securing the title 
with City in 2012 and 2014 fills him with confidence he can do the same with 
Roma, and there is no doubt that winning on Saturday would boost the belief 
among every member of Spalletti’s squad. They could even take something out of 
a draw given Juventus have won each of their last 24 games on their own turf, a 
remarkable run that testifies to the strength of Massimo Allegri’s side as they 
pursue a sixth successive championship.

The two teams go into the encounter having won standout fixtures – Juventus 
beating Torino 3-1 in the Turin derby and Roma overcoming Milan 1-0 at the 
Stadio Olimpico 24 hours later. And while separated by four points, there is 
little to split them in goals scored (Juventus 35, Roma 36) and goals against 
(Juventus 14, Roma 16).

It is extremely tight and for Roma, without a title since 2001, when Gabriel 
Batistuta and Francesco Totti were in their pomp (the latter recently turned 40 
and remains part of the club 24 years after his debut), this is a golden chance 
to get one over opponents for whom there has been little love lost since thegol 
di Turone in May 1981.

A victory in that encounter would have taken Roma top with two games of the 
season left – instead they finished runners-up afterMaurizio Turone’s header at 
the Stadio Comunale <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dp70MZeWo6E>, Juventus’s 
home until 1990, was debatably ruled offside.

“We need the fans,” Dzeko said before the visit to the Juventus Stadium. 
Increasingly, they also need him.
 