
Child marriage <https://www.theguardian.com/society/child-marriage> in 
Bangladesh could drop by up to one-third if girls receive educational support 
or skills training, according to a study looking at ways to combat the practice 
in a country with one of the highest prevalence rates.

The Population Council’s Bangladeshi Association for Life Skills, Income and 
Knowledge for Adolescents(Balika) project 
<http://www.popcouncil.org/research/balika-bangladeshi-association-for-life-skills-income-and-knowledge-for-ado>
 evaluated the success of three approaches in delaying the number of girls 
under 18 being married off.

Bangladesh urged to combat ‘epidemic of child marriage’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/09/bangladesh-urged-combat-epidemic-child-marriage>
Bangladesh has the fourth highest rate of child marriage in the world 
<http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/where-does-it-happen/>. In terms of absolute 
figures, Bangladesh comes second to India for the number of girls married 
before they are 15.

More than 9,000 girls between 12 and 18, living in 72 communities in three 
districts ofBangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> that are 
considered “hotspots” for early marriage – Khulna, Satkhira and Narail – took 
part in the study, which began in 2012.

Over 18 months, girls received either tutoring in maths and English, training 
in their rights, critical thinking and decision-making, or jobs-based training. 
Each girl had weekly meetings with mentors.

Another 24 communities acted as a control group for the study. Girls in these 
communities received no services.

The results, published during the Commission on the Status of Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/14/world-leaders-gender-equality-pledge-reality-un-commission-on-the-status-of-women-sustainable-development>
 last month, show that the girls receiving extra activities were one-third less 
likely to be married as children than girls living in the communities not 
involved in the project.


Girls who received extra tutoring or life-skills training were 31% less likely 
to be married. Those who received jobs training were 23% less likely to marry.

“[The study is] giving the first concrete results about what we can do to 
reduce child marriage,” said Sajeda Amin, a senior associate and lead 
researcher on the study.

Tales of women in Bangladesh: tackling early marriage and child labour | Anna 
Ridout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/sep/29/women-bangladesh-tales-tackling-early-marriage-child-labour>
“Now we have not one, but three approaches that are proven to work. The Balika 
results show that programmes which build girls’ skills and knowledge and 
elevate their visibility and status in their families and communities while 
keeping them safe can significantly reduce the average child marriage rate in 
the community.


“If we want to effectively reduce child marriage in Bangladesh, we must employ 
new approaches that empower girls, and engage their families and their 
communities so girls are seen as an asset, not a liability.”

The NGO, which conducts research on health and development topics, said 
efforts to tackle child marriage need to start early, provide skills training 
so girls can thrive, and should involve the community. The Balika project was 
most successful in delaying marriage among girls under 16 and in school.

Amin said 34 communities involved in the project had decided to continue 
supporting girls in some way after the 18-month period, such as paying for 
mentors or for teachers to continue to run the training programmes. “One local 
government has actually budgeted to spend 10% of its budget on women and 
girls,” said Amin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fbangladesh-educating-girls-cut-child-marriage-by-a-third-study-pilot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c8f59493592bed094d2dd296db417b879093ca8%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Educating%20girls%20could%20cut%20child%20marriage%20in%20Bangladesh%20by%20a%20third%2C%20study%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fbangladesh-educating-girls-cut-child-marriage-by-a-third-study-pilot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Educating%20girls%20could%20cut%20child%20marriage%20in%20Bangladesh%20by%20a%20third%2C%20study%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fbangladesh-educating-girls-cut-child-marriage-by-a-third-study-pilot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c8f59493592bed094d2dd296db417b879093ca8%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 A billboard in Bandarban, Bangladesh, informs people child marriage is illegal 
and a serious offence. Photograph: Alamy 
Shifting attitudes towards child marriage in Bangladesh is proving difficult. 
“Child marriage is not really moving forward,” said Amin. “[Child marriage 
figures] are surprisingly high because there has been a lot of progress in a 
lot of other spheres – investing in schooling, reducing young births.”

 “When you go to rural Bangladesh, it’s still so common. At the Girl Summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/girl-summit>, the prime 
minister declared she would reduce child marriage. No attention was paid to it 
as a central social problem. Now, everyone is paying attention,” added Amin, 
whose mother and grandmother were both married before they were 18.

At the summit, held in London in 2014, the prime minister, Sheikh Hasina, 
announced her intentionto end child marriage among under-15s 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/world-location-news/uk-international-development-minister-lynne-featherstone-visits-bangladesh>
by 2021 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/world-location-news/uk-international-development-minister-lynne-featherstone-visits-bangladesh>
 and reduce by more than one-third the number of girls married between the ages 
of 15 and 18. The country has set 2041 as the target date to eliminate the 
practice.

However, last year Human Rights Watch said the government was not doing enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/09/bangladesh-urged-combat-epidemic-child-marriage>
 to act on its promises.
 