
Edward Snowden has been the subject of several high-profile appeals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/edward-snowden-exile-church-committee-letter-obama-cia>
 this year, calling on Barack Obama to pardon the National Security Agency 
whistleblower and allow him to return home to the US.Writers 
<https://pardonsnowden.org/news/authors-call-for-pardon>, intelligence experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/edward-snowden-exile-church-committee-letter-obama-cia>
,film stars <https://pardonsnowden.org/supporters> and tech tycoons have all 
joined the chorus.


Intelligence experts urge Obama to end Edward Snowden's 'untenable exile'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/edward-snowden-exile-church-committee-letter-obama-cia>
Now the most audacious display of support for Snowden is under way. Messages 
calling for his pardon are being beamed on to the outside wall of the Newseum, 
the Washington institution devoted to freedom of speech and the press that 
stands less than two miles from the White House.

The event is a guerrilla action carried out without the knowledge or approval 
of the Newseum itself, though the organisers of the stunt from the Pardon 
Snowden campaign are hoping they will be given a sympathetic reception.

“We sincerely hope that the Newseum supports what we are doing as an 
affirmation of the significance of a free press,” Noa Yachot, the campaign’s 
director, told the Guardian before the event.

Almost 4,000 messages backing Snowden’s decision to expose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/09/edward-snowden-nsa-whistleblower-surveillance>
 mass government surveillance of emails and phone calls have been gathered by 
the campaign, from across the US and around the world.

The messages include this one, from Casey: “I’m a 69-year-old vet and applaud 
your guts, we owe you lots and let’s hope you can come home to your family and 
friends.”

And this, from Tess: “Ed, I’m on your side. You’re a hero and an example of 
what it means to be an American. Thank you for making such an incredible 
sacrifice in order that we might move a bit more toward the truth.”

Frank offers: “True patriotism: speaking up when your government loses its 
moral compass.”

The messages are being projected onto the 74ft-high marble tablet that is 
attached to the facade of the Newseum and which has the words of the first 
amendment carved into it.

Written in 1791 as part of the bill of rights, it states: “Congress shall make 
no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free 
exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the 
right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a 
redress of grievances.”

Saturday night’s action in Washington comes at a critical time for Snowden, 
who remains in exile in Russia where he has been granted asylum, having been 
charged in the US with offences under theEspionage Act. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/22/snowden-espionage-charges>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fedward-snowden-pardon-messages-newseum-washington-dc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b586192d805eb73b8ceeb5aa703304486b4f96d%2F0_221_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Edward%20Snowden%20backers%20beam%20calls%20for%20pardon%20on%20Washington%20news%20museum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fedward-snowden-pardon-messages-newseum-washington-dc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Edward%20Snowden%20backers%20beam%20calls%20for%20pardon%20on%20Washington%20news%20museum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fedward-snowden-pardon-messages-newseum-washington-dc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b586192d805eb73b8ceeb5aa703304486b4f96d%2F0_221_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Images of supporters were also projected on to the Newseum. Photograph: Pardon 
Snowden 
Obama has less than six weeks left in office, meaning that if he is to use his 
power to pardon the whistleblower or extend some other form of leniency that 
would allow him to come home, he has to do so quickly.

Obama’s successor, President-elect Donald Trump, has hinted 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/457314934473633792> that he would 
sooner see Snowden executed than pardoned.

Yachot said the Newseum had been chosen as the location of the guerrilla 
action as a way of highlighting Snowden’s careful and responsible use of global 
news organisations as a way of disseminating his leaks.

“Snowden’s work with journalists, including the Guardian, enabled the release 
of information into the public domain,” she said. “It showed that we need a 
strong and adversarial media, working with whistleblowers, to inform the public 
about what the government is doing without anyone’s knowledge.”

Yachot added that though time was running out, history suggested that US 
presidents often reserved their most contentious pardons until the last minute.

“There are only six weeks left,” she said, “but we know that controversial 
pardons often come at the end of a president’s term, so we are still hoping.”
 