
Edward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden>, the 
National Security Agency whistleblower, has been given permission to stay in 
Russia for three more years and will be allowed to travel abroad for 
three-month stints. His Russian lawyer told reporters that Snowden, whose 
temporary asylum ran out on 1 August, has received a three-year residence 
permit.

"The decision on the application has been taken and therefore, starting 1 
August 2014, Edward Snowden has received a three-year residential permit," said 
Anatoly Kucherena.

But the former NSA contractor has not been granted political asylum, which 
would have allowed him to stay inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> permanently. However, Kucherena said 
Snowden would be able to extend his residency permit for a further three years 
when it runs out and after five years would be eligible to apply for Russian 
citizenship. He did not know if Snowden intended to do so.

Snowden arrived at Moscow's Sheremetyevo airport on a flight from Hong Kong on 
23 June 2013 after identifying himself as the source of the Guardian's 
revelations on the extensive US and British clandestine internet surveillance 
operations. Snowden, who was on his way to Cuba,spent five weeks in the transit 
area after 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/01/edward-snowden-grant-temporary-asylum-russia>
the US cancelled his travel documents, before being given temporary asylum in 
Russia.

The residency permit will allow Snowden to travel out of Russia for the first 
time, provided he does not stay outside the country for more than three months 
at a time, Kucherena said. The lawyer said he could not say which country 
Snowden might visit.

In an interview with the Guardian last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/18/-sp-edward-snowden-interview-rusbridger-macaskill>
, Snowden said that he keeps late and solitary hours â€“ effectively living on US 
time, tapping away on one of his three computers.

Of his life now compared with before, he said, "There's actually not that much 
difference. You know, I think there are guys who are just hoping to see me sad. 
And they're going to continue to be disappointed."

Kucherena told the press conference that Snowden was studying Russian and had 
an IT-related job, but did not provide details. He said Snowden's security was 
being taken seriously and that he was using private security guards. He denied 
that Snowden was living in housing provided by the Russian government or under 
the protection of government agents, saying that the whistleblower lived off 
his salary and donations to a fund in his name.

"He leads a rather modest lifestyle, but nevertheless we proceed from the tone 
of statements that come from the US state department and other political 
figures," he said.

"He moves around pretty freely, he goes to stores, museums, theatres, as 
photos published in the media show," Kucherena said. "But we also need to think 
about his safety."

In response to a question from the Guardian, the lawyer denied that Snowden 
had had any contacts with Russian intelligence or was working in any capacity 
with the government.

"I have a good relationship with him and he asks me about most things, but 
there have been no questions from him about [intelligence] contacts or giving 
evidence," Kucherena said. "He works in a profession in which he is a great 
expert, in technology, and he works on issues related to this. We've mainly 
discussed questions of his stay here, as well as his questions about human 
rights. He likes what he's doing and he's not engaged in any other activities."

Asked about the recent admission by US intelligence officials that another 
insider similar to Snowden appeared to be leaking secrets to journalists, 
Kucherena said Snowden might have inspired "successors", but was not directly 
involved.

"As far as successors, not just one person, but many have appeared," Kucherena 
said. "Edward Snowden doesn't have anything to do with this, but the feat he 
accomplished inspires other young people who follow this and understand that we 
live in a world of total surveillance in violation of our rights."

Snowden's whereabouts remain a secret and few pictures of him have appeared in 
the media.

Senior US political figures have accused Snowden of committing treason.

Snowden told the Guardian that he is financially secure for the immediate 
future. In addition to substantial savings from his career as a 
well-compensated contractor, he has received numerous awards and speaking fees 
from around the world. He is also in the process of securing foundation funding 
for a new press-freedom initiative,creating tools that allow journalists to 
communicate securely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/17/edward-snowden-professionals-encrypt-client-communications-nsa-spy>
.

The US has filed espionage charges against Snowden, charging him with theft of 
government property, unauthorised communication of national defence information 
and wilful communication of classified communications intelligence to an 
unauthorised person. The case has been a factor in tensions between Russia and 
the US.

The UN's top human rights official has suggested that the US should abandon 
its efforts to prosecute Snowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/16/edward-snowden-should-not-face-trial-un-human-rights-commissioner-navi-pillay>
, saying his revelations of massive state surveillance had been in the public 
interest. Navi Pillay credited Snowden with starting a global debate that has 
led to calls for the curtailment of state powers to snoop on citizens online 
and store their data.

Kucherena said Snowden's representatives were open to meeting with the new US 
ambassador when he arrives in Russia, but had no reason to turn Snowden over to 
the United States.
 