
Edward Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/edward-snowden> has said 
he is unafraid of Russian president Vladimir Putin turning him over to the US 
as a favor to President-elect Donald Trump.


The national security whistleblower, speaking during a Thursday webchat from 
Russia, where he has been stranded sincedisclosing revelations of widespread 
National Security Agency surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-nsa-files> in 2013, said it would be 
“crazy to dismiss” the prospect of Trump striking a deal with Putin that leads 
to his extradition and trial.

But he added: “If I was worried about safety, if the security and the future 
of myself was all that I cared about, I would still be in Hawaii.”

Snowden told the webchat hosted by the Dutch privacy-focused search engine 
StartPage he was comfortable with and proud of the choices he had made.


“I think I did the right thing,” he said. “While I can’t predict what the 
future looks like, I don’t know what’s going to happen tomorrow, I can be 
comfortable with the way I’ve lived to today.”

Trump, who has been complimentary about Putin and Russia in a manner that 
prompted accusations from his Democratic rival Hillary Clinton that he was a 
“puppet”, has in the past mused about having Snowden killed. Trump’s major 
national security ally, the retired general and former Defense Intelligence 
Agency chief Michael Flynn, oversaw ahighly speculative DIA report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/22/pentagon-report-snowden-leaks-national-security>
 that claimed Snowden took from the NSA a larger trove of documents than ever 
confirmed based on what Snowden could access as a contract systems 
administrator.

“Snowden is a spy who has caused great damage in the US. A spy in the old 
days, when our country was respected and strong, would be executed,” Trump
tweeted <https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/457314934473633792> in 2014.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
All of that has prompted concern among Snowden’s supporters worldwide that the 
groundwork for an extradition is in place. But Snowden proclaimed himself 
unperturbed.

“I don’t worry about it,” he said. “It’s possible. It would be crazy to 
dismiss the idea of this guy who presents himself as a big deal maker [Trump] 
as trying to make a deal.

“Now, the president of Russia has previously said on camera that the people of 
Russia consider me a human rights defender and regardless of the position we 
have on Russian politics, which obviously have a lot of problems, they said
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> is not a country that 
extradites human rights defenders.

“But let’s say that wasn’t true. Let’s say some kind of deal was made, all of 
that turned around and I was sent away. If I was worried about safety, if the 
security and the future of, sort of, myself was all that I cared about, I would 
still be in Hawaii.”

He added: “I think I did the right thing. And while you know I can’t predict 
what the future looks like, I can’t predict what’s going to happen tomorrow, I 
can be comfortable with the way I’ve lived to today. And no matter what 
happens, right, if there’s a drone strike that comes tomorrow, if you know, 
they put together some operation, I slip and fall down the stairs, that’s 
something that won’t change.”

Snowden has vigorously denied collaborating in any manner with any foreign 
intelligence agency, even unwittingly. The Obama administration nevertheless 
has charged him under the Espionage Act, which would restrict him from making a 
full case for his leaking to a jury.

In his talk, Snowden focused on advocating for encryption and other 
cybersecurity measures to become foundational to the architecture of the 
internet and to connected devices, as well as urging sustained political 
activism around privacy measures. For the most part, the world’s most famous 
whistleblower elided questions about the presidential election.

Snowden alluded to “very concerning statements made by our new 
president-elect”, but expressed optimism that the US will survive it.

“This is a dark moment in our nation’s history, but it is not the end of 
history. And if we work together we can build something better, and we can 
enjoy a more free and a more liberal society that benefits everyone,” Snowden 
said.

“As long as we do our best to live in accordance with our values, we don’t 
have to worry about what happens tomorrow, because today is enough.”
 