
The radical Egyptian cleric who was kidnapped in Milan by the CIA in 2003 has 
come to the defence of a formerCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> 
officer convicted for her alleged role in his extraordinary rendition.

Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr, who is known as Abu Omar, told the Guardian in a 
telephone interview that he believed Sabrina De Sousa, who faces imminent 
extradition to Italy, was a scapegoat and ought to be pardoned by Italy’s head 
of state,Sergio Mattarella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/29/italy-search-new-president-berlusconi-renzi>
. De Sousa, a 60-year-old dual American and Portuguese citizen, faces a 
four-year prison sentence andis due to be extradited from Portugal on 4 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/25/former-cia-agent-sabrina-de-sousa-extradition-italy-abu-omar-kidnapping>
.

“Sabrina and the others who were convicted are scapegoats. The US 
administration sacrificed them. All of those higher up in the hierarchy are 
enjoying their immunity,” he said. “These people higher up, without doubt they 
should be convicted in this case. They should face trial.”

The remarks mark an extraordinary turn of events in a story that has vexed the 
US and Italian governments since Abu Omar’s case became public in 2005, 
exposing in great detail theinner workings of a highly classified and 
controversial Bush-era counter-terrorism programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rendition>. The case also exposed US allies’ 
help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/09/uk-government-seeking-to-avoid-responsibility-for-renditions-abdel-hakim-belhaj>
 in conducting the secret programme. Abu Omar’s views on De Sousa werefirst 
reported by ADNKronos 
<http://www.adnkronos.com/fatti/esteri/2016/04/25/caso-abu-omar-agente-cia-sousa-spera-nella-grazia-mattarella_jbBnIu401yVPMaUZjITAsO.html>
, a wire agency.

Abu Omar’s story began on 18 February 2003 when he was stopped on a street in 
Milan, grabbed from behind and pulled inside a car by CIA officers, allegedly 
working with the help of Italian officials. The radical cleric, who had been 
granted political asylum inItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> in 
2001 and was already the subject of a terrorism investigation by other Italian 
officials, leading to his eventual conviction in absentia, was then transported 
to Cairo via Germany, where he was allegedly imprisoned, interrogated and 
tortured.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fegyptian-cleric-defends-cia-agent-convicted-rendition-abu-omar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26cffab9ab061d2cb93b480f085ed5107e09fd43%2F0_43_1361_815%2F1361.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egyptian%20cleric%20defends%20CIA%20agent%20convicted%20over%20his%20rendition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fegyptian-cleric-defends-cia-agent-convicted-rendition-abu-omar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egyptian%20cleric%20defends%20CIA%20agent%20convicted%20over%20his%20rendition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fegyptian-cleric-defends-cia-agent-convicted-rendition-abu-omar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26cffab9ab061d2cb93b480f085ed5107e09fd43%2F0_43_1361_815%2F1361.jpg>
 Abu Omar was stopped on a street in Milan, grabbed from behind and pulled 
inside a car by CIA officers. Photograph: Nasser Nasser/AP 
The case was investigated by an independent prosecutor in Italy, leading to the
conviction in 2009 of 22 CIA operatives and other US officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/nov/04/cia-guilty-rendition-abu-omar> 
for orchestrating the kidnapping. The US officials, including De Sousa, who was 
publicly a state department official in Milan but actually an undercover CIA 
officer, were convicted in absentia as they had left Italy before the trial 
began. Some officials, including Italians, were later pardoned.

The US did not invoke diplomatic immunity for De Sousa or other low level 
officials. The story was dormant for years, largely because successive Italian 
governments steered clear of the issue and never sought to extradite any of the 
Americans involved. But that changed the momentDe Sousa decided to leave the US 
last year and travel to Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/08/former-cia-operative-detained-portugal-kidnapping>
 to visit family. She was detained at the airport in Lisbon on her way to India 
because of an outstanding European arrest warrant that had been issued by law 
enforcement officials.

De Sousa has always said she played a minor role as a translator in an 
early-stage discussion of extraordinary rendition, before Abu Omar had been 
named as a potential target.


In the Guardian interview, Abu Omar said he was not sure whether she played a 
role, but that he had never seen her before.

He said: “Now she’s 60 years old. If media reports are right, she and the 
people who kidnapped me were the reason why I left my job in Italy, and a lot 
of trouble to me and my family happened because of that. They are the reason 
behind my physical disabilities now. The Italian prosecution actually accused 
her of this.”

Whatever her involvement, he added: “She’s threatened to be sentenced between 
four and six years, and I don’t wish that for her. I’ve been in prison before, 
and I don’t wish for the same to happen to her, either as a friend or a foe. 
Especially because she’s a woman.”

He pointed out that De Sousa had been on her way to visit her 90-year-old 
mother in India, and that he had been forbidden from paying respects to his own 
late mother after Egypt’s interior minister at the time refused to release him 
from jail.

“[He] refused for me to attend my own mother’s funeral, and Sabrina could be 
subjected to the same problem,” he said. “As a Muslim, I should wish for her to 
be pardoned.”


Italy condemned for its role in abduction of Egyptian imam in 2003
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/italy-abu-omar-abduction-egyptian-imam-european-court-of-human-rights>
He insisted that hers was a humanitarian case, because she “exposed injustices 
and revealed the injustices through the media”. De Sousa has been a consistent 
critic of the US government and made a series of allegations in 2013, including 
that the former CIA station chief Jeffrey Castelli had exaggerated the threat 
Abu Omar posed to get approval for the rendition, and that the operation had 
been approved by the then CIA director George Tenet.In a recent interview with 
the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/italy-abu-omar-abduction-egyptian-imam-european-court-of-human-rights>
 she suggested she would willingly have discussions with Italian officials in 
order to defend herself.

De Sousa said in response to the Abu Omar comments that she appreciated his 
remarks about her family.

“Abu Omar also recognises that my imprisonment will not result in real 
accountability for what he went through in Egypt,” she said.

De Sousa has said she knows the US government actively lobbied Italy’s 
president, Mattarella, topardon two CIA officials 
<http://www.ansa.it/english/news/politics/2015/12/23/mattarella-pardons-seldon-lady-medero_a52da0cc-ecda-4840-9258-5535adfa6bac.html>
 who were shown leniency late last year, even though they never served time in 
Italy.

The former CIA officer’s predicament comes at an exceedingly tricky moment for 
the Italian government.

“The US has been between a rock and a hard place on this for some time and now 
Italy is poised to wedge themselves in as well,” said Chris Jenks, director of 
the Criminal Justice Clinic and an assistant law professor at Southern 
Methodist University’s Dedman School of Law, who has followed the case. A move 
by Mattarella to pardon De Sousa would be politically problematic in Italy 
given the country’s ongoing stand-off with Egypt over the recent torture and 
murder of an Italian citizen, Giulio Regeni, in Cairo.

Americans, he added, were generally perceived as being unaccountable in 
matters of justice in Italy, from cases ranging from the 1998 Cavalese cable 
car disaster, when 20 people were killed after four American pilots 
accidentally cut a cable supporting a gondola but never faced prosecution, to 
the case of Amanda Knox, who was found not guilty of murder last year after a 
contentious murder trial.

“The Obama administration inherited this debacle and cannot publicly support 
what the CIA did in Milan. At the same time the US, like all countries, needs 
an intelligence service and President Obama doesn’t want his legacy to be as 
allowing the first ever extradition of a CIA agent,” Jenks said.


Underscoring the point, the conservative Wall Street Journal published an 
editorial this week that criticised the White House for failing to protect De 
Sousa, saying Washington had “abandoned one of its operatives to the political 
whims of foreign prosecutors” and that her case sent a “demoralising message to 
all who serve in the shadows, even as the war on terror enters a dangerous new 
phase”.

The US has refused to comment on the case. But one official told the Guardian 
that De Sousa had made a decision to break ties with the government when she 
moved to sue the US for not invoking diplomatic immunity to help her.


Jenks said it would probably never be known how the US might try to 
incentivise Italy’s president to “make this go away” but that Italy would 
probably leverage the situation to get something in return for a pardon.

The issue could feasibly be discussed as early as Friday, when the US 
vice-president, Joe Biden, is due to meet Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, 
in Rome.
 