
The world of archaeology was electrified last year by the news that 
Tutankhamun’s tomb could contain hidden chambers possibly containing the 
remains and riches of Queen Nefertiti. It was a story that seemed to have 
everything: false walls, buried treasure, at least one mummy – and new hope for 
Egypt’s ailing tourist industry.

Tutankhamun's secret? Experts hope new chambers could contain tomb of Nefertiti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/hidden-rooms-tutankhamun-tomb-new-treasures-queen-nefertiti>
There was just one problem: the announcement now seems to be unfounded. But 
scientists say the evidence, based on new research, is being suppressed by the 
government in Cairo.


The announcement in November by the then minister of antiquities, Mamdouh 
Eldamaty, that he was “90% positive” that an earlier radar scan of the tomb had 
revealed an unexplored chamber,galvanised worldwide excitement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/hidden-rooms-tutankhamun-tomb-new-treasures-queen-nefertiti>
, and seemed to add weight to the theory of a British Egyptologist, Richard 
Reeves, that the tomb was also the intact burial site of Nefertiti 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3TiEzjWimDY>, widely believed to be 
Tutankhamun’s stepmother and who may have preceded him as pharaoh.

A second scan was carried out this year using advanced ground-penetrating 
radar technology and was organised by the National Geographical Society (NGS), 
which said it sent the report to the Egyptian ministry of antiquities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fegypt-hidden-chambers-tutankhamun-tomb-nefertiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c7954ae3bb7cafe100bf78655db5589f0df85e4%2F0_0_1512_2332%2F1512.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt%20'suppressing%20truth'%20over%20hidden%20chambers%20in%20Tutankhamun%E2%80%99s%20tomb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fegypt-hidden-chambers-tutankhamun-tomb-nefertiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%20%27suppressing%20truth%27%20over%20hidden%20chambers%20in%20Tutankhamun%E2%80%99s%20tomb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fegypt-hidden-chambers-tutankhamun-tomb-nefertiti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c7954ae3bb7cafe100bf78655db5589f0df85e4%2F0_0_1512_2332%2F1512.jpg>
 A 3,300-year-old limestone bust of Queen Nefertiti. Photograph: Robert 
Michael/AFP/Getty 
However, the ministry has not revealed the findings, raising suspicions that 
they disprove the original claim, and triggering political infighting in Cairo. 
Eldamaty was replaced in March.

Dean Goodman, a California-based geophysicist who analysed the data from the 
new scan, said he was unable to comment due to a non-disclosure agreement with 
NGS. But he was earlier quoted by theNational Geographic website 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/05/160509-king-tut-tomb-chambers-radar-archaeology/>
 as saying that no hollow chamber had been found. “If we had a void, we should 
have a strong reflection,” he said. “But it just doesn’t exist. Radar data can 
often be subjective. But at this particular site, it’s not. It’s nice at such 
an important site to have clear, convincing results.”

An NGS spokeswoman said: “National Geographic scans and Goodman’s review of 
them were shared with the Egyptian ministry of antiquities. Any questions about 
the National Geographic scan results should be directed to the ministry.”

However, there was no answer on Thursday at the ministry’s press office 
telephone number, and an email bounced back with an automated message saying 
the email address was no longer valid. There has been no response to a request 
for comment from Reeves, a senior Egyptologist at the University of Arizona.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fegypt-hidden-chambers-tutankhamun-tomb-nefertiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25bf9ad7d7f5ea9ab3a2e0fa321b1c144f5e671d%2F0_58_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt%20'suppressing%20truth'%20over%20hidden%20chambers%20in%20Tutankhamun%E2%80%99s%20tomb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fegypt-hidden-chambers-tutankhamun-tomb-nefertiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%20%27suppressing%20truth%27%20over%20hidden%20chambers%20in%20Tutankhamun%E2%80%99s%20tomb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fegypt-hidden-chambers-tutankhamun-tomb-nefertiti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25bf9ad7d7f5ea9ab3a2e0fa321b1c144f5e671d%2F0_58_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 King Tutankhamun in his burial chamber in the Valley of the Kings. Photograph: 
Khaled Desouki/AFP/Getty Images 
Lawrence Conyers, an anthropology professor at the University of Denver and 
the author of Ground-Penetrating Radar for Archaeology, said: “National 
Geographic came in and collected two sets of data and they used the used all 
the newest equipment with the right antenna. They first did a scan of a wall 
where they knew there was a void space behind it and used that as a model, so 
they knew what they were looking for. They did multiple scans of every single 
wall, and from what I understand, there is absolutely no indication of a void 
space.”

A scientist familiar with the controversy said: “My understanding is that the 
Egyptians are in a state of denial about this. They are freaking out, and it 
has become politically toxic. When you’re the in the middle of a situation in 
which people are being purged because of their position on this, then 
scientists should back off and let the politics take its course. We have left 
the realm of science.”

The initial optimism about finding hidden chambers in the tomb was fuelled by 
a radar scan performed by a veteran Japanese specialist, Hirokatsu Watanabe. 
Those findings are under scrutiny, particularly as Watanabe has refused to 
share the raw data upon which he based his conclusions.

He told the National Geographic website at a conference in Cairo that after 
more than 40 years in the field, he has customised his equipment to such a 
degree that its data is unreadable to others. “When someone says that they want 
to check the data, I am so sad,” he said. But he expressed no doubts about his 
results: “I trust my data completely.”
 