
At 9.30am in Luxor’s Valley of the Kings, the sun is high in the sky and 
inside the famed 63 tombs it’s starting to get humid. This should be peak time 
for visitors, but there are few footprints in the dust leading to each tomb. 
About 50 tourists stroll in and out of the tombs, or fan themselves in the 
shade. “This is about as busy as it gets,” said Aamer Ibrahim, a Luxor native 
who has worked in tourism all his professional life. He gestured at a spot 
about 200 metres from the entrance to the tomb of Ramses IV. “People used to 
have to queue – the line would stretch to there.”

There is a guilty, selfish pleasure in standing alone in the tomb of 
Tutankhamun, or having the stars and hieroglyphs in the tomb of Ramses IV 
almost to myself. But for an industry reliant on E£100 (£9) entry tickets to 
the Valley of the Kings (plus extra to see Tutankhamun’s mummy and gilded 
sarcophagus), this is a disaster. Egyptian tourism is heavily pegged to its the 
political fortunes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76236edc6bca0b441051bc23e94482172034c404%2F0_180_5396_3238%2F5396.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt's%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%27s%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76236edc6bca0b441051bc23e94482172034c404%2F0_180_5396_3238%2F5396.jpg>
 Colossi of Ramses II at the entrance to Luxor Temple. Photograph: Alamy Stock 
Photo 
A revolution in early 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/feb/02/egypt-revolution-turns-ugly>, a 
popularly backedmilitary coup in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/04/egypt-morsi-removed-army-live>, 
and a series of high-profile airline disasters, beginning with the downing of
Metrojet 7K9268 in Sharm el-Sheikh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crashes-in-sinai-egyptian-pm-says>
 in October 2015, have shattered an industry that made up 11.4% of Egypt’s GDP 
in 2015. A slow drip of turmoil has ensured that any gains the industry made 
since the shock of 2011 have been reversed: figures released by Egypt’s 
official statistics agency, Capmas, show that tourist numbers in July this year 
were down 41.9%, compared to the same period in 2015. Critics say that until 
Egypt is truly transparent about the reasons behind the Metrojet crash, as well 
as the crash of EgyptAir flight 804 in May this year, tourists won’t return 
with confidence.

Nonetheless, there are hopes that Russia could lift its flight ban on Egypt 
before the end of the year, and Germany recently restarted direct flights to 
the popular Sinai resort of Sharm el-Sheikh. The town was previously the main 
generator of tourism for Egypt and a keystone for UK tour companies: luxury 
operator Kuoni told the Guardian it has seen “a significant drop in holidays to 
Egypt in the past five years, and particularly since the suspension of flights 
into Sharm el-Sheikh”. Thomas Cook added: “Since 2012, the proportion of our 
customers travelling toEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> has 
dropped from under 6% to under 3%.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2693f44e5bac09ec1f3515704155dda4c50f880b%2F0_299_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt's%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%27s%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2693f44e5bac09ec1f3515704155dda4c50f880b%2F0_299_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Tourist guide Aamer Ibrahim at Karnak temple. 
A ban on direct flights from the UK to Sharm el-Sheikh remains, but there is 
no ban on visiting the area – for now tourists have to fly there via Cairo. And 
Heathrow recently reinstated a direct EgyptAir flight to Luxor. “The good news 
for us, regarding the resumption of direct flights to Luxor, is that it sends a 
good, calming message to potential travellers that the situation is stable and 
improving,” said John Telfer of Explore Worldwide. The company has seen a 75% 
reduction in bookings to Egypt since 2011, with this year’s figures a 20% drop 
on the already low booking figures of 2015. “The question [everyone is asking] 
is, is Egypt stable? This is why the Luxor flight is good news for the industry 
as a whole.”

At the Sonesta St George 
<https://www.sonesta.com/eg/luxor/sonesta-st-george-hotel-luxor> in Luxor, once 
visited by former president Hosni Mubarak, lines of sun loungers await bronzed 
guests and rows of empty tables fill the restaurants during what should be the 
start of high season. At the famedWinter Palace 
<http://www.sofitel.com/gb/hotel-1661-sofitel-winter-palace-luxor/index.shtml>, 
formerly the home of the Egyptian royal family, ornate gold-and-glass 
chandeliers hang over empty brocade sofas, awaiting visitors. The Winter Palace 
is currently administered by Sofitel – like the vast majority of large Egyptian 
hotels, it is funding from a large international chain that keeps the doors 
open and the staff employed during a downturn this severe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c4221b2d401d21eceaccccf2eb2168f2dbc4987%2F0_336_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt's%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%27s%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c4221b2d401d21eceaccccf2eb2168f2dbc4987%2F0_336_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Old Winter Palace Hotel. Photograph: Dave Bartruff/Getty Images 
But many in the tourism industry feel the Cairo government has hung them out 
to dry. They say government pledges to resuscitate the industry to 15 million 
annual visitors haven’t been backed by logistical or financial help for those 
actually working on the ground. “The government doesn’t care about tourists,” 
said Ahmed Ramadan Boghdady, owner of the New Monaliza souvenir stall that sits 
close to the famed Hatshepsut temple. “You should care for people whose jobs 
depend on this – the guides, those guys selling water. They only care about us 
once we have money. Civil servants with a monthly wage don’t care about 
tourists.”

For Boghdady, a day of sales used to be E£600 (£55). Now, it’s barely E£200 
(£18), or sometimes nothing at all. He points at the rows of carved sphinxes, 
busts of Nefertiti and various pharaohs that line the shop, themselves symbols 
of Egyptian industry: black granite from Aswan, sparkling white alabaster from 
Luxor, or stones from Sinai, Sohag and Minya, all carved by local artisans . 
Boghdady says that tourists spend less, now that a holiday to Egypt can be done 
on a smaller budget. “Yesterday, there was a bus full of tourists here, a big 
bus of 400 people. They spent [only] E£245 (£22.50)! Eighty per cent of my 
artists aren’t working – look at how many pieces we have here!” he exclaimed. 
“Look, the rows are three deep; before it was one!”

For its part, Egypt’s government has worked to reopen attractions such as the 
tombs of King Seti and Queen Nefertari earlier this year, as well as four tombs 
used to bury royal butlers which reopened in late 2015, but adding to the rich 
array of attractions has done little to get visitor numbers back to their 
previous highs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a4a6b41a88e3c05045248f1c0031dadf046ff1%2F0_55_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt's%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%27s%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a4a6b41a88e3c05045248f1c0031dadf046ff1%2F0_55_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Areeka café, Luxor. Photograph: Areeka café 
The economic ripples of this decline reach far beyond the well-known tourist 
spots. On Luxor’s main Television Street downtown, rows of shoe and clothes 
shops stand to attention under fluorescent lights, but no one is buying. The 
Areeka cafe on Television Street could seat up to 100 people, who come to sip 
ice-cold fruit juice or puff on a shisha pipe, but there are few tables taken. 
Owner Emad El Nubi says “there is no comparison” between a good day’s business 
today and pre-2011.

“Everything slowed down. We have no income. Prices have gone up,” he said. El 
Nubi’s family has also been forced to close their business producing rice, 
honey and sugar because of a lack of hard currency. The low number of tourists 
has sent Egypt’s economy on a continued downward spiral, even as the government 
insists that mega-projects, such as the second Suez Canal channel, would 
reverse the country’s fortunes. Egypt recently accepted a $12bn loan from the 
IMF, requiring it to slice further into subsidies and, in all likelihood, 
devalue its currency for a second time in a year. The result has been price 
hikes for basic goods and services, not to mention the sudden introduction of 
VAT, that have hit ordinary Egyptians in the pocket from Aswan to Alexandria.
 Ramses VI’s tomb in the Valley of the Kings. Photograph: Kenneth 
Garrett/Getty Images/National Geographic Creative 
Reduced numbers of tourists also mean a lack of funds. “Per day, we get maybe 
20 people now,” said Samia Abdel Aziz, head of the Luxor Museum. The museum 
recently increased ticket prices to the equivalent of E£100 (£9) from E£80 
(£7.40), and added a special E£50 (£4.50) ticket for taking photos, without 
flash, of the exhibits. The revenue from ticket sales from the museum, as well 
as other historical sites around the country, are pooled and fed back to the 
Ministry of Antiquities, which maintains a separate budget from the rest of the 
government, funded in large part by these ticket sales. But decreased sales 
means less money for projects like the long-awaited Grand Egyptian Museum near 
Cairo, designed to draw in new visitors once it opens in 2018.

A drop in visitor numbers is also tied to security. At the Karnak temple, an 
Egyptian guide gestures to a statue of Ramses II and his wife Nefertari as he 
conducts a tour in fluent Mandarin, while another leads a group in Russian. 
There is no shortage of trained guides, but safety remains a concern –Karnak 
witnessed a rare but troubling attack by a suicide bomber and two gunmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/10/egyptian-tourist-city-of-luxor-hit-by-suicide-bomb-attack>
 in June last year. The Ministry of Antiquities funds metal detectors and bag 
scanners at heritage sites across Egypt: a drop in funds means less money to 
keep these in top condition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3759fdc01a28bbffa693e62b5d0275a2a5737df%2F0_135_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt's%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%27s%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3759fdc01a28bbffa693e62b5d0275a2a5737df%2F0_135_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
 The gold mummy of Tutankhamun. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Ibrahim believes that bringing tourists back is a “three-stage process”: first 
the Germans, then the Brits – then the Americans, a final sign that things are 
truly booming again. When a burly American tourist with a GoPro strapped to his 
head and a camera atop a selfie-stick boards the train to the Hatshepsut 
temple, Ibrahim laughs with him and adds he should tell all his friends to come 
to Egypt. “Tell them yourself,” he replies, pointing his camera at Ibrahim. 
“Please, please come to Egypt, we are waiting for you!” Ibrahim jokingly pleads.

But perhaps the solution to Egypt’s tourism woes lies elsewhere. At the tomb 
of Horemheb, a ruler known for bringing stability back to the country, visitor 
Vinod Ramanathan from India said Egypt could easily become a top destination 
for Indians. “Indians want to travel, as we have more disposable income now, 
and this is the place for that,” he said. “People need to know about this 
country, and they don’t right now ... you could have many Indians travelling 
here.”

Other destinations in Egypt

CAIRO
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba2ea6dce77b92fa424ef8c13112e1077daeb6a4%2F0_542_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt's%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%27s%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba2ea6dce77b92fa424ef8c13112e1077daeb6a4%2F0_542_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 The bar at the Windsor Hotel. 
Cairo has never had any shortage of hotel rooms, and large hotel chains have 
continued a steady, if depreciated, flow of business since 2011, mostly from 
visitors from the Gulf. Visitors to Cairo can choose from over 15,000 
brand-name hotel rooms, a 7% growth on 2015, according to a recent report by 
estate agency Colliers.

Large chains may be able to weather the storm, but Cairo’s smaller venues have 
suffered, including the much-lovedWindsor Hotel 
<http://www.windsorcairo.com/mainpage.htm> in downtown Cairo (double from $50 
B&B). “[Business] isn’t good now but at least it’s a little better than 
before,” said owner Wafik Doss, whose family have owned the Windsor since 1966. 
“We [have] started having people from all over the world; before it was just 
Egyptians for some time.”

The UK Foreign Office continues to give Cairo a green rating, telling 
travellers to “see our travel advice before travelling”, as security remains a 
concern. A shooting by the Giza pyramids in 2015, as well as the bombing of the 
Italian consulate adjacent to central Tahrir Square in the same year, have put 
off many foreign visitors, although the city continues to attract business 
visitors from elsewhere in the Middle East.

SHARM EL-SHEIKH
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F553105a01836d67a325d5a423ded0f995afe3f47%2F0_294_4612_2768%2F4612.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt's%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%27s%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F553105a01836d67a325d5a423ded0f995afe3f47%2F0_294_4612_2768%2F4612.jpg>
 Empty beach chairs at former tourist hotspot Sharm el-Sheikh. Photograph: 
Chris McGrath/Getty Images 
Sharm el-Sheikh was the most popular tourist resort in Egypt and a keystone 
for UK tour companies: tour operator Kuoni told the Guardian it has seen “a 
significant drop in holidays to Egypt in the past five years, and particularly 
since the suspension of flights into Sharm el-Sheikh.”

Nonetheless, there are hopes that Russia could lift its flight ban on Egypt 
before the end of the year, and Germany recently restarted direct flights to 
the popular Sinai resort town. There is little indication yet as to whether 
direct British flights will resume, although Egypt hired British firm Restrata 
to train Egyptian airport security personnel across the country, including at 
Sharm el-Sheikh.

Although the FCO will not currently allow direct flights to Sharm el-Sheikh, 
it doesn’t prevent British tourists from going to the resort, so many simply 
fly to Cairo and travel on from there.

RED SEA 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d33f9c72e5ab9f7dcd0610148a674bd6d510b81%2F0_177_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt's%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%27s%20tourism%20industry%20is%20still%20reeling%20but%20hope%20is%20on%20the%20horizon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fegypt-tourism-industry-plagued-by-lack-of-visitors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d33f9c72e5ab9f7dcd0610148a674bd6d510b81%2F0_177_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Divers in the Red Sea, Dahab. Photograph: Asmaa Waguih/REUTERS 
North of Sharm el-Sheikh, tourism spots previously favoured for being off the 
beaten track are struggling. Seaside towns like Dahab and Nuweiba, which once 
played host to many eager British and Russian tourists, as well as others from 
all over Europe, are now empty of all but the most dedicated visitors. The 
recent addition of theCoworkInn <http://www.coworkinn-dahab.com/> to Dahab’s 
collection of cafes and bars is designed to bring back both Egyptian and 
foreign travellers who feel like working by the beach. Even so, the FCO 
continues to advise against “all but essential travel” to the two towns, in 
part because they are closer to North Sinai, which has witnessed a spike in 
activity since 2013 from Sinai Province, a group now affiliated with Isis.

Along the Red Sea coast, the town of Hurghada was previously popular with 
Russian, British and German visitors. A report by Capmas found that Russian 
visits to Egypt were down 60%, British 17.5% and German visits by 10.4% in July 
this year, compared to 2015. But Hurghada has begun to host many of the foreign 
visitors put off by travel to Sinai while, further north, the towns of Ain 
Sokhna and Gouna are increasingly visited by Egyptians looking for a break.
 