
8.33am BST 

Summary

Middle East Live is now primarily a forum for readers to share links and 
offer commentary on developments in theMiddle East and North Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast>. Please post your comments below.

Here's a roundup of the latest news:

Egypt

• Egypt is holding its breath for mass demonstrations to mark the first 
anniversary of President Mohamed Morsi's election on Sunday, amid speculation 
the army might intervene in the event of large-scale civil unrest. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/27/egyptian-activists-hope-revolution-morsi>
 Opposition activists claim an unverifiable 15 million Egyptians have signed a 
petition demanding Morsi's removal, and expect a significant proportion of that 
number to take to the streets on 30 June.

• Morsi's supporters are to hold "open-ended' rallies - two days ahead of the 
opposition protests calling for the president to resign, the BBC reports. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-23092817> Meanwhile, one person 
died and a number of others were injured in clashes in northern Egypt late on 
Thursday.

• A new protest movement that has rejuvenated Egypt's secular opposition – 
which had seemed beyond resuscitation three months ago. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/27/tamarod-egypt-morsi-campaign-oppsition-resignation>
 Tamarod, which means "rebel" in Arabic, is exclusively focused on collecting 
signatures for a petition that calls for PresidentMohamed Morsi 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/mohamed-morsi>'s resignation. Tamarod have 
also become a lightning rod for violence, with several of their offices 
attacked by unknown opponents.

• The increasing polarisation in the country could lead to violent 
confrontation, warns the respected Egypt watcher Nathan Brown.  
<http://mideast.foreignpolicy.com/posts/2013/06/27/will_june_30_be_midnight_for_morsis_cinderella_story>
Writing in Foreign Policy he says: 

Whatever the outcome of the confrontation on June 30, Egypt's deep structural 
problems will remain. But the society will be addressing them with weakened and 
tarnished institutions, a political process incapable of producing clear 
policies, embittered losers and mistrustful winners, and no accepted procedures 
for resolving political differences. These problems may slowly resolve 
themselves over time, but Egyptian politics shows few signs of patience.

• GuardianWitness is inviting readers in Egypt to share their stories, videos 
and images of this weekend's protests.  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/27/egypt-demonstrations-morsi-images-video>
Please share your eyewitness accounts or information that will help us document 
the situation. 

Syria

• An explosion struck the Christian Bab Touma district in the Old City of 
Damascus on Thursday in what Syrian state television said was a suicide bombing.
 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/06/27/uk-syria-crisis-bomb-idUKBRE95Q0NW20130627>
 Opposition sources said it was a mortar attack. It was the first major blast 
reported inside the walls of the Old City, a Unesco World Heritage, since the 
uprising began. At least four people were killed and several wounded, Syrian 
television said.

• The Independent's Patrick Cockburn, who was staying near the scene of the 
blast, said the aftermath appeared to resemble damage done by a mortar bomb 
rather than a suicide bomber. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/the-mood-was-one-of-resignation-death-comes-to-straight-street-in-damascus-8677460.html>

There was no blood around the spot as there would have been if someone had 
blown themselves up. It looked as if the mortar had been randomly fired into 
the Christian quarter by rebels who assume Christians, frightened of Islamic 
fundamentalism, are pro-government.

• UN inspectors, blocked from entering Syria, are in Turkey to gather 
information about possible use of chemical weapons in the civil war, Reuters 
reports.  
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/06/27/uk-syria-crisis-chemicalweapons-idUKBRE95Q0B420130627>
The visit came as the head of the team, Swedish scientist Ake Sellstrom, met 
Turkish foreign minister Ahmet Davutoglu.

• The International Committee of the Red Cross said it is planning 
humanitarian operations for an extended conflict in Syria in the absence of any 
sign of a diplomatic breakthrough. 
<http://www.icrc.org/eng/resources/documents/news-release/2013/06-27-annual-report-2012.htm>
 Red Cross president Peter Maurer, said: "We don't see where a political 
solution should easily come from. And that's the reason why we would rather 
calculate for a longer conflict. Even if we would find a solution tomorrow,Syria
 <http://uk.reuters.com/places/syria?lc=int_mb_1001> would need badly much more 
humanitarian assistance than what is delivered today."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsvpeq-9pqWU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsvpeq-9pqWU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsvpeq-9pqWU&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsvpeq-9pqWU&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsvpeq-9pqWU>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsvpeq-9pqWU&media=>
close 
Tunisia

• European feminist activists who spent a month in jail after a topless 
protest in Tunisia retracted the apology they made a day earlier to go free and 
claimed to have endured filthy and humiliating conditions in prison. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/27/femen-activists-tunisia-retract-apology>
 The two French women and a German member of the Ukrainian group Femen were 
freed overnight after a court in the Muslim country lifted their prison 
sentence. Hours later, on Thursday, they arrived in France.

Updated at 9.02am BST
 