
Robert Howley and Allister Coetzee are head coaches for whom victory at the 
Principality Stadium on Saturday afternoon may not be enough at the end of a 
year when they have tried to change the way their sides play and add a splash 
of colour. The result has been like an explosion in a paint factory, the 
muddle, rather than the middle, way.

They could be forgiven for feeling, in PG Wodehouse’s words, like a man who, 
chasing rainbows, has had one of them suddenly turn and bite him in the leg. 
Wales and South Africa have in recent years been exponents of structured rugby, 
preferring to impose themselves physically rather than take risks, but the 
zeitgeist now is a faster, more fluid game, playing to win rather than not to 
lose.

Coetzee took over as South Africa’s head coach earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/12/allister-coetzee-south-africa-coach-rugby-union>
, basing his style on theLions who reached the Super Rugby final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/06/hurricanes-claim-maiden-super-rugby-title-with-victory-over-lions>
 with an approach that was not very Springbok, all movement and daring. It 
yielded a narrow andfortunate series victory over Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/south-africa-ireland-match-report>
 and acomeback against Argentina in Nelspruit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/south-africa-argentina-rugby-championship-match-report>
 at the start of the Rugby Championship, but two defeats saw them revert to the 
familiar: it was good enough to see off Australia buta record home defeat to 
New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/south-africa-new-zealand-rugby-championship-match-report>
 followed.

Rugby union autumn internationals: 10 things to look forward to this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/25/rugby-union-autumn-internationals-what-to-look-forward-to-this-weekend>
Howley is Wales’s interim head coach, standing in for Warren Gatland who is 
preparing for the Lions tour to New Zealand. He occupied the position four 
years ago but the difference now is that Gatland has said he will not be 
seeking a renewal of his contract when it runs out after the 2019 World Cup. 
This month, and the Six Nations, is like an audition, his opportunity to show 
the Welsh Rugby Union it doesn’t have to look elsewhere.

Wales started to evolve their style after the World Cup when they lost close 
matches to Australia and South Africa, paying for a lack of creativity and 
composure. The change in style is being implemented with largely the same 
players: Wales’s 23 for Saturday contains 15 players who were involved inlast 
year’s quarter-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/oct/17/south-africa-wales-rugby-world-cup-2015-live>
 against the Springboks – who have just four survivors – with three unavailable 
through injury.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwales-south-africa-springboks-howley-coetzee-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7c35ee1c813fd62eb928f3a75b9786c5e262fdc%2F0_97_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Embattled%20Wales%20and%20South%20Africa%20coaches%20seek%20a%20pick-me-up%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwales-south-africa-springboks-howley-coetzee-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Embattled%20Wales%20and%20South%20Africa%20coaches%20seek%20a%20pick-me-up%20%7C%20Paul%20Rees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwales-south-africa-springboks-howley-coetzee-%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7c35ee1c813fd62eb928f3a75b9786c5e262fdc%2F0_97_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 The South Africa coach, Allister Coetzee, before his team lost to Italy for 
the first time ever, in Florence last Saturday. Photograph: Andrea Staccioli/AP 
It is not quite Wimbledon’s crazy gang discovering the virtues of tiki-taka 
football, looking to nutmeg, rather than nut, opponents, but it is a profound 
shift in emphasis. If it is too strong to say straitjackets have been removed 
because Gatland has from the start encouraged his players to be alert to 
opportunities, the players’ comfort blanket has been snatched away: no longer 
can they hide behind the gameplan.

When Wales announced their team this week, the official release said that it 
contained one change from the teamthat had beaten Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/12/wales-v-argentina-rugby-union-autumn-internationals-live>
, a game played two weeks before. Their previous match, againstJapan, which was 
won by a Sam Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/19/wales-japan-autumn-internationals-match-report>
 drop goal in the final seconds, had been forgotten; and with good reason 
because it highlighted the players’ determination to embrace the new way but 
without the necessary discernment.

Gus Pichot: ‘The Fiji v England game wasn’t very good for rugby … it’s unfair’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/25/gus-pichot-world-rugby-fiji-england-global-calendar-player-welfare-eligiblity>
“We just need time,” said the centre Jonathan Davies. “Traditionally we have 
been drilled the same way and it is about developing different ways of playing. 
We need to fill the field completely and give ourselves options: we got lost a 
bit at times against Japan but it is a transition and we are getting used to 
it.” His long-term midfield partner, Jamie Roberts, has been relegated to the 
bench again but with little in the way of new blood the coaches are struggling 
to get circulation flowing.

While Wales have familiar faces and unfamiliar ways, Coetzee has picked a team 
high on energy rather than experience. He has gone back to the Lions, who 
supply the half-backs and half the three-quarters, telling his players to have 
no fear and express themselves. It should make for a more stirring encounter 
than when the sides last met inCardiff two years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/29/wales-south-africa-autumn-international-match-report>
 on a November day when the crowd had more chance of getting sunburnt than 
seeing a try.

The pressure is on the two head coaches, both the target of media scorn, 
rather than the players. The former Wales and Lions captain Gareth Thomas has 
described the team’s performances this month as so dire they have spawned a 
national crisis. There has been little more perspective in South Africa, where 
Coetzee, who has had to contend with political interference and an increasingly 
shallow pool of players based at home, is seen as taking charge for the final 
time.

Like Coetzee, Howley has a strong track record, with the Lions as well as 
Wales, who have punched above their weight in the Gatland years. Too often 
sport is reduced to caricature, reductive rather than reasoned. The problems 
facing South Africa go far beyond who is their national head coach while Wales, 
far from being dire, simply need to use their heads.
 