
The rise of populist leaders such as Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin poses a 
“dangerous threat” to human rights that could encourage global abuses around 
the world, Human Rights Watch has warned in itsannual report 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2017>.

Accusing the US president-elect of a campaign for office that fomented hatred 
and intolerance, the group also singled out “strongman” leaders inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan> the Philippines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rodrigo-duterte> and China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping>, accusing them of substituting 
their own authority in place of rule of law and accountable government.

“These converging trends, bolstered by propaganda operations that denigrate 
legal standards and disdain factual analysis, directly challenge the laws and 
institutions that promote dignity, tolerance, and equality,” Human Rights Watch 
said.


Human rights abuses in Bahrain cast shadow over £2m UK aid support
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/13/human-rights-abuses-bahrain-cast-shadow-over-2m-uk-aid-support>
The organisation’s executive director, Kenneth Roth, argued a “new generation” 
of authoritarian populists was seeking to overturn the concept of human rights 
protections.

“Donald Trump’s successful campaign for the US presidency was a vivid 
illustration of this politics of intolerance,” Roth wrote inan introduction to 
the Human Rights Watch world report 2017 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2017/country-chapters/dangerous-rise-of-populism>
.

“Sometimes overtly, sometimes through code and indirection, he spoke to many 
Americans’ discontent with economic stagnation and an increasingly 
multicultural society in a way that breached basic principles of dignity and 
equality. He stereotyped migrants, vilified refugees, attacked a judge for his 
Mexican ancestry, mocked a journalist with disabilities, dismissed multiple 
allegations of sexual assault, and pledged to roll back women’s ability to 
control their own fertility.”

Roth also trained his fire on autocratic rule in Venezuela, where the 
government was accused of launching military and police raids that led to 
widespread allegations of abuse, including extrajudicial executions and 
arbitrary deportations. The HRW director said the “Bolivarian revolution” 
ushered in by Hugo Chávez had become an economic disaster for the worst-off 
segments of society.

In Africa, said Roth, supposed models of authoritarian development like 
Ethiopia and Rwanda were, on closer examination, plagued by “government-imposed 
suffering”. He cited allegations that the Ethiopian government forcibly moved
rural famers into villages to make room for major agricultural projects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jul/15/ethiopian-farmer-uk-court-resettlement-policy-villagisation>
and the Rwandan government’s rounding-up of street vendors and beggars. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/04/kigali-plan-rwandan-city-afford-new-homes-offices>

In South Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, said the 
study, the civil war continued with serious abuses against civilians by 
government forces and opposition fighters. Referring to Sudan’s northern 
neighbour, the report’s authors said: “Sudan’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> human rights record remains abysmal 
in 2016, with continuing attacks on civilians by government forces in Darfur, 
South Kordofan, and Blue Nile states; repression of civil society groups and 
independent media; and widespread arbitrary detentions of activists, students, 
and protesters.”

Egypt court ruling upholds decision to freeze assets of women's rights 
activists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2017/jan/12/egypt-court-ruling-upholds-decision-freeze-assets-womens-rights-activists>
Separately, the UN high commissioner for human rights called on Friday for 
business leaders converging on Davos for next week’s World Economic Forum to 
stand up for human rights and prevent rights violations.

“We begin the year full of anxiety about the state of the world: the deeply 
disturbing increase in divisive behaviour and policies, and outright hatred; 
the attacks against fundamental human rights, particularly of those already 
vulnerable; and the continued widespread failure to ensure fair access to 
resources, prosperity and economic security for all,” said Zeid Raad al-Hussein.

Companies needed to take “a clear, unequivocal stance” that did not tolerate 
links to human rights abuses anywhere in their operations and supply chains, 
said Zeid. He noted that many firms had already begun taking steps to prevent 
and mitigate human rights abuses, in line with theUN guiding principles on 
business and human rights 
<http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf>
.
 