
When I was a child in Lahore in Pakistan, my parents employed a driver called 
Sultan. Sultan, a retired soldier, was from a village near Jhelum. He was a 
cheerful man in his 60s who readily joined in our games of badminton. But to me 
the most interesting fact about Sultan was that he could speak Italian. 
A fragmentary, broken Italian, but Italian nonetheless, picked up as a prisoner 
of war in Italy. He called mesignorina and taught me three Italian words: si, 
grazie and buongiorno. Decades later, when I told my children about Sultan, 
they were gobsmacked. What was a Pakistani villager doing fighting in Italy? He 
wasn’t Pakistani then, I explained, he was Indian. Sultan was one of more than 
two million Indian soldiers who fought for the allies in the second world war. 
“No! Really?” they breathed.

My children (daughter 17, son 15) were born and raised in London and have had 
the good fortune to attend fantastic schools where they have been offered, 
alongside the usual array of subjects, a rich diet of music, drama, art, sport 
and languages. Their extracurricular clubs include Arabic, feminism, astronomy, 
mindfulness and carpentry. In my convent school in Lahore, I had to listen 
in respectful silence. In London, they are encouraged to question and argue.

Yet, for all the range and candour of their education, they haven’t once 
encountered Britain’s colonial past in school. My daughter is now in her second 
year of A-levels. She has studied history from the age of nine, but the closest 
she has come to any mention of empire was in her GCSE syllabus that included 
the run-up to the second world war. While studying the Treaty of Versailles, 
she learned that some countries had colonies at the time and, as part of 
Germany’s punishment, it was stripped of its colonial possessions. Period.

Though she read about the brutal battles in the Pacific and North Africa, no 
mention was made of the 2.5 million Indian soldiers who volunteered to fight in 
the second world war – or the 1.3 million who served in 1914-18. There was 
nothing about the 87,000 jawans killed in 1939-45. She had no notion of the 
massive contribution India – and Britain’s other colonies – made to the war 
effort. Hence her astonishment at Sultan’s Italian connection.

Of course, my kids know that their grandparents, along with the citizens of 
almost half the globe, were once British subjects. But they have acquired this 
knowledge at home, not at school. Aged 11, my son learned in a geography class 
that one of the many reasons Ghana (the Gold Coast to its 19th-century British 
rulers) was economically less developed was because of its colonial past. It 
had been stripped of its wealth by the British. Just one bland sentence. Now, 
in secondary school, he is currently reading a past Booker winner,The White 
Tiger <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/white-tiger.html> by Aravind Adiga. For 
half-term, his English teacher has asked him to read another novel about India. 
The list she has given him includes Rudyard Kipling’sKim 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/kim-11.html>, EM Forster’s A Passage to India 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/passage-to-india-3.html> and Salman Rushdie’s 
Midnight’s Children 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/midnight-s-children-5.html>. I imagine some 
mention of colonialism will be made when discussing those texts.

But even this is off-piste learning, the initiative of an individual teacher; 
it is not part of the curriculum. Last year, my daughter, who is studying 
history of art at A-level, was taken to see Tate Britain’s exhibitionArt and 
Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/23/artist-and-empire-review-tate-britain>
. Her teacher thought it important for the paper on orientalism and, something 
of a political activist in her youth, gave them an impassioned lecture on 
Britain’s imperial past. But the historical context was not obligatory in the 
curriculum. Students were required to restrict themselves to a technical visual 
analysis of the paintings they studied, not explore the political background 
that produced them.

Dr Mukulika Banerjee, director of the South Asia Centre 
<http://www.lse.ac.uk/southAsia/Home.aspx> and associate professor of 
anthropology at the London School of Economics, talks of British students who 
“arrive at university completely ignorant about the empire, that vital part of 
their history. When we talk of Syria today, they have no knowledge of Britain’s 
role in the Middle East in the last century. When discussing burning political 
questions today, they have no historical context to  draw on that links 
Britain’s own past with those events. Similarly, they have no clue about the 
history of the immigration. They don’t understand why people of other 
ethnicities came to Britain in the first place. They haven’t learned any of it 
at school. So, in their second year at university, when my students discover 
the extent of their ignorance, they are furious.”

I don’t know whether this amnesia is due to embarrassment or fear of 
reparations or, indeed, a sinister desire to keep the electorate ignorant and 
pliable. Whatever the original rationale, the ugly xenophobia unleashed since 
the EU referendum has brought home the urgent need to reform history textbooks 
and address this abyss at their heart. Without it, they are distorted, 
dishonest. I used to laugh when British people asked me where I had learned my 
English. (Despite 20 years in this country, I still have a strong Pakistani 
accent.) Post-Brexit, I am not amused. And it’s no good pretending that the 
history of Malaysia, Nigeria, India or Kenya is world history and therefore not 
relevant to the modern British curriculum. It is British history. To quote 
Kipling, that controversial yet compelling poet of empire: “What should they 
know of England who only England know?”
 