
There was something wonderful about George Michael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/georgemichael>. Great singer (when he hadn’t 
smoked too much), great looking (though he didn’t like one side), great 
songwriter (before he got creative block), great personality (when not too 
stoned), and of course a great source of tabloid scandal. He didn’t give many 
interviews, but when he did he really did give good interview (I interviewed 
him twice, in 2005 and 2009). He didn’t believe in holding back.

The last time we met was at his home in Highgate for that second interview. 
Again, that was typical Michael. Few pop stars let you anywhere near their real 
life; Michael showed you everything when the time was right. He was a recluse 
of sorts, but he hid in plain sight. Everybody knew George lived opposite the 
big pub, that he was likely to drive into the front window of Snappy Snaps when 
he’d had a toke too many, that he frequented Hampstead Heath most nights for 
casual sex.

Obsessive fans would wait for days outside his house hoping for a glimpse, 
photo or chat. There were a couple outside that time I was there – they’d come 
from Germany on the off-chance. His home was frequently stalked.

George Michael: 'I'm surprised I've survived my own dysfunction'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/dec/05/george-michael-interview-music-sex-drugs>
It was a dark December day, and George was in confessional mode. When I’d 
interviewed him four years earlier, much of the discussion was about death (he 
felt he was cursed following the death of his mother and boyfriends; even the 
puppy he bought to replace his dead dog had drowned), and his inability to 
write. He was haunted by his creative block, though he always insisted he was 
one chorus away from a purple patch.

George was a complex man. What had been so private in his life (his sexuality) 
became an open book. What had been so public (his music) became strangely 
private. He told me he was in the studio writing new songs, but when I asked 
about them he became coy and embarrassed.

 So he smoked spliff after spliff and stuck with what he regarded as safe 
territory – sex and drugs. There had been stories in the tabloids that he had 
been caught cottaging on the Heath with a pensioner who resembled Bernard 
Manning. Michael was outraged by the reports. There was something sweet as well 
as narcissistic about him. Yes, he was a bit embarrassed about how the story 
reflected on him, but he also felt for the man. “His only crime was being the 
least fortunate looking person to come off the Heath after me.” And was the 
cottaging true? Of course, he said. As if that wasn’t enough, he provided a 
run-through of a typical day in the life. “I normally get up about 10am, my PA 
will bring me a Starbucks, I’ll have a look at my emails … Then, if I’m in the 
mood, I’ll come up to the office in Highgate, do some work, writing, backing 
tracks or whatever. Come home. Kenny [his then boyfriend] will be here, the 
dogs are here. Maybe eat locally, hang out, and then probably go off and have a 
shag or have someone come here and have a shag.”

Michael brought out the paternal in me. There had been reports that he had 
been cautioned for possession of crack, but he had never talked about it. As I 
asked him about it I could feel my voice changing. We were the same age, but I 
could have been his father.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Michael%3A%20singer%2C%20songwriter%2C%20pop%20superstar%2C%20dies%20aged%2053%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Michael%3A%20singer%2C%20songwriter%2C%20pop%20superstar%2C%20dies%20aged%2053%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary&media=>
George Michael: singer, songwriter, pop superstar, dies aged 53 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/dec/26/george-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary>
I asked if he’d been smoking crack, and he blustered about doing things at 
different times he wasn’t proud of. In the end, I asked him to look me in the 
eye and tell me whether he had been smoking crack on that occasion. “Was I? On 
that occasion? Yeah.” he finally mumbled like a lost little boy.

'There was so much death'
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/dec/09/popandrock> 
The interview ended up making the news. It wasn’t just the crack and the 
cottaging, it was what he’d said about Elton John, who had told people he was 
worried about Michael. “Elton lives on that. He will not be happy until I bang 
on his door in the middle of the night saying, ‘Please, please, help me, Elton. 
Take me to rehab.’ It’s not going to happen. You know what I heard last week? 
ThatBono <http://www.time.com/time/covers/1101020304/story.html> … Oh for God’s 
sake …” He’s choking on his laughter. “Geri [Halliwell] 
<http://www.geri-halliwell.com/> told Kenny that Bono, having spoken to Elton, 
had approached Geri to say, ‘What can we do for George?’ This is what I have to 
deal with because I don’t want to be part of that social clique. All I’d have 
to do to stop it is hang out in London, so people realise I don’t look close to 
death.” But, of course, they were all right to worry for him.

Michael lived a short drive away from me. Despite the spliffs, he insisted on 
driving me home. Typical of his generosity, if a little reckless on my part 
(this was only a few months before the Snappy Snaps incident). I asked him if 
he’d knock on the door while I hid. My elder daughter answered the door, said 
“It’s George Michael!” and almost passed out.

His publicist hated the interview, and said I was the worst kind of tabloid 
scum. George was perfectly happy with it. He gave me his email, but he was a 
hopeless correspondent, and never replied. Then, one day, out of the blue I got 
a gloriously optimistic email from him.

Hi Simon, 

I’m sure the right time for another interview will come. In hindsight you may 
consider me a little less paranoid than you thought I was the last time we met. 
I considered joining the Leveson inquiry fiasco but decided against it, 
partially because there were so many idiots involved but also because I believe 
fuck all will change. I did however send them the extensive letter that the 
poor old bastard they tried to “attach” me to (on every level :) at Hampstead 
Heath sent me. He told me how they blackmailed him without even telling him who 
he was supposed to have met up there in the dark, and some other horrific 
details of his ordeal, poor bastard … It had a ghastly effect on him, and as no 
one gives a shit about celebs I thought his evidence might be of more use. 
Plus, being totally honest, I couldn’t help wanting to let the world know that 
portly pensioners are not to my taste. Even in the dark :)


I feel great these days, clean as a whistle, and with almost a complete album 
ready to go, this year is going to be a good one i think. Would make a lovely 
change. I hope you and your family are well, was lovely to meet them.


Take care , The Singing Greek xx


That was four years ago. The album never materialised.

 