
Gilles Vesco calls it the “new mobility”. It’s a vision of cities in which 
residents no longer rely on their cars but on public transport, shared cars and 
bikes and, above all, on real-time data on their smartphones. He anticipates a 
revolution which will transform not just transport but the cities themselves. 
“The goal is to rebalance the public space and create a city for people,” he 
says. “There will be less pollution, less noise, less stress; it will be a more 
walkable city.”


Vesco, the politician responsible for sustainable transport in Lyon, played a 
leading role in introducing the city’sVélo’v bike-sharing 
<http://www.velov.grandlyon.com/?L=1> scheme a decade ago. It has since been 
replicated in cities all over the world. Now, though, he is convinced that 
digital technology has changed the rules of the game, and will make possible 
the move away from cars that was unimaginable when Vélo’v launched in May 2005. 
“Digital information is the fuel of mobility,” he says. “Some transport 
sociologists say that information about mobility is 50% of mobility. The car 
will become an accessory to the smartphone.”


Vesco is nothing if not an evangelist. “Sharing is the new paradigm of urban 
mobility. Tomorrow, you will judge a city according to what it is adding to 
sharing. The more that we have people sharing transportation modes, public 
space, information and new services, the more attractive the city will be.”

The Vélo’v scheme is being extended, car clubs that use electric vehicles are 
being encouraged, and what Vesco calls a “collaborative platform” has been 
built to encourage ride-sharing by matching drivers with people seeking lifts. 
There is, he says, no longer any need for residents of Lyon to own a car. And 
he practises what he preaches – he doesn’t own one himself.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129977516%2F28363585-19a0-4f66-a0e6-0f6b72edb47a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129977516%2F28363585-19a0-4f66-a0e6-0f6b72edb47a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pedestrian-friendly central Lyon, on the banks of the River Rhône. Photograph: 
Alamy 
The number of cars entering the city has fallen by 20% over the past decade, 
without even a congestion-charging scheme (Vesco says it would impose a 
disproportionate burden on the less well-off, who tend to drive 
higher-polluting vehicles). And even though Lyon’s population is expected to 
rise by more than 10% over the next decade, he is targeting a further 20% drop 
in car use. The car parks that used to run alongside the banks of Lyon’s two 
rivers have already been removed, and human parks opened in their place. Vesco 
says someone returning to Lyon for the first time in a decade would barely 
recognise the city.


The goal is to rebalance the public space and create a city for people
Gilles Vesco 
Birmingham, which vies with Manchester for the title of England’s second city, 
has been following the experience of Lyon and other European cities closely, 
and is now embarking on its own 20-year plan calledBirmingham Connected 
<http://www.birmingham.gov.uk/connected>, to reduce dependence on cars. For a 
city so associated in the public mind with car manufacturing, this is quite a 
step. The initiative is being driven by the veteran leader of Birmingham city 
council, Sir Albert Bore, who talks airily about imposing a three-dimensional 
transport plan on the two-dimensional geography of the city: “French and German 
cities all have an infrastructure which has a far better understanding of how 
you need to map the city with layers of travel.”

“Multi-modal” and “interconnectivity” are now the words on every urban 
planner’s lips. In Munich, says Bore, planners told him that the city dwellers 
of the future would no longer need cars. Bikes and more efficient public 
transport would be the norm; for occasional trips out of the city, they could 
hire a car or join a car club that facilitated inter-city travel. The statistic 
everyone trots out is that your car sits outside, idle and depreciating, for 
96% of its life. There has to be a more efficient way to provide for the 
average of seven hours a week when you want it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129178822%2F60484ac4-104b-4cad-9006-0ea286bd92b1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129178822%2F60484ac4-104b-4cad-9006-0ea286bd92b1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Smallbrook Ringway, part of Birmingham’s original, road-dominated Bull Ring 
development. Photograph: PA Archive 
Car clubs offer a second statistic. Whereas a personally owned car caters for 
an individual or a family, a car-club car can service 60 people. As I type this 
I look at the VW Golf sitting outside my window, which I last drove a fortnight 
ago. Private cars are wasteful and expensive.

Bore recognises that his plan to transform his city will not be easy, and will 
require a healthy dose of public education. “Birmingham was seen as the 
champion of the car,” he says, “and as a result it didn’t develop an 
underground or the tram network you see in major cities across Europe. There’s 
been a failure to develop those systems because there’s been no longer-term 
vision.” Birmingham now has a long-term plan – but what it doesn’t have is the 
money. It needs £4bn; so far it has raised only £1.2bn. Central government, 
private-sector developers and local businesses are going to have be convinced 
it’s worth it.


Birmingham was seen as the champion of the car, so there's been no longer-term 
vision
Sir Albert Bore 
Anne Shaw, Birmingham’s head of transportation services, walks me round the 
centre of the city to show me the changes already taking place. The single tram 
line, which runs from Wolverhampton, is being extended; the gyratory road which 
cuts off many of the municipal buildings is being taken out and traffic 
re-routed; forbidding concrete subways are being removed; cycle lanes are being 
put in, and a fast bus service is planned.

One day, perhaps, Birmingham will even have its own underground system, though 
that is many years and millions of pounds away. Commuting into Birmingham is 
currently split 50-50 between car and public transport; that, too, has to 
change – in London, only 15% of commuters use a car. In Birmingham, the 
district in the centre which houses Symphony Hall and the new state-of-the-art 
library is called Paradise. One day, Bore hopes it will live up to its name.

The planners in Birmingham accept they are late to the party. London, which 
has pioneered congestion charging and has a well-integrated system of public 
transport, has led the move away from cars over the past decade, during which 
time 9% of car commuters have switched to other forms of transport. “People in 
London have a lot of options and there’s been huge growth across all modes,” 
says Isabel Dedring, the American-born deputy mayor for transport in the 
capital. “There’s been a massive increase in investment in public transport.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430130257403%2Fb01521d6-22a8-41b9-9770-7a5bc96b1297-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430130257403%2Fb01521d6-22a8-41b9-9770-7a5bc96b1297-1020x612.jpeg>
 London’s Piccadilly Circus in 1969, when car parking was still free in most of 
the capital. Photograph: Dezo Hoffmann/Rex Features 
Dedring says London has always been progressive in terms of public transport – 
its narrow, twisting roads were never conducive to the automotive domination 
that occurred in many US and European cities in the 1960s and 70s, when the car 
was king. But from the turn of the millennium, there has been a concerted 
attempt to encourage switching to other modes of transport, and the past decade 
has seen a 30% reduction in traffic in central London.

“Traffic levels have gone down massively,” says Dedring, “partly because of 
the congestion charge, but also because we are taking away space from private 
vehicles and giving it to buses through bus lanes and to people through public 
realm [developments].” And now to cyclists, too, with the planned “cycle 
superhighways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2015/jan/28/londons-cycling-superhighway-may-inspire-similar-schemes-across-the-uk>
” and cycle-friendly neighbourhoods being trialled in three London boroughs.

London's twisting roads ​​were never conducive to the domination by car that 
occurred in many US and European cities

In Waltham Forest, which is running one of those pilot schemes (tagged 
“mini-Holland”), I go cycling with councillor Clyde Loakes, deputy leader of 
the council and the cabinet member responsible for the environment. What used 
to be rat runs in the area now known as Walthamstow Village have been closed to 
through-traffic, and at a stroke the number of vehicles using the area has 
dropped by more than 20%. The area is remarkably quiet and relaxed when we 
cycle around one weekday afternoon; indeed it comes as quite a shock when we 
leave the confines of the village and are suddenly pitched back into the noise 
and traffic as we head to the town hall.


Loakes says the trial is an attempt to alter behaviour and the feel of the 
area, but is also a recognition that change is already occurring. “In Waltham 
Forest, we have an increasing number of households without a car. Public 
transport is getting better; we have an increasingly young demographic; and in 
many of the developments being built car parking is not a priority, so car 
ownership is not an option.”

To put it more bluntly: many city developments are now predicated on there 
being no car spaces for residents. Developers worried about this initially, but 
have come to realise it doesn’t pose a problem for the young professionals 
likely to be buying their flats, so have accepted the demands of council 
planning departments.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430132634410%2F00e76d54-55d7-4be6-89d6-55bb27807905-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430132634410%2F00e76d54-55d7-4be6-89d6-55bb27807905-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Walthamstow Village has seen a 20% drop in vehicle numbers since trialling its 
cycle-friendly neighbourhood scheme. Photograph: Alamy 
The inner-London borough of Hackney <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hackney>, 
which prides itself on being the greenest council in London, tells a similar 
story. “We are trying to create a more liveable environment,” says councillor 
Feryal Demirci, the cabinet member for neighbourhoods, “and car-free 
developments are one way of doing that.” She says almost 90% of the 
developments currently under way are completely car-free, with the council 
guaranteeing alternatives to personally owned cars, including a commitment that 
every resident will live within three minutes of a car-club bay.


The statistic Hackney is proudest of is that more than 15% of its residents 
commute to work by bike. “It’s about creating an environment where it’s easier 
for people to cycle or take the bus, so they’re not relying on cars,” Demirci 
says. Car ownership in the borough has dropped over the past 10 years: whereas 
a decade ago 56% of households did not own a car, that figure now stands at 
65%. Hackney, which is not on the underground network, also claims the highest 
level of bus usage in London. Though the population has risen by 45,000, the 
number of cars owned by people in the area has fallen by 3,000. These are 
trends that urban planners elsewhere would kill for.

This model of denser, less car-dependent cities is becoming the accepted 
wisdom across the developed world. “The height [of buildings] is going up; 
density is going up; borough policies and London plan policies are all about 
intensification and densification of land uses,” explains Ben Kennedy, 
Hackney’s principal transport planner. “We’re probably going the way of 
Manhattan. People live very close and they don’t travel at all because 
everything is on their doorstep; the population in one block is so high, it can 
support all the amenities you could ever want. We’re slowly going in that 
direction in London.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430137895239%2Fc79ab6d5-edc4-487a-9bde-da39650f8d29-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430137895239%2Fc79ab6d5-edc4-487a-9bde-da39650f8d29-2060x1236.jpeg>
 According to the Helsinki Times, most future residents of the city will not 
own a car. Photograph: Pekka Liukkonen/Alamy 
A revolution is coming, but it costs money

Rikhard Manninen is another man with a plan – a very large plan, which is laid 
out on a table in his office in the centre of Helsinki. Manninen is director of 
the city’s strategic urban planning division. The project is a vision of how 
the city will look in 2050. It will have a lot more people – the population is 
projected to rise by 50% – but withmuch less dependence on cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/10/helsinki-shared-public-transport-plan-car-ownership-pointless>
. The city’s population density will be increased; many of the new high-rise 
apartment blocks will not have residents’ car parking; key arteries into the 
city will be replaced by boulevards; more and more space will be given over to 
cycle lanes. A report on the plan in theHelsinki Times last year confidently 
predicted 
<http://www.helsinkitimes.fi/finland/finland-news/domestic/11062-the-future-resident-of-helsinki-will-not-own-a-car.html>
: “The future resident of Helsinki will not own a car.”

“Agglomeration” is the buzzword that planners such as Manninen like to use, 
and the benefits which derive from it are driving the vision of a new city. 
“When you are located quite close, businesses can interact more easily; people 
can walk to work and use public transport. It’s more efficient.”


In many cities, the era of the suburban commuter, along with the era of the 
car, is drawing to a close. Manninen no longer wants a city with a single 
centre; he envisages a multi-polar city with half-a-dozen hubs where people 
live, work, shop and play. This will reduce transport congestion and generate a 
series of vibrant, efficiently organised, semi-autonomous units – that’s the 
plan, anyway.

The younger generation are no longer car dependent. They are less likely to 
have a driving licence
Rikhard Manninen 
Though Finland is seen as a pioneer in sustainable transport, the reality is 
rather different. Because the country came late to urbanisation and there was a 
huge amount of development in the 1950s and 60s, commuting by car is more 
entrenched than in some older cities. Finns have tended to live in the suburbs, 
driving to the centre of Helsinki to work and to their beloved country cottages 
at weekends. But Manninen echoes Vesco in Lyon in his view that attitudes are 
changing: “The younger generation are no longer car dependent. They are less 
likely to have a driving licence than previous generations.”


Generation Y, the so-called millennials now in their 20s and early 30s who 
have come of age in the digital era, seem less wedded to possessions than their 
baby boomer predecessors. Surveys show that the one object that is prized is 
the smartphone, and the future of transport is likely to be based not on 
individually owned cars but on “mobility as a service” – a phrase supposedly 
coined by another Finn, Sampo Hietanen, chief executive of Intelligent 
Transport Systems (ITS) Finland. Consumers will, so the theory goes, use their 
smartphones to check ultra-detailed travel news, locate car-club cars or bikes, 
check for parking spaces,call up Uber drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/17/all-hail-uber-but-what-about-black-cabs>
, and arrange shared rides. Who needs a personally owned car?


While in Helsinki, I meet a delegation from the city’s Regional Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> Authority. I’m struck not just by 
their commitment to sustainable transport, but their willingness to engage with 
the public. They send staff into schools and workplaces to try to win converts 
to walking, cycling and public transport, and take their message to older 
people, who are usually the most resistant to abandoning their cars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129301926%2F62118f1b-0605-449e-ab51-a65b060205f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129301926%2F62118f1b-0605-449e-ab51-a65b060205f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Helsinki’s Baana bicycle corridor opened to the public in 2012. Photograph: 
Alamy 
One of the initiatives they are proudest of is their Kutsuplus (“Call plus”) 
bus service – a fleet of nine-seater minibuses whose routes are determined by 
the bookings they get on any given day. It’s a great idea, and I book a bus to 
take me from their offices into town. It arrives quickly, picks me up at a bus 
stop just 100 metres away, and costs €5 for the two-mile trip. The problem is 
that, so far, Helsinki only has 15 buses, and doesn’t have the funding for any 
more. Like many of the schemes currently under way, it’s at the pilot stage. 
There’s a revolution coming, but revolutions cost money.

“We are not making a car-free Helsinki – that is not possible,” says Reetta 
Putkonen, director of the transport and traffic planning division, who I meet 
for lunch at an exhibition space devoted to the city’s vision of the future. 
“But we are going to take control of where the cars are and how they are used, 
so that we will have places where it’s really nice to walk, it’s very fast and 
easy to bike, and public transport is highly efficient. Walkers will be the 
kings, and the cyclists will have their own paths. We will still have cars – 
people need them for carrying goods – but their speeds will be very low and 
there won’t be so many of them. Our planning shouldn’t be based on cars and on 
parking. It will be a balanced system.”

After lunch, I meet another Reetta – not all Finnish women are called Reetta, 
they assure me. Reetta Keisanen is the city’s cycling coordinator, and she has 
brought two of the department’s pool bikes for us to undertake a tour of the 
city. She takes me first along a cycle path that used to be a rail track, 
linking the town centre with the harbour. Halfway along the route, there is an 
electronic register counting the cycles as they pass – I am the 54,672nd so far 
this year. Reetta II tells me that 96% of the residents of Helsinki are 
pro-cycling, though Reetta I had cautioned that the figure might be lower if 
motorists realised how much of their road space was being eaten into.

There are only three gears on the bike and I am not dressed for this sudden 
spasm of activity – instead of shorts, I am wearing thick trousers and jacket – 
so it is a struggle, especially on the gritty areas near the seafront. It is, 
though, pleasant when we eventually get there, and sit in the spring sunshine 
in the garden of the Regatta, a tiny wooden café which is one of Helsinki’s 
best-loved attractions.

Keisanen, who is in her mid-20s and committed to the sustainability cause, is 
convinced a major change is afoot. “We’ve got lots of work to do because many 
Finns still own cars,” she says, “but in cities it is now possible to live 
without a car, and young people are buying fewer cars than older people.” 
Cycling in Helsinki has doubled since 1997, and Keisanen predicts further 
increases as the cycling network expands. I suggest to her that not all 
cyclists behave well – I am thinking of the ones I see in London who whizz 
along pavements and go in the wrong direction down one-way streets – but she 
has a good answer. “Cities get the cyclists they deserve. If you have good 
infrastructure, you will get good cyclists. It’s the same with drivers and 
pedestrians.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430130990961%2F8c14d2b1-cb84-46d4-ba20-d19c7b00f6fd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430130990961%2F8c14d2b1-cb84-46d4-ba20-d19c7b00f6fd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cars line up to enter the Brooklyn Battery Tunnel heading into Mahattan during 
New York’s first full-scale transit strike in 1966. Photograph: Arthur 
Schatz/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty 
 To drive or not to drive: have we reached ‘peak car’?

All the trends in cities appear to be moving in the direction favoured by 
environmentalists, so do they think they are finally winning? “We’re at a stage 
now in history where people, especially young people, want to have the choice 
whether to drive or not to drive,” says Jason Torrance, policy director at 
sustainable transport group Sustrans. “We’ve seen a huge change over the past 
five years around an ownership model. You now have Spotify and other on-demand 
services. My entire record collection is in the loft. We have everything on 
iTunes and Spotify and my son, who is six, only vaguely knows what a CD is.”


Torrance says the appetite is there for alternatives to the car, and that some 
cities – both in Europe and in the developing world, notably China – are 
responding to the challenge. The pro-car attitude which was dominant in the UK 
from the 1960s through to the end of the Conservative Thatcher era has 
certainly declined but, he says: “We have a poverty of ambition in the UK in 
our relationship with cars, and our city leaders should be a lot bolder.”


It is five minutes to midnight for the private car. It’s no longer rational to 
use cars in cities like London
Stephen Bayley 
Sustrans’ response to what it sees as government inertia is to get involved in 
grassroots projects such as itsDIY Streets scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-living-blog/2009/nov/25/diy-streets-clapton-sustrans>
, where it works with local councils and residents to reduce the way cars 
affect their streets. The aim is to let the residents decide what they want in 
terms of traffic flow and number of parking spaces. “We find residents on DIY 
streets drive much less, there is a significant increase in the number of kids 
playing on the street, and there is a lot more cycling,” he says.


Torrance believes we are still wedded to the car as a status symbol, but 
others disagree. Stephen Bayley, who has written several books on car design, 
is convinced the age of the car is coming to an end. “It’s five minutes to 
midnight for the private car,” he says. “It’s no longer rational to use cars in 
cities like London.” Cars were invented as agents of freedom, but to drive 
(and, worse, to have to park) one in a city is tantamount to punishment.

Bayley also believes the arrival of driverless cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/self-driving-cars> will further 
undermine the driving experience. Sex, beauty, status, freedom – all the words 
which advertisers have tried to associate with cars over the past 50 years – 
have been replaced by mere functionality.

“There was some research a year or so ago which interviewed people in their 
20s and 30s,” he says. “The great majority said they would rather give up their 
car than their smartphone, and in their list of cool brands, no car 
manufacturer appeared in the top 20. That’s a very significant change. Twenty 
years ago, if you’d asked young people, BMW and other car brands would 
certainly have featured.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131395231%2Ff74f1155-372b-4cc8-9480-6a089f098fa2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131395231%2Ff74f1155-372b-4cc8-9480-6a089f098fa2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Citroen DS cars on display on the Champs-Elysées in Paris in the mid-60s. 
Photograph: Charles Edridge/Getty Images 
Bayley draws my attention to the French philosopher Roland Barthes’ homage to 
the Citroën DS, which appeared in his 1957 book Mythologies. “I believe that 
the automobile is, today, the almost exact equivalent of the great Gothic 
cathedrals,” wrote Barthes. “I mean, a great creation of the period, 
passionately conceived by unknown artists, consumed in its image, if not its 
use, by an entire populace which appropriates in it an entirely magical 
object.” These days, cars all look the same and pretty soon, if the 
manufacturers have their way, we won’t even have to drive them.

Christian Wolmar, the transport analyst who is seeking the Labour nomination 
for the London mayoralty in 2016, welcomes this demystification of the car. 
“Attitudes have changed,” he says. “My stepson didn’t bother passing his 
driving test till he was 27. None of my kids are car-oriented in the way that 
we were. When I was a teenager [he is now 65], we lived in Kensington and I 
used to borrow my mother’s car, drive into the centre in the evening, park it 
somewhere, go to the cinema and a nightclub, then drive home again. That is 
inconceivable today with drink-driving laws, parking and the general hassle of 
it all. We have begun to shift away from cars. On trains, people can use their 
mobile devices; ‘peak car’ seems to have been reached in America, with young 
people favouring what they call transit; and there is a trend of younger people 
no longer seeing the car as central to their lives.”


For the past decade, predating the global economic downturn, car traffic has 
been flatlining
Glenn Lyons 
Peak car. This is a phrase I hear again and again. The question of whether 
there is now an irreversible move away from cars towards other forms of 
transport is central to the cars-in-cities debate. Glenn Lyons, founder of the 
Centre for Transport and Society at the University of the West of England, is 
in no doubt that something fundamental is happening. “For the past decade, 
predating the global economic downturn, car traffic has been flatlining. This 
is true not only of the UK but of a number of other developed economies around 
the world.”

According to Lyons: “Young people have stood out particularly. Car licence 
acquisition has been going down among younger age groups, and there are strong 
suspicions that the digital age is contributing to why people now have less 
reliance on physical mobility. We are in the midst of a fundamental regime 
transition in society. We are increasingly seeing the car as a functional 
technology to get from A to B, rather than the much more symbolic 
representation it had in defining society in previous generations. That is not 
to suggest the car is done and finished with, but I believe it will become a 
background technology.”


David Metz, former chief scientist at the Department for Transport and now 
visiting professor at University College London’s Centre for Transport Studies, 
published a book last year called Peak Car, in which he argued that “car use in 
developed economies has reached a maximum” and that “we have come to the end of 
an era in which we have steadily travelled more”. “Car use per capita in most 
of the developed economies has stopped growing,” he tells me, “and stopped 
growing well before the recession. If you look at the UK data, you see a 
long-term rise in car travel which came to a stop in the late 1990s.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129606666%2F8101801d-59b6-48b3-8734-a993395039ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129606666%2F8101801d-59b6-48b3-8734-a993395039ad-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Personal Rapid Transport cars on display at the Institute of Science and 
Technology in Masdar City, Abu Dhabi. Photograph: Iain 
Masterton/incamerastock/Corbis 
Holding out against what is rapidly becoming the orthodoxy is Stephen 
Glaister, former professor of transport at Imperial College and about to retire 
as director of the Royal Automobile Club Foundation: “Until the 2008 recession, 
broadly speaking there was continued growth [in car travel],” he insists. “Then 
the young age group were very badly hit economically, so it’s not surprising 
their take-up of driving licences is falling. To what extent that’s also to do 
with some fundamental change in attitudes remains to be seen. Let’s see what 
happens when they get to 30 and have a family.”


Glaister points out that the Department for Transport is still assuming an 
overall increase in traffic of more than 25% by 2040. “You can make different 
assumptions about oil prices and demographic effects,” he says, “but whichever 
way you look at it, you’re going to get substantial traffic growth.” Stephen 
Joseph, executive director of the Campaign for Better Transport, counters that 
the DfT is hooked on out-of-date thinking: “What we are still battling with is 
a bunch of policies, design manuals and ways of thinking that are driven by 
1989; that where we’re going to end up is Los Angeles and that’s the natural 
order of things. But that’s not true. It’s not even true worldwide: there are 
examples, particularly in parts of Latin America, of cities that have been 
built around buses rather than cars. The idea that the natural end of 
development is Los Angeles – even Los Angeles doesn’t think that now.”


We’ve seen companies that didn’t recognise the changes that were happening 
around them – and they don’t exist any more
Richard Brown 
So where does this leave car manufacturers? At a conference on driverless cars 
organised by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), I 
buttonhole BMW executive Glenn Schmidt, who is giving a talk on what this 
future generation of cars means for a manufacturer such as BMW, which has 
traditionally put great emphasis on the driving experience. In his talk, he 
admits we are now seeing “a shift from ownership to accessing mobility”, and 
that young people are less likely to own cars than previously. Hence BMW’s 
backing for DriveNow, a car club which has established itself in Germany, the 
US and, more recently, central London.


“There is a fundamental change taking place,” Schmidt tells me, “and if you 
look at dense urban environments with traffic jams, the solution can’t be to 
stuff more cars into that environment.” So BMW will sell fewer cars? “We 
obviously have the cars in DriveNow; usually younger people choose to use 
these, and later they will move into buying cars. DriveNow is a mechanism to 
attract young people. It gives us an edge by attracting younger people and 
bringing them to our brands, and later on they will be interested in buying our 
vehicles.” That, at least, is what car manufacturers are hoping.


Jean-Philippe Hermine, vice-president of strategic environmental planning at 
Renault, which has pioneered electric cars, accepts that vehicles are now 
regarded differently. “The relationship with the car is changing,” he says. 
“You can question the need to own a car. Some people are looking for more 
functionality. With our electric cars, where customers can rent the battery, we 
are to some extent selling mobility and mileage more than a product.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131303065%2Fd2811f97-534b-4c97-b4f8-5ef8f92c6413-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131303065%2Fd2811f97-534b-4c97-b4f8-5ef8f92c6413-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A Google driverless car on a test drive in Mountain View, California. 
Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
Disruption is coming – especially if Google and Apple bring their experiments 
with driverless cars to fruition – and there are sure to be casualties, but for 
the moment the manufacturers are citing the old adage that every crisis is an 
opportunity. No one wants to be left behind –Autolib’ is poised to come into 
London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/09/electric-boris-car-source-london-how-work-paris-autolib>
 with a fleet of electric cars, and will also take over the running of the 
charging infrastructure in the capital – but eventually consolidation in the 
car-club market seems inevitable, with a few national players dominating, as 
with mobile phones. This is an industry in which scale will be everything.

“We’re going to see a very different state of play over the next couple of 
decades,” says Richard Brown, manager of Ford’s advanced product group, “and 
the car is clearly going to be part of theinternet of things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet-of-things> that everybody is 
talking about. You have to be prepared to embrace the potential disruption and 
be excited by the challenges that lie ahead. We’ve seen over the past five or 
10 years a number of companies that didn’t recognise the changes that were 
happening around them – and they don’t exist any more. Look at the Kodaks and 
Nokias of this world. We don’t want to allow ourselves to become a Nokia.”


People think we love our cars, but do we? If you get a good enough 
service-level offer, you will switch
Sampo Hietanen 
“People think we love our cars, but do we?” Sampo Hietanen asks me, following 
a seminar staged by the thinktank Nesta to discuss mobility-as-a-service. “If 
you get a good enough service-level offer, you will switch,” he says. “If I 
offer £100 of free use of taxis and guarantee you can do all your trips by 
taxi, people will say, ‘what do I need a car for?’”

Hietanen argues that in the future, instead of buying cars, we will have a 
monthly contract with a supplier which meets all our mobility needs. So how 
long will it be before we see these mobility service providers, as he calls 
them, start to appear? “I’m expecting the first services at the start of next 
year,” says Hietanen. “It won’t be long before someone is providing this in 
London.”

Transport consultant George Hazel, another of the speakers at the seminar, 
cites a report which anticipates 16 major mobility providers entering the 
global market. “The idea is that a supplier understands my needs, constantly 
learns about my profile, and gives me a package according to what I’m prepared 
to pay.” For mobility suppliers, he says, the attraction will be that once they 
have you as a customer, they will be able to offer you a range of services in 
addition to transport.


Hazel’s vision reminds me of a technology consultant I talked to at the SMMT 
conference, who said that in the future, the car that people drive (or that 
drives them) will be less valuable than the data derived about the person from 
the vehicle’s connectivity – where they travel, what they listen to or watch as 
their driverless vehicle ferries them around, where they take their holidays, 
even how they sit in the car. He anticipated a time when connected, autonomous 
cars were given away, just so suppliers could add the recipient to their 
customer base and access that data. The car as loss leader.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129384479%2F51f45647-6a49-4c0f-9bb7-682a485b832a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129384479%2F51f45647-6a49-4c0f-9bb7-682a485b832a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The masterplan for Masdar City, Abu Dhabi, which keeps cars out of the centre. 
Illustration: Foster and Partners 
Cities of the future – without cars?

On a sparkling spring morning, I meet David Nelson, head of design at 
architects Foster and Partners, and Bruno Moser, who heads its urban planning 
division. Increasingly, Foster and Partners is interested in designing whole 
cities, and in trying to take the sustainability message to the developing 
world. In Abu Dhabi, it has spent the past 10 years creating Masdar City, an 
environmentally friendly community which will eventually grow to 100,000 people 
and in which cars are kept out of the centre, and walking and cycling 
encouraged.


“We were trying out zero-carbon, zero-waste thinking, and mobility plays a key 
part in that,” says Nelson. What he calls “carbon cars” are kept at the 
perimeter, and in the centre Foster and Partners have designed a personal 
rapid-transit system similar to the pods used at Heathrow’s Terminal 5. The 
crash of 2007-8 slowed the development of Masdar, and so far only the first two 
phases have been completed, but Nelson insists the project has been a success,
despite criticisms of the slow rate of progress 
<http://www.wired.co.uk/magazine/archive/2013/12/features/reality-hits-masdar> 
and a lack of affordable housing that means many workers have to commute to the 
city, undermining some of its key goals.


If cities in the developing world go through the same cycle that we have in 
the past 50 years, we have a problem
Bruno Moser 
Foster and Partners is more interested in the way cities are evolving in the 
developing world than in Europe. Moser thinks the battle against the car has 
been more-or-less won in the west, where car ownership in cities is lower than 
in suburban and rural areas. But in the developing world, the opposite is true: 
city dwellers are wealthier and more likely to own cars, and unless the public 
can be educated in the merits of sustainability and cities are created that 
aren’t car-dependent, there will be exponential growth in car ownership and 
usage.

“If cities in the developing world go through the same cycle that we have in 
the past 50 years, we have a problem,” says Moser. Nelson believes there is a 
“great opportunity” for radical new solutions, but worries that “the desire for 
the middle-class lifestyle, which includes a big car” will get in the way. “If 
you start out planning with cars in mind, everybody learns from the US, so in 
the middle of cities you’ll get six-lane roads. The car becomes king and you 
design for that, and everybody forgets about everything else. That is still 
happening a lot in Asia, and when we get a project we try to convince everyone 
that’s not the right thing to do.”

Even in a traffic-clogged, car-fixated megacity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/nov/27/poor-transport-planning-mumbai-traffic-bedlam>
 such as Mumbai, however, there are glimmers that the anti-car lobby is gaining 
some traction. Last October, the Equal Streets movement beganclosing one 
four-mile stretch of main road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/nov/24/equal-streets-happier-healthier-mumbai>
 there each Sunday morning so that residents of a city desperately short of 
public space could walk, cycle and play freely. And despite Mumbai politicians’ 
penchant for building new flyovers, the sheer crowdedness of street life and 
poor state of the roads are surely a disincentive to owning an expensive 
“status symbol” car.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430132223595%2F2cad4d04-7855-4e03-b8bd-e087f76cb8d3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430132223595%2F2cad4d04-7855-4e03-b8bd-e087f76cb8d3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Traffic clogs a main road during Mumbai’s hectic rush hour. Photograph: 
Rajanish Kakade/AP 
The final stop on my car journey is the Future Cities Catapult, which I visit 
on itsfirst day in new offices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/17/urban-innovation-centre-future-cities-catapult-dan-hill-vince-cable>
 on the edge of the City of London – so new the smell of fresh paint is 
overwhelming. The government has set up these trendily named catapults in a 
number of key areas – energy, transport, cell therapy, the digital economy – to 
encourage innovation and act as a bridge between academia and industry. Here, 
surely, they will have a vision of where we are heading.


“I hope we are at peak car,” says Dan Hill, executive director of futures and 
best practice, when we settle down to talk in their showroom-cum-lounge. What, 
even in the developing world? “They have an opportunity to leapfrog and not 
make the same mistakes we have over the past 50 years,” he says optimistically.

The idea that we use privately owned cars to shift the massive bulk of people 
around a city seems utterly absurd to me
Dan Hill 
“If the 20th-century approach to solving a mobility problem, just like solving 
a housing problem, was to build some roads or add some rail, in the 21st 
century we have to adopt a non-building approach, optimising the existing 
built-fabric we have,” Hill says. “That’s where the possibility of, say, a 
shared, autonomous, self-driving car service could radically transform the way 
people move around a city without building a single road – just as we are 
already seeing companies like Airbnb transforming the approach to accommodation 
without building a single hotel. They don’t own any buildings at all, they 
write code, but they’ve changed the way the fabric of the city is working. Uber 
doesn’t own any cars, but they’re changing the nature of mobility.”

The mobility revolution is already happening, according to Hill, and can only 
accelerate. He believes Hietanen’s notion of mobility service providers is 
likely to become a reality, and agrees with Bayley’s contention that the era of 
the car is nearly over. “The idea that we use privately owned cars to shift the 
massive bulk of people around a city seems utterly absurd to me. What a crazy 
thing to do.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129730526%2Fc6de2ecd-ec09-4797-ad2a-0e4c5e8757ad-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=End%20of%20the%20car%20age%3A%20how%20cities%20are%20outgrowing%20the%20automobile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fapr%2F28%2Fend-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430129730526%2Fc6de2ecd-ec09-4797-ad2a-0e4c5e8757ad-1020x612.jpeg>
 London’s Edgware Road flyover at its opening in 1967 
But what’s the timescale? Hill offers a qualified answer. “It depends on the 
city. Cities like Helsinki, Copenhagen, Zurich, those small cores with a 2 
million exterior [population]; in the next five years I think we’ll be seeing 
really coherent mobility-as-service offers. They’re already halfway there – 
they’ve got Zipcar and Uber, really good public transport systems, are very 
walkable and bikeable, and have a strong public policy on carbon emissions and 
making a safer city. So I can’t see why in five years we wouldn’t have reached 
a significant transition point.”

Those, though, are the easy ones. “With somewhere like London, which is 15 
Copenhagens in size, it’s really difficult to say. It depends on the decisions 
that Transport for London makes, and on manufacturers like Ford and BMW 
extending their mobility experiments. Then with cities like Sydney and San 
Diego, you are maybe talking 20 or 30 years before you get significant modal 
shift from private car ownership.

“Once you’ve built all those highways and car parks, it takes a lot of money 
and time to unpick them. They placed a big bet on cars in the late-1950s, and 
it’s a long time before you get a chance to make another bet. A city like 
London, which is a couple of thousand years old and contains many different 
histories, ends up with a tapestry of multiple side-bets rather than one 
overweening vision. That’s actually more interesting and more malleable.”


What is evident is that the cities of tomorrow are likely, in effect, to 
revert to the cities of yesterday: denser, more neighbourhood-based, with 
everything you need for work and leisure in one district. There will be less 
separation of functions, less commuting, less travel generally.

“To me, this last 50 or 60 years feels like an anomaly,” says Hill. “If you 
haven’t already guessed, I’m a non-driver. I think we will look back on this 
time and say, ‘Wasn’t it odd that we drove ourselves around?’ In the 1920s and 
30s, you’d have gone to the butcher on your high street, and a grocery boy (it 
would have been a boy then) would have delivered the goods to your home on a 
bike – and they’d have been there by the time you got back.”

In Hill’s view, that age and those services will return. Neighbourhoods and 
self-sufficient communities will make a comeback in a new era that will be 
dominated not by the car, but by the smartphone and the network. The commuter 
is dead. Long live the hipster.

Are we seeing the decline of the car in cities? Share your thoughts in the 
comments below
 