
England may still be a work in progress but the concept of defeat under Eddie 
Jones remains entirely alien. They canset out for Australia this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/eddie-jones-england-australia-tour-wales>
 in optimistic mood, having scored five tries against well-beaten opponents who 
faded badly after a bright start. Wales, on the other hand,will leave for New 
Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/27/wales-england-warren-gatland-rugby-union>
 in deeply contemplative mood, having also had their experienced flanker Dan 
Lydiate invalided out of the tour.

The final margin of defeat could have been even wider against an England side 
missing 10 players involvedin the Premiership final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/saracens-exeter-premiership-play-off-final-match-report>
. George Fordhas already had a tricky month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/16/mike-ford-bath-head-coach> and 
contrived to miss six of his seven attempted kicks at goal in perfect 
conditions. Jones defended his fly-half afterwards, pointing out that Tiger 
Woods and Michael Jordan also had their occasional off-days, but the contrast 
with the currently dead-eyed Owen Farrell was inescapable.

Saracens Premiership champions after Alex Goode ends Exeter fightback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/saracens-exeter-premiership-play-off-final-match-report>
The good news for England is that, even without the all-conquering Saracens 
posse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/28/saracens-exeter-premiership-play-off-final-match-report>
, there are several young players doing their best to complicate Jones’s 
selectorial plans. If Joe Launchbury was a deserving man of the match, there 
were notable tries from the Harlequins pair Jack Clifford and Marland Yarde and 
sufficient energy on his debut from Teimana Harrison to justify his promotion.

Luther Burrell, Anthony Watson and Ben Youngs also contributed well-taken 
tries, even if some of Wales’s defence left plenty to be desired. Warren 
Gatland put a brave face on the outcome, insisting the problems exposed in the 
second half were fixable, but Wales have not conspicuously kicked on since
ambushing England on this ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/27/england-wales-rugby-world-cup-stuart-lancaster>
 in the pool stages of last autumn’s World Cup.

Jones, for his part, took issue with those pointing fingers at Ford, 
suggesting that any fly-half whose side scores five tries against Wales cannot 
have had too disastrous a game. He was more concerned about the way in which a 
frustrated Dan Biggar remonstrated with the French referee Marius Mitrea 
following Clifford’s try, which came after Dan Cole had knocked down an 
attempted pass from Biggar.

“We’ve got to be careful of that in rugby ... that shouldn’t happen,” insisted 
Jones, also disputing the Welsh view that Cole had knocked the ball forward. “I 
didn’t like how Biggar went on afterwards. When you look at the replays it’s 
definitely a try. The ball went backwards and Coley tried to catch the ball. 
Tightheads should be rewarded for trying to catch the ball, don’t you think?”

Gatland felt very differently, having watched Clifford outpace Scott Williams 
over 50 metres for the 47th-minute try that tilted the game England’s way. 
“There’s no attempt to catch the ball, it’s been knocked down and not in any 
way controlled. Dan was adamant it was a knock-on. There wasn’t any abuse, that 
would be unacceptable but there’s nothing wrong with a player showing a bit of 
passion. It was a pretty important decision at a pretty vital time of the game.”

When any side lose the second half of a Test 17-0, however, it is impossible 
to argue too long and loud. Wales may have looked the sharper side initially, 
the lively Rob Evans crashing over to reward a sustained period of pressure, 
but their early 10-0 lead proved a mirage on a lovely sunny afternoon.

The powerful Burrell, set to replace the injured Manu Tuilagi in the 
Australian tour party, struck back at the end of the first quarter, surging 
from deep to gather Youngs’s short pass, but after Biggar had slotted a third 
penalty to extend his side’s lead to 13-5 the visitors had only themselves to 
blame for not increasing it. A long breakout from Hallam Amos and Jamie Roberts 
should have yielded a score, only for Scott Baldwin to end up isolated on the 
left wing when moving the ball right was the obvious option. England needed 
some kind of response and a 33nd‑minute try by Watson provided it, even if some 
TV angles cast doubt over whether the winger reached the line before the ball 
was dislodged by a sliding Biggar. Ford, again, took aim only for the ball to 
fade past the right post for the third time in a row.

Whatever Jones said at half-time clearly worked. Within three minutes Wales 
were caught out by Clifford switching to the scrum-half role, allowing Youngs 
to appear from slightly deeper and step past Baldwin to score. Clifford’s 
long-distance gallop followed almost immediately and, at 22-13 down, Wales were 
toiling.

England 27-13 Wales: international rugby union – as it happened!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/29/england-v-wales-international-rugby-union-live>
With no Welsh sides involved in the Pro12 play-offs their players have been 
short of recent rugby, while Lydiate’s early departure with hamstring and 
shoulder joint injuries scarcely helped. It still did not wholly explain the 
visiting bench’s lack of impact, nor the poor tackling that saw Yarde power 
over for a fifth try. England allowed a big lead to slip in their World Cup 
pool game but this time they eased home with a bit to spare.

It has certainly buoyed Jones – “I was surprised we won so easily; I thought 
it would be a lot tighter” – as he prepares to return to his homeland. He 
suspects a “much harder” assignment awaits in Australia but insists he has “no 
doubt we can win the series” against the Wallabies. The three Tests should 
certainly be lively affairs, particularly if conditions are good. On the 
evidence of this fast-moving game, the argument that top-level rugby union is 
better played in the depths of a European winter feels increasingly perverse.

England Brown; Watson, Joseph (Daly, 65), Burrell, Yarde; Ford (Devoto, 76), B 
Youngs (Care, 55); Mullan (Genge, 65), Hartley (capt; Taylor, 76), Cole (Hill, 
69), Launchbury, Lawes (Attwood, 62), Harrison, Haskell (Kvesic, 62), Clifford.

Tries Burrell, Watson, Youngs, Clifford, Yarde. Con Ford.

Wales Liam Williams; North, S Williams (Anscombe, 56), Roberts, Amos; Biggar 
(Priestland, 55), Webb (Lloyd Williams, 65); Evans (Jenkins, 55), Baldwin 
(Dacey, 55), Lee (Jones, 63), Ball, AW Jones (Turnbull, 57), Moriarty, Lydiate 
(capt; King, 24), Faletau.

Try Evans. Con Biggar. Pens Biggar 2.

Referee M Mitrea (France). Att 81,128.
 