
Chris Robshaw <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-robshaw> has been ruled 
out of the Six Nations Championship after undergoing shoulder surgery on 
Monday, deepening England’s injury crisis less than a month before Eddie 
Jones’s side begin the defence of their title.

Robshaw aggravated a shoulder injury in Harlequins’ New Year’s Day defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/harlequins-chris-robshaw-tests-injured-shoulder>
 by Worcester and a meeting with a specialist on Monday confirmed the need for 
surgery. Quins expect the blindside flanker will spend 12 weeks on the 
sidelines.

Related: World Rugby ‘disappointed’ with Northampton over George North injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/world-rugby-disappointed-northampton-george-north-injury>

Jones is now facing the prospect of being without more than half of his 
starting pack when England host France on 4 February with the Vunipola 
brothers, Mako and Billy, already ruled out and question marks over Joe Marler, 
George Kruis, Joe Launchbury and James Haskell.

Robshaw had hoped to play some part in England’s Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> campaign, stating that his 
shoulder “feels fine in everyday life, but rugby isn’t everyday life” last week 
but he will now be out of action until April. The 30-year-old moved to 
blindside flanker and relinquished the captaincy last year but is still a key 
figure for Jones.

He has started 12 of the 13 successive victories achieved by England since 
Jones took charge, missing only theend-of-season friendly against Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/england-wales-international-match-report>
. “Chris is a massive ‘glue’ player who does the unseen work,” Jones said at 
the two-day training camp in Brighton last week. “He is a really strong, 
consistent player and is a massive leader for us in an informal sense.”

Jones has hinted that Maro Itoje, who missed England’s autumn campaign with a 
hand injury, may make the switch from second row to blindside, while Tom Wood 
is also a contender for the No6 jersey he occupied during England’s disastrous 
2015 World Cup campaign. Northampton’s Teimana Harrison is another option, 
along with the uncapped pair Josh Beaumont and Mike Williams.

It is desperate luck for Robshaw who is now denied the chance to shine during 
a Six Nations that will go a long way to determining the makeup of Warren 
Gatland’s squad for the British & Irish Lions tour of New Zealand in the 
summer. Robshaw was overlooked by Gatland in 2013 and the back row is among the 
most competitive of positions for places in the touring party.

Jack Clifford, Robshaw’s Harlequins team-mate, also comes into the equation 
for England at blindside but he too missed Saturday’s 29-26 victory over Sale 
after suffering a concussion against Worcester.Marler withdrew from the match 
against Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/harlequins-joe-marler-england-injury-six-nations>
 before kick-off with a calf injury and is likely to undergo a scan and, with 
Mako Vunipola out with a knee injury, Jones’s options at loosehead are limited. 
Billy Vunipola also has a knee injury and his fellow Saracens forward Kruis is 
recovering from a fractured cheekbone.

Related: Rugby union weekend talking points from the Premiership and Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/09/talking-points-from-the-weekends-premiership-and-european-action>

Haskell lasted all of 35 seconds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/08/england-james-haskell-head-injury-wasps-comeback>
 in his first appearance since June on Sunday in Wasps’ entertaining victory 
over Leicester, going off with a head injury shortly after coming off the 
bench. He must undergo the return-to-play protocols, meaning an appearance for 
Wasps in the Champions Cup against Toulouse on Saturday is unlikely. Elliot 
Daly was also withdrawn late on against Leicester with a head injury and 
Launchbury has a calf strain. Compounding Jones’s problemsat forward, Dylan 
Hartley’s six-week ban will leave him short of game time when France arrive at 
Twickenham.

Meanwhile, the Saracens duo Brad Barritt and Richard Barrington have been 
charged for the incident during Saturday’s draw with Exeter Chiefs that left 
Geoff Parling requiring lengthy treatment before being carried off.

Parling was caught in the jaw by Barritt’s swinging arm a moment before 
Richard Barrington’s shoulder connected with his head. Barrington was sent off 
and is charged with dangerous charging. Barritt went unpunished but has been 
cited for dangerous tackling in accordance with World Rugby’s clampdown on high 
tackles. The hearings will take place on Tuesday.

“I just wanted to express my sincere apologies to Geoff and the Premiership 
fans watching on Saturday,” wrote Barritt in a message posted on Twitter. “No 
one likes seeing a fellow player injured and it’s even more disappointing when 
I’m involved. I take responsibility for my misjudgment and assure you no malice 
was intended.”
 