
Chris Robshaw <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chris-robshaw> seems likely 
to miss some, if not all, of the Six Nations after Harlequins revealed that the 
flanker would either need shoulder surgery or an extended period of rest and 
rehabilitation.

Robshaw suffered the injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/harlequins-chris-robshaw-tests-injured-shoulder>
 in the first-half of Quins’ defeat at Worcester last weekend, his first 
appearance for the club since the end of October. He will see a specialist on 
Monday. “Chris will see a specialist early next week to determine the best 
course of action for his recovery, either an extended period of rest and 
rehabilitation, or an operation,” said the club.

Eddie Jones draws up Six Nations plans to cover for injured England stars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/england-eddie-jones-six-nations-injured-stars>
A year ago, Robshaw’s future looked uncertain. England had exited the World 
Cup early, Stuart Lancaster had left as head coach and his replacement, Eddie 
Jones, had questioned whether the player who had captained the side for four 
years was an international quality openside flanker.

Jones moved Robshaw to the blindside and the 30-year-old played a key role in 
helping England go through 2016 unbeaten but, withBilly Vunipola out with a 
knee injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/24/mako-vunipola-england-six-nations-saracens-suspected-ligament-injury>
, England face having to remodel their back row for the Six Nations opener 
against France at Twickenham.

Better news for Jones is that his openside flanker in last year’s Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> and tour to Australia, James 
Haskell, is set to make his first appearance of the season on Sunday having 
been named on the Wasps bench for the match against Leicester in Coventry.

A potential replacement for Robshaw is the second-row Maro Itoje, but Jones 
does not know yet how many of his locks will be fit for France. Joe Launchbury 
is out with a calf injury and George Kruis is unlikely to return for Saracens 
before the France match having fractured his cheekbone.

If Itoje remains in the second row, Jones would have the option of moving 
Haskell to the blindside and playing Tom Wood or Teimana Harrison at No7 or 
giving the Leicester flanker Mike Williams his first cap. Wood is also an 
option at No6.

The utility back Rhys Priestland has signed a new contract with Bath, which 
will probably end his Wales career on 48 caps because of the Test quota on 
players who do not play for one of the four Welsh regions. Bath were keen for 
him to commit with their England No10 George Ford set to leave at the end of 
the season.
 