
And so ends the most extraordinary season in the history of English rugby. 
When the host nation stumbled out of last year’s World Cup in the pool stages 
no one imagined the same players would fly home from Australia unbeaten in 10 
games and trailing numerous historic achievements in their wake. To their Six 
Nations grand slam can now be added a 3-0 series whitewash of the Wallabies, an 
unprecedented feat for an England team in the southern hemisphere.

To suggest Eddie Jones has slightly outflanked his compatriots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/25/england-sweeping-statement-whitewash-australia-eddie-jones-vunipola-robshaw-rugby-union>
 is like saying Shane Warne took the occasional Ashes wicket in his time. For 
England to round off a memorable series by registering a record number of 
points in Australia, having trained and played for 12 solid, aching months and 
endured such savage World Cup disappointment, was remarkable. To do so in a 
breathlessly quick game against opponents determined to deliver a 
pressure-relieving victory was almost as noteworthy.

With the antipodean dust finally settled on a thrilling series, there is no 
question a clutch of players merit special mention. There is no more reliable 
top-class goalkicker anywhere in the world at present than Owen Farrell and no 
young player with a brighter future than Maro Itoje. Add in the Vunipola 
brothers, who are finishing this campaign at a rare gallop, the revitalised Dan 
Cole and calm leadership ofDylan Hartley and England have both a core and a 
spine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/eddie-jones-england-australia-whitewash-3-0-series>
 to give all their rivals, New Zealand included, long-term pause for thought.

Not that anyone would have guessed from Jones’s immediate post-match verdict, 
the wily wizard of Oz again stressing England remain a long way behind the All 
Blacks and describing this performance as sub-par. As ever he was reluctant to 
sidestep brutal truths; England have never previously conceded 40 points and 
won a Test match and this was just the fourth time it has happened in 
international history. But rugby is about heart, soul and commitment as well as 
statistics and no England touring side since 2003 has come close to emulating 
whatHartley’s mob have done this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/england-dylan-hartley-australia-whitewash>
.

they managed four tries, with Farrell nailing 24 points from the tee to take 
his tally for the series to 66 points.Out of 29 kicks at goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/australia-england-match-report> 
he has landed 26, a strike-rate even Jonny Wilkinson would have settled for. It 
duly delivered the ninth win in nine games since Jones took charge and 
inflicted Australia’s worst home series drubbing since 1971.

Australia v England: third rugby union Test match – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/25/australia-v-england-third-rugby-union-test-match-live>
On a cool, clear Sydney night this was another exhilarating contest, with the 
outcome still uncertain deep into the final quarter. The Australian coach 
Michael Cheika, not for the first time, had concerns about some refereeing 
decisions but England fully deserved their win, effectively sealed with a 
67th-minute try from Jamie George.

The reserve hooker was slightly fortunate when Danny Care’s low pass cannoned 
off his shins and fell conveniently into his path to enable him to cross by the 
posts. Then again, given the season began last June for several of these 
English players, no one could say they had not worked hard for that slice of 
fortune. Overall, England scored nine tries in the series compared with the 
Wallabies’ 10, hardly the sign of a side with nil ambition.

They had looked slick and threatening even before Cole merrily crashed over in 
the 11th minute for just his third try in 68 Test. England’s defence, however, 
was rather less watertight than in Melbourne. What they initially thought was a 
forward pass from Dane Haylett-Petty to Folau also turned out to be a rebound 
off the hand of Itoje and Foley duly punished their hesitation to level the 
scores.

The hosts had a second try on the board after 20 minutes, England running out 
of numbers as slick Wallaby handling put Haylett-Petty over in the corner for 
his first Test try. Farrell and Bernard Foley exchanged further penalties 
before England regained the lead, Anthony Watson kicking ahead down the left 
for the combative Mike Brown to gather and hold off the cover for a try 
converted by the deadly Farrell.

In the absence of James Haskell, however, England needed more ammunition at 
and around the breakdown against a more urgent home pack and Jones again opted 
not to wait until half-time to fix the problem. Off came Teimana Harrison, 
whose parents had flown over from New Zealand to watch him, after just 31 
minutes, with Courtney Lawes coming into the second-row and the versatile Itoje 
switching to No6.

As with Luther Burrell’s brutal early substitution in Brisbane, it was a bold 
intervention that made a discernible difference. Although Australia edged into 
an 18-17 lead at half-time courtesy of Foley’s second penalty, they mostly 
found the second-half tougher. Their set-piece came under strain and the 
Wallabies were also aggrieved play was not halted when a George Ford punt soon 
after the interval struck the overhead ‘spider-cam.’ They also insisted a touch 
judge’s untimely intervention had contributed to Stephen Moore missing the 
subsequent lineout, but there was no disputing Billy Vunipola’s power as he 
rampaged off a scrum to score England’s third try.

Only the Wallabies’ ability to turn half-breaks into tries kept them in the 
game. First Hooper and then Folau, after more missed English tackles, added 
further tries before Farrell kicked his fourth penalty to narrow the gap to a 
single point at the start of the final quarter. A helter-skelter finale ensued, 
with a poor pass from Nick Phipps giving England crucial field position which 
ultimately yielded George’s unorthodox score. Farrell kicked a further penalty, 
a late score from Taqele Naiyaravoro providing scant local consolation.

England may have played better under Jones but never have their rugby players 
handed Australia such a comprehensive beating.

Australia Folau; Haylett-Petty, Kuridrani, Toomua (Lealiifano 68), Horne 
(Naiyaravoro 68); Foley, Phipps; Slipper (Sio 59), Moore (capt; Polota-Nau 62), 
Kepu (Holmes 59), Skelton (Palu 52), Simmons (Coleman ht), Fardy, Hooper, 
McMahonTries Foley, Haylett-Petty, Hooper, Folau, Naiyaravoro Cons Foley 3 Pens 
Foley 3

England Brown; Watson, Joseph, Farrell, Nowell; Ford, Youngs (Care 54); M 
Vunipola (Mullan 80) Hartley (capt; George 64), Cole (Hill 68), Kruis 
(Launchbury 62), Itoje, Robshaw (Clifford 54), Harrison (Lawes 31), B Vunipola 
(Daly 75).Tries Cole, Brown, B Vunipola, George Cons Farrell 3 Pens Farrell 6

Referee Nigel Owens (Wal) Att 44,063 Match rating 9/10
 