
Joe Marler has apologised for calling the Wales prop Samson Lee a “Gypsy Boy” 
and insisted he is not a racist, ahead of a World Rugby misconduct hearing on 
Tuesday.

Marler escaped with a reprimand after insulting Scarlets prop Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/17/joe-marler-disciplinary-action-world-rugby-gypsy-boy-wales-samson-lee>
 in England’s 25-21 RBS Six Nations win against Wales last month, but the 
Harlequins front-rower could face a retrospective ban from World Rugby.

Marler apologised on Twitter on the eve of the hearing, adding that he would 
accept the ruling from the governing body. He wrote: “I’m not a racist. What I 
said to Samson was out of order and wrong and I am sorry it was said, we shook 
hands at the end of the game and looked to move on. Whatever happens to me 
tomorrow I will accept.
Joe Marler (@JoeMarler) 
🏳🏳🏳 pic.twitter.com/lLLddU4bQw <https://t.co/lLLddU4bQw>
 <https://twitter.com/JoeMarler/status/717052682075299840> April 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JoeMarler/status/717052682075299840> 
“I’m sorry to anyone who was offended, saying it was in the ‘heat of the 
moment’ isn’t an excuse, but one comment, one mistake, does not make me a 
racist. My wife, kids, family and friends (yes, I do have some friends) know 
this.

“Thanks to the people who have supported me and have understood that I made a 
mistake and sorry again to the people I offended.”

Joe Marler is victim of ‘excruciating media witch-hunt’ says Damian Hopley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/29/damian-hopley-joe-marler-rugby-players-association->
Marler, 25, avoided a potential four-week suspension after Six Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> chiefs judged his remorse, his 
apology at half-time during the Wales match and subsequent admonishing by 
England as sufficient punishment.

World Rugby’s taking independent action outlined a level of dissatisfaction 
with that move, leaving the Six Nations disciplinary process under almost as 
much scrutiny as Marler himself.

“World Rugby can confirm that the Joe Marler misconduct hearing is scheduled 
to take place on 5 April in London,” read a statement from the governing body 
issued on 28 March.

“The case will be heard by an independent judicial committee, assembled by the 
independent judicial chairman in accordance with World Rugby regulation 18.

“The committee will comprise Terry Willis (chair, Australia), Jean-Noel 
Couraud (France) and Alan Hudson (Canada).”

The Rugby Football Union chief executive, Ian Ritchie, had attempted to move 
past the Marler storm, insisting that the Six Nations’ decision to clear the 
prop should be “the end of the matter”.

Marler came off the bench in the 31-21 victory against France in Paris that 
secured England’s first Grand Slam since 2003, and has also returned to club 
action.

The Harlequins <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> director of 
rugby, Conor O’Shea, has offered a staunch defence of Marler, insisting his 
player is in no way racist and also claiming that Lee hurled abuse at the Quins 
forward in their heated exchange during the Wales match.
 