
England’s aim of becoming the dominant force in the global game has been 
strengthened by an agreement signed by theRugby Football Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugby-football-union> and Premiership Rugby 
Limited.

The eight-year partnership between Twickenham and the Premiership clubs, worth 
over £200m, will giveEddie Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eddie-jones>
 greater access to players, a later deadline for selection, two additional 
training camps and more rest periods for his Grand Slam winners.

The RFU chief executive, Ian Ritchie, said: “This is a true partnership 
focused on making English rugby the best in the world for club and country.”

Negotiations over the deal began two years ago and were interrupted by the 
stand-off over the structure of European club competition and the World Cup, 
when Ritchie was forced to deal with the fallout ofEngland’s group exit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/04/england-rugby-world-cup-stuart-lancaster-10-reasons>
.

Ritchie’s key act was to appoint Jones as Stuart Lancaster’s replacement and 
that decision has been rewarded with a grand slam andlast month’s 3-0 series 
whitewash of Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/australia-england-third-test-match-report>
.

Jones’ view on elements of the groundbreaking agreement helped shape its 
format. Ritchie said: “Eddie was heavily involved in all the situations around 
the deal and is very supportive. We feel we’ve got the balance right and Eddie 
is very happy with the access it gives him to players.”

The Professional Game Agreement will see the size of the England Elite Player 
Squad increase from 33 to 45 with up to 36 players able to be selected for 
training camps.

Critically, Jones will be able to finalise his EPS squad in the first week of 
October when previously the deadline was late August, before thePremiership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/premiership> season had even begun.

The additional training camps will take place in early October before the 
autumn internationals and in January during the buildup to the Six Nations.

Players who pass a threshold of minutes played in November and during the Six 
Nations will be given an extra mandatory rest period of one weekend, in 
addition to the existing 10-week summer off-season for England’s internationals.

The PRL chief executive, Mark McCafferty, said: “Eddie has come to meet with 
our board on a couple of occasions to explain his view of the English game and 
where he was hoping to take it.

“One of the things he explained very clearly having worked all over the world 
was that we have the best setup in the world in terms of facilities, backup and 
support.

“But he also explained his frustration that because of that, and with the 
player base we have, we need to be more successful at club and international 
level.”

The deal is worth in the region of £2m per club annually and is twice the size 
of the previous eight-year arrangement.

Ritchie said: “It’s been a fairly intensive deal with a few gaps because we 
felt we had to get it right – it’s a hugely important and very significant 
financial deal. The guaranteed payment on the first four years is £112m and we 
all hope that in the second four years that figure will grow, but there are no 
guarantees.”
 