
An Eritrean man detained by Sudanese police last month and then extradited to 
Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> accused of being a people 
smuggling kingpin has declared he is the victim of mistaken identity, in a 
potential embarrassment for Italian and British law enforcement.

Italian and British police claimed on Wednesday to have brought to Rome a 
notorious 35-year-old people-smuggler called Medhanie Mered, who once boasted 
of smuggling at least 13,000 people toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. But on the first day of 
pre-trial proceedings in Rome on Friday the suspect in custody said he was in 
fact Medhanie Berhe, a 29-year-old refugee unconnected to people smuggling, and 
stressed his innocence.

Police investigating if wrong man caught in anti-smuggling operation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/police-investigating-if-wrong-man-caught-in-anti-smuggling-operation>
According to his lawyer, Berhe admitted that he had made two calls in recent 
months to smugglers in Libya, but only to reach relatives being smuggled by 
those men. Members of the Eritrean diaspora are often forced to be in regular 
contact with Libya-based smugglers in order to pay the ransoms of their 
relatives.

To prove his innocence, Berhe gave the passwords and usernames of his social 
media accounts to Italian prosecutors on Friday, his lawyer, Michele 
Calantropo, said.

“My client said he is innocent,” Calantropo told the Guardian following the 
hearing. “There are no elements that [suggest] he is lying. And I firmly 
believe in his innocence. We’ll try to get him out from jail as soon we can.”

Berhe’s identity documents were allegedly taken by the Sudanese authorities, 
but his family has supplied school and medical certificates that confirm his 
name and likeness.

The disclosure risks becoming a major embarrassment for both Italian and 
British police, who had both confidently announced the news on Wednesday that 
they had tracked down alleged smuggling kingpin Medhanie Mered at a safe house 
in Khartoum,Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>, and then had him 
extradited to Europe.

Britain’s National Crime Agency hailed the capture of “one of the world’s most 
wanted people smugglers”, proudly noting how the arrest “was only possible 
thanks to substantial cooperation between the Sudanese national police and the 
NCA”.

But on Friday, the NCA went to ground, declining to respond to 12 questions 
about how the arrest had turned into a case of allegedly mistaken identity.

The NCA would not answer concerns raised by Berhe’s friends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/police-investigating-if-wrong-man-caught-in-anti-smuggling-operation>
 and family,as well as Mered’s former victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/smugglers-victims-say-police-have-arrested-innocent-refugee>
, that they had arrested the wrong person. They also refused to say what proof 
they had for the suspect’s identity, beyond the word of the Sudanese 
government, whose president is wanted for war crimes.

A spokesperson simply said that “we are confident in our intelligence”, and 
would not expand on why they referred to a “Mered Medhanie” while the Italians 
consistently call him “Medhanie Mered”.

Prosecutors in Palermo, where the Italian investigation was based, have been 
more forthcoming, admitting on Thursday to the “unusual” nature of the 
situation. Following the session on Friday, Maurizio Scalia, Palermo’s deputy 
chief prosecutor, confirmed that he would investigate concerns over the alleged 
mistaken identity.

“The suspect was very collaborative and he answered all the questions,” Scalia 
said. “He admitted he made some calls to Libyan traffickers. We’ll continue to 
lead appropriate investigations about his identity.”

On Friday, Berhe’s family expressed shock at the prospect of their brother 
being accused of running a Libyan-based smuggling ring. “It’s not true,” said 
Seghen, his 30-year-old sister. “He has never been to Libya.”

Earlier in the week, people who said they had been smuggled by the real Mered 
in Libyasaid they did not recognise the man extradited to Rome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/smugglers-victims-say-police-have-arrested-innocent-refugee>
. “I know [Mered] very well, I can recognise him very well,” said Anbes Yemane, 
a 23-year-old Eritrean student who said he had been smuggled to Italy by Mered 
in December 2013. “That wasn’t him.”

Hundreds of thousands of Eritreans have passed through Sudan and then Libya on 
their way to Europe in recent years, fleeing a government that the UN accused 
this week ofcommitting crimes against humanity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/un-commission-eritrea-international-criminal-court-hague>
 on its own people. Many pay thousands of dollars to alleged smugglers, who 
often torture them in order to exact more payment from their relatives. 
Hundreds are also believed to have died of thirst and exhaustion in the Sahara 
as they try to cross into Libya.

Berhe’s family said their relative was just a simple refugee who fled Eritrea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eritrea> in late 2014 – long after Mered is 
alleged to have begun his smuggling business. Unlike many of his countrymen, 
however, his family said Berhe stayed put in Sudan while he tried to find a 
safer route to the west than the hellish route through the Sahara and across 
the Mediterranean.
 