
Paul McCartney – One of These Days


I’m ashamed to admit how long I overlooked Paul McCartney’s solo work, and I 
was especially glad to find this sincere song. The simplicity of a man and his 
guitar is on full display here. One of These Days casts a spell with its 
dreamy, hopeful lyrics, and the wandering, naive voice carrying them.McCartney’s
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/24/paul-mccartney-i-was-depressed-after-the-beatles-broke-up-bbc-mastertapes-show>
 voice has always been melodic and reassuring, but in this relaxed and 
uncluttered context it takes on a particularly meditative quality.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKBMPqqwNOr4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKBMPqqwNOr4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKBMPqqwNOr4&media=>
Moondog – Do Your Thing

In my household at the moment we’re putting Moondog on at mealtimes. Listening 
with my daughter I stumbled across this wonderful, hymn-like gem. On one visit, 
my mother remarked that it was a soothing song. I responded with a satisfyied 
smile, before telling her a bit aboutMoondog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/nov/17/classicalmusicandopera.usa>, or 
“the Viking of 6th Avenue”. Blind from the age of 16, he is a fascinating 
figure in musical history. Do Your Thing is an uplifting song for a sunny day’s 
introspection. The simple vocal melody and surprisingly complex piano 
accompaniment complement each other perfectly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp7Bq_MvkUtU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp7Bq_MvkUtU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dp7Bq_MvkUtU&media=>
Barrington Levy – I Can’t Wait Too Long


Such worshipful music – the song, the voice, the production – All for Jah! I 
Can’t Wait too Long is unhurried, but never loses hold of the mystical groove 
that defines reggae. Aside from the lazy, hypnotic drums and the full-bodied 
bass line at the bottom end, the song is effortlessly minimal, while throwing 
in the most pleasing and mind-bending musical grenades. Even Barrington’s 
gentle croon is left far back in the mix, as though his words of faith and 
peace are heard from far away.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOMuXFciadj4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOMuXFciadj4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOMuXFciadj4&media=>
Robbie Basho – Blue Crystal Fire

Acoustic maestro and rare genius Robbie Basho was born with synaesthesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/apr/27/benefit-synaesthesia-brain-injury-mental-decline>
: he saw all tones as colours. A proponent of Asian music and culture, he 
believed he was the reincarnation of a 17th-century Japanese poet, from whom he 
borrowed his name. Before his bizarre death in his chiropractor’s office, 
Robbie Basho was sure that his many compositions – some 15 albums – would not 
outlive him. Thankfully, great music outlasts us all. I find Basho’s warbling 
vocals to be soothing without exception – sombre and beautiful. That’s not to 
forget the subtle complexity of his strumming, which sounds at times as if 
there are multiple guitars. The simplicity of the song produces something truly 
hypnotising.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYYaGChm8RWw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYYaGChm8RWw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYYaGChm8RWw&media=>
Silver Quintette – Sinner’s Crossroads

“Just as you are …” With Sinner’s Crossroads, meditation is movement. This 
gospel rendition, from 1956, anticipated the rock’n’roll that was about to be 
unleashed on the world. Who could stand still when this one starts up? Lead 
singer Roscoe Robinson is testifying his heart out, and the “congregational” 
backing vocalists are not passive in their response. I’m reminded of 
Pentecostal services I attended in my youth, when the powerful sound of the 
faithful singing could draw your feet in to the aisles. It’s a song for 
everyone!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdX7S0V8GE8Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdX7S0V8GE8Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdX7S0V8GE8Y&media=>
 * Eska plays the Roundhouse 
<http://www.roundhouse.org.uk/whats-on/2016/ron-arads-curtain-call/eska/>, 
London, on 18 August.  