
Esma Redžepova, the Macedonian singer and humanitarian, who has died aged 73, 
bore the title “Queen of the Gypsies” proudly. She rose from poverty to be 
feted by world leaders, as an eloquent spokesperson for Europe’s Roma people, a 
confidante of the Yugoslav president Josip Broz Tito and a cultural ambassador 
for the Republic of Macedonia. Redžepova released hundreds of records and 
performed thousands of concerts, her music spanning generations – even taking 
her to theEurovision song contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eurovision-2013> in 2013.

She was born at the height of the second world war, in Skopje’s old town, to 
Ibrahim Redžepova, a shoeshine man, and his wife, Canija, a seamstress. After 
the war, Esma and her five siblings took advantage of the free education and 
cultural organisations the socialist government of Yugoslavia offered. Young 
Esma, a precocious performer, entered and won a school talent competition in 
1957.

The contest was broadcast on Radio Skopje and among those listening was Stevo 
Teodosievski, an accordionist and bandleader. He was so impressed by Esma’s 
voice that he approached Ibrahim to ask whether he would let his daughter join 
Stevo’s ensemble. Initially, Esma’s parents were reluctant, believing that 
female singers ended up performing in bars and were thus viewed as 
unmarriageable.

'Queen of Gypsy music' Esma Redžepova dies aged 73
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/12/esma-redzepova-dies-dead-roma-gypsy>
Teodosievski persisted, his reputation as an honest man and membership of the 
Communist party helping win them over. He arranged a contract with Ibrahim 
whereby he guaranteed Esma’s virtue and education and Ibrahim promised not to 
arrange a marriage for her before she turned 18 (many Roma girls were then 
married in their early teens). Aged 14, Esma went on tour.

In 1959 Teodosievski shifted his ensemble to Belgrade and began their 
recording career.Chaje Shukarije <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EdtbaLJUYco> 
(Beautiful Girl) – an infectious, upbeat song composed by Redžepova – was an 
immediate hit and has since become a Balkan standard, performed by everyone 
from pop singers to brass bands. President Tito began employing the band for 
state occasions: in 1960 Redžepova sang at a Belgrade gathering for the leaders 
of Non-Aligned nations. This was the first of many such occasions and Redžepova 
would sing for statesmen including Jawarhalal Nehru, prime minister of India, 
and the Libyan leaderColonel Muammar Gaddafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/20/colonel-muammar-gaddafi>.

Her beauty, charm, striking voice and performance skills quickly made her 
famous across Europe – in 1962 she became the first Yugoslav artist to appear 
at the Olympia theatre in Paris – and the records she made with Teodosievski 
through the 1960s and 70s are magnificent Balkan pop-folk fusions. Ensemble 
Teodosievski had a formidable work ethic, often performing up to 400 shows a 
year at the height of their popularity. “It was like a movie show,” Redžepova 
told me. “Four or five performances a day on weekends!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fesma-redzepova-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1870000cc5caa3c1a9a683dcab1aa3bfcb568260%2F0_264_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Esma%20Red%C5%BEepova%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fesma-redzepova-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Esma%20Red%C5%BEepova%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fesma-redzepova-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1870000cc5caa3c1a9a683dcab1aa3bfcb568260%2F0_264_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Esma Redzepova on stage with the Legendary Gypsy Queens and Kings at the Royal 
Festival Hall, London, 2009. Photograph: Hayley Madden/Redferns 
She married Teodosievski in 1968 and, around the same time, they began a 
policy of taking in Roma boys and providing them with a musical apprenticeship. 
This would be the basis for the idea that the couple adopted 48 boys over the 
years but, in fact, only five became their wards, with the rest living with the 
couple only while they learned musical technique and performing skills. Several 
of these youths went on to join Ensemble Teodosievski and others developed 
their own successful musical careers.

In 1976, when performing in Chandigarh, India, the couple were given the 
honorary titles of Queen and King of Gypsy Music. In 1989, as Yugoslavia began 
to crumble, they left Belgrade for Skopje. The Yugoslav banking crisis had 
wiped out most of their savings and, initially, they had to live in a hut. Yet 
the work ethic and their popularity endured and they quickly rebuilt their 
fortunes.

Teodosievski died of cancer in 1997 and, along with Yugoslavia’s collapse, 
this devastated Redžepova. But rather than retire, she reinvented her career, 
recording with Balkan pop singers and folk bands while surfing the wave of 
western interest in Gypsy music. Her last UK performance was at the Royal 
Festival Hall in London in 2009 as part of the Legendary Gypsy Queens and Kings 
show of which, as always, Redžepova was very much the star.

Once resettled in Skopje, she had begun to speak out on all manner of issues 
surrounding the Roma people, funding charities to work with women and children, 
and campaigning for universal education and on behalf of Roma refugees from 
Kosovo. For her humanitarian work, the Macedonian government twice nominated 
Redžepova for the Nobel peace prize.

• Esma Redžepova, singer and humanitarian campaigner, born 8 August 1943; died 
11 December 2016
 