
The EU and Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> signed a free 
trade deal on Sunday that was almost derailed last week by objections from 
French-speaking Belgians , exposing the difficulties of securing agreement from 
28 member states as Britain prepares for Brexit talks.

The European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jean-claude-juncker>, said there was no 
parallel between the deal struck with Canada and looming Brexit talks.

“I don’t see any relation between what we are signing today and the Brexit 
issue,” Juncker said, before greeting Canada’s prime minister,Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>, in Brussels

Trudeau and top EU officials signed the comprehensive economic and trade 
agreement, known as Ceta, paving the way for most import duties to be removed 
early next year. However, the treaty needs the approval of at least 38 national 
and regional parliaments, including the UK’s, to take full force.

Trudeau was meant to fly to Brussels last Wednesday but he stayed at home when 
the Wallonia region raised objections that held up agreement until Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/belgium-reaches-deal-with-wallonia-over-eu-canada-trade-agreement>
. Belgium’s regional parliaments endorsed a compromise deal, which addressed 
concerns about competition for Wallonia’s farmers from Canada, on Friday.


Donald Tusk <https://www.theguardian.com/world/donald-tusk>, the president of 
the European council, who stood beside Trudeau at a news conference, said the 
delay was caused by Belgium’s internal politics and that the deal would be far 
less contentious when it went before national parliaments.

Tusk said: “Fortunately we live in a democratic system and democracy is less 
predictable than other political systems but I still prefer democracy. My 
prediction is there is no huge problem with European parliaments. After my 
talks with all 28 member states’ leaders, I have no doubt Ceta is the least 
controversial trade agreement you could imagine.”

Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, apologised to MPs last week for 
not allowing a parliamentary debate on the trade deal. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/eus-tough-post-brexit-stance-puts-politics-over-prosperity-says-liam-fox>
 He said holding up the agreement would have made the UK unpopular with other 
EU members but also with Canada and that the deal was worth £1.3bn a year to 
Britain.

Fox said the UK parliament could still veto the deal and he warned that 
problems in agreeing Ceta showed the difficulty Britain could face in 
negotiating a trade agreement with the EU.

Supporters of Ceta say it will increase Canadian-EU trade by 20% and boost the 
EU economy by €12bn (£10.9bn) a year and Canada’s by C$12bn (£7.4bn).

Trudeau said consumers and businesses would immediately feel the benefits. “We 
are confident that demonstrating that trade is good for the middle classes 
(...) will make sure that everybody gets that this is a good thing for our 
economies and that it is also a good thing for the world,” he said.

With free trade under attack from populist movements and anti-globalisation 
campaigners, the deal reduces Canada’s reliance on the US and gives the EU a 
first trade pact with a G7 economy when its credibility has taken a knock from 
Britain’s decision to leave.

Juncker said: “We are setting standards which will determine globalisation in 
the coming years. Nothing in other trade agreements will be able to remain 
below the level of what we have reached today with Canada.”

Geoffrey Yu, the head of UBS Wealth Management’s UK investment office, said 
the last-minute delay to the deal, which took seven years to agree, showed how 
difficult it could be to get a decision in the EU.


He said: “The EU’s detractors will cite Ceta’s travails as another example of 
the bloc’s institutional failures. In some respects, the impasse is a 
vindication of the UK electorate’s decision to leave the EU and pursue its own 
agreements.”


He said when the UK government was free to make its own trade deals after 
leaving the EU, it should target willing partners such as emerging markets.
 