
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is considering whether 
to forge ahead with a plan to work with repressive African regimes in an 
attempt to stem migration flows, according to the draft version of a policy 
expected to be finalised by European officials on Tuesday.

To stop refugees reaching southern Europe from Africa, Europe is mulling 
whether to partner with Sudan,whose president is wanted for war crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2009/mar/04/sudan-war-crimes>, and 
Eritrea, whose government isaccused of crimes against humanity by the UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/08/human-rights-abuses-eritrea-may-be-crimes-against-humanity-un-report>
.

Mediterranean death toll has reached at least 1,000 this week, says IOM
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/mediterranean-death-toll-880-last-week-unhcr-migration>
Both countries are a significant source of refugees in Europe, while Sudan is 
also a major migration thoroughfare for people moving between eastAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and the Libyan coast, the 
springboard for most people-smuggling missions to Italy. Over 150,000 people 
reached Europe from Libya in 2015 – only slightly fewer than the record of 
170,000 in 2014.

In a draft document seen by the Guardian ahead of its official release by 
European civil servants on Tuesday, the EU has pledged to go ahead with a 
project that could see Europe provide Sudan’s security services with more 
equipment and funds to stop refugees, as well as assisting Eritrea’s judiciary.

The text has yet to be finalised, and EU sources could not confirm that the 
sections concerned would be kept in the text when it is officially published on 
Tuesday. The plans are only the latest iteration of a new EU migration strategy 
still being fleshed out by European leaders.

The proposed strategy also includes sending more aid and technical assistance 
to about 20 countries including Jordan, Lebanon, Niger,Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> and Ethiopia, in a bid to persuade 
their governments to do more to curb irregular migration.

Following a fall in the number of people reaching Europe from Turkey, European 
leaders are now trying to curb migration from elsewhere in the region. 
Favourable trade deals and visa liberalisation programmes are among the 
suggested ways of winning the acquiescence of target countries. Vague reference 
to legal pathways for refugees to Europe, as well as increased job 
opportunities for refugees left behind in Africa and the Middle East, are also 
included among the so-called “country packages”.

But buried deep within the draft document, the most eye-catching announcement 
concerns the EU’s “BetterMigration <https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration>
 Management” project, which the draft suggests “will start this summer”.

The project was first floated publicly in December, and according to documents 
released at the time 
<https://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/sites/devco/files/t05-eutf-hoa-reg-09-better-migration-management_en.pdf>
 could involve the provision of cars, equipment and possibly aircraft to the 
Sudanese government – as well as “capacity-building” for Eritrean judges, whom 
the UN accuses of aiding and abetting President Isaias Afwerki’s despotic 
regime in Asmara.

The proposals have been met with fury by some rights campaigners and leftwing 
MEPs. Barbara Spinelli, an Italian MEP fromGUE/NGL 
<http://www.guengl.eu/group/about>, a leftwing coalition in the European 
parliament, said: “These ‘country packages’ would make us complicit with 
dictatorships and deny basic fundamental rights to people fleeing wars, famine 
and extreme poverty … The commission should be ashamed of this proposal.”

Sara Tesorieri, a policy adviser at Oxfam <https://www.oxfam.org/>, accused EU 
leaders of compromising European values, should the proposals come to pass on 
Tuesday. She said: “The EU needs to reconsider very carefully exactly how much 
it is willing to sacrifice on the altar of migration, because right now, they 
are headed down a road where they will have a foreign policy that consists of a 
single objective. And they will be bargaining with regimes that they have held 
at arm’s length.”

She added the EU “should be rethinking its approach. It needs to return to 
reframing migration as an opportunity. The reality is that migration is 
increasing globally and Europe is going to be part of that.”

A spokesperson for the European commission said: “There are also no [concrete] 
plans at this stage to provide equipment to the Sudanese government. Any 
decision to provide civilian equipment will be taken on the basis of a 
forthcoming appraisal mission toSudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> 
from the EU and the consortium of EU member states.”

The German development minister, Gerd Müller, last week told the Guardian that 
Germany had no plans to send money to Sudan, contrary to reports in Der Spiegel 
and statements within EU policy documents, including the draft seen by the 
Guardian.

The Guardian view on Eritrea: a regime of terror | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/10/guardian-view-eritrea-regime-of-terror-migration>
Tuesday’s policy paper is only the latest attempt by the EU to stem the flow 
of people arriving on Europe’s shores.At a summit in Valletta last November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/12/migration-crisis-european-and-african-leaders-agree-18bn-trust-fund>
, the EU promised to give 23 African nations a share in a €1.8bn (£1.4bn) 
“trust fund”, money for employment projects and border controls to dissuade 
people from travelling to Europe.

Some countries would like to see the EU go further, with a tougher approach to 
refugees. Austria’s foreign minister, Sebastian Kurz, has called for asylum 
seekers to be kept on islands rather than having direct access to the 
continent. In aninterview with Die Presse 
<http://diepresse.com/home/politik/aussenpolitik/5003144/Kurz_Rettung-aus-Seenot-ist-kein-Ticket-nach-Europa?from=gl.home_politik>
 on Sunday, he urged the EU to follow the Australian model, where migrants and 
refugees are sent to Pacific island detention centres, where they are held 
indefinitely, while their asylum applications are processed.

Hungary, a staunch opponent of plans to redistribute refugees around the bloc, 
had already proposed that refugees be restricted to “closed and protected” 
centres beyond the EU’s borders.
 