
The European commission has rejected Theresa May’s call for preparatory talks 
on Brexit before the UK’s formal resignation from the EU.

The commission, which will run Brexit talks for the EU, reiterated its refusal 
to negotiate before article 50 is triggered, which the prime minister has
promised will happen by before the end of March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/03/theresa-may-pledges-to-trigger-article-50-by-end-of-march-video-highlights>
. “I cannot go an inch beyond the ‘no negotiations without notification’ 
principle,” said Margaritis Schinas, the chief spokesman for the commission’s 
president, Jean-Claude Juncker.
What is article 50? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=48ff8b3e-e2d2-43c0-94e1-5ad8411b6dc0>
The prime minister, who delighted Eurosceptics with her party conference 
speech, which leaned towards a complete break with the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/02/conservative-conference-may-to-explain-brexit-great-repeal-bill-in-marr-interview-politics-live>
, is pushing for advance talks, before article 50. She said it was important 
for the UK and for Europe as a whole, to carry out “preparatory work” to ensure 
smoother negotiations.


Juncker will meet May on the sidelines of a European summit in October, but 
would not negotiate with her, his spokesman said.


“When it comes to article 50 we will work constructively on the basis of a 
notification, not on the basis of a speech. And until this letter of 
notification arrives, there will be no negotiations. Once it arrives we are 
prepared to engage constructively and in good faith,” the spokesman said.


The statement is more emphatic than the response of the European council 
president, Donald Tusk, who also appeared to pour cold water on the idea of 
preparatory talks. Following May’s speech on Sunday, he tweeted:

EU diplomats have rebuffed attempts by British colleagues to launch informal 
preparatory talks on article 50; so far the consensus shows no sign of cracking.

Officials from France, Germany, Poland and Slovakia, which holds the EU’s 
rotating presidency until the end of 2016, on Monday repeated the “no 
negotiations without notification” line that was agreed by EU leaders at a
summit following the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/brussels-eu-summit-leaders-push-quick-divorce-cameron-germany-brexit>
.

Malta’s prime minister Joseph Muscat said the format of Brexit negotiations 
would “be more or less like what happened with Greece”, referring to bailout 
negotiations in 2015 that saw Athensforced to accept conditions it had sworn 
against 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/greece-bailout-terms-eurozone-policymaking-powers>
.

Muscat, who will be in the hot seat of the EU presidency when article 50 is 
triggered,told Politico 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/malta-pm-joseph-muscat-brexit-talks-will-be-like-the-greek-bailout/>
 that EU countries agreed the UK should lose privileges if it left the single 
market. “Any deal has to be a fair deal, but an inferior deal,” he said.

Senior UK officials have told their counterparts that ruling out preparatory 
work heightens the risk of a disorderly Brexit that is bad for both sides.


Countering this view, one European diplomat said it was in the interests of 
the EU27 to avoid preparatory talks, because it would mean more focused 
discussions and unity among countries. He said: “The whole Brexit business is 
bad for the EU. Very clearly, all this is not going to be a joyful ride, but I 
am pretty confident that avoiding pre-negotiations is good for the EU27.”


Speaking last week before May’s conference speech, one senior European 
diplomat conceded there was a grey area where informal talks could take place. 
“For now [no negotiations without notification] is fully respected because the 
Brits don’t know where they are going,” the diplomat told the Guardian.

“The critical moment is when the Brits start sounding out the French and the 
Germans about what is feasible … there is a grey zone between negotiating and 
sounding out.”

What will happen now timescale for article 50 has been revealed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/article-50-timescale-theresa-may-brexit>
Jean De Ruyt, Belgium’s ex-ambassador to the EU, also suggested there was “a 
grey area” where informal talks could happen. But governments will not start 
negotiations with the UK without notification of article 50. “They have said 
that too loudly, that will not change,” he said.

He said the rest of the EU would be pleased May had set an article 50 
deadline. “The uncertainty was the biggest problem, because many people here 
did not believe it will happen. Now we know exactly what the timetable will be.”

He expects Britain’s exit negotiations will be concluded within the two-year 
timeframe. Both sides had an incentive to wrap up divorce talks in two years, 
he said: for the EU it was important to complete talks before European 
elections in May or June 2019, while the UK would have the advantage of being 
able to sign trade deals with other countries by making a relatively fast exit.


Britain’s exit from the EU will begin when May sends a letter to Tusk, 
spelling out her intention to trigger article 50. EU leaders will then meet, 
without the UK, to draw up a mandate for the talks. Diplomats are taking 
soundings on national red lines, which are likely to cover the single market, 
financial services, the status of Gibraltar and the rights of EU citizens 
settled in the UK.

EU leaders are expected to give the commission the task of running the talks, 
but will make final decisions on the future relationship with the UK.Michel 
Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/27/jean-claude-juncker-puts-michel-barnier-in-charge-brexit-talks>
, the commission’s chief Brexit negotiator, has made a low-key start to his 
role, after starting work on 1 October.Didier Seeuws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/belgian-diplomat-to-head-eus-brexit-taskforce>
, a Belgian diplomat, is leading a Brexit taskforce on behalf of EU member 
states.
 