
The European commission (EC) has filed charges against Facebook for providing 
“misleading” information in the run-up to thesocial network’s acquisition of 
messaging service WhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/feb/19/facebook-buys-whatsapp-16bn-deal>
 after its data-sharing change in August.


The charges will not have an affect on the approval of the $22bn merger and is 
being treated completely separately to other European cases against Facebook, 
but could lead toFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> 
being fined up to 1% of its global turnover in 2014 when the merger was 
approved, which was greater than $10bn for the first time.

The European competition commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, said: “Companies 
are obliged to give the commission accurate information during merger 
investigations. They must take this obligation seriously.

“Our timely and effective review of mergers depends on the accuracy of the 
information provided by the companies involved. In this specific case, the 
commission’s preliminary view is that Facebook gave us incorrect or misleading 
information during the investigation into its acquisition ofWhatsApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/whatsapp>. Facebook now has the 
opportunity to respond.”

The commission said that Facebook informed regulators that it would not be 
able to perform automated matching between user-held Facebook accounts and 
WhatsApp accounts. However, Facebook’s privacy policy change for WhatsApp in 
August, for which the EC was notified in January, specifically enabled 
automated matching and data sharing after technical changes, including one for 
Apple and its iOS, allowed the matching of the majority of accounts not using a 
phone number with Facebook.

The commission’s review of the merger in 2014 revolved around whether Facebook 
would or could merge the two messaging services, making them cross-compatible; 
a technically difficult feat that was made harder in 2016 with the roll out of 
WhatsApp’s end-to-end encryption for messages by default.

Facebook has until 31 January 2017 to respond to the charges.

A Facebook spokesperson said the company was pleased that the EC stands by its 
clearance of the company’s WhatsApp acquisition and would continue to 
co-operate with regulators to resolve their complaints. It said: “We respect 
the commission’s process and are confident that a full review of the facts will 
confirm Facebook has acted in good faith.

“We’ve consistently provided accurate information about our technical 
capabilities and plans, including in submissions about the WhatsApp acquisition 
and in voluntary briefings before WhatsApp’s privacy policy update this year.”

Facebook halted the use of user data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/17/facebook-halts-use-of-whatsapp-data-for-advertising-in-europe>
 shared between WhatsApp and Facebook for advertising purposes in November after
pressure from the pan-European data protection agency group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/whatsapp-pause-sharing-user-data-facebook-european-privacy-regulators-yahoo>
 Article 29 Working Party in October.

 * Why we should worry about WhatsApp accessing our personal information - 
Elizabeth Denham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/whatsapp-access-personal-information-privacy-facebook-consumers-information-commission>
 * EU proposals will force multinationals to disclose tax arrangements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/07/eu-multinationals-tax-arrangements-us-google-amazon>
 * Facebook wins appeal against Belgian privacy watchdog over tracking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/facebook-wins-appeal-against-belgian-privacy-watchdog-over-tracking> 