
Any sweeping trade deals the EU wants to sign with other countries will have 
to be approved by member state governments, a senior EU lawyer has said, in an 
opinion that could deepen complications over Britain’s post-Brexit future.

Eleanor Sharpston QC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/apr/19/we-dont-decide-national-cases-ecj-veteran-swipes-away-eurosceptic-barbs>
, an advocate general at the European court of justice, argued in a ruling 
released on Wednesday that an EU trade deal with Singapore could only be 
finalised by the EU and member states, and not by Brussels institutions acting 
alone.

In practice, this means the deal may have to be ratified by at least 38 
national and regional parliaments, including the EU’s 28 national parliaments, 
at least five regional and linguistic parliaments in Belgium and at least five 
upper houses, including those of Germany and Italy.

Deloitte apologises for Brexit memo in effort to make peace with No 10
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/deloitte-apologises-for-brexit-memo-in-effort-to-make-peace-with-no-10>
Sharpston’s opinion does not bind the Luxembourg-based court, which is 
expected to issue its judgment in early 2017. But the court follows the views 
of advocate generals in a majority of cases.


If her opinion prevails, the EU could find it trickier to sign wide-ranging 
free-trade agreements. Life would also be harder for the British government, as 
any post-Brexit trade deal with the bloc could potentially require the approval 
of at least 38 national parliaments.


This scenario could add years to finalising a trade deal, leaving the British 
government facing the nightmare possibility that any one regional or national 
assembly could block a deal.

A taste of the possible drama to come was hinted at earlier this year when the 
Walloon region of Belgiumthreatened to veto an EU-Canada trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/29/britain-must-learn-from-the-eu-canada-ceta-trade-deal-saga>
 following seven years of tortuous negotiations and legal drafting.

The current case hinges on whether an EU trade deal with Singapore can be 
finalised by theEuropean commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> alone, or whether the 
approval of national governments is also needed.


The European commission, which negotiates trade agreements on behalf of the 
EU’s 510 million people, argues it has the power to sign agreements. But 
national governments contend that the trade deal touches on national 
competences and requires their approval.


Sharpston said the Singapore agreement, under discussion since 2010, could 
only be concluded by the commission and member states together.


“While the advocate general notes that difficulties may arise from a 
ratification process involving all of the member states alongside the EU, she 
considers that that cannot affect the question of who has competence to 
conclude the agreement,” she wrote.


She distinguished between EU competences and national ones. The European 
commission may take comfort from the fact it was deemed to have exclusive power 
to negotiate trade agreements on a wide range of issues, including trade in 
goods and many services, foreign-direct investment, many intellectual property 
questions and competition policy.

But the commission must give member states a say if a trade agreement covers 
trade in transport services, aspects of public procurement, as well as 
provisions affecting labour, social or environmental policy, Sharpston said.


Reality check: will it take 10 years to do a UK-EU trade deal post Brexit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/reality-check-will-it-take-10-years-to-do-a-uk-eu-trade-deal-post-brexit>
A European commission spokesperson said: “This is an important element 
contributing to the court’s reflection, so we are of course carefully analysing 
it. However, it must be clear that no definitive conclusions can be drawn until 
the court itself issues its final opinion.”


The EU currently has 34 trade agreements covering 60 countries. EU trade 
negotiators have embarked on 19 separate trade negotiations covering 52 
countries, including the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with 
the US, nowput into the deep freeze following the election of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/germany-trump-ttip-trade-deal>. 

These trade deals have evolved from relatively simple agreements centred on 
cutting tariffs to far-reaching accords covering everything from mutual 
recognition of environmental, safety and labour standards to public procurement.

As a result, national governments are increasingly challenging the EU’s sole 
competence to conclude such sweeping trade agreements, amid a growing public 
backlash against free trade and the power of obscure trade tribunals to settle 
disputes between governments and large corporations.
 