
More than 150,000 people have signed an EU staff petition demanding that the 
formerEuropean commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> president José Manuel 
Barroso loses his pension for taking a job at Goldman Sachs.

A delegation will present the petition on Wednesday to the main EU 
institutions: the commission, parliament and council, which represents EU 
governments.

Nearly 152,000 people have put their name to the declaration 
<https://www.change.org/p/for-strong-exemplary-measures-to-be-taken-against-jm-barroso-for-joining-goldman-sachs-international>
, which accuses Barroso of “morally reprehensible” behaviour over his decision 
to join the US investment bank. Since its launch by a handful of EU employees 
in July, the petition has spread far beyond Brussels staff, becoming a 
lightning rod for concerns about senior politicians taking lucrative private 
sector jobs.


The petition comes ahead of a keenly awaited investigation by an EU ethics 
committee into Barroso’s job. A three-person panel, comprising an ex-EU judge, 
ex-MEP and ex-official, willadvise the commission on whether Barroso broke the 
EU’s code of conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/12/juncker-asks-eu-ethics-panel-to-investigate-barrosos-goldman-sachs-job>
, which states that ex-commissioners must act with “integrity and discretion” 
during and after they have left office.

Barroso, who led the commission for a decade until 2014, took a job at Goldman 
Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> in July to advise the 
bank’s clients on Brexit.

The current commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, questioned his 
predecessor’s decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/jean-claude-juncker-jose-manuel-barroso-decision-to-join-goldman-sachs>
, saying he did not have a problem with Barroso “working for a private bank – 
but maybe not this bank”. The New York-based bank has come under fire for its 
role inhelping the Greek government hide the extent of its budget deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/18/greece-goldman-sachs-debt-derivatives>
, as well as selling sub-prime mortgages, a trigger of the global financial 
crisis.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fjuncker-hits-out-at-predecessor-barrosos-goldman-sachs-role-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Juncker%20hits%20out%20at%20predecessor%20Barroso%E2%80%99s%20Goldman%20Sachs%20role%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fjuncker-hits-out-at-predecessor-barrosos-goldman-sachs-role-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Juncker%20hits%20out%20at%20predecessor%20Barroso%E2%80%99s%20Goldman%20Sachs%20role%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fjuncker-hits-out-at-predecessor-barrosos-goldman-sachs-role-video&media=>
Juncker hits out at predecessor Barroso’s Goldman Sachs role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/sep/15/juncker-hits-out-at-predecessor-barrosos-goldman-sachs-role-video>
Barroso and the bank have strongly refuted claims of any unethical behaviour. 
Such claims are “baseless and wholly unmerited ... discriminatory against me 
and against Goldman Sachs”, Barroso wrote to Juncker in September.

Goldman Sachs has also stressed that it followed “strict rules” set by global 
regulators. “José Manuel took the role after an 18-month restriction period 
following the end of his term at the European commission, a longer period than 
that imposed by most European institutions”.


The EU staff, who have drafted the petition, are calling for tighter rules on 
politicians moving into the corporate sector, once they have left their EU jobs.

These calls have been broadly backed by the EU ombudsman, Emily O’Reilly, who 
has argued that the right to work should be balanced by “the public right to an 
ethical administration”.


Speaking to the Guardian and European newspapers recently, she said: “You 
could have a much stronger code of conduct pour encourager les autres.”

O’Reilly, who has also served as Ireland’s national ombudsman, argues the EU 
should eventually set up an independent body to oversee appointments of 
ex-officials, similar to Ireland’s Standards in Public Office Commission. “That 
is the natural progression, that it moves away from the commission and other 
institutions themselves.”

She predicted the Barroso case would have a permanent impact on the EU 
institutions. “Nothing has ever been so big, or has captured the public 
imagination in the same way. I think eventually this [case] will make the 
commission deal with the revolving doors issue in a more serious way.”


One of the petition organisers suggested their action had set a precedent that 
would make ex-politicians think twice before taking certain corporate jobs. “It 
is a precedent, in the culture of the EU institutions this will remain.”


The official said it was the first time EU staff had publicised criticism of 
their former bosses for actions, which they argue, have tarnished the EU’s 
image. “We are deeply committed to theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and we want to defend it.”

The petition organisers, who wish to remain anonymous, will be represented at 
handover by a group of retired EU officials and staff unions. At the same time, 
campaigners from Transparency International and the Alliance for Lobby 
Transparency and Ethics Regulation, will deliver aseparate petition 
<https://www.alter-eu.org/press-releases/2016/08/10> criticising the “revolving 
door between the European commission and big business”.

The commission’s ethics panel is also investigating Neelie Kroes, the former 
EU competition commissioner, who failed to declare a directorship in an 
offshore firm, in breach of commission rules.

The panel is expected to take around six to eight weeks to reach a conclusion 
on both cases.
 