
The EU’s chief Brexit negotiator wants to prevent Britain from getting a soft 
transitional deal that would allow single market access on easy terms once it 
has left the bloc.


At a closed-door meeting in Brussels, Michel Barnier outlined his negotiating 
strategy to EU government officials for the first time. Described as technical 
seminar, the event on Tuesday lasted about three hours, and was attended by 
experts from 27 EU member states, but not the UK.


According to informed sources, Barnier wants to guard against a Brexit 
transition that is too comfortable and would allow the UK access to the single 
market without meeting the EU’s obligations, such as free movement of people 
and paying into the EU budget.

Donald Tusk blames British voters for expats' EU uncertainty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/donald-tusk-turns-on-tories-in-row-over-rights-of-eu-citizens-in-uk>
The British government is seeking a transitional deal with the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/21/pm-warned-transition-brexit-deal-fiendishly-difficult-to-achieve-theresa-may-eu>
, to prevent a “cliff edge” for companies when Britain’s two-year negotiating 
period for leaving the bloc comes to an end.


The issue is likely to be a flashpoint in Brexit talks, with Luxembourg’s 
prime minister, Xavier Bettel,warning he would oppose an interim deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/luxembourg-pm-tells-britain-either-in-the-eu-or-not-xavier-bettel>
. “Either you’re a member or you’re not a member of the European Union,” he 
told Agence France-Presse. “There is no in-between status, there is no hybrid 
status between the two.”

But the discussion in Brussels shows the EU has not ruled out a transition 
deal. Insiders stress the outcome of Brexit negotiations depends on what the UK 
pitches for, while stressing access to the single market comes with strings 
attached: accepting EU rules and the authority of the European court of 
justice, as well as making payments to the EU budget.


Barnier listed the areas Britain’s exit talks would cover, under article 50. 
Those talks will include dates and timing of Brexit, the rights of EU citizens 
living in another member state, the Brexit bill and EU officials’ pensions, 
borders and what the UK leaving the bloc means for international treaties, such 
as environmental agreements.

He has not reached conclusions on the EU stance on any of these points. His 
officials are mapping scenarios to look at the cost of different Brexit options 
for the UK and the EU.


As expected, Barnier and his team are treating negotiations on a trade deal as 
separate from the EU exit talks.


Sources informed about the meeting described it as a technical exercise, where 
no decisions on negotiating postures were taken.


EU leaders are sticking firmly to the mantra of “no negotiations without 
notification”, insisting talks cannot begin until article 50 is triggered.
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has promised to 
launch article 50 by the end of next March, but some EU leaders are sceptical 
about whether the prime minister can stick to this timetable.


The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
 declined to comment after the meeting. One informed source said participants 
had been sworn to secrecy.
 