
“General and indiscriminate retention” of emails and electronic communications 
by governments is illegal, the EU’s highest court has ruled, in a judgment that 
could trigger challenges against the UK’s new Investigatory Powers Act – the 
so-called snooper’s charter.

Only targeted interception of traffic and location data in order to combat 
serious crime – including terrorism – is justified, according to a long-awaited 
decision by the European court of justice (ECJ) in Luxembourg.

The finding came in response to a legal challenge initially brought by the 
Brexit secretary,David Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/daviddavis>, 
when he was a backbench MP, and Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, over the 
legality of GCHQ’s bulk interception of call records and online messages.

EU ruling means UK snooper's charter may be open to challenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/eu-ruling-means-uk-snoopers-charter-may-be-open-to-challenge>
Davis and Watson, who were supported by Liberty, the Law Society, the Open 
Rights Group and Privacy International, had already wona high court victory on 
the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/17/data-retention-and-surveillance-legislation-ruled-unlawful>
, but the government appealed andthe case was referred  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/european-court-to-consider-legality-of-uk-surveillance-laws>
by appeal judges to the ECJ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/european-court-to-consider-legality-of-uk-surveillance-laws>
. The case will now return to the court of appeal to be resolved in terms of UK 
legislation.


The aim of going to Luxembourg was to clarify EU law on surveillance. The two 
MPs had argued successfully in the domestic courts that the Data Retention and 
Investigatory Powers Act (Dripa) 2014 was illegal. Dripa has since been 
replaced by the Investigatory Powers Act, whichcomes into force at the end of 
this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/snoopers-charter-bill-becomes-law-extending-uk-state-surveillance>
.

At issue was whether there are EU standards on data retention that need to be 
respected by member states in domestic legislation. The result, though 
immediately significant, could prove academic once the UK has withdrawn from 
the EU and the ECJ no longer has jurisdiction over the UK.

In a summary of the ruling, the court said electronic communications allow 
“very precise conclusions to be drawn concerning the private lives of persons 
whose data has been retained”.

It added: “The interference by national legislation that provides for the 
retention of traffic data and location data with that right must therefore be 
considered to be particularly serious.


“The fact that the data is retained without the users of electronic 
communications services being informed of the fact is likely to cause the 
persons concerned to feel that their private lives are the subject of constant 
surveillance. Consequently, only the objective of fighting serious crime is 
capable of justifying such interference.

“Legislation prescribing a general and indiscriminate retention of data … 
exceeds the limits of what is strictly necessary and cannot be considered to be 
justified within a democratic society.” Prior authorisation by a court or 
independent body to access retained data is required for each official request, 
the ECJ said.


Before becoming Brexit minister, Davis travelled to Luxembourg to hear the 
case. He argued that the British government was“treating the entire nation as 
suspects” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/12/mp-david-davis-calls-limit-uk-surveillance-powers-european-court-justice>
 by ignoring safeguards on retaining and accessing personal communications data.

Davis, one of the most vociferous critics of the state’s powers to collect 
data on its citizens, withdrew from the case following his ministerial 
appointment.

The Dripa case was heard by 15 ECJ judges. It coincided with successive 
atrocities inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/paris-attacks-salah-abdeslams-lawyers-give-up-his-defence>
,Brussels <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brussels-attacks> and Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bastille-day-truck-attack> that reinforced 
political demands for expansion of powers to intercept emails and phone calls 
to help catch Islamic State militants operating on the continent.

Lawyers for the UK government maintained that intercepted communications have 
been at the heart of every terrorist case investigated by police and the 
security services in recent years.

 Responding to the ruling, Watson said: “At a time when we face a real and 
ever-present terrorist threat, the security forces may require access to 
personal information none of us would normally hand over. That’s why it’s 
absolutely vital that proper safeguards are put in place to ensure this power 
is not abused, as it has been in the recent past.

“Most of us can accept that our privacy may occasionally be compromised in the 
interests of keeping us safe, but no one would consent to giving the police or 
the government the power to arbitrarily seize our phone records or emails to 
use as they see fit. It’s for judges, not ministers, to oversee these powers.”

 Martha Spurrier, director of the human rights group Liberty, said: “Today’s 
judgment upholds the rights of ordinary British people not to have their 
personal lives spied on without good reason or an independent warrant. The 
government must now make urgent changes to the Investigatory Powers Act [IPA] 
to comply with this.

“This is the first serious post-referendum test for our government’s 
commitment to protecting human rights and the rule of law. The UK may have 
voted to leave the EU – but we didn’t vote to abandon our rights and freedoms.” 
Liberty is preparing to challenge the IPA in court.


Jim Killock, executive director of the Open Rights Group, said: “Blanket 
surveillance of our communications is intrusive and unacceptable in a democracy.


“The government must act quickly to rewrite the IPA or be prepared to go to 
court again.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fthe-snoopers-charter-is-back-video-explainer&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F1%2F1456845044864%2FKP_1817518_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20snooper's%20charter%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fthe-snoopers-charter-is-back-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20snooper%27s%20charter%20is%20back%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fthe-snoopers-charter-is-back-video-explainer&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F1%2F1456845044864%2FKP_1817518_crop_640x360.jpg>
The snooper’s charter is back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/mar/01/the-snoopers-charter-is-back-video-explainer>
A Home Office spokesperson said: “We are disappointed with the judgment from 
the European court of justice and will be considering its potential 
implications.

 “The government will be putting forward robust arguments to the court of 
appeal about the strength of our existing regime for communications data 
retention and access.”

 The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, said: “Many of us warned that these 
powers were far too widely drawn. Effectively, they allow for fishing 
expeditions where data is collected on a vast number of individuals. They also 
allow for data gathering against anyone suspected of the most minor crimes, not 
just terrorism and organised crime, and there is insufficient judicial 
oversight. Targets were not informed.”

The Liberal Democrat home affairs spokesman Brian Paddick said: “Collecting 
and storing everyone’s internet web browsing histories and phone records so 
government agencies can look at them is an Orwellian nightmare that intrudes 
into our privacy and erodes our civil liberties.”

Daniel Carey, the solicitor from Deighton Pierce Glynn who represented the 
Open Rights Group andPrivacy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> 
International, said: “The court is very clear that indiscriminately retaining 
everyone’s metadata is unlawful, which is a point my clients placed particular 
emphasis on. This prohibition arises out of longstanding EU legislation, which 
the UK played an important role in creating.”

Camilla Graham Wood, of Privacy International, said: “Today’s judgment is a 
major blow against mass surveillance and an important day for privacy. It makes 
clear that blanket and indiscriminate retention of our digital histories can be 
a very intrusive form of surveillance that needs strict safeguards against 
abuse and mission creep.”

The National Police Chiefs’ Council lead for communications data, assistant 
chief constable Richard Berry said: “We will work within any authorisation and 
oversight regime deemed appropriate by parliament and courts of law. But it is 
important for us to have a regime that is practical and dynamic enough to be 
able to respond to the volume and urgency of our cases. Any changes that impede 
our ability to access data quickly with appropriate safeguards will undermine 
our ability to keep people safe.”
 