
1) Wasps’ fluency can make fans flock to Coventry

Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> will be saying their 
hellos to Coventry this week before their relocation from High Wycombe to the 
Ricoh Arena. Almost 23,000 tickets have already been shifted for Sunday’s 
Premiership game against London Irish and, even if several thousand seats will 
be filled by non-paying guests, it will be a marked contrast to the six and a 
half thousand attendance for their final game at Adams Park.

What Wasps will want to stay unchanged is their attacking fluency which has 
propelled them back into contention for a place in Europe’s last eight this 
season. Beat Quins away andLeinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster>
 in Coventry next month and they will be into the quarter-finals having lost 
their opening two games, no mean feat. It looks increasingly unlikely, however, 
that their England forward Joe Launchbury – due to see a specialist this week 
about his ongoing neck problem – will be available for their remaining pool 
games.Robert Kitson
• Wasps 44-17 Castres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/14/wasps-castres-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
2) Decisions by committee can leave a sour taste

Those in the world of football who resist the introduction of video technology 
will point to the endgame in the Aviva Stadium for support. In what was a 
white-hot finish to a sometimes lukewarm game the referee Romain Poite went 
upstairs after a dust-up left Leinster’s Dominic Ryan on the ground holding his 
face. “Much ado about nothing,” said Conor O’Shea. His opposite number Matt 
O’Connor made even less of an incident that saw Quins’ Charlie Matthews receive 
a yellow card. The citing commissioner Stefano Marrama of Italy has until 
Monday evening to decide if there is a further case to answer. The problem was 
it felt as if Poite would take as long to reach a decision on the field. Fans 
were losing the will to live it went on so long. Does technology give us a 
better game? Certainly. But it is turning into decision by committee. Get on 
with it.Brendan Fanning
• Leinster 14-13 Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/13/leinster-harlequins-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
3) The Mayol remains among Toulon’s most prized assets
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F14%2F1418592820280%2F18779b60-c2c9-4b9c-a8c6-ce5ec13d06f1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20%7C%20Guardian%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20%7C%20Guardian%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F14%2F1418592820280%2F18779b60-c2c9-4b9c-a8c6-ce5ec13d06f1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Toulon supporters get ready to watch their side’s clash with Leicester at the 
Stade Félix Mayol. Photograph: Bertrand Langlois/AFP/Getty Images 
The Stade Félix Mayol is not a perfect model of what a modern sports stadium 
should be. It’s a little faded, a little tight in its space just behind the 
Toulon waterfront, a little open to the elements. It holds only just over 
15,000. But it has a role to play in the development of Rugby Club Toulonnais 
into one of the major dynasties of the European game – the generation of sound 
and fury. The Mayol bounces on match day. Of course, the project is helped no 
end by the club’s spending power and the superstars in every position give the 
crowd plenty of reasons to roar. Money is obviously important and Leicester 
looked fearfully undernourished trying to stop Mathieu Bastareaud and Chris 
Masoe. To think of Leicester as outgunned poor relations seems ludicrous but 
the truth seems to be that Toulon are putting distance between themselves and 
just about everybody, bar the top French clubs. Anyone that wants to knock them 
out of the Champions Cup may have to wait until they are well away from their 
beloved Mayol to have a chance. And even then, play out of their skin, something
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> failed to do. 
Eddie Butler
• Toulon 23-8 Leicester  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/13/toulon-leicester-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
4) Saracens may come to rue missing bonus point

“In some kind of control going into rounds five and six” is how Mark McCall, 
Saracens’ director of rugby, described the situation at the end of round four. 
He is satisfied, if not elated, that is where Saracens are. He would have been 
notably more enthusiastic had his team registered the bonus point but the good 
news is that Clermont failed to register one in their victory over Munster. The 
concerning news is that Munster, somehow, did nick one in defeat. They must be 
the only team in Europe who can do that kind of thing, despite being as 
comprehensively outplayed in every department as they were in Clermont. And/or 
Clermont are the only team who can dominate like that and not extract full 
value. If Clermont are as negligent when Saracens visit in round six they may 
yet get mugged. Munster, though, are capable of winning in Barnet. It is tight 
but at leastSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> remain in 
control of their destiny – kind of.Michael Aylwin
• Saracens 28-15 Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/13/saracens-sale-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
5) Saints boast strength but No10 is fly in the ointment

Northampton are virtually back to full strength before two key Premiership 
matches, Leicester at home and Harlequins at Twickenham two days after 
Christmas. George Pisi is back in the centre after a hamstring strain and, 
while George North’s return from concussion lasted 43 minutes, the dead leg he 
suffered is not expected to sideline him this weekend. The prop Alex 
Corbisiero, who has not played since suffering a shoulder injury at the end of 
September, is expected back in a couple of weeks and, despite not signing many 
players in the season, the Saints have an enviable strength in depth. The 
fly-half is an exception: James Wilson moved to 10 from full-back via the wing 
when Stephen Myler was taken off early but, should anything happen to Myler, 
who has started every Premiership and Champions Cup match,Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> would not be able to 
cover his absence as seamlessly as they do with others.Paul Rees
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F14%2F1418592891981%2F9525352b-6c8f-4038-aac6-83c776efaffb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20%7C%20Guardian%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20%7C%20Guardian%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F15%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F14%2F1418592891981%2F9525352b-6c8f-4038-aac6-83c776efaffb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Northampton fly-half Stephen Myler lines up a conversion during Saints’ 
thumping win over Treviso. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA • Northampton 67-0 Treviso
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/13/northampton-treviso-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
6) Toulouse showing British rivals how it is done

What was billed as the biggest game Glasgow have ever staged ended in 
disappointment at what might have been if they had played slightly better.
Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse>, in contrast, have won 
all four of their matches to date despite not resembling the all-conquering 
aristocrats of a few years ago. Glasgow and Bath now need to win both their 
remaining fixtures but only one of them can progress. The two sides are due to 
meet at the Recreation Ground on the final pool weekend next month.Robert Kitson
• Glasgow 9-12 Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/13/glasgow-toulouse-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report> 