



1) Wasps settling in nicely at the Ricoh

There was a lot of chat around the ground before the game about how long the 
journey took up the Ms – the 1, 6 or 40 – to reach the Ricoh. Enough to suggest 
that Londoners formed a large part of the crowd of 23,493. These travellers 
were from far enough away to dismiss the cheeky Leicester poster – “On your 
doorstep since 1880” – with a smile. Whose doorstep? A few drivers looked a bit 
confused working out the ABCD of the car parks but in general everyone seemed 
to know where they were going, what they were watching and when they would be 
back next. What is called the match-day experience seemed already familiar. And 
the rugby was excellent. From being a homeless spent force on the brink of 
financial ruin,Wasps <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> seem 
reborn. Moving house does not seem to have been stressful at all.Eddie Butler

 * Wasps 20-20 Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/24/wasps-leinster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

 * Dai Young: I pinched myself seeing 28,000 at the Ricoh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/23/wasps-dai-young-european-rugby-champions-cup-leinster>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fwasps-draw-with-leinster-20-20-video-highlights&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F25%2F1422186904584%2Fcrop_KP_77982_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wasps%20draw%2020-20%20with%20Leinster%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fwasps-draw-with-leinster-20-20-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wasps%20draw%2020-20%20with%20Leinster%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F25%2Fwasps-draw-with-leinster-20-20-video-highlights&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F25%2F1422186904584%2Fcrop_KP_77982_640x360.jpeg>
 Wasps draw 20-20 with Leinster – video highlights 



2) Racing resolve can be hard to stop
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F26%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points-from-the-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F25%2F1422205433713%2Fe4b93b12-d33a-4dbb-94eb-ee42479ad275-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20%7C%20Guardian%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F26%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points-from-the-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20%7C%20Guardian%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F26%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points-from-the-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F25%2F1422205433713%2Fe4b93b12-d33a-4dbb-94eb-ee42479ad275-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Benjamin Lapeyre of Racing Métro celebrates his try during the match 
againstNorthampton Saints Photograph: Clive Mason/Getty Images 
There may be no French clubs left in the European Challenge Cup, a tournament 
that does not carry the carrot of a place in the Champions Cup for the winners, 
something that will surely be rectified in the coming years, but they have made 
far more of an impact in the main event. Racing Métro, who before this season 
had won only seven out of 24 matches in the European Cup, doubled the 
Premiership champions and leaders to finish at the top of the pool. French 
clubs have a reputation for being poor travellers, coming from a league where 
away victories are rare, but the resolveClermont Auvergne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/clermontauvergne> showed in Munster and 
Toulouse’s victory in Bath suggested a sea-change. Racing reinforced that: 
Northampton like playing down the slight slope at Franklin’s Gardens in the 
second half but found themselves going uphill when they conceded two tries in 
three minutes as Racing never released the early grip they had taken on the 
game. Their Wales centre Jamie Roberts had said after the opening-round victory 
over the Saints in Paris last October that the club was targeting the European 
Cup. When resources and resolve combine, they are difficult to stop.Paul Rees

 * Match report: Northampton 8-32 Racing Métro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/24/northampton-racing-metro-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

 * Read Donald McRae’s interview with Jamie Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/11/jamie-roberts-top-14-wales-paris-racing-metro-rugby-union>
3) The Stade Marcel Michelin atmosphere is intoxicating

There is a lot still wrong with Europe’s leading club tournament – see 
Castres’ talking point below – but there is so much right too, and none more so 
than the colour and verve that Clermont Auvergne bring to the party. They 
inspire fondness on the field because they are brilliant but far from 
infallible. Off it, though, the vibrancy of the club, set among its volcanoes, 
is a joy to experience. Forgive the excitement of this virgin to the Massif 
Central but the atmosphere at the Stade Marcel Michelin is intoxicating. Is it 
the most feral bear-pit in Europe? Their fans may not travel in the numbers 
that Munster’s do but at their place they put on a show of noise and colour 
that is at least the equal of the Thomond Park experience. Ravenhill and Stade 
Mayol are two stadiums still unvisited, so definitive pronouncements would be 
inappropriate. Suffice it to say, if you get the chance to go to 
Clermont-Ferrand to watch rugby, take it (and it was not even a very good game).
Michael Aylwin

 * Match report: Clermont Auvergne 18-6 Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/25/clermont-auvergne-saracens-european-champions-cup-match-report>

4) Ulster continue to thwart Leicester 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F26%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points-from-the-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422233843044%2F4c8d73e4-fabf-4bc5-8bf5-375f85bc32dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20%7C%20Guardian%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F26%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points-from-the-weekend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%20%7C%20Guardian%20writers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F26%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-talking-points-from-the-weekend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422233843044%2F4c8d73e4-fabf-4bc5-8bf5-375f85bc32dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ulster’s Darren Cave is cheered off by fans after his three tries during their 
Pool 3 match against the Leicester Tigers. Photograph: Charles McQuillan/Getty 
Images 
Ravenhill is fast becoming Leicester’s least loved European venue. They have 
visited Belfast four times, only once coming within a sniff of troubling 
Ulster. Martin Johnson’s side started the trend in 2003, two season’s after 
Leicester’s back-to-back Heineken titles. He went down 33-0 and two days later 
announced the end of his Test career but the worst walloping came in 2012 when 
Tigers lost 41-7. On Saturday night they needed a bonus-point victory to keep 
hopes alive of going through to the quarter-finals but instead conceded four 
tries in under 50 minutes to a side which was already out of the competition.
Mike Averis


 * Match report: Ulster 26-7 Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/24/ulster-leicester-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

 * Dean Ryan: Champions Cup refreshes parts Heineken could not reach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jan/22/european-champions-cup-heineken-cup>
5) Castres have put up the white flag

We were supposed to have moved on from the bad old days when the natural 
course of the pool stages in Europe was skewed by the predictable capitulation 
of French teams with nothing to play for, but the tradition remains alive and 
kicking in Castres. Vaguely competitive they may have been in their first two 
games – and for about 60 minutes of their third – but since then they have 
waved their competitors through. Wasps, Leinster and Harlequins have put 44, 50 
and 47 points past them respectively. The implications for teams in other 
groups are significant. Wasps’ points difference on the back of their two big 
wins over Castres, for example, might have knocked Saracens out of the 
competition, had Montpellier not proved more serious about the competition by 
beating Toulouse. Mark McCall, Saracens’ director of rugby was scathing after 
the game against Clermont. “It’s so disappointing to see a club like Castres 
put up the white flag,” he said “as they have now for four games in a row. This 
is meant to be an elite competition and that shouldn’t be tolerated.” It is 
true thatCastres <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/castres> have more pressing 
concerns, namely their survival in the league they were champions of only the 
season before last, but no matter the format of Europe’s premier competition, 
it seems some things are more resistant to change than others.Michael Aylwin

 * Match report: Castres 19-47 Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/24/castres-harlequins-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

 * European Rugby Champions Cup round-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/25/european-rugby-champions-cup-round-up>



6) Bath and Glasgow talents set to international impact
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F26%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-bath-beat-glasgow-20-15-video-highlights&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422273556371%2Fcrop_KP_78349_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20Bath%20beat%20Glasgow%2020-15%20-%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F26%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-bath-beat-glasgow-20-15-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20Bath%20beat%20Glasgow%2020-15%20-%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjan%2F26%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-bath-beat-glasgow-20-15-video-highlights&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422273556371%2Fcrop_KP_78349_640x360.jpeg>
Mike Ford, Bath’s director of rugby, spoke afterwards of the fine margins 
involved at the top level. He also rated Glasgow an extremely well-coached side 
who made life very awkward for his team at times. He was right on both counts, 
the Warriors coming within a few centimetres of ruining Bath’s quarter-final 
push. There was enough promise from Sean Maitland, Tommy Seymour, Alex Dunbar 
and Mark Bennett behind the scrum to suggest Scotland’s strike-rate will 
improve in this year’s Six Nations but perhaps the individual highlight of the 
game came from the Fijian Leone Nakarawa. His stunning one-handed line-out take 
in the second-half was the work of a gifted athlete whom Gregor Townsend, his 
coach, reckons has plenty more improvement in him. With Glasgow’s Bath-bound 
scrum-half Niko Matawalu also looking sharp, the pair could yet make Fiji 
dangerous opponents at this year’s World Cup.Robert Kitson

 * Match report: Bath 20-15 Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/25/bath-glasgow-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 