
1) Double jeopardy rule could prove crucial for Toulouse

Football changed its rules this season, so that any player who concedes a 
penalty through a foul that is not deemed deliberate, or cynical, is no longer 
automatically sent off. Rugby’s double jeopardy rule still applies, so when 
Danny Cipriani was deemed to have entered a driving maul from the side nine 
minutes from the end of Wasps’ match against Toulouse, he was sent to the 
sin-bin by the referee John Lacey, who also awarded a penalty try. Can entering 
a maul from the side be deemed accidental? Cipriani only did so fleetingly, and 
with no impact, before retreating and then preventing the replacement prop, 
Vasil Kakovin, from scoring a try in a seemingly onside position. He was not 
bound to the maul at the time, having made no effort to collapse it during his 
fleeting incursion, and the incident merited a review. The try gave Toulouse 
what turned out to be a bonus point, leaving them four points behind leaders 
Connacht ahead of Sunday’s home match with the Guinness Pro 12 champions. A 
victory by more than seven points should see them qualify for the 
quarter-finals as one of the three best runners-up, assuming Waspsdo not lose 
their stripes at Zebre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/wasps-toulouse-david-young-zebre-european-champions-cup>
. It may be that the two qualifiers from this group find themselves on the 
road, in a season when the leaders in the other four groups have lost one home 
match in all competitions between them.Paul Rees


 * Match report: Wasps 17-14 Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/wasps-toulouse-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 * The Breakdown: new tackling laws are a step forward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/tackling-laws-serious-injuries-inevitable-breakdown>
 Wasps’ Joe Simpson stands over the scrum. Photograph: Seconds 
Left/REX/Shutterstock 
2) Glasgow should fancy their chances against Leicester

Ah, that feels more familiar. Not so much Leicester and Racing 92 bringing up 
the rear, but Munster sitting pretty at the top of a pool, qualifying for the 
quarter-finals with a round to spare. Shall we start calling it the Heineken 
Cup again? Less familiar is the sight of Glasgow tucked in behind them in 
second, despite their agonising defeat to the Irish side at Scotstoun. Had 
Munster been in their position, with five minutes to overturn a two-point 
deficit and cradling precious ball in opposition territory, you know they would 
have found a way to win. But, for all their improvement, for all that they were 
fielding a full XV of Scotland internationals, they’re not Munster yet. Still, 
qualification as a best runner-up remains in their grasp – to make sure, they 
just have to beat Leicester next weekend. Never has that seemed a less daunting 
task. Their main problem, perversely, will be the utter humiliation the Tigers 
suffered in Paris, against a Racing side on nul points whose interest in this 
year’s competition has long since evaporated. The pattern is fairly well set 
for Leicester in Europe this season: abject capitulation away, followed by 
doughty victory at home. It’s the sign of a great team in decline. They can 
still summon enough of the old fury to defend their honour in extremis, but the 
humiliations have become the more accurate gauge of where they are. If the 
theory was that Leicesterwould respond better to Aaron Mauger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/leicester-trouble-aaron-mauger-richard-cockerill>
 than to Richard Cockerill over the medium term, it is looking shaky.Michael 
Aylwin


 * Match report: Glasgow 12-14 Munster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/glasgow-munster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 * The Agenda: England to announce Six Nations squad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/agenda-tour-down-under-six-nations-squads-masters-snooker-nfl-playoffs>
 Glasgow players react after the agonising defeat to Munster at Scotstoun. 
Photograph: Fotosport/REX/Shutterstock 
3) Northampton could solve England’s issues up front

Bottom of their pool and, despite four wins on the trot now, playing some of 
the Premiership’s least inspiring rugby, Northampton’s 2016-17 model could 
still be the unlikeliest of saviours for England. In Pool 4’s only competitive 
game of the round (Leinster, who have clicked into gear perfectly, effectively 
had another training run in walloping Montpellier), the Saints’ 28-21 win over 
Castres was built upon the back of three magnificent performances from England 
forwards. Teimana Harrison switched seamlessly from the flank to No8 and, as 
well as contributing at the breakdown, came away with two tries. The man of the 
match though was Tom Wood, who has shone in a dismal season; thoughNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> were underpowered at the 
scrum he was a demon in the tackle and a devil at the breakdown, his body 
position earning turnover after penalty after turnover after penalty. Courtney 
Lawes too was outstanding in defence and his upturn in form has coincided with 
Northampton’s resurgence. It is worth considering that should Dylan Hartley 
retain his England place then all three have worked with the suspended captain 
for years in the lineout. Alex Waller is also an option at loosehead prop, 
albeit a big outside bet. Lawes, Wood and Harrison though are giving Eddie 
Jones a surprising headache amid a pre-Six Nations injury crisis.Dan Lucas

 * Roundup: Northampton upturn continues against Castres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/european-rugby-champions-cup-roundup-northampton-castres-connacht-zebre>
 * Clark set to leave Northampton at end of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/northampton-saints-calum-clark-saracens-premiership>
 Christian Day takes a breather during Northampton’s hard-fought victory over 
Castres. Photograph: Clive Mason/Getty Images 
4) Saracens’ Lozowski finds new level in Llanelli

Whatever unfolds on the final weekend, defending champions Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens> are guaranteed to feature in the 
last eight. As all top teams do, they have mastered the art of avoiding defeat, 
even when they are slightly below par, and also continue to unearth quality 
replacements. Alex Lozowski is already an England squad member and first made 
his name at Wasps but he stepped up to a new level in Llanelli, helping Sarries 
secure a 22-22 draw with an outstanding display in the unfamiliar role of 
full-back. Even a quality No15 like the Scarlets’ Liam Williams, who is set to 
move to north London next season, found himself playing second fiddle. It was 
also a notable afternoon for the exiled England wing Chris Ashton, whose two 
tries once again underlined his virtues as a quality support runner. Toulon’s 
bonus point victory over Sale, meanwhile, has scuppered Scarlets’ chance of 
finishing second in the pool, but the Welsh region’s head coach Wayne Pivac has 
been encouraged by the improved overall showing of the Pro12 sides, compared 
with their Premiership and Top 14 counterparts. “It’s good to see that gap 
appears to be closing,” said Pivac.Robert Kitson

 * Match report: Scarlets 22-22 Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/scarlets-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 * Saracens juggernaut led by miserly defence says Bosch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/marcelo-bosch-defence-saracens-scarlets-european-champions-cup>
 Jack Nowell was in excellent form for Exeter in the win over Ulster. 
Photograph: Paul Harding/PA 
5) Chiefs have plenty of reasons to be cheerful

Exeter <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> remain up against it in 
their bid to reach the Champions Cup quarter-finals, but some of their 
attacking play in the 31-19 victory over Ulster showed Rob Baxter’s men are 
beginning to click. The Chiefs are third in the Aviva Premiership, but must 
beat Clermont with a bonus point next weekend to have any hope of qualifying 
for Europe’s last eight. The way they shredded the Ulster defence at Sandy Park 
will have given them hope, and in Jack Nowell they have one the game’s very 
best players on current form. Baxter was purring in his praise of Nowell 
afterwards, and with the Chiefs finding form at the right time you wouldn’t bet 
against them reaching the Aviva Premiership final for the second successive 
year, whatever happens in Europe.Alex Bywater


 * Match report: Exeter Chiefs 31-19 Ulster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/exeter-ulster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report> 