
The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
 has paid tribute to Sir Ivan Rogers after he resigned as Britain’s top 
diplomat to the European Union, praising him as a “very professional [and] very 
knowledgeable” figure in a rare public comment on national politics.

In qualified praise a day after Rogers’ resignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
, the EU’s executive made clear its respect for the diplomat, as Brussels 
observers predicted his departure would be a loss for the UK in the upcoming 
Brexit negotiations.

“We regret the loss of a very professional, very knowledgeable, while not 
always easy interlocutor and diplomat,” a commission spokeswoman said on 
Wednesday.


Rogers’ decision came as a shock to many in Britain, but did not surprise some 
seasoned observers, even if many staff at the UK permanent representation to 
the EU had no inkling of their boss’s decision until his resignation memo 
landed in their inbox on the first day of the new term in Brussels.

Rogers kept out of the loop on Brexit because he wasn't trusted, Duncan Smith 
claims - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/04/ivan-rogers-brexit-eu-ambassador-ids-couldnt-be-trusted-by-ministers-claims-duncan-smith-politics-live>
One senior EU source said Rogers had found himself in an impossible situation: 
“[He] was deeply worried about the lack of preparation by the Brits and the 
constant underestimation in London of the difficulties and the problems [of 
Brexit] ... and the persistent incapacity of the May cabinet in taking a 
credible line.”

Worrying implications of EU ambassador exit | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/worrying-implications-of-eu-ambassador-exit>
His departure is seen in Brussels as likely to rebound to the UK’s 
disadvantage. “I don’t think this is something that will strengthen the British 
position in these negotiations,” another diplomat said.

Tensions had risen between No 10 and the UK’s man in Brussels after the leak 
of a Brexit memo, where Rogers warned that finalising a trade deal could take 
up to a decade. He had also not held back in giving his unvarnished advice to 
ministers about the pitfalls awaiting the British government as it embarks on 
the most complex diplomatic task since the second world war.


“Contrary to the beliefs of some, free trade does not just happen when it is 
not thwarted by authorities,” he wrote inhis resignation email to staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/quote-sir-ivan-rogers-resignation-eu-brexit-email-in-full>
, where he praised speaking truth to power. “Increasing market access to other 
markets and consumer choice in our own, depends on the deals, multilateral, 
plurilateral and bilateral that we strike.”


Regarded as heresy by some Brexiteers, this is seen in Brussels as stating the 
obvious. “We knew the concerns he had, which are obvious,” said one EU 
diplomat. “Everyone knows what he put in his note. He was doing his job in 
warning about those hazards.”

Ministers 'failing to defend independence of senior mandarins'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/ministers-failing-to-defend-independence-of-senior-mandarins-dave-penman>
This diplomat was unconvinced by the Foreign Office’s hasty justification of 
Rogers’ resignation as a routine personnel change, to clear the decks before 
the prime minister, Theresa May, launches formal EU exit talks under article 
50. “[The resignation] is probably the result of his own warnings not being 
welcomed,” the EU diplomat said.

Donald Tusk, the European council president, warned in June that the UK faced 
seven years of uncertainty over Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/12/britain-faces-seven-years-of-limbo-after-brexit-says-donald-tusk>
. Rogers was picking up on this and similar warnings when he warned ministers 
about the potential timeframe of a free trade deal.

EU leaders, including Angela Merkel, François Hollande and the chief Brexit 
negotiator, Michel Barnier, have repeatedly stressed there can be no 
negotiations ahead of notification of article 50.


Rogers was among the first to realise the full force of this message: his 
attempts to start preparatory talks were consistently rebuffed by his 
counterparts.

But the man himself was highly regarded, seen as sceptical and a tough 
defender of Britain’s interests. “His ability, his seriousness, his knowledge 
of the EU was unanimously recognised by his counterparts,” said the EU 
diplomat. “His objective was clearly the UK’s interests.”
 