
European human rights judges have upheld the right of British courts to impose 
“whole life” prison sentences in the most heinous cases of murder.

The case was brought by a triple murderer, Arthur Hutchinson, now aged 73, who 
was sentenced to spend the rest of his natural life behind bars for the murder 
in 1983 of three members of a Sheffield family and the rape of a young woman 
staying at the house at the time.

Hutchinson claimed his whole-life sentence amounted to inhuman and degrading 
treatment as he had no hope of release. But the ruling at theEuropean court of 
human rights <https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> 
confirmed that a power clearly exists in British law that provides those 
spending the rest of their lives in prison with the possibility of release in 
highly exceptional circumstances.

Whole life terms are currently being served by more than 50 of Britain’s most 
notorious criminals, including the Moors murderer, Ian Brady, the Yorkshire 
Ripper, Peter Sutcliffe, and serial killer Rosemary West.

The justice secretary, Chris Grayling may order their release but only in the 
most exceptional circumstances such as only having weeks left to live.

The issue of the legality of whole-life sentences under European human rights 
law has been a key question in the debate over the future of Britain’s 
relationship withEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

The ruling, which effectively ratifies an agreement brokered by the former 
attorney general, Dominic Grieve, will help to take some of the sting out of 
the highly charged political debate in Britain over human rights law. The 
Hutchinson ruling also overturns a 2013 judgment by the European human rights 
court involving three killers, Jeremy Bamber, Douglas Vintner and Peter Moore.

The six-to-one ruling in the Hutchinson case says the justice secretary does 
clearly have a power to release whole-life prisoners in exceptional 
circumstances making the law sufficient to comply with article three, which 
bans inhuman or degrading treatment.

The original confusion about the law stems from the 2003 Criminal Justice Act, 
which scrapped the need for a minister to automatically review a whole-life 
sentence after a prisoner had served 25 years.

No alternative review mechanism was put in its place, but the justice 
secretary retained a discretionary power to release a prisoner in exceptional 
circumstances. This power is also subject to judicial review.

This provision was tested and found to be legal by the court of appeal in 
London in February 2014 in a case involving two killers, Ian McLoughlin and Lee 
Newell.

In its latest ruling that there had been no human rights violation, the 
Strasbourg human rights court said: “Domestic law thus provided a whole-life 
prisoner hope and the possibility of release in the event of circumstances in 
which the punishment was no longer justified.”

The political significance of the ruling, however, is probably greater than 
its legal implications. The 2013 European court of human rights ruling that 
British law was unclear on whether there was a legal right of review for a 
prisoner serving a “life must mean life” sentence triggered a political storm 
in Britain.

That ruling was cited by Grayling, as one of the key reasons why he was 
proposing the Conservative party promise to introduce a new British bill of 
rights that would give UK courts and parliament the “final say” over such 
matters.

But legal commentators said Tuesday’s ruling from Strasbourg accepting the UK 
court of appeal ruling was actually a victory for the strategy of encouraging 
sensible dialogue between Britain and Strasbourg.

The approach was pioneered by Ken Clarke while he was justice secretary and 
detailed talks took place between the European judges and Grieve before he was 
sacked last year as attorney general.

The resolution of the issue surrounding whole-life sentences and the final 
deportation of the Islamist radical preacher, Abu Qatada, last year means that 
the vexed question of prisoners’ right to vote remains the last outstanding 
issue souring relations between Strasbourg and London.

Notorious killer whose series of appeals have failed
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Feuropean-human-rights-whole-life-tariff-hutchinson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422959348573%2Ff685d4a9-2aca-40e6-acff-7edf5ee3ba3e-1459x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20judges%20uphold%20British%20courts%E2%80%99%20right%20to%20impose%20%E2%80%98whole%20life%E2%80%99%20tariffs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Feuropean-human-rights-whole-life-tariff-hutchinson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20judges%20uphold%20British%20courts%E2%80%99%20right%20to%20impose%20%E2%80%98whole%20life%E2%80%99%20tariffs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Feuropean-human-rights-whole-life-tariff-hutchinson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422959348573%2Ff685d4a9-2aca-40e6-acff-7edf5ee3ba3e-1459x2040.jpeg>
 Arthur Hutchinson at the time of his conviction in 1984. Photograph: PA 
The challenge to the whole-life sentence was brought by one of Britain’s most 
notorious killers, Arthur Hutchinson, who has no hope of release from his cell 
in Frankland prison, County Durham.

Hutchinson was in 1984 sentenced to spend the rest of his life in prison after 
being convicted of triple murder, rape and aggravated burglary.

Sir Leon Brittan, the then home secretary, imposed a whole-life tariff on 
Hutchinson for the murder and rape of the Laitner family in Sheffield in 
September 1983.

He stabbed to death Basil Laitner, his wife, Avri, and their son, Richard, on 
the wedding day of one of their daughters. He repeatedly raped a young woman 
after dragging her into the wedding marquee and handcuffing her. He later broke 
into the family home and stole a watch and money.

The trial judge in the case sentenced him to life imprisonment with a 
recommendation he serve at least 18 years. The lord chief justice, however, 
recommended that he serve a whole-life sentence and not be released. This 
recommendation was confirmed by the home secretary on 16 December 1994.

Hutchinson appealed against his whole-life sentence in 2008 but the high court 
and the court of appeal both found that, given the seriousness of his crimes, 
there was no reason to deviate from the whole-life term.
 