
1) Bath’s midfield trio on song to alert Lancaster

Bath’s players will reflect on their stunning four-try victory at the Stade 
Ernest-Wallon with massive satisfaction. England supporters, for their part, 
will look at the midfield chemistry between George Ford, Kyle Eastmond and 
Jonathan Joseph and ponder again why the national team have not yet opted to 
field the dazzling trio en bloc. Test and club rugby are different environments 
but Joseph, in particular, is playing the rugby of his life. Stuart Lancaster 
now has to decide whether to plump for the more solid virtues of Brad Barritt 
and Luther Burrell against Wales in the opening game of the Six Nations, with 
every indication Barritt’s defensive prowess will count in his favour. And what 
price will Eastmond and Joseph miss out on the 2015 World Cup squad while 
anotherBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> centre, a certain Sam 
Burgess, makes the cut? If that happens it will tell us everything about 
English rugby’s modern mindset.Robert Kitson

• Match report: Toulouse 18-35 Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/bath-toulouse-european-rugby-champions-cup>

2) Money talks, so Munster will probably walk

Munster will not qualify from Pool 1 in the Champions’ Cup. Above them sit 
Clermont – part of France’s elite with funds and player salaries that make the 
eyes of the rest of Europe water – and Saracens,leading the campaign to do away 
with the salary cap in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/19/saracens-salary-cap-abolished>. 
To vie for honours in domestic and cross-border competitions you need a vast 
squad of seriously good talent. Munster have Thomond Park, still a home to 
match the best rugby fortresses of France, but they cannot afford a squad that 
can win the Guinness Pro12 and the Champions Cup. Perhaps it is simply their 
turn to watch others – Leinster – lead the Irish charge, but the gap between 
the haves of France and the have-nots of the Celtic fringe seems more stark 
than ever. For the first time since the early days of the professional age, 
Munster were brushed aside in Europe. Not so long ago, the clubs of England and 
France were cursing Ireland’s rugby dominance in Europe. How clinically the 
wheel has been turned the way of the financially dominant.Eddie Butler

• Vunipola ‘a force of nature’ in European Champions Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/17/saracens-billy-vunipola-european-champions-cup>
• Match report: Saracens 33-10 Munster  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/17/saracens-munster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
• Saracens’ protective patches are a game-changer not a gimmick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jan/11/saracens-x-patches-sean-ingle>
• Alphonsi ends glittering career in style as Saracens seal title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/maggie-alphonsi-ends-career-saracens-premiership-title-wasps>

3) Simpson teaches England rival Care a lesson at No9

Just what should be England’s back row in Cardiff? Last week the headlines 
were calling for Nick Easter; this week they’re callingfor Billy Vunipola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/17/saracens-billy-vunipola-european-champions-cup>
and James Haskell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/james-haskell-looks-england-material-as-wasps-turn-tables-on-harlequins>
. Next week? If Harlequins should be criticised for failing to make more on the 
scoreboard of their dominance – and they should – it is their backs, and the 
half-backs in particular, who must take to the stand. On another day (the 
Saturday before, for example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/10/harlequins-leicester-premiership-match-report>
) Easter and Chris Robshaw would have been lauded again for their performances 
here. But they met their nemesis in Haskell, who made 25 tackles, and the rest 
of a furiously hard-working Wasps defence. Meanwhile, at half-back, Danny Care 
was shown up by Joe Simpson. Care has always played on the edge. When it works 
it is highly effective, intoxicating even. But sometimes he is the one 
intoxicated, and with intoxication comes the odd fall off that edge. He’s had a 
few this season. Simpson is another Wasp who must be playing himself into 
contention with England. The standard of England’s No9s might not be quite as 
high as that of the back-row forwards, but the competition is becoming as 
fierce.Michael Aylwin

• Match report: Harlequins 3-23 Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/17/harlequins-wasps-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

4) France should recreate Clermont’s half back partnership

Clermont Auvergne may not look like obvious winners in the winner-takes-all 
final pool game versus Saracens – they took 74 minutesto get over the Sale line 
on Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/sale-clermont-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 – but it’s hard to see why Philippe Saint-André, once of Sale but now bossing 
France, doesn’t select the Clermont half-back partnership of Morgan Parra and 
Camille Lopez. While Lopez seems certain to start against Scotland, Parra 
hasn’t made the Six Nations squad of 31, Saint-André going with yet another 
South African option.Mike Averis

• Match report: Sale 13-22 Clermont Auvergne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/17/sale-clermont-auvergne-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
• Hines urges Cipriani to stay at Sale for his England future 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/16/nathan-hines-danny-cipriani-sale-england>

5) Wood splinters Ospreys with ubiquitous performance

After England lost to South Africa in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/15/england-south-africa-international-match-report>
, the public inquest tried to answer a commonly asked question: what does Tom 
Wood do? He was regarde Wasd as the invisible man among the England forwards, 
someone who scattered defenders as he carried the ball or made eye-catching big 
hits and he was duly left out of the next game against Samoa. Stuart Lancaster 
has long held Wood in the highest regard: but for injury, the back-rower may 
have been England’s captain instead of Chris Robshaw and he was linked with the 
position as recently as 16 months ago. Wood was a central figure in
Northampton’s victory at Ospreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/northampton-saints-ospreys-dylan-hartley>
 that put them in course not just for a place in the quarter-finals but a home 
draw. He charged down Rhys Webb’s clearance which led to Calum Clark’s opening 
try of the game and from the start he haunted Ospreys in the tackle area, 
making it difficult for the home side to generate the quick ball they coveted. 
Wood played at No8the last time England were in Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/16/wales-england-six-nations> and 
he regularly wears No7 for Northampton, but he was on the blind-side on Sunday, 
his best position, out of plain sight, but far from invisible.Paul Rees

• Match report: Ospreys 9-20 Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/northampton-saints-ospreys-dylan-hartley>

6) Glasgow on the front foot as they head to Bath

Glasgow go to The Rec next Sunday looking to do the double over Bath and 
qualify for a quarter-final in Europe’s senior competition for the first time. 
However Jake White’sMontpellier <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/montpellier>
, a team with nothing to lose, did not lay down, leading at half-time before 
DTH van der Merwe, Glasgow’s Canadian wing, in for the injured Sean Lamont, 
completed a 68-minute hat-trick. The down side for Glasgow is they could be 
without their captain, Josh Strauss, who ended the game on a stretcher.Mike 
Averis

• Match report: Glasgow 21-10 Montpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/18/glasgow-montpellier-gregor-townsend-european-champions-cup>
 