
Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> and migrants at risk of 
dying in the severe cold weather sweeping across Europe are being moved back 
over borders and subjected to violence and confiscations, the UN’s refugee 
agency has said, as it calls on governments to do more to help.

The UNHCR said at least five refugees had died from the cold weather since the 
start of the year, as temperatures dropped as low as -14C in parts ofGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, and several countries saw some of 
the heaviest snowfall in years.

The fatalities include two Iraqi men, whose bodies were found in south-eastern 
Bulgaria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bulgaria> after they had crossed 
from Turkey, and a young Somali woman whose body was found in the same region. 
A 20-year-old Afghan man died of complications resulting from exposure to the 
cold after crossing the Evros river at the border between Greece and Turkey at 
night, when temperatures fell below -10C.

“Saving lives must be a priority and we urge state authorities across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to do more to assist and 
protect refugees and migrants,” a UNHCR spokeswoman, Cecile Pouilly, told a 
press briefing in Geneva on Friday.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frefugees-greece-face-freezing-winter-conditions-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugees%20in%20Greece%20face%20freezing%20winter%20conditions%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frefugees-greece-face-freezing-winter-conditions-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugees%20in%20Greece%20face%20freezing%20winter%20conditions%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frefugees-greece-face-freezing-winter-conditions-video&media=>
Refugees in Greece face freezing winter conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2017/jan/10/refugees-greece-face-freezing-winter-conditions-video>
The UNHCR has transferred hundreds of people on the Greek islands of Lesbos 
and Chio to warmer accommodation, but there are still more than 2,500 people 
living in Lesbos’s Moira camp, which was condemned on Friday by a doctor 
working there.

Diane Sampson, an American paediatrician, told Reuters she had treated 
desperate patients in Moira suffering from frostbite, shivering with cold and 
drenched by snow and rain that had washed through the flimsy tents they were 
staying in. “In a situation like that our main responsibility is to look at 
these human beings and treat them like human beings. This place lacks basic 
human dignity,” she said.

The UNHCR is also deeply concerned about 1,000 people, including families with 
young children, living in unheated tents and dormitories on the island of Samos.

During a fiery exchange in the Greek parliament this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/greece-severe-weather-places-refugees-at-risk-and-government-under-fire>
, the migration policy minister, Yannis Mouzalas, conceded that people trapped 
in the country were living in appalling conditions exacerbated by the weather. 
“The situation in the hot spots is very bad,” Mouzalas said. “Conditions on the 
island are awful.”

In Serbia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia>, more than 82% of the 
7,300 refugees, asylum seekers and migrants were living in heated government 
shelters, but the UNHCR expressed concern about the situation of 1,200 males, 
including up to 300 unaccompanied or separated boys, who were sleeping rough in 
inadequate informal sites in Belgrade city centre.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Feuropean-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40cb2da4f2d41536b147711539338674a263a423%2F0_239_3835_2301%2F3835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20countries%20mistreating%20refugees%20in%20cold%20weather%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Feuropean-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20countries%20mistreating%20refugees%20in%20cold%20weather%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Feuropean-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40cb2da4f2d41536b147711539338674a263a423%2F0_239_3835_2301%2F3835.jpg>
 Refugees wash themselves and their clothes over a barrels of water heated by 
fire in the snow in Belgrade. Photograph: Anadolu agency/Getty Images 
“Given the harsh winter conditions, we are extremely concerned by reports that 
authorities in all countries across the western Balkans route continue to push 
back refugees and migrants from inside their territory to neighbouring 
countries,” Pouilly said.


Some people had alleged violent treatment by police, she added, and some said 
they had had items of clothing and phones confiscated, preventing them from 
calling for help once stranded.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Feuropean-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F206d0f798dfe22ca1e021309e8566e48f58ff25a%2F1369_418_3136_1882%2F3136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20countries%20mistreating%20refugees%20in%20cold%20weather%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Feuropean-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20countries%20mistreating%20refugees%20in%20cold%20weather%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Feuropean-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F206d0f798dfe22ca1e021309e8566e48f58ff25a%2F1369_418_3136_1882%2F3136.jpg>
 A migrant sits outside a tent at the refugee camp of Vagiohori village, east 
of Thessaloniki in Greece. Photograph: Giannis Papanikos/AP 
Staff from the UN children’s agency who were working across central and 
eastern Europe, and parts of southern Europe, reported “grave humanitarian 
consequences” of freezing temperatures.

Lily Caprani, Unicef UK’s deputy executive director, said on Friday that the 
weather had increased the risks of outbreaks of influenza and acute respiratory 
infections, especially among children under five.

UK urged to transfer child refugees from freezing Europe camps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/uk-urged-to-transfer-child-refugees-from-freezing-europe-camps>
“Thousands of migrants and refugees are trapped in freezing conditions in 
shelters that are ill-adapted for winter in Greece and the Balkans,” Caprani 
said in a statement to the Guardian. “Refugee and migrant children and women in 
asylum-seeker centres and other hosting accommodations are particularly 
vulnerable when facilities lack adequate heating.”


Jennifer Scott, the refugee crisis programme manager for the British Red 
Cross, said many in Greece had been living in poor conditions for months and 
the cold weather was making their situation even more desperate.

“In the mainland, thousands are living in industrial warehouses that are unfit 
for living under normal circumstances, let alone in sub-zero temperatures. On 
the islands, more than 16,000 people are living in crowded camps, most of which 
are out in the open and bitterly exposed,” Scott said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Feuropean-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba3844b9088bec9ae27b85528e0bb4ddb979acb1%2F0_236_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20countries%20mistreating%20refugees%20in%20cold%20weather%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Feuropean-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20countries%20mistreating%20refugees%20in%20cold%20weather%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Feuropean-countries-mistreating-refugees-in-cold-weather-says-un%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba3844b9088bec9ae27b85528e0bb4ddb979acb1%2F0_236_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Yarisda, five, and her grandmother look after three-day-old Faromarsh who was 
born in the Oinofyta refugee camp, north of Athens, Greece. Photograph: Orestis 
Panagiotou/EPA 
Unicef released data showing that 25,800 unaccompanied and separated children 
arrived in Italy by sea in 2016, more than double the number who arrived the 
previous year, leading the charity to call on the British Home Office to take 
urgent action.


“Just three unaccompanied children were transferred from Italy to the UK last 
year. In a year when the number of arrivals doubled, that is a concerning 
statistic,” Caprani said.
 