
In Jeff Wall’s 1993 photograph A Sudden Gust of Wind (after Hokusai) 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/wall-a-sudden-gust-of-wind-after-hokusai-t06951>
, a disparate group of people are caught in a wild breeze. They seem liberated 
by the blast: as papers go flying about in comic disarray a businesslike man in 
a dark coat, white shirt and tie responds to the gust with ecstatic abandon, 
set free from his constrained existence by this moment of chaos.

Katsushika Hokusai's later life to feature in British Museum show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/10/katsushika-hokusais-later-life-to-feature-in-british-museum-show>
It might be an allegory of the need for change, even revolution. In 1993 the 
term “yuppie” would still have applied to the well-dressed man embracing 
nature’s power. Today, it looks even more like an image of society being shaken 
up by a sudden event, such as a financial crash, that turns everything upside 
down.

Wall’s picture is also proof that a Japanese artist born in 1760 is still 
being ransacked for ideas by the west. Soon after the death of Katsushika 
Hokusai in 1849, the thousands of prints and drawings he created in his long 
life started to be collected by European artists and critics who found them as 
liberating and inspirational as that gust of wind, which he originally 
portrayed in his woodblock print A Sudden Gust of Wind (Ejiri in Suruga Province
 <http://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/36493>) in the early 1830s.

The British Museum is putting on a big Hokusai exhibition this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/10/katsushika-hokusais-later-life-to-feature-in-british-museum-show>
 and about time too, for we know a lot less about this genius than we should. 
As the exhibition’s subtitle “Beyond The Great Wave” suggests, Hokusai is 
famous today for just one of his designs, when in reality his art deserves to 
be looked at like that of Van Gogh or Rembrandt: as a richly developing and 
complex oeuvre of great human profundity.

The reason we don’t look beyond The Great Wave 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/JP1847/> enough, in spite of 
Hokusai’s influence on modern art, is quite simply that European ideas of 
artistic genius have found ways to subtly belittle the individuality of 
non-European artists. Even though the works of Hokusai made a huge impact in 
France from the 1850s onwards, they were seen as “japonaiserie 
<http://www.markmitchellpaintings.com/blog/japonisme-japonaiserie-and-chinoiserie/>
” and became raw material for avant-garde artists to rifle for ideas. One 
Japanese artist is much like another in the western imagination. Hokusai,
Hiroshige <https://ukiyo-e.org/artist/utagawa-hiroshige>, or Utagawa Kuniaki II 
<https://ukiyo-e.org/artist/utagawa-kuniaki>, whose art is pinned to the wall 
in Emile Zola’s study inManet’s 1868 portrait of him 
<http://www.musee-orsay.fr/en/collections/works-in-focus/search/commentaire_id/emile-zola-313.html>
, all became source material for the first modernists without much attention 
being paid to the separate personalities of these woodcut masters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-monopoly-artistic-genius-hokusai-japanese-prints-drawings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ca5e325d69e6befabd9c2ca73e250bc3ba6b39%2F55_55_2619_1571%2F2619.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe%20thought%20it%20had%20a%20monopoly%20on%20artistic%20genius.%20Hokusai%20proved%20it%20wrong%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-monopoly-artistic-genius-hokusai-japanese-prints-drawings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%20thought%20it%20had%20a%20monopoly%20on%20artistic%20genius.%20Hokusai%20proved%20it%20wrong%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-monopoly-artistic-genius-hokusai-japanese-prints-drawings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ca5e325d69e6befabd9c2ca73e250bc3ba6b39%2F55_55_2619_1571%2F2619.jpg>
 ‘Japan’s great artists of the 18th and early 19th centuries were seen as 
artisans.’ Hokusai, detail from Poppies from Large Flowers, 1831-2 Photograph: 
© The Trustees of the British Museum 
That’s not entirely fair. Van Gogh, for one, genuinely revered these Japanese 
artists and carefully copied works by Hiroshige. There’s nothing to suggest he 
saw himself as inherently more important as a painter than his Japanese 
inspirations. Yet every detail of Van Gogh’s life is studied or made into 
films, while most people today probably know as little about the lives of the 
great woodblock artists as a Victorian might have.

Just as women were long excluded from the western canon of artistic genius, so 
were non-European artists, even when their work was valued. Japan’s great 
artists of the 18th and early 19th centuries were seen as artisans whose art 
reflected a tradition rather than expressing unique individual visions of the 
world.

Hokusai took himself incredibly seriously as an artist. He dismissed 
everything he had done before he was 70. The British Museum show takes him at 
his word and sets out to reveal the daring of his late works. Like Titian, 
Lucian Freud orCy Twombly <http://www.cytwombly.info/>, he aged well.

Hokusai watches people with compassion, tolerance and curiosity

What makes Hokusai a great artist is the same thing that sets apart all the 
most universal and enduring art. He captures the human condition. That print of 
people shivering in a gust of wind combines – to take two of his British 
contemporaries – Turner’s feel for nature with Jane Austen’s sense of social 
comedy. This mixture of the comic and sublime is absolutely typical of Hokusai 
and totally at odds with European art that tends to keep them separate. You 
don’t seeWilliam Hogarth 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/william-hogarth> painting a wintry 
landscape, orCaspar David Friedrich 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/caspar-david-friedrich> making 
jokes. Hokusai can be serious and humorous at the same time. His theme is the 
world, and he sees the artist’s role as to observe and distil it.

Hokusai watches people with compassion, tolerance and curiosity as they 
balance on precarious bridges, hike through snow, brave the sea in boats or 
make love in Edo’s brothels. Whether he is portraying the mystery of Mount Fuji 
or exploring sexuality in his Shunga prints, he always has this frank, wise, 
accepting eye for the strangeness of life.

He is a philosopher who sees human beings not as solitary, but social animals. 
Most of all, he is a visionary of acceptance who urges us to enjoy being alive. 
The genius of Hokusai can help us to be happy, wise and free – like people 
enjoying a sudden gust of wind.
 