
Officials suspended shipping along Europe’s second-longest waterway as a 
freezing spell gripped large parts of the continent, causing hardship 
especially among migrants, the homeless and the elderly. The death toll rose to 
61 on Tuesday, with a third of those inPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland>.

Romanian police halted shipping at midday on Tuesday along 565 miles (900km) 
of the Danube river. Croatian and Serbian authorities also stopped river 
traffic on the Danube.

In Serbia shipping was banned on the river Sava because of icy conditions 
which claimed two lives in southernSerbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia>.

Greece: severe weather places refugees at risk and government under fire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/greece-severe-weather-places-refugees-at-risk-and-government-under-fire>
Authorities said an 88-year-old man and his son, 64, died from freezing 
temperatures in the village of Duga Poljana in the country’s south which has 
been hardest hit by the recent cold spell. Serbian state TV reported the two 
victims, discovered by a man delivering bread from a neighbouring village, were 
extremely poor.

Three people have been found dead in the past three days in Macedonia as 
temperatures plunged to -20C (-4F). One 68-year old homeless man was found 
frozen to death in the capital, Skopje, while a 60-year-old man died in front 
of his home in the southern town in Strumica. An 80-year-old woman was 
discovered in her home in eastern Macedonia.

Authorities urged homeless people to go to shelters and local schools, which 
are taking them in during the cold spell.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadd1495191cb4b27b1ec29f049a3d7cc3d0251e9%2F0_161_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe%20cold%20snap%3A%20death%20toll%20hits%2061%20as%20the%20poor%2C%20old%20and%20helpless%20succumb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%20cold%20snap%3A%20death%20toll%20hits%2061%20as%20the%20poor%2C%20old%20and%20helpless%20succumb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadd1495191cb4b27b1ec29f049a3d7cc3d0251e9%2F0_161_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Boat stuck in the frozen river Danube in Belgrade, Serbia. Photograph: Andrej 
Cukic/EPA 
In Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania> it snowed in the 
southern city of Saranda for the first time in 32 years. A homeless Albanian 
man was found dead in the south-eastern city of Korca, the fifth person to die 
in the frigid weather.

In the central town of Bulqize temperatures plummeted to -22C (-7.6F) with 
most rural areas cut off by snow. There were temporary power and water outages. 
Army helicopters were distributing aid in remote mountain areas.

Following strong criticism from aid agencies and others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/greece-severe-weather-places-refugees-at-risk-and-government-under-fire>
, authorities on the Greek island of Lesbos said they would move 250 refugees 
from tents at camps into vacant hotel rooms as heavy snow continued unabated 
around the country.

The government also said it was sending a Greek Navy ship to Lesbos, to serve 
as a floating shelter for residents of a snow-bound camp.

“We denounce the inhuman living conditions refugees on Lesbos are facing,” an 
association of public hospital doctors said “They are living in mud and snow, 
cramped together in unsuitable tents … and lighting fires inside them to stay 
warm.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frefugees-greece-face-freezing-winter-conditions-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugees%20in%20Greece%20face%20freezing%20winter%20conditions%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frefugees-greece-face-freezing-winter-conditions-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugees%20in%20Greece%20face%20freezing%20winter%20conditions%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Frefugees-greece-face-freezing-winter-conditions-video&media=>
Refugees in Greece face freezing winter conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2017/jan/10/refugees-greece-face-freezing-winter-conditions-video>
Elsewhere snow prevent several flights in Greece’s second-largest city, 
Thessaloniki, while a state of emergency was declared in several parts of the 
country.

Snow dusted the ancient Acropolis in Athens and closed most schools in the 
capital, while more than 10 heated shelters were opened for homeless people. An 
Athens municipal employee was placed under disciplinary review for allegedly 
telling occupants to leave a shelter because his shift had ended and nobody was 
available to take his place.

One person died and more than 10 were injured in Istanbul after a mosque 
canopy collapsed because of high winds and snowfall. It happened during a 
funeral service near Istanbul’s main airport. Bulent Kerimoglu, a district 
mayor, told reporters ambulances rushed the injured to nearby hospitals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4ea44e620e9e67d30b0acfcd1f36ea6ca92f7b2%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe%20cold%20snap%3A%20death%20toll%20hits%2061%20as%20the%20poor%2C%20old%20and%20helpless%20succumb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%20cold%20snap%3A%20death%20toll%20hits%2061%20as%20the%20poor%2C%20old%20and%20helpless%20succumb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4ea44e620e9e67d30b0acfcd1f36ea6ca92f7b2%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Turkish rescuers and medics work at the scene after a roof collapsed during a 
funeral ceremony in the courtyard of a mosque in Istanbul. Photograph: 
STRINGER/Reuters 
Several Serbian municipalities declared emergency measures to battle the 
extreme weather and dozens of villages in the south were cut off by high 
snowdrifts.

In Romania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/romania> the Bucharest mayor, 
Gabriela Firea, on Tuesday ordered schools in the capital to remain closed for 
the rest of the week as the country battled the bitter cold which has led to 
travel delays, power outages and a surge in demand for natural gas and power.

Farther north in Poland where 20 people have died since the cold spell started 
last week, alarming smog levels led authorities to close schools and 
kindergartens for two days in the southern city of Rybnik to protect children 
from noxious fumes, and offer free public transport to try and improve air 
quality.

Poland’s capital, Warsaw, offered free public transport on Monday and the 
situation improved, although residents complained of coughing and irritated 
noses and eyes. Smog alarm levels were exceeded in Rybnik, Czestochowa, 
Katowice and another low-lying industrial region.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81420967581f3b61c2c2e5625f23f322f86b4b27%2F0_0_4096_2706%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe%20cold%20snap%3A%20death%20toll%20hits%2061%20as%20the%20poor%2C%20old%20and%20helpless%20succumb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%20cold%20snap%3A%20death%20toll%20hits%2061%20as%20the%20poor%2C%20old%20and%20helpless%20succumb&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Feurope-cold-snap-death-toll-hits-61-as-the-poor-old-and-helpless-succumb%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81420967581f3b61c2c2e5625f23f322f86b4b27%2F0_0_4096_2706%2F4096.jpg>
 Polish authorities offered free public transport due to smog in Warsaw and 
other cities. Photograph: Jacek Turczyk/EPA 
The smog mainly emanated from substandard fuels such as coal mud, waste and 
plastic burned in poor quality heaters in private homes, air monitoring expert 
Barbara Toczko told The Associated Press. She said authorities should help 
residents acquire heaters which use clean fuel and have low-level emissions.

She said traffic fumes and industrial smoke also contributed to the poor air 
quality but to a lesser extent as they had to meet European standards.

Poland’s government centre for security said six people died on Monday because 
of the cold.
 