
POOL ONE 

Saracens 

Lost just once, but Saracens minus Steve Borthwick are not yet the force of 
last seasonwhen they got to the European final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/24/toulon-saracens-heineken-cup-final-match-report>
. However, they have the habit of learning from their mistakes and get a little 
closer to the title each year. Also tend to be slow starters and there’s no 
Zebre around this season to save them if it goes badly against Clermont 
Auvergne. I don’t think it will.

Key man Owen Farrell

Verdict Last four, possibly better
 Saracens beat Clermonth Auverge in the semi-final of the Heineken Cup last 
season, but lost the final to Toulon. Photograph: Colorsport/Corbis 
Clermont Auvergne

Still not over last season’s Saracens drubbing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/apr/26/saracens-clermont-auvergne-heineken-cup-semi-final-report>
. “We want to forget our last game against Saracens,” said captain Damien 
Chouly this week, so clearly they haven’t. New coaches Franck Azéma and Jono 
Gibbes have got them back to the top of the French league but they have been 
out of sorts in the past fortnight and are without Morgan Parra. His deputy 
Thierry Lacrampe is also struggling, as is Wesley Fofana.

Key man Aurélien Rougerie

Verdict Jury out until January

Munster

Back-to-back semi-finals is not bad going for a team which is rebuilding. 
However, they have lost twice at Thomond Park this season and there were plenty 
of mutterings about new coach Anthony Foley untiltheir demolition of Leinster 
before a passionate 40,000 in Dublin earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/04/leinster-munster-pro12-match-report>
. They have the pedigree – what price another Thomond miracle when Sale visit 
on the last day – but need a new Ronan O’Gara to show them how.

Key man Peter O’Mahony

Verdict Passion is not enough

Sale

Northampton last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/11/northampton-sale-premiership-rugby-match-report>
 left a pretty sizeable hangover. Looked really poor against the kind of power 
pack they have to beat to make any progress. Munster at home, then the trip to 
Stade Marcel Michelin, with Nathan Hines returning to Clermont and the stadium 
where he had so much success. If Danny Cipriani doesn’t show he can play on the 
back foot then Sale will be glad when Europe’s over.

Key man Danny Cipriani

Verdict All over by Christmas

POOL TWO

Leinster

Three-times champions and the bookies’ favourite for the group. Sean O’Brien 
is out for five to six months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/02/sean-obrien-ireland-leinster-injured-six-months>
, Cian Healy and Fergus McFadden are missing and another prop, Marty Moore, was 
sidelined this week. Still, there are plenty of old heads – Gordon D’Arcy, Rob 
Kearney – to see them through this first post-O’Driscoll European season. And 
what of the former Rabbitoh, Ben Te’o?

Key man Jamie Heaslip

Verdict Best in an iffy group

Castres

The 2013 Top 14 top dogs have had a dire start to the season, losing six from 
nine. They may have held on to Rory Kockott, who needs a good Europe to get a 
France cap, but they’ve lost Antonie Claassen, Brice Dulin and Pedrie 
Wannenburg among others. Sitiveni Sivivatu is out until Christmas. “We had some 
ambitions for this tournament at the start of the season … but it’s a bit more 
complicated now,” says Rémi Talès, who was stripped of the captaincy because he 
is off at the end of the season.

Key man Rory Kockott

Verdict Minds are elsewhere

Harlequins

Tournament opener against Castres may get the show back on the road but things 
aren’t clicking at the heart ofHarlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/harlequinsru> right now, meaning slim 
pickings for the big signings out wide, Marland Yarde and Asaeli Tikoirotuma. 
Do they have the forwards to beat Leinster? And are they too dependent on Nick 
Evans staying fit and kicking his points? Where’s the on-field back-up? After 
three defeats in six games Conor O’Shea, the moderated voice of reason, has 
become Mr Angry.

Key man Nick Evans

Verdict Glitch on the flight deck
 Nick Evans’s goalkicking will be crucial if Harlequins are to make any 
progress in this year’s tournament. Photograph: Paul Childs/Action Images 
Wasps

The last English winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/may/21/rugbyunion.heinekencup200607> 
and a side building a head of steam which could see them through among the best 
losers. Pumped up by off-field issuesthey duffed up the Bath pack for 60 
minutes last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/12/wasps-bath-premiership-match-report>
 and have also beaten Northampton at High Wycombe. Up front the passion of 
James Haskell drives things along and the midfield partnership of Andy Goode 
and Alapati Leiua is coming along nicely.

Key man Alapati Leiua

Verdict Fly in the ointment

POOL THREE

Toulon

With or without Steffon Armitage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/oct/14/steffon-armitage-bath-england-toulon-stuart-lancaster>
, Toulon have the squad to become the first side to win three European Cups on 
the trot. Since last season’s Top 14/Heineken double, owner Mourad Boudjellal 
has bought James O’Connor, Mamuka Gorgodze and Leigh Halfpenny, but have Toulon 
become over-dependent on Matt Giteau in the post-Wilko era? With Giteau they 
are five from five but only one from four when he’s rested or wrapped in cotton 
wool.

Key man Matt Giteau

Verdict Too strong for anyone
 Toulon have added to their considerable ranks with the addition of James 
O’Connor and Leigh Halfpenny. Photograph: Frederic Lancelot/Sipa/REX 
Leicester

Logovi’i Mulipola joined the ranks of walking wounded at Welford Road this 
week, the Samoan prop likely to be missing for six weeks at least. If the 
formula for European success involves having one class front row on the field 
and another ready to go on, it doesn’t help having four favoured props and a 
Test hooker injured. Right from the start, against Ulster,Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> are scrapping for their 
lives.

Key man Manu Tuilagi

Verdict Do I hear cavalry?

Ulster

It’s difficult taking early Pro12 form as a reference point with the Irish, 
but despite losing director of rugby David Humphreys to Gloucester, Johann 
Muller to retirement and Ruan Pienaar to injury, Ulster have lost only once so 
far and last weekend’s win at high-flyers Glasgow was impressive. In recent 
seasons Ulster have become a force and Ravenhill is no place for the 
faint-hearted.

Key man Rory Best

Verdict Big one this weekend

Scarlets

So good to watch, but they are minus Jonathan Davies and have a new coach in 
Wayne Pivac, the veteran Regan King is injured and now the Test scrum-half and 
top try scorer Gareth Davies is out for three months. Toulon on Sunday is a 
hard place to start, particularly if there are doubts about the pack. Real 
underdogs, but at Parc yScarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> 
they have been known to administer the odd nasty bite.

Key man Scott Williams

Verdict Great entertainers

POOL FOUR

Bath

Look like a side built for Europe. Still missing Francois Louw (neck surgery) 
and a gaggle of back-rowers, whileSam Burgess’s arrival has been delayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/13/england-stuart-lancaster-sam-burgess-world-cup>
, but there have been moments this season of real class in the forwards and 
backs. Leicester and Saracens come to mind. That said, they were on the ropes 
for 60 minutes at Wasps last week and much will depend on Davey Wilson putting 
that experience behind him.

Key man George Ford

Verdict Pool leaders

Glasgow

Not much European pedigree here; not past the pool stages since 1998 and only 
five wins in 41 European trips. However, Gregor Townsend is doing wonders at 
Scotstoun for Scottish rugby as well as Glasgow, which is a good thing now that 
Edinburgh have been denied automatic entry. A more mature Stuart Hogg is back 
on song and a win overBath <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bath> on Saturday 
would be no great surprise.

Key man Niko Matawalu

Verdict Glasgow or Ulster to go through

Montpellier

The loss of François Trinh-Duc to a broken leg is huge. The fly-half had 
turned himself into the most accurate kicker in France and the search for a 
replacement – Felipe Contepomi has knocked them back – says everything. Even 
the club admit it’s a big ask for Enzo Selponi to step up, but the alternative 
is converting a scrum-half. And does head coach Fabien Galthié want it enough? 
Top 14 is central toMontpellier <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/montpellier> 
thinking.

Key man Ben Mowen

Verdict See below
 Montpellier’s Australian centre Ben Mowen, left, tries to avoid Davit 
Kubriashvili of Stade Fran in the Top 14 match. Photograph: Sylvain 
Thomas/AFP/Getty Images 
Toulouse

Written off (too) many times and still champions of Europe four times, but 
five defeats on the trot tell whereToulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> are. They bounced back last 
weekend with a win over Toulon to end their worst run in two decades, but the 
set piece has been a shambles and coach Guy Novès needs a front row which is 
why the return of Census Johnston is good news. Toby Flood is also back to take 
on Montpellier after missing three games.

Key man Gurthrö Steenkamp

Verdict Sunday losers pack their bags

POOL FIVE

Northampton

England’s champions and they have kicked on since taking the title. Everyone 
bar Alex Corbisiero is fit and well and going like a train.Ask Sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/11/northampton-sale-premiership-rugby-match-report>
. Coach Jim Mallinder now has strength in depth, particularly in the pack and 
off the bench, and Northampton are learning to get the best from Kahn 
Fotuali’i’s subtle changes in tempo. Racing Métro is a tasty starter for a side 
that hasn’t been at their happiest across the Channel, but Mallinder should get 
his wish for a home quarter-final. At least.

Key man Kahn Fotuali’i

Verdict Is this the year?

Racing Métro

Is this a team in turmoil? Coach Laurent Labit says he’s unhappy with his trio 
of Welsh internationals and even ifJamie Roberts denies he’s heading home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/16/jamie-roberts-racing-metro-wales>
, the coach prefers to play Alexandre Dumoulin. The good news for Labit, who 
faces yet another touchline ban for ref-bashing, is that Jonny Sexton is fit, 
even if he won’t renew his contract. Have never made it out of the group stages 
but the Treviso factor will help.

Key man Jonny Sexton

Verdict Through by default
 Jonny Sexton is fully fit, but his team appear to be in flux with the future 
of many of Racing’s players unresolved. Photograph: Nicolas Tucat/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Ospreys

Unbeaten this season despite the loss of Ryan Jones, Adam Jones, Ian Evans and 
Richard Hibbard, but Franklin’s Gardens and Stade Yves-du-Manoir are tough 
places for a young front row. If the exceptional Alun Wyn Jones and his 
forwards go backwards life will be a lot harder for Dan Biggar and the sniping 
scrum-half Rhys Webb.

Key man Alun Wyn Jones

Verdict Lightweight

Treviso

The only Italian side in the competition, probably lucky to be here, and 
Racing’s ticket to the play-offs. They’re bottom of Pro12 with just one point 
from six games and a side ripped apart at the end of last season when 
uncertainty about Pro12 survival saw four Test props and two Test hookers head 
for new homes. However Alessandro Zanni stayed as did Michele Campagnaro, the 
Italian shooting star from last season’s Six Nations.

Key man Alessandro Zanni

Verdict May not get a point
 