
Pool 1

Oyonnax

Ground Stade Charles-Mathon Capacity 11,400

Coach Olivier Azam League Top 14

There has been a complete change of coaching team, with the former Gloucester 
hooker Olivier Azam taking over from Christophe Urios, although there are 
already rumours of unrest among the players. They qualified by finishing sixth 
in the Top 14 last season and were probably punching above their weight – which 
is often a disaster for the following year as they won’t have the squad 
strength to fight on two fronts.Their current Top 14 position of 13th suggests 
this is a campaign they will want kept away from the TV cameras.

Key man Soane Tonga’uiha

Verdict Will hope to get back to the Top 14 without too many injuries

Toulon’s all-star cast still the side to beat in European Champions Cup | 
Robert Kitson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/12/toulon-european-rugby-champions-cup>
Saracens

Ground Allianz Park Capacity 10,000

Coach Mark McCall League Premiership

Top of the Premiership thanks to their outstanding defence and they will be in 
the knockout stage, no doubt at all. Whether their approach is good enough to 
win it is the big question and history says not. They are an outstanding side 
and I think they’ll reach the semis. Owen Farrell is hugely important and 
Marcelo Bosch has had an outstanding World Cup and will be a big player, not 
least thanks to his 60m kicking game, as Racing Métro found out last year.

Key man Marcelo Bosch

Verdict Will reach the semi-finals

Toulouse

Ground Stade Ernest-Wallon Capacity 19,500

Coach Ugo Mola League Top 14

The new coach Ugo Mola has a big challenge in replacing Guy Novès, who has 
left after 22 years in charge to coach France. But his side have started the 
Top 14 well and they are playing good rugby. Toby Flood looks alive under the 
new regime after appearing heavy shouldered last year. I think there is a good 
chance that two will qualify from this group.Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> went out at the pool stage last 
season, an embarrassment for the four-times European champions, but this year 
should be better.

Key man Gaël Fickou

Verdict Could well reach the quarter-finals

Ulster

Ground Kingspan Stadium Capacity 18,196

Coach Les Kiss League Pro12

Les Kiss is the new director of rugby after seven years as an assistant coach 
with Ireland, but there’s not much change among the players. They need a fast 
start, and a win at Oyonnax should give them this. But they will struggle with 
injuries as they are likely to be without Tommy Bowe for the season and his 
Ireland team-mates Jared Payne and Iain Henderson until Christmas. In their 
absence Ruan Pienaar becomes even more important to the side.

Key man Ruan Pienaar

Verdict Struggling to get out of pool

Pool 2
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff38b1793c6852cfba764f05104553382c5792206%2F83_408_1002_601%2F1002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20pool-by-pool%20guide%20%7C%20Dean%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20pool-by-pool%20guide%20%7C%20Dean%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff38b1793c6852cfba764f05104553382c5792206%2F83_408_1002_601%2F1002.jpg>
 Henry Slade will be a vital part of Exeter’s side. Photograph: Richard 
Lee/BPI/REX Shutterstock 
Clermont

Ground Parc des Sports Marcel Michelin Capacity 18,030

Coach Franck Azéma League Top 14

In Damien Chouly, Morgan Parra and Camille Lopez they have the best eight, 
nine, 10 combination in the competition. Their front row is first class and 
they have signed the South Africa second row Flip van der Merwe to add even 
more to their pack. They have alsoadded another Englishman  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/22/david-strettle-withdrawing-world-cup-squad>
to their back three in David Strettle and he will form a real threat alongside 
the full-back Nick Abendanon. They will be unbeatable at home in the pool and I 
can’t wait to see them play at Exeter.

Key man Morgan Parra

Verdict Could go all the way to the final again

Bordeaux

Ground Stade Chaban-Delmas Capacity 34,694

Coach Raphaël Ibañez League Top 14

Adam Ashley-Cooper and Sekope Kepu are major signings but this is still a team 
who may wish they could focus on the league. They qualified by the back door by 
beating Gloucester in the play-off having finished seventh in the Top 14 and, 
in a World Cup year, playing every week is brutal for smaller squads. Their 
first XV, with Lionel Beauxis pulling the strings, is not bad but something has 
to give and they have little hope of progress.

Key man Adam Ashley-Cooper

Verdict No hope

Exeter

Ground Sandy Park Capacity 12,600

Coach Rob Baxter League Premiership

I’m always concerned about predicting how far they can go as they keep proving 
me wrong. They are an outstanding side and they look stronger again this 
season. Much will depend on how quickly Geoff Parling recovers from his groin 
strain, but the news is encouraging. They open this weekend againstOspreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ospreys> and I think they are capable of 
getting a decent result there. With Clermont in the group, it is essential 
Exeter win away in Wales and at Bordeaux.

Key man Henry Slade

Verdict Must get off to flyer to challenge Clermont

Ospreys

Ground Liberty Stadium Capacity 20,827

Coach Steve Tandy Captain Pro12

They have had a shocking start to the season with two wins out of seven, both 
against Italian sides, but that’s no surprise with Dan Biggar, Alun Wyn-Jones 
and Rhys Webb missing during the World Cup. Biggar is crucial and I’m surprised 
he wasn’t nominated for world player of the year. He has been phenomenal and 
has held Wales together. Webb’s injury, though, will rule him out of the pool 
stage. I cannot see them getting anything from Clermont, which they would need 
to do to get out of this pool.

Key man Dan Biggar

Verdict Will finish third

Pool 3
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad768a00fc75aa0f83e64b7fab50264ddd8a8a00%2F442_504_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20pool-by-pool%20guide%20%7C%20Dean%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20pool-by-pool%20guide%20%7C%20Dean%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad768a00fc75aa0f83e64b7fab50264ddd8a8a00%2F442_504_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Leone Nakarawa could be a game-changer for Glasgow. Photograph: Ian 
Buchan/Corbis 
Glasgow

Ground Scotstoun Stadium Capacity 10,000

Coach Gregor Townsend League Pro12

I’ve had them as my dark horses for a couple of years and they have not quite 
been able to nail it. Yet they won the Pro12 last season, so maybe this could 
be their year. Finn Russell is crucial and they have real game changers in the 
wing Taqele Naiyaravoro, who they signed from the Waratahs, and the Fijian lock 
Leone Nakarawa. A very tough start as they are away to Racing and I think they 
will struggle to get out of this pool, but they could well decide which of
Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> or Racing 
tops it.

Key man Finn Russell

Verdict Could struggle to hit a post-World Cup stride

Northampton

Ground Franklin’s Gardens Capacity 15,500

Coach Jim Mallinder League Premiership

Cannot get things going at the moment but they have dominated the Premiership 
for the past few years. They have had notable losses in Samu Manoa and Salesi 
Ma’afu, so I’m not sure their squad will be as strong as it has been, but they 
are still one of the favourites. All eyes will be on Luther Burrellbecause of 
the Sam Burgess situation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/27/sam-burgess-henry-slade-england-rugby-world-cup-squad-stuart-lancaster>
. Saints have suffered on the road in the past,as we saw away to Racing last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/24/northampton-racing-metro-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
, and this often costs bonus points. I do, though, think their slow start this 
season is a blip.

Key man Kieran Brookes

Verdict Quarter-finals

Racing 92

Ground Stade Olympique Yves-du-Manoir Capacity 14,000

Coach Laurent Labit and Laurent Travers League Top 14

The Ireland fly-half Jonny Sexton has gone but he may not be missed as his 
replacement is Dan Carter, arguably the best ever and fresh from winning the 
World Cup with New Zealand. They also have Chris Masoe, in fromToulon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulon>, Yannick Nyanga and Juan Imhoff, 
among many big names. The main man is Carter, though, and his ability to 
quickly settle in Europe will be key to how well Racing do. The group looks 
like a straight shootout between Racing and Northampton, which will be decided 
by their back-to-back fixtures in rounds three and four.

Key man Dan Carter

Verdict Semi-finals

Scarlets

Ground Parc y Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> Capacity 
14,870

Coach Wayne Pivac League Pro12

They are doing well in the Pro12 but I think their Champions Cup efforts will 
be more about being entertaining than anything else. Scott and Liam Williams 
are still injured and they will be missed. Gareth Davies at scrum-half enjoyed 
a very good World Cup but the squad is light on numbers and with two the 
Williams missing they are struggling for quality. DTH van der Merwe had a good 
World Cup and is a decent signing from Glasgow but he will need to be scoring 
regularly for them to have a chance.

Key man Gareth Davies

Verdict Will go out at the pool stage

Pool 4
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f16a5132363c46dbde85c2624050d09cd76c1b6%2F376_158_1449_869%2F1449.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20pool-by-pool%20guide%20%7C%20Dean%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20pool-by-pool%20guide%20%7C%20Dean%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f16a5132363c46dbde85c2624050d09cd76c1b6%2F376_158_1449_869%2F1449.jpg>
 Simon Zebo could make the difference for Munster. Photograph: Diarmuid Greene 
/ SPORTSFILE/Diarmuid Greene / SPORTSFILE/SPORTSFILE/Corbis 
Treviso

Ground Stadio Comunale di Monigo Capacity 6,700

Coach Umberto Casellato League Pro12

Very weak and their presence means there is likely to be a second qualifier 
from the pool. We know we need representation from every country but you are 
guaranteed 10 points from them, which skews the pool stage.Treviso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/treviso> are currently 12th and bottom of 
the Pro12, having played seven and lost seven, and they have finished 11th in 
each of the past two seasons. They have not won more than one game in a 
Heineken or Champions Cup pool since 2005. They will struggle.

Key man Alessandro Zanni

Verdict Complete no hopers

Leicester

Ground Welford Road Capacity 24,000

Coach Richard Cockerill League Premiership

With two Heineken Cup wins to their name, in 2001 and 2002, Leicester are one 
of three sides in this pool who are historically strong but who are not what 
they once were. By hiringAaron Mauger as head coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/nov/24/aaron-mauger-leicester-tigers-head-coach-new-zealand>
, under Richard Cockerill as director of rugby, it appears they are trying to 
move to a more expansive game, but this will take time to fully bed in and it 
will be tough in Europe. Manu Tuilagi will miss too much of the campaign and 
some of their quality is not quite where they would want it to be. Treviso’s 
presence, though, could see them through to the quarters.

Key man Ben Youngs

Verdict Will finish second and could qualify

Munster

Ground Thomond Park Capacity 25,600

Coach Anthony Foley Captain CJ Stander

They have huge pride and pedigree but, particularly since Paul O’Connell went 
to Toulon, they lack the quality to make a real impact in this tournament. The 
captain, Peter O’Mahony,who injured his knee playing in the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/12/ireland-peter-omahony-out-rugby-world-cup-knee-injury>
 victory over France, looks likely to be out for the season and will be sorely 
missed. If he can stay injury-free, the former New Zealand Under-20 fly-half 
Tyler Bleyendaal could make a real impact.

Key man Simon Zebo

Verdict Likely to finish third

Stade Français

Ground Stade Jean-Bouin Capacity 20,000

Coach Gonzalo Quesada League Top 14

Another one-time big hitter recently reduced. They are back in the Champions 
Cup after missing out in the play-off againstWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> to qualify for last season’s 
competition and are the current Top 14 champions. But they sit 11th in the Top 
14 table having lost five of eight. Willem Alberts, the monstrous Springboks 
blindside flanker, has come in and could make a huge impact alongside Sergio 
Parisse. The Australia scrum-half Will Genia, another new signing, should enjoy 
playing on the front foot behind those two.

Key man Will Genia

Verdict Quarter-finals

Pool 5
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbae076c7e9b9b385a20edf54e568a356dd47d91b%2F0_148_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20pool-by-pool%20guide%20%7C%20Dean%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Rugby%20Champions%20Cup%20pool-by-pool%20guide%20%7C%20Dean%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F13%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-pool-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbae076c7e9b9b385a20edf54e568a356dd47d91b%2F0_148_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Jimmy Gopperth will be important for Wasps when he returns from his ban. 
Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
Bath

Ground The Recreation Ground Capacity 13,500

Coach Mike Ford League Premiership

Sam Burgess <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sam-burgess> was always the 
headline but he was never going to make a dent in Europe,and the addition of 
David Denton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/10/bath-david-denton-edinburgh-scotland-rugby-union>
 makes Bath a better side. Their problem is that their front five does not 
quite match their brilliant backline, and it is up front where European games 
are often decided. Nikola Matawalu, their new Fijian scrum-half, could well be 
the key man as he could change the balance between the backline and what goes 
on around the ruck, but I think this pool will be too much for them.

Key man Nikola Matawalu

Verdict Likely to struggle

Leinster

Ground RDS Arena Capacity 18,500

Coach Leo Cullen League Pro12

Jonny Sexton is back and his return to fitness after injury at the World Cup 
will be important, though his international understudy Ian Madigan, who is also 
at Leinster, has proven more than able. But I don’t think they will get out of 
this pool because of Toulon’s presence. It highlights the disparity in quality 
between the pools, and how it favours sides in weaker pools, as Leinster – 
semi-finalists last year– will struggle to get out of this one butLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> could well sneak out of 
theirs.

Key man Jonny Sexton

Verdict Second and out

After grim World Cup European rugby ready for revival by CPR from EPCR | Eddie 
Butler
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/nov/07/world-cup-european-rugby-epcr-champions-challenge-cup>
Wasps

Ground Ricoh Arena Capacity 32,609

Coach Dai Young League Premiership

Will be delighted to be involved and it will be interesting to see if they 
have the necessary front-row power. Their backline is exciting, with Frank 
Halai, Elliot Daley, Charlie Piutau and Christian Wade all capable of opening 
up a defence, and Jimmy Gopperth will set things running once he is back from 
his three-week ban. Whether the forwards can provide them with a platform at 
this level is the question, and I doubt they can – especially in this group.

Key man Jimmy Gopperth

Verdict Tough to see them making it out the pool

Toulon

Ground Stade Mayol Capacity 15,820

Coach Bernard Laporte League Top 14

Quade Cooper, Ma’a Nonu and Duane Vermeulen has to be the biggest shopping 
spree ever seen in northern hemisphere rugby. When you add those names to a 
squad that already includes Steffon Armitage, Matt Giteau and Bryan Habana, let 
alone Drew Mitchell, Mamuka Gorgodze and all the others, this Toulon side are 
surely unbeatable. The only weakness is that they have lost Ali Williams and 
Bakkies Botha, and the new signing Paul O’Connell is injured, so their second 
row may not be that great in the lineout. So that could be a weakness, but we 
are struggling to find it.

Key man Quade Cooper

Verdict Likely to be winners, again
 