
1) England prospects enjoy mixed fortunes with Jones watching on

Even before the grandstand finish that saw George Ford snatch victory with a 
nerveless touchline conversion, the watching England head coach Eddie Jones 
will have experienced mixed emotions. Neither team were at their best, despite 
the raft of England contenders, and the game was not quite the high-calibre 
Test trial it might have been. Bath’s head coach Mike Ford met Jones for a chat 
on Friday, when the Australian indicated he would be looking at the incumbent 
England squad members plus Semesa Rokoduguni. Ford also urged him to consider 
his young props Nick Auterac and Henry Thomas but, on the day, it was theWasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> props Matt Mulland and Jake 
Cooper-Woolley who mostly enjoyed the upper hand. Elliot Daly’s footwork and 
outside break for Rob Miller’s try also caught the eye but James Haskell and 
Joe Simpson will be hoping Jones reviews the tape of Wasps’ big European win 
over Toulon rather than basing his Six Nations selections entirely on the 
evidence of this game. Either way, the former Wallaby flanker George Smith is 
ideally placed to offer his old coach an expert opinion.Robert Kitson

• Wasps 23-25 Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/wasps-bath-european-champions-cup-match-report>
• Toulon 24-9 Leinster: Pool 5 match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/steffon-armitage-scores-two-tries-as-toulon-all-but-end-leinsters-title-hopes>

2) Exeter show Clermont the fight that is needed

It’s over 20 years since the All Blacks played the South West in Redruth, and 
even then, two years before union went professional, there was a sense that 
this might be a final fling. Big-time rugby in Cornwall and Devon was on the 
way out. That has not happened, because Exeter have happened. Sandy Park is a 
grand place on match days and the defiance of the crowd envelopes the players. 
It may be based on the fear that if this does not work it really will be the 
end – but in that regard the Chiefs are just like the All Blacks. Fear of 
oblivion is a mighty force – but how wellExeter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/exeter> hide their fears. Meanwhile, at the 
tail end of their wretched year, France do not see much worth in themselves. 
Having failed to turn up for the World Cup they now ask themselves what the 
point of European competition is. It’s all such a waste of time; Albert Camus 
for national coach. Clermont were good when they could be bothered and yet 
seemed trapped in this malaise. They sighed their way through the game. Perhaps 
they will raise a huff and a puff at home next week, but for the moment they 
can’t be bothered.Eddie Butler

• Exeter Chiefs 31-14 Clermont Auvergne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/exeter-chiefs-clermont-auvergne-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
• Dean Ryan: Overseas aid can help Jones expand England options 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/10/eddie-jones-premiership-england>

3) Northampton need to take chances to repeat European feats

Northampton are known for their powers of recovery in Europe’s back-to-back 
pool matches at this time of year, beating Leinster and Ulster one week after 
being heavily defeated, but they were on the road each time in the second 
encounter. On Friday night, they will be at home to Racing 92 having lost by 30 
points last Saturday, as Daniel Carter enjoyed a stress-free debut for the 
Paris club. The reverse ended a run of four consecutive victories for the 
Saints, but what should exercise them this week is their finishing. Their 
points at the Stade Yves-du-Manoir came from a penalty and their only try in 
the last three Premiership rounds was a Luther Burrell interception at Bath. 
Burrell thought he had scored at the end of the first half against Racing, but 
only a few camera angles were made available to the referee George Clancy and 
he ruled they did not offer conclusive proof. There may have been no doubt had 
Burrell passed the ball wide when he received it, but he may have been mindful 
of Victor Matfield’s pass a few minutes earlier that was picked off by Brice 
Dulin and turned into seven points.Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> have to make better use 
of George North: the wing made one burst into midfield in a set-piece move but 
was otherwise largely called on to tackle or chase. The Saints lost the 
physical battle on Saturday, but they did not make much of the turnovers they 
won, despite JJ Hanrahan’s prompting, and given the make-up of their back 
division they have the wherewithal to make much more of possession.Paul Rees

• Racing 92 33-3 Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/racing-92-northampton-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
• Racing 92 splash out but rugby still behind football in pay league 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/10/leicester-racing-92-rugby-union-football-pay-league-manu-tuilagi-dan-carter>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-rugby-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ec2a3305189bd82bd79b0178522b913eca850f3%2F0_168_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%E2%80%99s%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-rugby-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%E2%80%99s%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-rugby-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ec2a3305189bd82bd79b0178522b913eca850f3%2F0_168_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Dan Carter enjoyed a stress-free debut for Racing 92. Photograph: Jean 
Catuffe/Getty Images 
4) Goode leads Saracens charge and makes his England case 

There is a pleasing fluency to Saracens’ attacking game this season and they 
appear a more rounded side than in recent years, when they have gone close in 
Europe but never taken home the prize. Full-back Alex Goode is one man 
relishing the shift in emphasis. Time and again Oyonnax found themselves 
flummoxed by a smart sidestep, or a sympathetic pass to put a man in space. The 
French side may not have provided the most stern of tests, but Goode produced 
high-calibre displays against Toulouse and Ulster too. He is a man brimming 
with confidence and, given Mike Brown’s underwhelming World Cup, he is going to 
be pushing the Harlequins man very hard for a Six Nations starting spot should 
his form and fitness hold. Andrew Gwilym

• Oyonnax 10-45 Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/oyonnax-saracens-european-champions-cup-match-report>
• Gustard closes in on England role under Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/13/england-saracens-paul-gustard-assistant-coach-offer>

5) One way or another, Leicester keep winning

Who are the real Leicester – the attacking unit revitalised by Aaron Mauger 
who swept past Stade Francais, and have rattled in 12 tries in their three 
European games, or the doughty mob that have ground their way to third in the 
Premiership table despite the absence of several regulars? The necessary 
reality is a mixture of the two – an effective blend that demonstrated its 
potential at the most unlikely of venues. Leicester are now the only team to 
win two European ties at Thomond Park, rolling back the years to repeat their 
2006 success, as their hosts found it was their turn to feel the painful 
passage of time. They went toe-to-toe with the Munster pack to keep the scores 
level, holding out even when Marcos Ayerza was sin-binned before turning on the 
style, Vereniki Goneva and Ben Youngs scoring on the break as an eerie silence 
descended. Munster can hardly be relishing the return trip to Welford Road next 
Sunday. Leicester’s moves to bring in Australia’s Matt Toomu, and tie down Ben 
Youngs and Manu Tuilagi, show they are building for big things. Director of 
rugby Richard Cockerill is refusing to get carried away, claiming the scoreline 
flattered his team, who were “a shadow of the side we want to be” against 
Worcester last week. Regardless of whichLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> turn up, they are finding a 
way to win.Niall McVeigh

• Munster 19-31 Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/12/munster-leicester-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

• Ben Youngs and Tuilagi sign new Leicester deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/07/ben-youngs-leicester-new-contract>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-rugby-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbcfdc212ee6e2d7f3c15c3a7f07a8a5a04a8ab3%2F0_323_4926_2957%2F4926.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%E2%80%99s%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-rugby-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20Champions%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20weekend%E2%80%99s%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F14%2Feuropean-rugby-champions-cup-rugby-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbcfdc212ee6e2d7f3c15c3a7f07a8a5a04a8ab3%2F0_323_4926_2957%2F4926.jpg>
 Ben Youngs celebrates after Leicester’s victory. Photograph: Matt 
Browne/Sportsfile/Corbis  