
The president of the European commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>, Jean-Claude Juncker, 
has condemned attacks on Polish people in the UK in the aftermath of the Brexit 
vote.

“We Europeans can never accept Polish workers being beaten up, harassed or 
even murdered in the streets of Essex,” Juncker said in his annualstate of the 
union address 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/13/jean-claude-juncker-eu-is-facing-existential-crisis>
 to MEPs in Strasbourg. Five Polish people have been attacked in the Essex town 
of Harlow since the EU referendum, including one man who died from his injuries.

As he set out a series of security and economic measures aimed at uniting 
Europe following the Brexit vote, Juncker urged EU member states to take 
greater responsibility for explaining thevalue of the European project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/francois-hollande-renewal-european-project-trip-brexit-france>
.

Declaring that the next 12 months would be crucial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/22/the-guardian-view-on-the-eu-struggling-with-the-vision-thing>
 for the EU, Juncker said a united Europe could only be built if it were better 
explained and better understood. He highlighted the referendum as a warning 
that the EU faces abattle for survival against nationalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/24/european-far-right-hails-britains-brexit-vote-marine-le-pen>
.


“The European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> doesn’t have enough 
union,” he said. “There are splits out there and often fragmentation exists … 
That is leaving scope for galloping populism.”


Arkadiusz Jóźwik, 40, died after he was beaten up by teenagers in Harlow last 
month.Essex <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/essex> police said Jóźwik and a 
second Polish man, who survived, were apparently the victims of an unprovoked 
attack. The motive is unknown, but one line of inquiry is the possibility of it 
being a hate crime.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjuncker-european-unity-brexit-vote-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5e6a756e74ae07c2a4856433075a237ee22b90%2F0_356_1161_696%2F1161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=European%20commission%20president%20decries%20attacks%20on%20Poles%20since%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjuncker-european-unity-brexit-vote-eu%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=European%20commission%20president%20decries%20attacks%20on%20Poles%20since%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fjuncker-european-unity-brexit-vote-eu%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5e6a756e74ae07c2a4856433075a237ee22b90%2F0_356_1161_696%2F1161.jpg>
 Arkadiusz Jóźwik. Photograph: SWNS.com 
Three other Poles have been attacked in the town and there have been reports 
of further incidents across Britain. Following the attack on Jóźwik, the 
president of Poland, Andrzej Duda,wrote to church leaders in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/06/polish-communities-in-uk-to-get-more-protection>
 asking them to help prevent attacks on Poles living in the UK and combat a 
climate of “aversion and animosity”.

Eric Hind, a Harlow-based Pole who organised a protest march in the town after 
Jóźwik’s killing, welcomed Juncker’s remarks, but said hate crimes had 
continued since the referendum.

“I am glad people don’t accept this and have reaffirmed that hate crime has no 
place in UK society, but it is still happening,” he said.

“We respect Britain’s decision to leave the EU, but we would like to see 
respect for people that have moved here, that have built their lives here, that 
contribute.

“Many feel let down by the British government. We made the UK our home, but we 
don’t feel welcome here anymore. People are scared and worried.”

Juncker’s speech in Strasbourg did not dwell on the Brexit vote, though he 
repeated that Britain couldnot have “à la carte access” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/14/pmqs-corbyn-may-brexit-cannot-have-a-la-carte-access-to-single-market-eu-chief-says-politics-live>
 to the single market.

The European commission president has previously criticised the former prime 
minister David Cameron for failing to prepare the ground for the EU referendum 
and launching the four-month campaign for Britain to remain after years of 
sniping directed at Brussels.

Juncker’s bold speech shows Brexit is the least of the EU’s worries | Joris 
Luyendijk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/15/juncker-little-damage-brexit-eu-european-commission>
Juncker said he would ask his team of 27 EU commissioners to increase the 
number of visits made to national parliaments to discuss EU policies. “[Europe] 
can only be built with the member states, not against the member states,” he 
said. “We do listen to our citizens and we would like to do that more 
intensely.”

The 55-minute speech amounted to a laundry list of subjects, ranging from 
Europe’s contribution to 70 years’ of peace to roaming charges and the price of 
milk. “I will not accept that milk is cheaper than water,” he said, in a nod to 
Europe’s farmers. Just as telling were the subjects that went unmentioned, from 
the EU’scontroversial migration pact with Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/25/eu-and-turkey-restart-talks-over-migrant-pact>
 to low-levelfighting in eastern Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/28/east-ukraine-frontline-europe-forgotten-war>
 and tensions with Russia. Juncker, however, called for the EU’s foreign policy 
chief, Federica Mogherini, to have a seat at the table in Syrian peace talks.

In a widely-trailed part of the speech, Juncker called for an EU military 
headquarters and common EU military hardware to stop wasting money in 
overlapping projects. Juncker is a well-known supporter of an EU army, but 
aides insist his vision – set out in a policy paper by Mogherini in late June – 
stops far short of a common fighting force.

The EU has run 30 military and civilian missions in Africa and the Middle East 
in the last decade, but Juncker said a permanent EU headquarters was needed to 
make operations more effective.

The speech comes two days before EU leaders meet in Bratislava, without the 
UK, to chart a way forward for a post-Brexit EU.

The European commission hopes to smooth the path by increasing the EU 
infrastructure fund to €500bn (£425bn) by 2020. Juncker promised a €44bn 
investment fund for Africa in an attempt to create jobs and deter people from
undertaking the perilous sea crossing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/29/dramatic-photos-show-refugees-fleeing-libya-being-rescued-at-sea>
 to Europe.

Also on the cards are plans to create a European travel information system, 
which could mean that British travellers would have topay about £10 to visit 
the continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/09/britons-may-have-to-apply-to-visit-europe-under-eu-visa-scheme>
 after Brexit. Juncker promised to publish a draft law in November.

In a move aimed at alleviating the migration crisis and Europe’s chronic youth 
unemployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/10/calabria-bavaria-eurozone-youth-unemployment-job-opportunities>
, Juncker vowed to create a 100,000-strong youth volunteer corps by 2020.

The other strand of the EU migration strategy that Juncker chose to highlight 
was a plea for the speedy implementation of a law to create an EU border and 
coastguard, to ensure better control of migrants and refugees arriving from the 
Middle East and Africa.


Miloš Zeman: the hardline Czech leader fanning hostility to refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/milos-zeman-czech-leader-refugees>
In a tacit acknowledgement that European commission plans for refugee quotas 
were in trouble, he said solidarity could not be forced, but “must come from 
the heart”. Hungary,Poland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> and other 
central and eastern European countries have accused the commission of blackmail 
over proposals that would oblige them to pay for not giving refuge to people 
fleeing war.

Juncker’s speech received a short standing ovation from two-thirds of the MEPs 
present in Strasbourg. Nigel Farage and the other Ukip MEPs, as well as Marine 
Le Pen and her rightwing group, remained in their seats. In his response, 
Farage chose to avoid a direct attack on Juncker, but saved his ire for the MEP 
and former Belgian prime minister Guy Verhofstadt, who has beenchosen to lead 
Brexit negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/guy-verhofstadt-diehard-european-to-lead-brexit-talks-for-european-parliament>
 for the European parliament. Farage described Verhofstadt as a “fanatic” and 
said his appointment marked “a declaration of war on any sensible negotiation 
process”.


Farage objects to Verhofstadt’s statement that the UK must accept free 
movement of people if it wants access to the single market, a view echoed by 
the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and the European council president, 
Donald Tusk. Farage said this approach would inevitably mean no deal and leave 
the UK trading under World Trade Organisation rules. The former Ukip leader 
claimed this “actually isn’t too bad” for the UK, but argued that it would be 
very bad news for German carmakers and French winemakers.

Le Pen shares the view that the Brexit vote has not been “an apocalypse”. 
“Brexit has broken a taboo,” she said. “The Brits have shown us that you can 
leave the EU and come out better.”
 