
Connacht made a statement on their return to the Champions Cup, with a 
thrilling 23-21 Pool 2 win againstToulouse. Craig Ronaldson’s coolly struck 
conversion of Bundee Aki’s 67th-minute try proved to be the decisive score, as
Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> fell to a fifth 
successive away defeat in Europe for the first time in their history.

Saracens make history by downing Toulon in clash of the heavyweights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/toulon-saracens-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
The French giants’ raw power enabled them to open up a 21-11 interval lead, 
Sébastien Bezy’s three early scrum penalties topped up by tries from Yann David 
and Jean-Marc Doussain. In between,Connacht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/connacht> recovered from their sluggish 
start to set up Ireland prospect Niyi Adeolokun’s fourth try of the season, 
with Jack Carty also kicking two penalties.

Back in Europe’s top tier for the first time since 2013-14, Connacht went on 
to punish tiring Toulouse with tries from the full-back Tiernan O’Halloran and 
the talismanic Aki, whose centre partner, Ronaldson, nailed the all‑important 
conversion.

The Leinster coach, Leo Cullen, was quick to heap praise on his forwards after 
the 33-15 Pool 4 victory overCastres. The hooker Sean Cronin scored a pair of 
tries and loosehead propJack McGrath also crossed to put the Irish province in 
the driving seat as they went to the half-time interval 19-10 ahead. Isa Nacewa 
crossed for the bonus-point try in the 47th minute before the home scrum was 
rewarded with a penalty try after an hour. Anthony Jelonch’s late try for 
Casters’ was mere consolation. Cullen said: “They give really good hit-outs 
every week at training, some real good ding-dong battles there during the week 
at training.”

Stephen Myler holds nerve to rescue Northampton against Montpellier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/15/northampton-montpellier-european-champions-cup-rugby-match-report>
The Wasps director of rugby, Dai Young, was delighted his side maintained 
their output from start to finish to crushZebre 82-14 at the Ricoh Arena a 
European club-record score.Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps> scored 12 tries to beat their 
previous 11-try haul and also achieved their highest score and their biggest 
margin of victory.

Rob Miller and Joe Simpson each scored two and Frank Halai, Ashley Johnson, 
Elliot Daly, Jake Cooper-Woolley, Josh Bassett, James Gaskell, Dan Robson and 
Joe Launchbury one apiece. Danny Cipriani converted six and Jimmy Gopperth five 
to complete the scoring in the Pool 2 game. “We knew we had to get five points 
and that was the big target to secure those points and have no injuries,” said 
Young. “There are a lot of smiles on people’s faces as there was some great 
interplay between backs and forwards.”

Sale slumped to a 12th successive defeat in the competition as their campaign 
suffered an immediate setback atScarlets. The Sharks, without a European Cup 
win since they beat Cardiff Blues two years ago, were sent on their way by 
first-half tries from the scrum-half Gareth Davies and the wing DTH van der 
Merwe. Van der Merwe’s second touchdown after 57 minutes ended the contest, with
Scarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets> fly-half Rhys Patchell 
adding three penalties and two conversions in a 28-11 Pool 3 win. 
 