
1) Toulouse craft cuts through Bath

Toulouse <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/toulouse> finished their moves 
with an aplomb bordering on the insolent. Players formed a queue on the end of 
overlaps. Bath could not finish off half-breaks by Jonathan Joseph, thrusts by 
Dominic Day, runs by Semesa Rokoduguni. French teams are second only to New 
Zealanders in sensing an opportunity in attack and they flood the runner – and 
the place where he is heading – with support. The important difference is that 
these runners hold their depth. In turn, the runner passes the ball into the 
space where the receiver is going to be – not at him. British and Irish teams 
generally like a visible target to hit with hard, flat passes. There is always 
a risk of the receiver overrunning the ball-carrier. Not so in France, where 
the art of putting the ball into unoccupied space is cherished.Eddie Butler

• Bath 19-21 Toulouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/25/bath-toulouse-european-rugby-champions-cup-report>

2) Robshaw’s energy shines through

Wasps’ director of rugby, Dai Young, felt his side had run out of energy after 
a bruising few weeks but Harlequins’ Chris Robshaw keeps on going like that 
relentless toy bunny in those old battery advertisements. His ‘engine’ remains 
his greatest strength and Quins cannot understand why anybody would not want 
him as England’s captain. “How anyone would even contemplate going on the field 
without him is beyond my comprehension,” said his director of rugby, Conor 
O’Shea, having restored Robshaw as captain in the absence of the injured Joe 
Marler. “He loved it getting the armband back ... it’s probably good for 
England and Stuart Lancaster.” The counter argument is that England still lack 
an out-and-out openside but, in the end, it is all about the overall balance of 
any back row. Robshaw may just be destined to be one of those players whose 
true value becomes fully apparent only when they are not around. Robert Kitson 

• Wasps 16-23 Harlequins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/26/wasps-harlequins-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>

3) Glasgow can break into select group 

Glasgow had only once won in France in the European Cup, in Toulouse in 2009, 
their next opponents after victory inMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/montpellier>, where they drew three seasons 
ago. Following the opening-day victory over Bath, Glasgow are on course to 
reach the last eight for the first time. They have made an impact in the Pro12 
in recent seasons with a fast, open game but they had to dig in against a side 
that is fourth in the Top 14, winning a battle of attrition through the boot of 
Finn Russell and an indomitable forward effort. The knock-out stage of the 
tournament has in recent years largely been a preserve of the French, English 
and Irish but a side that contains 17 of the Scotland squad is on course to 
break through.Paul Rees

• Montpellier 13-15 Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/25/montpellier-glasgow-european-rugby-champions-cup-report>

4) Crucial double-header awaits lax Leicester

Make mistakes at any level and you are in trouble. Make three costly ones, as 
Leicester did at Parc y Scarlets on Saturday night, and you could easily be out 
of Europe before the knock-out stages come around.Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> now have a pre-Christmas 
double-header against Toulon, getting up a nice head of steam in their quest to 
be the first team to dominate Europe for three seasons on the bounce. One 
senses that the first meeting, at Welford Road on 7 December, might make the 
following week’s trip to the south of France doubly difficult.Mike Averis

• Scarlets 15-3 Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/25/scarlets-leicester-european-rugby-champions-cup-report>

5) Pro12 sides showing their worth

It is early days yet but there have been seven European Champions Cup fixtures 
pitting Premiership against Pro 12 sides. And the score in this little game 
within a game? Five to the Pro 12, two to the Premiership, with Munster leading 
the charge thanks to two wins out of two against English opposition. Friday 
night’s defeat for Saracens in Limerick certainly makes life interesting for 
the north London side in the New Year, particularly if Munster prosper home and 
away against Clermont in December. The structure of the competition may change 
but a desire to beat the English never goes out of fashion.Robert Kitson

• Munster 14-3 Saracens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/24/munster-saracens-european-champions-cup>

6) George North proves centre credentials

The Wales head coach, Warren Gatland, has long mused whether George North will 
end up as a centre rather than a wing and after North played in the midfield 
against Ospreys he will have had more pause for thought. North looked sharp 
throughout, quick off the mark and hard to stop once he got into a stride. His 
first try, changing pace after having to slow down to secure a pass, may not 
have looked the pick of his four but it showed how he has evolved since joining 
fromScarlets <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/scarlets>. He will be an option 
in midfield in the opening Test against Australia if Jonathan Davies is ruled 
out by the shoulder injury he sustained during Clermont’s match against Sale 
and played in the centre for the final 32 minutes of Wales’ Test against 
Australia last year. Though Gatland does not have an abundance of wings, as he 
contemplates the toughest of World Cup groups, he will appreciate Wales have to 
maximise North’s involvement.Paul Rees 

• Northampton 34-6 Ospreys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/oct/25/northampton-ospreys-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 