
The huge, wooden scale model of Odense, inside a temporary information centre 
opposite the town hall, looks initially like a replica of the Danish city. But 
give them a few minutes and a local would begin to spot some differences, 
especially to the main traffic route bisecting the urban centre.

Thomas B Thriges Street <https://da.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_B._Thriges_Gade> 
was built in the 1960s as a solution to growing car congestion: a fast-moving, 
four-lane road laid like a curved ribbon across the middle of the city.

That ribbon was first trimmed 18 months ago when a central section of the 
street was closed to vehicles. More isto come in the next few years 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tJyOLNlpFzQ>, as the rest of the road is 
transformed into a new heart for Odense, reserved for bikes and pedestrians, 
and lined with shops, cafes and homes.

It is the centrepiece of a hugely ambitious, and initially controversial, 
near-£3bn makeover for Denmark’s third-biggest city, which is attempting to 
revive itself from slightly struggling post-industrial area to a hi-tech hub 
for education and industry. And at the centre of this transformation is the 
thing Odense boasts it does as well as anywhere in Europe: liveability.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQz3BF3Njx-k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQz3BF3Njx-k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQz3BF3Njx-k&media=>
 Odense plans to transform a busy four-lane road into an area for pedestrians 
and people on bikes 
“We try to think about people living here all their life, and having a good 
life here,” saysAnker Boye 
<http://www.odense.dk/indflydelse%20og%20politik/odense%20byraad/byraadets%20medlemmer/anker%20boye%20borgmester%20a>
, the city’s veteran mayor, a house painter turned professional politician. 
“The investors are coming because they know people want to live in Odense.”

The investors are coming because they know people want to live in Odense
Anker Boye 
The lure comes in two parts, which until recently might have seemed a 
confusing meld of right-wing business notions and more left-leaning urban 
design.

Boye’s centre-left coalition proudly claims to have created the most 
business-friendly environment inDenmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/denmark>, with low taxes and various 
business fees abolished. But in parallel to this is a city where 50% of all 
central trips are made by bike, and private cars are increasingly and 
deliberately kept away from the centre.

While Copenhagen has long been the place of pilgrimage for foreigners with a 
yearning to experience Denmark’s famously pro-bike culture, Odense quietly but 
firmly stresses its national primacy on two-wheeled transport.

Following decades of work to build infrastructure and embed a cycling culture, 
the statistics are astonishing. Odense, a city of just under 200,000 people, 
has almost 350 miles of bike lanes and 123 cyclist-only bridges.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe86490a52bc38c269aaae8f0de510660adb6167b%2F0_0_5427_3623%2F5427.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe's%20most%20liveable%20city%3F%20The%20secret%20of%20Odense's%20post-industrial%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%27s%20most%20liveable%20city%3F%20The%20secret%20of%20Odense%27s%20post-industrial%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe86490a52bc38c269aaae8f0de510660adb6167b%2F0_0_5427_3623%2F5427.jpg>
 Cyclists and pedestrians on Vestergade, one of Odense’s main streets. 
Photograph: Thomas D Mørkeberg 
Most impressive is the inclusivity of cycling, with 81% of children riding to 
school and training programmes in place to get even two-year-old kindergarten 
entrants to trundle to and from home on a balance bike.

Troels Andersen, head of cycle projects for the city, says the embedded 
bike-ness extends to the other end of the demographic curve. “It’s very rare 
that older people stop cycling because of the infrastructure and safety, it’s 
mainly because of balance problems,” he says.

We are very average as a city … you could have hundreds of cities like Odense 
all over Europe
Troels Andersen 
“With some people, when they can’t cycle any more because of their age they 
push their bike along as a walking frame, leaning on it. They don’t like to use 
a normal walking frame, as then you look really old and frail. They walk around 
the city with their bike, and they feel normal.”

Odense was formerly one of Denmark’s industrial centres, especially for 
shipping, building huge container vessels for the Maersk group until 2012.

Its hoped-for economic future is based heavily around reshaping the centre to 
reflect the new purpose. An old harbour is being rebuilt with offices and 
homes, as well as a cultural centre, all linked to the centre by a 
just-finished, sweep-curved cycle bridge.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7780cd0d613ace4904fae787a50249b62c9d6954%2F0_490_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe's%20most%20liveable%20city%3F%20The%20secret%20of%20Odense's%20post-industrial%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%27s%20most%20liveable%20city%3F%20The%20secret%20of%20Odense%27s%20post-industrial%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7780cd0d613ace4904fae787a50249b62c9d6954%2F0_490_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Cycling Anton spreads the two-wheeled message to children at a kindergarten in 
Odense. Photograph: Odense Kommune 
Meanwhile Thomas B Thriges street – named, inevitably, after a famous local 
industrialist – will in its rebuilt form host not just bikes and pedestrians 
but also a new tramline, linking to the city’s university and hospital. Cars 
can approach the city centre via ringroads but will be channelled to 
park-and-ride systems or new underground parking.


A few years ago the city adopted a new motto, At leger er at leve (To play is 
to live) – appropriate for somewhere which claims more than 120 parks and 250 
playgrounds. Central to this is the cycling strategy which, Andersen explains, 
has to approach the subject from a different perspective than somewhere like 
Copenhagen – let alone London or New York.

Andersen says that congestion in Copenhagen makes it easier for city 
authorities to tempt people into cycling with new infrastructure. That 
incentive is not so strong in Odense. “Unlike in Copenhagen, we don’t have the 
benefits of traffic congestion,” he says. “In Copenhagen they just build 
infrastructure and they get a lot of cyclists. People do it here for free. When 
people are cycling here they do it for the fun and pleasure, and for health.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd88522303da0f5aa309a6e6075728bc07acbc218%2F0_167_4114_2579%2F4114.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe's%20most%20liveable%20city%3F%20The%20secret%20of%20Odense's%20post-industrial%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%27s%20most%20liveable%20city%3F%20The%20secret%20of%20Odense%27s%20post-industrial%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd88522303da0f5aa309a6e6075728bc07acbc218%2F0_167_4114_2579%2F4114.jpg>
 Cycle parking in Odense. ‘With some people, when they can’t cycle any more 
because of their age they push their bike along as a walking frame.’ 
Photograph: Thomas D Mørkeberg 
A key element is thus promotion and encouragement, especially with younger 
people. Foreign students who come to study at one university in Odense receive 
a bike with their university room. Machines from themunicipal bike-hire scheme 
<http://www.visitodense.com/ln-int/danmark/rent-a-city-bike-in-odense-with-your-mobile-gdk805365>
 need to be unlocked using a mobile phone code, but then cost nothing to use. 
One intrepid city employee dresses in a head-to-toe cuddly duck outfit and, in 
the guise ofa character named Cycling Anton 
<http://www.cycling-embassy.dk/2015/12/09/kindergarten-kids-cycle-in-odense/>, 
rides between kindergartens to spread the two-wheeled message via stickers and 
hugs.

We try to think about people living here all their life, and having a good 
life here
Anker Boye 
The result is clear in Odense’s post-school mini rush hour. While many 
children do cycle with their parents, a number of others, even of primary age, 
ride alone or with similar-sized siblings. The official policy is that routes 
to schools should be sufficiently safe for those aged six or older to cycle 
alone if the family chooses.

Klaus Bondam, who heads the Copenhagen-based Cyklistforbundet 
<https://www.cyklistforbundet.dk/>, or Danish cyclists’ union, admits Odense 
has the lead over his city on this: “In many places in Copenhagen we do have a 
cycling environment, but you don’t feel safe sending a kid out to cycle. Odense 
are doing good.”

Odense has spent many years building up its cycle infrastructure and culture, 
and Andersen stresses that for other similar-sized cities to follow does need 
time and continuous political support. But he, adds, it need not cost too much.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb23055286816731fe1e1cef8de4d1f4ca6f6cecb%2F0_118_6882_4130%2F6882.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europe's%20most%20liveable%20city%3F%20The%20secret%20of%20Odense's%20post-industrial%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europe%27s%20most%20liveable%20city%3F%20The%20secret%20of%20Odense%27s%20post-industrial%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F21%2Fodense-post-industrial-city-liveable-hi-tech-hub-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb23055286816731fe1e1cef8de4d1f4ca6f6cecb%2F0_118_6882_4130%2F6882.jpg>
 Thomas B Thriges street before the makeover. Photograph: Odense Kommune 
Between 1999 and 2002, the city undertook what became known as the 20, 20, 20 
scheme. A programme to boost cycling that brought a 20% rise in cyclist 
numbers, and a 20% reduction in bike-related crashes, and all for a cost of 
just 20m krone, or about £2m.

“We’re very average as a city,” Andersen says. “There are hundreds of cities 
like this aroundEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. So it’s 
more interesting – you could have hundreds of cities like Odense, all over.”

Boye’s press team show me Odense by lending me a Christiana bike 
<http://www.christianiabikes.com/en/>, one of the three-wheeled contraptions in 
which the luggage or, in this case, my five-year-old son, can sit inside a 
compartment at the front.

The idea of riding around London’s combative and feral streets in such a way, 
especially given overnight snowfall, would be unthinkable. But in Odense it is 
easy, not least as a fleet of mini-tractors carrying rotating brushes have 
swept the bike lanes clear. It’s not just the ubiquitous infrastructure which 
inspires confidence, it’s also the sheer number of fellow cyclists, and the 
concomitant care drivers take when interacting with them.

How Groningen invented a cycling template for cities all over the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/29/how-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world>
Much like the Netherlands, Denmark lost a good deal of its bike-based culture 
from the 1960s, as big roads like Thomas B Thrige street were pushed through 
city centres.

Boye says cities like his need to accept that this era is over. “In the 1960s 
people thought it was good to get a house and a car, and we built our new 
family houses in suburbs around the city,” he said. “Odense became a big, flat 
city. Now we’re concentrating things inside the old industrial areas, but we’re 
trying to do it in a clever way.”

The mayor says he sees no contradiction between the futuristic industries now 
arriving – Odense hosts a major international test centre for drones – and a 
transport network based around bikes and trams, technologies which have not 
changed fundamentally since the 19th century.

“More and more investors are coming here, because they believe in the way 
we’ve transformed this old, industrial city into a new city,” he says. “We know 
we need to live from private businesses, so we need to have good conditions for 
that. But we care about the whole life of people. It’s all these many things 
together.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 