
Pep Guardiola knew this fixture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/15/everton-manchester-city-premier-league-live>
 was going to be hard but felt his side would show the benefit of a full week 
off in which to prepare. Manchester City had enjoyed thatfive-goal romp at West 
Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/west-ham-united-manchester-city-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
 in the FA Cup on Friday 6 January, whereas Everton had played on the Saturday 
and been dumped out of the only competition remaining open to themby Leicester 
City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/everton-leicester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
.

Ademola Lookman adds flourish for Everton in defeat of Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/everton-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
Cue glumness at Goodison, with complaints that Everton’s season had ended in 
early January and hints from Ronald Koeman that some transfer action in the 
window may be a good idea if the team was going to be any stronger for the next 
campaign. Yet it was City, still with everything to play for, who looked stale 
here. Everton were fresh, inventive, up for it. Their midfield was bolstered by 
the introduction ofMorgan Schneiderlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/morgan-schneiderlin-joins-everton-manchester-united>
, their £20m new signing, in the second half but by that point the home side 
were already two goals to the good. While City’s star-studded midfield 
struggled to find a way through Everton’s back three and Sergio Agüero endured 
an afternoon without the ball, an 18-year-old local product was making a name 
for himself and delighting his home crowd while dispatching another body blow 
to Guardiola’s hopes of securing a top-four place in his first season in 
England.

Tom Davies made his first start of the season only a fortnight ago but Koeman 
evidently liked what he saw and against City it was possible to see why. 
Undaunted by Yaya Touré, David Silva, Kevin De Bruyne and all the other 
illustrious names in front of him, Davies played with a confidence and maturity 
beyond his years. His pass to Kevin Mirallas to allow Romelu Lukaku to open the 
scoring was simply sublime, perfectly measured and weighted and responsible for 
taking out two or thee City defenders. Right at the end of the first half he 
stuck a foot in to dispossess Silva and set an attack in motion that could have 
brought Lukaku a second goal, then to complete a busy 45 minutes he turned up 
on his own line to prevent an equaliser when Bacary Sagna’s header needed to be 
cleared.

The best was saved until last, however, for in the second half, with the game 
already won at 2-0 and City beginning to wish they were somewhere else, Davies 
collected the ball in his own half and set off on a run down the right wing. 
Taking on Gaël Clichy and Touré and turning inside to beat them both, Davies 
played in Lukaku, picked up a return pass from Ross Barkley and calmly stroked 
the ball over Claudio Bravo to score his first goal for the club.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fguardiola-and-koeman-speak-after-everton-thrash-manchester-city-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardiola%20and%20Koeman%20speak%20after%20Everton%20thrash%20Manchester%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fguardiola-and-koeman-speak-after-everton-thrash-manchester-city-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardiola%20and%20Koeman%20speak%20after%20Everton%20thrash%20Manchester%20City%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fguardiola-and-koeman-speak-after-everton-thrash-manchester-city-video&media=>
Guardiola and Koeman speak after Everton thrash Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/15/guardiola-and-koeman-speak-after-everton-thrash-manchester-city-video>
That was quite a moment, yet Everton were still not finished. Although the new 
signing Ademola Lookman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/everton-announce-signing-of-ademola-lookman-charlton-athletic>
 was sent on only for the last few minutes of stoppage time, just to introduce 
the former Charlton Athletic player to his new surroundings, the 19-year-old 
found the visiting defence in such disarray that he helped himself to a debut 
goal at the Gwladys Street End.

That turned a convincing victory into a rout of City and the wild celebrations 
were fuelled by elements of surprise as well as relief. This was Everton’s 
biggest win over City in three decades and before the game absolutely no one 
was expecting that. Before the gameEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> would have gladly settled for a 
draw or perhaps a narrow defeat and a mistake or two from John Stones.

The City defender was predictably booed on his return to Goodison but was 
playing well and displaying his usual coolness under pressure until the game 
got away from the visitors in the second half. Everton’s precise passing and 
enthusiastic support play bypassed Stones for the third goal – and for the 
fourth the defender was unlucky when his attempted clearance struck Séamus 
Coleman and rebounded kindly for Lookman to take advantage.

For all Everton’s unexpected excellence, it remains unlikely that they will 
crack the top six this season, although on this evidence City could soon be 
making a place available. Guardiola’s side never got their game going. Pablo 
Zabaleta did not bring much to midfield and Touré and De Bruyne seemed to be 
playing too deep, moving the ball around quite neatly but usually too far from 
the Everton goal to cause the home side any alarm.

Pep Guardiola rules Manchester City out of title race after Everton thrashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-rules-out-title-race>
Guardiola argued his side suffered through not taking the chances they created 
in the first half, which was true up to a point. Better finishing from Raheem 
Sterling from De Bruyne invitations on two occasions before Everton scored 
might have put the home side under more pressure and altered the outcome of the 
game, although City still need to work out why Agüero is not getting on the end 
of their best chances or why opponents seem to find it so easy to open up their 
defence so completely.

Guardiola thought the game was a little like the 1-1 draw against Everton at 
the Etihad Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/manchester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report>
 in October, which was odd because on that occasion his side would have won but 
for missing two  penalties.

Everton did give notice three months ago that under Koeman they are capable of 
staying compact in defence and making the most of isolated opportunities to 
counter but that was not what happened here. Everton’s opportunities were far 
from isolated, as the scoreline suggests.

“We punished them,” Koeman said. Guardiola, who also expressed dismay at the 
scoreline, did not disagree. “It might have been different if Sagna had scored 
at the end of the first half but Davies was in the way,” the City manager said.

Of Everton’s two teenage goalscorers, Davies is the younger by eight months 
but he can consider himself to have truly arrived if Guardiola knows his name 
already.
 