
A former militia leader from northern Uganda has denied committing war crimes 
including rape and murder, on the opening day of his trial at theinternational 
criminal court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/state-impunity-international-criminal-court-african>
 at The Hague, saying that as a child soldier taken by force from his home by 
the organisation he was a victim of its atrocities, not a perpetrator.


Dominic Ongwen, once a feared commander of the Lord’s Resistance Army, told 
judges in a dramatic outburst that he was “one of the people against whom the 
LRA committed atrocities”. He said: “In the name of God, I deny all these 
charges.”

 The trial of is one of the most momentous in the ICC’s 14-year history, and 
raises difficult questions of responsibility and blame. Ongwen, who is between 
35 and 40 years old, is the first former child soldier to face trial at the 
controversial institution and the first defendant to be both alleged 
perpetrator and victim of the same crimes.

Ongwen was abducted by the LRA at the age of 10 when returning from school and 
is thought to have been forced to participate in combat and violent acts 
against civilians as a child. He told the court he should not be on trial.

Child soldier to war criminal: the trial of Dominic Ongwen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/mar/27/dominic-ongwen-war-crimes-trial-former-child-soldier-icc-uganda>
“I am not the LRA … It is the LRA who abducted people in northern Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>. It is the LRA who killed people,” 
Ongwen said, speaking through an interpreter.

 A court official needed almost 20 minutes to read the 70 charges against 
Ongwen. They included murder, attempted murder, torture, rape, sexual slavery 
and, for the first time, “forced pregnancy” and “forced marriage”.

 Led by Joseph Kony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/life-after-joseph-kony-uganda-women-rebuilding-lives-child-soldiers>
, a former rebel leader who claimed to be religiously inspired, the LRA waged 
war across five countries in east and centralAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> for nearly 30 years.

The group has been blamed for the deaths of about 100,000 people and the 
abduction of 60,000 children. It relied on the abduction of largely defenceless 
villagers and refugees, including children, to provide labour and combatants. 
Girls were forced into sexual and domestic slavery while boys were forced to 
commit atrocities and conditioned to believe such acts were necessary and 
justified.

 Most of the charges against Ongwen focus on a series of attacks on refugee 
camps between 2002 and 2005. One of the worst involved a four-day raid by the 
LRA on camps in north-eastern Congo in December 2009, in which about 350 
civilians were killed and another 250, including at least 80 children, were 
abducted.

Defence lawyers will argue that much of the evidence against Ongwen is 
unreliable and say their client was brutalised and traumatised after being 
abducted.

“He was tortured … forced to watch people being killed, used for fighting as a 
child soldier. Even the prosecution have said that what he went through is a 
serious mitigating factor,” said Thomas Obhof, a US lawyer based in Uganda and 
part of the defence team.

Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda told the court that past victimisation as a child 
might be a mitigating factor in sentencing but was not a defence of Ongwen’s 
alleged decision to “wholeheartedly” embrace violence.

“Ongwen was directly involved in many attacks on civilians … He knew that the 
crimes he committed were part of widespread and systematic attacks … He played 
a crucial role in …. the abduction of children in order to maintain the 
fighting strength of the LRA,” she told the court.


Bensouda said eyewitnesses remembered Ongwen giving orders “to bite and stone 
an old man to death” and cited evidence that the majority of the children in 
Ongwen’s “battalion” were young teenagers who were regularly forced to 
participate in torture and murder “to convince them there could be no 
acceptance for them back in society”.

Charge number 69 against Ongwen involved the alleged conscription of children 
under the age of 15 into an armed group, while charge number 70 alleged the use 
of children as combatants in an armed group between July 2002 and December 2005.

Ledio Cakaj, the author of When the Walking Defeats You, a book that documents 
the experiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/09/scars-body-soul-joseph-kony-bodyguard-when-the-walking-defeats-you-ledio-cakaj-book-extract>
 of a bodyguard to the LRA leader,Kony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/08/joseph-kony-child-soldiers>, 
said the trial raised “a very tricky issue”. He said: “A lot of these people of 
the LRA, who are considered as the bad guys, were in some sense victims in the 
first place … There are very interesting questions here.”

 The LRA is now believed to comprise only about 100 fighters, but remains 
feared by civilians in remote communities and an inspiration to other militia 
groups, which have copied its brutal methods. Every week bringsreports of 
continuing attacks <https://www.lracrisistracker.com/>.

 Of the five senior LRA leaders indicted by the ICC 11 years ago, only Ongwen 
and his former leader,Kony <https://www.theguardian.com/world/joseph-kony>, are 
still alive. Despite a $5m (£3.5m) reward for information leading to his 
capture, Kony remains elusive.

Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> is still wracked by militia 
groups and militant outfits. Cakaj said that even though the trial dealt with 
events that occurred a decade or more ago it would raise issues that were 
relevant now.

Boko Haram <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram>, the Nigeria-based 
Islamist extremist organisation, has abducted tens of thousands of men and 
women, with some taking up combat roles or even launching suicide attacks.

 “The issues are important today … Any lessons can be applied to ongoing 
conflicts [in Africa] too,” Cakaj said.

 The case is crucial for the ICC, too. Huge resources have been invested in 
building a case against the LRA leaders, whose arrest warrants were the first 
issued by the court.

 The ICC, founded in 2002 to bring to justice perpetrators of crimes that 
local criminal systems cannot deal with, has been criticised in Africa by some 
who see it as a racist, imperialist institution. Nine out of the 10 cases being 
investigated by the ICC involve alleged crimes in Africa, and recent months 
have seenSouth Africa 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/10/24/south-africa-icc-move-betrays-victims>, 
the Gambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/gambia-becomes-latest-african-nation-to-quit-international-criminal-court>
, andBurundi 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/10/27/burundi-icc-withdrawal-major-loss-victims> 
announce their withdrawal from the court. It is possible, however, that none 
will leave, especially sinceelections in the Gambia ousted Yahya Jammeh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
.

 In September, the court convicted Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/28/iccs-first-cultural-destruction-trial-to-open-in-the-hague>
, who pleaded guilty to razing medieval shrines, tombs and a 15th-century 
mosque that formed part of theUnesco world heritage site in Timbuktu, Mali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/27/timbuktu-shrines-icc-sentences-islamic-militant-nine-years-destruction-ahmad-al-faqi-al-mahdi>
, when the city was seized by Islamic militants in 2012. Mahdi was sentenced to 
nine years in prison.

 Defenders say the majority of the investigations have followed an explicit 
request or grant of jurisdiction from the government in the country where the 
crimes were committed, as in the case of Uganda; while others say criticism of 
the institution came when it started investigating acts that had been committed 
by current rulers or their close associates from 2009.

 Thousands in Uganda are watching the Ongwen trial in The Hague on screens set 
up by the ICC at viewing sites in the four locations where the most significant 
alleged crimes were committed. The trial has been hailed byhuman rights 
campaigners 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/12/05/icc-first-lords-resistance-army-trial-begins>
.

 “The ICC trial of Dominic Ongwen is a significant first on justice for LRA 
atrocities,” said Elise Keppler, associate international justice director at 
Human Rights Watch. “The LRA leadership is reviled worldwide for its brutality 
against Africans, but never before has an LRA commander faced trial.”
 