
The former senior MI6 officer Sir Mark Allen will not face charges over the 
rendition and torture of two Libyan dissidents after theCrown Prosecution 
Service <https://www.theguardian.com/law/crown-prosecution-service> decided 
there was insufficient evidence to proceed.

But prosecutors concluded he had been in contact with countries that detained 
Abdel Hakim Belhaj <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-hakim-belhaj> and 
Sami al-Saadi in 2004 as they were transferred back to Colonel Gadaffi’s Libya 
and had “sought political authority for some of his actions”.

Following a four-year investigation by Scotland Yard, which gathered nearly 
30,000 pages of evidences, the CPS has confirmed that it did not believe there 
were grounds for launching legal action against “the suspect” described only as 
a public official.


Sue Hemming, the head of the CPS’s special crime and counter-terrorism 
division, said: “Following a thorough investigation, the CPS has decided that 
there is insufficient evidence to charge the suspect with any criminal offence.

“We made our decision based upon all the available admissible evidence and 
after weighing up all of the information we have been provided with.”

There had been speculation that the former foreign secretary Jack Straw could 
face charges. That prospect now seems to have disappeared.

Belhaj, a Libyan, and his wife, Fatima Bouchar, were abducted and flown by the 
CIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> from Bangkok to president Muammar 
Gaddafi’s interrogation and torture cells in Tripoli.

Saadi, who was forced on to a plane in Hong Kong, spent six years in jail. 
Both Belhaj and Saadi say they were frequently tortured. Saadi’s wife and four 
children – the youngest being a six-year-old girl – were also rendered and 
imprisoned.

Evidence of MI6 involvement in the Libyans’ ordeal emerged in correspondence 
with Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2012/apr/08/libya-moussa-koussa> 
that was found inside the abandoned office ofMoussa Koussa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/31/libya-conflict-mousa-kousa-defects>
, Gaddafi’s foreign minister and former intelligence chief, after the regime 
fell.

A CPS statement said: “In what has been a thorough and painstaking 
investigation, evidence and information was obtained from a large number of 
records, individuals and organisations including the Secret Intelligence 
Service [MI6], the Security Service [MI5], other government departments and 
authorities in other countries.


“Evidence was also taken from alleged victims and other witnesses during the 
course of this four-year investigation.”

The CPS concluded: “Officials from the UK did not physically detain, transfer 
or ill-treat the alleged victims directly, nor did the suspect have any 
connection to the initial physical detention of either man or their families.”


MI6 gets off scot-free over rendition of suspected Islamists to Libya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/rendition-islamists-mi6-torture-libya>
But, the statement added: “Following careful review, the CPS has concluded 
that there is sufficient evidence to support the contention that the suspect 
had been in communication with individuals from the foreign countries 
responsible for the detention and transfer of the Belhaj and Al-Saadi families; 
disclosed aspects of what was occurring to others within this country; and 
sought political authority for some of his actions albeit not within a formal 
written process nor in detail which covered all his communications and conduct.”

There was no reference to section 7 of the 1994 Intelligence Services Act, 
sometimes described as the“James Bond clause” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/nov/11/jack-straw-and-senior-spy-could-avoid-torture-prosecution>
, which protects MI6 officers from prosecution for actions anywhere in the 
world that would otherwise be illegal. That protection would only be available 
as long as their actions were authorised in writing by the secretary of state.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fmi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F657569a8ba914dfd8b4925c334ae034f8df7160e%2F0_104_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ex-MI6%20officer%20will%20not%20face%20charges%20over%20Libyan%20renditions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fmi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ex-MI6%20officer%20will%20not%20face%20charges%20over%20Libyan%20renditions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F09%2Fmi6-officers-not-charges-rendition-of-libyan-families-abdel-hakim-belhaj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F657569a8ba914dfd8b4925c334ae034f8df7160e%2F0_104_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Libya’s former foreign minister Moussa Koussa, in whose abandoned office the 
correspondence with Sir Mark Allen was found. Photograph: Zohra Bensemra/Reuters
Under the victims’ right to review scheme, Belhaj and Saadi have already 
indicated through their lawyers that they will challenge the CPS’s decision not 
to bring charges. If that fails to reverse the outcome, they could subsequently 
initiate judicial review of the process.


Westminster’s intelligence and security committee confirmed it would continue 
to investigate the two rendition operations. Chair Dominic Grieve, the former 
attorney general, said: “The ISC will be examining this case as part of our 
current inquiry in relation to detainee treatment and rendition. I cannot 
pre-judge the outcome of our investigation: this is a wide-ranging and detailed 
inquiry and I expect it to continue for some time.”

Responding to the CPS decision, Cori Crider, a lawyer from the human rights 
organisation Reprieve who represented the two families, said: “With today’s 
official acknowledgement that British officials were involved in this 
rendition, the fig leaf of official secrecy in this case is in tatters. There 
is one crucial question: who knew who was on those planes, and for those who 
knew, what possible reason can there be for them to evade justice?


Public need answers in 'shocking' MI6 rendition scandal, says senior Tory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/01/mi5-chief-right-to-be-disgusted-over-mi6-role-rendition-blair>
“Top British officials helped abduct a pregnant woman and four children, and 
so far we have no apology, no explanation, and now no one held responsible. Sir 
Mark Allen took credit, in writing, for the operation. Jack Straw, we are told, 
signed it off. The head of MI5 was so incensed about all this she wrote to Tony 
Blair at the time.

“Strangely, the CPS’s attitude to all this is ‘see no evil, hear no evil, and 
speak no evil’. It is hard to escape the conclusion that this decision has a 
great deal to do with political power and very little to do with the rule of 
law. While these families have been denied justice at every turn, we are 
determined to keep fighting for it.”

Belhaj’s wife, Fatima Bouchar, told the BBC about her rendition in 2004: “I 
was six months pregnant. I was so scared that I was going to die.”


Belhaj said: “I am very disappointed that individuals responsible will not be 
prosecuted. If there is political interference with the courts then it 
undermines British justice.”

The Metropolitan police issued a separate statement saying that its 
investigation, known as Operation Lydd, had been “thorough and penetrating” and 
“conducted without fear or favour” over a two-and-a-half year period, resulting 
in a 28,000-page file of evidencebeing handed to the CPS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/31/met-libya-abduction-rendition-cps>
.


It added that the decision to not prosecute Allen was entirely a matter for 
the CPS. Privately, however, some at the Yard have expressed their anger at the 
decision, believing they had built a powerful case, in particular over the 
second of the two rendition operations, in which Saadi and his wife and 
children were abducted and flown to Tripoli.

Andrew Tyrie, the prominent backbench Tory MP who has campaigned for several 
years for a thorough investigation into the UK’s involvement in extraordinary 
rendition, said the ISC must now get to the bottom of what happened. “The 
public need to be assured that the scope and limits of British involvement in 
kidnap and torture have been fully investigated.

“They cannot yet have that confidence. Failure to get to the truth would 
almost certainly result in a drip-drip of further revelations. These could 
tarnish Britain’s reputation far more than the shorter term impact of an 
inquiry – preferably judge-led – which gets to the truth.”

Sonya Sceats, the policy and advocacy director at charity Freedom from Torture 
<https://www.freedomfromtorture.org/>, said: “The full truth about British 
complicity in torture still has to be smoked out, even if this will not happen 
in a criminal court. The gravity of the issues and legal obligation for a human 
rights-compliant process mean that David Cameron must make good on his promise 
to hold a judge-led inquiry.

“By taking this step, the prime minister can start to repair the damage done 
to the UK’s reputation, support those working inside the intelligence services 
to prevent further British involvement in torture, and deliver justice for the 
survivors who endured unspeakable brutality at the hands of our security 
partners inLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> and elsewhere.”



Amnesty International UK <https://www.amnesty.org.uk/>’s legal programme 
director, Rachel Logan, said: “Today’s decision underscores the need for an 
independent inquiry that is thorough, effective, and can get to the bottom of 
the grave allegations of UK involvement in rendition and torture.

“The police investigations were narrow in scope – focused on whether they felt 
there was a realistic prospect of convicting an identified individual, to the 
criminal standard of proof, in these cases; the need properly to investigate 
the UK’s responsibility for violations of its human rights obligations in 
relation to these matters remains.”
 