
A university lecturer who has a controversial past infiltrating political 
groups as an undercover police officer has resigned from two academic posts 
following long-running protests from campaigners.

Bob Lambert, who fathered a child with an activist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/24/undercover-police-spy-girlfriend-child>
 before abandoning both of them, has quit his part-time posts at St Andrews and 
London Metropolitan universities. Campaigners had beencalling for him to be 
dismissed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/undercover-with-paul-lewis-and-rob-evans/2015/jan/06/university-under-pressure-to-sack-controversial-former-undercover-spy-bob-lambert>
, saying that his previous conduct as an undercover spy made him an unsuitable 
person to be teaching students.

Lambert’s covert work infiltrating animal rights and environmental groups in 
the 1980s wasexposed in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/16/academic-bob-lambert-former-police-spy>
 by a group of campaigners on whom he had spied. During his four-year mission, 
he had fathered a child with a campaigner and then disappeared from their 
lives, claiming that he had to flee abroad to escape being arrested by the 
police.

When it comes to Bob Lambert, the truth is stranger than fiction | Dreda Say 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/30/bob-lambert-truth-stranger-than-fiction>
The mother of his child only discovered the truth by chance in 2012, leaving 
her profoundly traumatised. Last year, the Metropolitan policepaid her £425,000 
in an out of court settlement. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/23/police-compensation-payout-woman-undercover-officer>
 Lambert also had a 18-month relationship with another woman,Belinda Harvey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jun/22/undercover-police-lovers>
, while he was undercover.

Last month, the Met apologised and paid substantial compensation to Harvey and 
six other women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/20/met-police-apologise-women-had-relationships-with-undercover-officers>
 who had discovered they had had intimate relationships with undercover 
officers. The Met admitted that the relationships had been “abusive, deceitful, 
manipulative and wrong”.

As part of his undercover work, Lambert also stole the identity of a dead boy 
to develop hisfake identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/feb/21/anatomy-of-betrayal-undercover-police>
, appeared in court using thisfalse persona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/06/home-office-police-childrens-identities-lambert>
, and been accused ofsetting fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/07/activists-appeal-convictions-involvement-police-spy>
 to a branch of Debenhams - an accusation he denies. He is under investigation 
over his role insecret operations to collect intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/02/stephen-lawrence-ipcc-met-commander-spying-claims>
 on the family of murdered teenagerStephen Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/mar/06/stephen-lawrence-theresa-may-inquiry-police>
.

After leaving the police in 2007, he secured posts at three universities, but 
has now quit all three. In a statement, St Andrews University said: “Dr Lambert 
resigned from his post as a lecturer at St Andrews with effect from the end of 
the current term.”

This month, four activists, including the Guardian journalist George Monbiot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/georgemonbiot>, had called for him to be 
sacked from his joblecturing students on terrorism 
<http://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/~cstpv/staff/rl40.html>, saying that it was 
“abhorrent that a man so lacking in moral compass should be in a position where 
he isshaping the minds of others 
<http://campaignopposingpolicesurveillance.com/2015/12/14/activists-demand-lamberts-sacking/>
”.

Prof Louise Richardson, the university’s principal, told its student paper, 
The Saint 
<http://www.thesaint-online.com/2015/12/bob-lambert-resigns-as-university-lecturer-over-spying-controversy/>
: “I think hiring people who have had real-world experience in an institution 
which is teaching counter-terrorism is entirely legitimate.

“In my position I’m not going to get involved in what people do privately 
whoever they are, so I think the university were legitimate to hire him and I 
think it has been reasonable for us to keep him.”

The London Metropolitan University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/londonmetropolitanuniversity> confirmed 
that Lambert had resigned earlier this month, adding that it would not comment 
as a matter of course on why he had left.

The university said 
<http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/faculties/faculty-of-social-sciences-and-humanities/people/surnames-k-to-m/robert-lambert/>
 he taught students about terrorism, counter-terrorism, far-right political 
violence and anti-Muslim hate crimes. Lambert had resigned from Exeter 
University in October 2011: the same monthhis undercover past 
<http://www.indymedia.org.uk/en/2011/10/486877.html?c=on> was exposed. Exeter 
has not explained why he left.

In a statement, Lambert said: “I have resigned from my part-time teaching 
positions at theUniversity of St Andrews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/standrewsuniversity> and London 
Metropolitan University and would like to take this opportunity to thank 
management, colleagues and students at both institutions for their kindness and 
support.

“Henceforward I will pursue my academic interests in responses to terrorism 
and political violence as an independent researcher. I will also continue to 
cooperate with the investigations and inquiry into undercover policing.”
 