
“In Concepción we had two earthquakes: the 8.8 one and the social earthquake – 
looting, arson … I think the last one affected our soul most violently,” said 
Álvaro Ortiz Vera, the mayor of Concepción, a coastal city in Chilehit by a 
major quake in February 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/23/rebuilding-chile-constitucion-earthquake-tsunami>
.


While traditional disaster risk management meant the city was well prepared in 
terms of strict building codes, limiting damage and loss of life, what was not 
foreseen was the total breakdown of communications networks. With critical 
services like water, electricity and sewerage networks severely disrupted, 
officials were unable to communicate with each other, coordinate help from the 
government in Santiago or keep the public up-to-date with what was happening. 
Reports of food shortages and theft escalated into looting and panic, until the 
military were brought in to restore order.


What traditional risk management missed became clear, though, when Concepción 
used theCity Resilience Index <http://www.cityresilienceindex.org> (CRI), a new 
tool developed and launched today byengineering consultancy Arup 
<http://www.arup.com/services/international_development> for the Rockefeller 
Foundation <https://www.rockefellerfoundation.org/>.


“Concepción had done all the things you’d expect an earthquake-prone city to 
do in terms of building codes and emergency management, but the weakness that 
emerged [from the CRI assessment] was that their telecommunications systems 
were all reliant on broadband internet,” says Jo da Silva, Arup’s director for 
international development. “When that failed in the quake, the whole city 
information stopped and there was a lot of social disruption as a result. A 
normal analysis of disaster risk reduction would never have unearthed that.”


The alternative to resilience is failure, it’s urban collapse
Jo da Silva 
The CRI measures a city’s resilience. Participants (usually municipal 
governments) answer 156 questions covering issues from health and wellbeing to 
economy and society, infrastructure and ecosystems to leadership and strategy. 
How affordable is transport? How robust is planning? How much green space is 
there?

Answers to these questions – both qualitative and quantitative – give the city 
a holistic ‘resilience profile’. It is not a single aggregate score, but what 
da Silva at Arup likes to explain as a representation of the city’s immune 
system.


Arup analysed 22 cities during the development of the tool and tested the 
finished index on five diverse cities around the world: Liverpool in the UK, 
Hong Kong, Arusha in Tanzania, Shimla in India and Concepción. In Shimla, for 
example, the hillside capital of Himachal Pradesh in the Himalayas, 35 city and 
state departments came together with academics and NGOs to complete the 
assessment. Weaknesses were identified in sustainability and planning, and 
healthcare was highlighted as an area of concern.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcity-resilience-index-expect-unexpected-how-measure-improve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe62b543c1b1beeb768bc8e893dd2c954f56d1ba9%2F92_38_821_662%2F821.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Expect%20the%20unexpected%3A%20how%20to%20measure%20and%20improve%20a%20city's%20resilience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcity-resilience-index-expect-unexpected-how-measure-improve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Expect%20the%20unexpected%3A%20how%20to%20measure%20and%20improve%20a%20city%27s%20resilience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fcity-resilience-index-expect-unexpected-how-measure-improve%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe62b543c1b1beeb768bc8e893dd2c954f56d1ba9%2F92_38_821_662%2F821.jpg>
 Shimla’s resilience profile. Illustration: Arup 
Arup is keen to stress, though, that the index is not about judging cities, or 
comparing performance across cities; instead it’s about creating a community of 
users who are able to improve performance in their own city, and then share 
their experiences with others.

The five pilot cities were deliberately not chosen from the Rockefeller 
Foundation’s100 Resilient Cities programme 
<http://www.100resilientcities.org/#/-_/>, which announces its final tranche 
next week. Any city can complete the CRI using theonline tool 
<http://www.cityresilienceindex.org/> – which helps guide multiple users to 
collaborate over the input of data – and the hope is that more cities will get 
involved.


“The CRI goes beyond preparedness,” da Silva explains. “Resilience is about 
recognising we’ve got to be ready whatever happens. You need to create cities 
that function well today and will continue to function irrespective of what 
happens. It may be the arrival of 200,000 refugees, it may be a major flood, or 
it could be an economic downturn. We can’t bury our heads in the sand until 
those shocks and stresses occur. We want to make sure cities are prepared to 
deal with both the expected and the unexpected. How we manage that, recognising 
the fact that the majority of people live in cities, is for me the agenda that 
is going to define the 21st century.

Judith Rodin's warning for the world: 'Crisis is becoming the new normal'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jan/27/judith-rodin-warning-world-crisis-new-normal-rockefeller-foundation>
“The alternative to resilience is failure, it’s urban collapse. When you look 
at the human consequences of that – whether it’s in cities like Detroit, that 
suffered an economic collapse, or Port-au-Prince in Haiti, which had a physical 
collapse – you are talking about events that affect hundreds of thousands of 
people. Urban failure of any sort is on the scale of major natural disasters.”


Sundaa Bridgett-Jones, associate director of international development at the 
Rockefeller Foundation, says the CRI has evolved as a diagnostic tool to fill 
the gap left by existing methods which tend to concentrate on easily 
quantifiable scientific measurements and focus on single hazards. The complex 
world of resilience doesn’t lend itself to aggregation into a single score or 
ranking, and there is much of value which cannot be quantified as a sum of 
money or a percentage.


“Growing numbers of city leaders really want to be able to look at the full 
spectrum,” she says, “to see where they are, and help them make decisions. They 
want to deal with challenges now and challenges that are coming – that may be 
weather, climate change, economic growth – but also to be able to deal with 
stresses and shocks that are unforeseen.


“The index allows cities around the world to assess where they are. Once 
they’ve completed a profile, they can see they’re strong in some areas and 
weaker in others. They can talk to other cities and share their knowledge, and 
we hope to be able to see what’s working and identify solutions.”

Guardian Cities is a member of the Habitat III Journalism Project. Read more 
about the project here <http://citiscope.org/journalism-project>.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

 