
1) Plymouth’s defensive masterclass should not be sneered at


The triumphant celebrations after Plymouth Argyle’s 0-0 draw at Anfield were 
further confirmation that giant-equalling is the new giantkilling. In the 
modern world of theFA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup>, it is 
enough for David to draw with Goliath – especially as it means a second payday 
for clubs often in need of such a financial boost. For Plymouth’s players, it 
was about more than that. It’s easy to be sniffy about their ultra-defensive 
approach against the youngest team in Liverpool’s history, but most League Two 
teams would not have been good enough to pull it off. Plymouth defended with 
such class and determination that their goalkeeper Luke McCormick barely had a 
save to make. And for once, there’s no harm in employing a little bit of 
artistic licence: in years to come, the record will show that Plymouth drew at 
Anfield, and the details will fade happily into the background.Rob Smyth


 * Match report: Liverpool 0-0 Plymouth Argyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/liverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Klopp has no regrets over team selection for draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-plymouth-argyle-draw-fa-cup>

Anfield draw was my greatest experience as a Plymouth fan – but pure pain | 
Josh Widdicombe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/09/plymouth-argyle-liverpool-fa-cup-josh-widdicombe>
2) Ndidi excels in the Kanté role for Leicester


A season-ending Cup defeat prompted Ronald Koeman to turn his ire on the 
Everton hierarchy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/ronald-koeman-everton-transfer-fa-cup-leicester-city>
 over their transfer business, or current lack of, but his mood would not have 
been helped by Wilfred Ndidi’s debut in the Leicester City midfield. Signedon 
Thursday from Genk for £15m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/leicester-city-wilfred-ndidi-transfer-genk-nigeria>
, the defensive midfielder had only two training sessions with the Premier 
League champions before being plunged into a team missing Jamie Vardy, Riyad 
Mahrez and Islam Slimani. He excelled, breaking up Everton attacks and 
releasing his team-mates swiftly and accurately. Early days of course, but the 
20-year-old provided the protection Leicester have lacked since N’Golo Kanté 
left for Chelsea. “I love players who recover the ball and pass the ball 
straightaway forward,” Claudio Ranieri said. “People love to make comparisons 
and maybe how he ran was more similar to Kanté, but we need a player like him.”
Andy Hunter


 * Match report: Everton 1-2 Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/everton-leicester-city-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Everton seal naming rights deal with Usmanov’s USM holdings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/everton-naming-rights-alisher-usmanov-usm-holdings-farhad-moshiri>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Franieri-compares-pleased-musa-to-vardy-after-leicester-beat-everton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ranieri%20compares%20Ahmed%20Musa%20to%20Jamie%20Vardy%20after%20Leicester%20stun%20Everton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Franieri-compares-pleased-musa-to-vardy-after-leicester-beat-everton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ranieri%20compares%20Ahmed%20Musa%20to%20Jamie%20Vardy%20after%20Leicester%20stun%20Everton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Franieri-compares-pleased-musa-to-vardy-after-leicester-beat-everton-video&media=>
Ranieri compares Ahmed Musa to Jamie Vardy after Leicester stun Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/07/ranieri-compares-pleased-musa-to-vardy-after-leicester-beat-everton-video>
3) Will Hull fans rein in protest chants to help out Silva?


Only 6,608 fans attended Hull City’s win over Swansea. That was the official 
number: it felt like far fewer and there was an eerie atmosphere inside the 
KCOM Stadium on Saturday. Those discontented Hull fans have much to feel 
unhappy about, and their longstanding grievances range from ticket and 
membership issues to a lack of investment in the team. “It’s important for me 
that our fans believe in the team because we need help,” said Marco Silva,the 
new Hull manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/hull-city-appoint-marco-silva-as-new-manager>
, asking those who stayed away to return for the next league match against 
Bournemouth on Saturday. The boycott was a one-off, but at every home game 
Hull’s supporters will sing against the Allam family. Even if their reasons are 
valid, will the chants continue as Silva attempts to drag Hull off the bottom 
of the table, or will some supporters hold their tongue until the end of the 
season in an attempt to help their struggling side?James Riach

 * Match report: Hull City 2-0 Swansea City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/hull-city-swansea-city-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Louise Taylor: Silva checks in at Hull and starts planning for a miracle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/marco-silva-hull-city-planning-miracle>

4) Rashford puts frustrations behind him

Marcus Rashford admitted that a lack of club goals since September had been 
frustrating, but the wait for his fifthManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> goal was ended here 
when he raced on to a second-half through ball and scored with a smooth finish. 
It was Rashford’s first strike since 24 September, in his 10th start since 
then, the reason being the combination of the 19-year-old’s rawness and Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic holding court as the No9. That was the position José Mourinho 
fielded Rashford in against Jaap Stam’s side, and his response was to score 
twice – he also registered United’s fourth after a horrific mistake from Ali 
al-Habsi in the Reading goal. All of this is ideal for the development of 
England’s brightest talents. Rashford said: “I think, halfway through the 
period of not scoring, it was a bit frustrating but, after I started to settle 
down again and getting some assists, and I was starting to play better football 
and now the goals have come so I’m just happy.”Jamie Jackson

 * Match report: Manchester United 4-0 Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/manchester-united-reading-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Jamie Jackson: What now for Rooney after equalling record? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-record-future>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmourinho-praises-rooney-for-equaling-manchester-united-goal-record-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mourinho%20praises%20Rooney%20for%20equalling%20Manchester%20United%20goal%20record%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmourinho-praises-rooney-for-equaling-manchester-united-goal-record-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mourinho%20praises%20Rooney%20for%20equalling%20Manchester%20United%20goal%20record%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmourinho-praises-rooney-for-equaling-manchester-united-goal-record-video&media=>
Mourinho praises Rooney for equalling Manchester United goal record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/07/mourinho-praises-rooney-for-equaling-manchester-united-goal-record-video>
5) Fonté situation clouds Puel’s outlook

Southampton’s draw against an inferior Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/norwichcity> means that, should they 
prevail in the replay, they will have played nine games this month. Claude Puel 
had bemoaned his squad’s tiredness even before this match but another 
preoccupation is what to do with his captain, José Fonte. The centre‑back has 
asked to leave the club and may have cost himself a place in the side for the 
League Cup semi-final first leg against Liverpool on Wednesday. Selling a 
33-year-old might make good business sense but Southampton must also contend 
with regular speculation about the future of Virgil van Dijk – the game’s 
outstanding player on Saturday. That, as we have seen so often, is simply 
Southampton’s place in the food chain and you wonder whether the club have hit 
their ceiling. Puel must hope his players can muster the energy to bring some 
cheer in midweek.Nick Ames

 * Match report: Norwich City 2-2 Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/norwich-city-southampton-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Southampton captain Fonte submits transfer request 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/southampton-jose-fonte-submits-transfer-request>

6) McGeady shows value of an old-fashioned entertainer

There was a real old-fashioned Cup‑tie atmosphere at Deepdale, with fog 
swirling around the floodlight pylons, a full complement of Arsenal supporters 
in the Bill Shankly Stand and an excellent contest on the pitch. During the 
first half there was a vintage moment to savour too, when Aiden McGeady helped 
create the opening goal, cutting in from the left wing past one defender then 
bamboozling Aaron Ramsey with a pirouette. The crowd were still cheering the 
audacity when Callum Robinson completed the move by sticking the ball in David 
Ospina’s net. McGeady is on loan fromEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton>, where he found it difficult to 
hold down a first-team place. Maybe he is too inconsistent a performer for the 
Premier League – he certainly wilted in the second half, as did most of his 
team‑mates – but with the ball at his feet he can be that rarest of treats, a 
crowd‑pleasing entertainer. “Everybody here loves him,” the Preston manager, 
Simon Grayson, said. “We like him to run with the ball and we don’t care if he 
loses it. We just tell him to do it again.”Paul Wilson


 * Match report: Preston North End 1-2 Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/preston-north-end-arsenal-fa-cup-match-report>

 * We need to start games better says Giroud after Cup escape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/arsenal-need-to-start-games-better-says-olivier-giroud-of-cup-escape>

 * Özil: my future at Arsenal depends upon Wenger staying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/mesut-ozil-arsenal-contract-arsene-wenger>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Farsenal-needed-to-dig-deep-in-win-over-preston-says-wenger-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20needed%20to%20dig%20deep%20in%20win%20over%20Preston%2C%20says%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Farsenal-needed-to-dig-deep-in-win-over-preston-says-wenger-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20needed%20to%20dig%20deep%20in%20win%20over%20Preston%2C%20says%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Farsenal-needed-to-dig-deep-in-win-over-preston-says-wenger-video&media=>
Arsenal needed to dig deep in win over Preston, says Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/07/arsenal-needed-to-dig-deep-in-win-over-preston-says-wenger-video>
7) Moyes should have reshuffled to avert tedium

A ground that rarely accommodates fewer than 40,000, and often hosts more than 
45,000, for Premier League games was sparsely populated by a crowd of merely 
17,632 asSunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> drew 0-0 
against Burnley. The stay-aways made the right decision in avoiding a truly 
appalling tie which presented a compelling case for abolishing fixture‑clogging 
replays in the early rounds and going straight to extra-time and penalties. 
“Sorry about that,” David Moyes said afterwards. “It was poor.” Sunderland’s 
manager fielded his strongest available team, refraining from resting even 
Jermain Defoe on a day when it would surely have been more beneficial for Moyes 
to, among other possible changes, have given young Joel Asoro and Josh Maja a 
run out in attacking tandem, and maybe offered the untested Mika a game in 
goal. Anything to relieve the tedium.Louise Taylor

 * Match report: Sunderland 0-0 Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/sunderland-burnley-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Sunderland reject £6m bid from West Ham for Defoe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/jermain-defoe-sunderland-reject-6m-bid-west-ham>

The Dozen: the weekend's best FA Cup photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2017/jan/08/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-fa-cup-photos>
8) Clough pays heavy price for his sense of adventure

On a weekend when many managers chose cold realism, Nigel Clough was punished 
for chasing glory. You can understand him believing in Burton Albion’s ability 
to defy the odds given how far they have come in recent years, so it was no 
surprise he named a strong team for the trip toWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford>, where Burton hoped to claim 
their first away victory against a top‑flight team. Their boldness backfired 
during a defeat in which they lost two important forwards to injuries – Will 
Miller and, most cruelly, Luke Varney, the latter only having joined the club 
last Wednesday. Both are likely to miss at least a few matches as Burton scrap 
to stay above the Championship relegation zone, starting with the duel with 
23rd-place Wigan next weekend. “That is why managers change teams for the FA 
Cup,” Clough said without a hint of regret. If Burton stay up at the end of the 
season, it will be worth recalling they did so without sacrificing their sense 
of adventure.Paul Doyle

 * Match report: Watford 2-0 Burton Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/watford-burton-albion-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Watford offer £8m for Brentford’s Hogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/watford-scott-hogan-offer-8m-west-ham>

9) McClaren gets the best from Bent and Ince

One should never underestimate how a new manager can revitalise a player. 
Before Steve McClaren was appointed for his second spell as Derby County 
manager in October, Darren Bent had scored four goals in 36 appearances since 
signing for the Rams permanently. After the rasping 25-yard drive that brought 
Derby level in their win againstWest Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom> on Saturday, Bent has the same 
tally in 13 games. Alongside Bent you can file Tom Ince, who curled home the 
winner at the Hawthorns and in the past three months has rediscovered his zest 
and zing to be one of the Championship’s most threatening attackers. “We just 
allow him to go and play and he does the work as well, up and down,” McClaren 
said of Ince. “He has got great fitness and he should be a Premier League 
player.” McClaren’s career has been, to be charitable, patchy, but this latest 
chapter has started brilliantly.Nick Miller

 * Match report: West Bromwich Albion 1-2 Derby County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/west-bromwich-albion-derby-county-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Pulis says Berahino has failed to sign a new contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/west-brom-saido-berahino-contract>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffa-cup-third-round-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23747a9a5a5097dddfc3c5072f3ab31a830da524%2F0_482_4301_2580%2F4301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffa-cup-third-round-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffa-cup-third-round-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23747a9a5a5097dddfc3c5072f3ab31a830da524%2F0_482_4301_2580%2F4301.jpg>
 Darren Bent celebrates his goal for Derby at West Brom. Photograph: Shaun 
Botterill/Getty Images 
10) Montanier staring at Forest exit after latest loss

“I know my position is not comfortable, that is logical after consecutive 
defeats,” theNottingham Forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> manager, Philippe 
Montanier, said after his team were beaten 2-0 by Wigan Athletic. That was 
Forest’s sixth defeat in the past seven games, a run that has left them two 
points off the Championship relegation zone as well as out of the FA Cup. It 
was not so much the defeat that might lead to Montanier being shown the door 
but the sort of performance you often see just before a sacking, bereft of 
ambition, ideas and effort. Montanier is a smart man with some pedigree, who 
has been hamstrung by injuries and incompetent ownership, but it is not working 
at the City Ground. A takeover of the club, by a group led by the American 
businessman John Jay Moores, is scheduled to go through this week, and one 
suspects that when that is confirmed Montanier will be handed his cards.Nick 
Miller


 * Daniel Taylor: Clubs suffering as owners experiment with chaos theory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/07/football-club-owners-chaos-theory-morecambe>

 * RB Leipzig offer £6m for Forest teenager Matty Cash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/rb-leipzig-nottingham-forest-matty-cash>
11) Romance alive and well for Stourbridge even in defeat

Sometimes the doomed romances leave the most cherished memories. Stourbridge, 
the lowest-placed side left in the Cup, received a crash course in the 
bittersweet cruelty of which the FA Cup is capable during their 2-1 defeat at
Wycombe <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wycombe>, but that did not 
tarnish an experience that will be the highlight of many careers and a few 
lives. They played outstandingly against an in-form League Two side and could 
even have won: they hit the underside of the crossbar shortly before Adebayo 
Akinfenwa scored Wycombe’s late winner. After the game the Stourbridge manager, 
Gary Hackett, was given a microphone to address the away support. “When you’ve 
been at a club for so long and you see that amazing support, it was a bit 
emotional,” he said. “There’s nothing wrong with that, I don’t think.” Or with 
looking back fondly on a defeat, and a winter romance to remember for ever.Rob 
Smyth


 * Faces behind the third round: ‘these are the days you live for’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/fa-cup-third-round-non-league-managers>

 * The Dozen: the weekend’s best FA Cup photos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2017/jan/08/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-fa-cup-photos>

 * FA Cup roundup: Akinfenwa sinks Stourbridge at the last 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/fa-cup-third-round-wycombe-stourbridge-oxford-rotherham>
12) Batshuayi on a hiding to nothing at Chelsea

It had been billed as a golden opportunity for Michy Batshuayi to shine; to 
stake his claim for more regular starting football – even though he is a £33m 
striker and Chelsea’s opposition were Peterborough United from League One. The 
problem for the summer signing from Marseille is called Diego Costa. Antonio 
Conte plays with only one striker and that striker is always going to be Costa 
in the Premier League. Batshuayi should be looking good againstPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/peterborough>, and he scored one and made 
another in his team’s 4-1 win. It was only the 23-year-old’s fourth start for 
the club – the previous three had come in the EFL Cup – and there was the 
feeling that he had more to lose than gain. Score, and it was normal; make 
mistakes, and the criticism would follow. Batshuayi did make mistakes. In his 
desperation to find the net, he ignored Willian on 39 minutes in a better 
position – to Conte’s obvious frustration – while he blew a clear chance late 
on. The road ahead for Batshuayi does not look straightforward.David Hytner


 * Match report: Chelsea 4-1 Peterborough United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/chelsea-peterborough-united-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Conte: Terry tackle did not warrant a red card 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/antonio-conte-john-terry-chelsea-peterborough-united>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffa-cup-third-round-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4f88caaac12c1db88107f4b141992e7b3e8ebd2%2F133_295_4439_2664%2F4439.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffa-cup-third-round-talking-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FA%20Cup%3A%20talking%20points%20from%20the%20third%20round%20matches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ffa-cup-third-round-talking-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4f88caaac12c1db88107f4b141992e7b3e8ebd2%2F133_295_4439_2664%2F4439.jpg>
 Michy Batshuayi scores against Peterborough, but the jury’s still out. 
Photograph: TGSPhoto/Rex/Shutterstock 
13) Bolton make the most of limited resources

A few minutes before Sam Allardyce contemplated the apparently astronomical 
fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/sam-allardyce-crystal-palace-defence-bolton-fa-cup>
 clubs might charge Crystal Palace for players this window, Phil Parkinson 
provided an illustration of how the other half live. Bolton Wanderers remain 
under a transfer embargo. They cannot buy players and while they can borrow 
them, there is a restriction on how many. “There is a little bit of room for 
manoeuvre,” Parkinson said. He lost Sammy Ameobi, who was recalled by Newcastle 
United, but retained James Henry, whose loan from Wolverhampton Wanderers was 
extended on Friday, 24 hours before he turned in a man-of-the-match display 
against last season’s FA Cup finalists. Henry almost supplied Bolton with a 
winner. So did Josh Vela, their putative player of the year. He and Zach 
Clough, another product of their youth system, are Wanderers’ prized assets and 
Parkinson added: “The most important thing is we don’t want to lose any of our 
best young players.” While Palace concentrate on buying, Bolton hope they will 
not be selling.Richard Jolly


 * Match report: Bolton Wanderers 0-0 Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/bolton-wanderers-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Bolton’s David Wheater: chicken parmesan’s just not healthy for a player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/david-wheater-bolton-wanderers-fa-cup-crystal-palace>

14) Aston Villa at least have their cohesion back

For the second time in succession Aston Villa departed from White Hart Lane on 
the back of a defeat by two goals, yet judging by their performance on Sunday, 
a lot has changed at the club sincethey lost 3-1 there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/02/tottenham-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
 in November 2015. Back then Rémi Garde had just been appointed manager and 
watched on as his side recorded a seventh straight Premier League defeat, going 
behind early and playing poorly. They ended up being relegated, with Garde 
sacked in the process. This weekend, Villa again rarely looked like winning but 
at least this time they showed great togetherness, especially in defence. It 
looked as if they were going to do enough to earn a replay until Ben Davies 
scored for Tottenham Hotspur with a well-taken header, with Son Hueng-min’s 
80th-minute strike wrapping up victory for the hosts. Steve Bruce has clearly 
galvanised Villa since replacing Roberto di Matteo as manager in October and 
while it has not been all smooth sailing since, they at least look like a team 
with a plan and a group of players willing to fight for each other. A blow for 
Bruce has been the loss of Jonathan Kodjia and Jordan Ayew to the Africa Cup of 
Nations yet, as the manager said after the loss to Spurs, that offers Gabriel 
Agbonlahor an opportunity to shine for his boyhood club after spending so long 
on the fringes. He worked hard on Sunday and would almost certainly have scored 
on 65 minutes had it not been for a fine tackle by Toby Alderweireld. In many 
ways the 30-year-old’s transformation from slacker to striver sums up the 
progress Villa have made since the dark days of relegation.Sachin Nakrani


 * Match report: Tottenham Hotspur 2-0 Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/tottenham-hotspur-aston-villa-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Middlesbrough complete £6m signing of Villa’s Gestede 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/middlesbrough-complete-signing-aston-villa-rudy-gestede-transfer>

FA Cup third round: AFC Wimbledon's return to Sutton United – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2017/jan/07/fa-cup-third-round-afc-wimbledons-return-to-sutton-united-in-pictures>
15) Sutton’s 3G pitch still offers tough tests for visitors

“Their home form in the last 18 months is exceptional – it proves a lot of 
teams come here and can’t handle it,” said Neal Ardley after hisAFC Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon> side survived their trip 
to Sutton’s 3G pitch with a 0-0 draw. It was certainly a contrast to the state 
of the playing surface during the giantkilling of Coventry City at Gander Green 
Lane in 1989, when a pudding of a pitch put paid to the top flight team in such 
dramatic fashion. Artificial surfaces have moved on since the days of Luton and 
QPR’s plastic pitches in the 1980s, and next year’s World Cup final in Moscow 
will also be played on synthetic grass. Especially in the depths of winter, 
there is no doubt they provide a more reliable alternative to the mudbaths of 
yesteryear but teams who play their matches on 3G pitches still enjoy a 
considerable advantage, even if Wimbledon were allowed to train at Sutton’s 
ground the day before the match as the result of a Football Association rule.Ed 
Aarons


 * Match report: Sutton United 0-0 Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/sutton-united-afc-wimbledon-fa-cup-match-report>

 * Sutton manager Doswell urges BBC to ‘get it right’ for replay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/sutton-united-doswell-bbc-wimbledon-fa-cup>
 