
Manchester United’s FA Cup defence and bid for a record 13th triumph will 
continue in a fourth-round tie againstWigan Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wiganathletic>, the 2013 winners, at Old 
Trafford.

José Mourinho, a winner with Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> against United in 2007, has 
revived his new team after an indifferent start and will look favourably on a 
draw against the Championship club.

Plymouth Argyle’s goalless draw at Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> on Sunday was the most 
admirable result of the third round and the reward for the League Two club, 
should they eliminate Jürgen Klopp’s team in the replay next week, is a home 
game with Wolverhampton Wanderers at Home Park.

Martyn Starnes, the Argyle chief executive, said: “When we beat Liverpool – 
that is a bit of task on our hands – but we’re really happy to have a home 
draw. Wolves are a massive club so they’re bound to bring a big crowd.” The 
Devon club reached the semi-finals in 1984 when they lost against Watford.

Sutton United, the lowest ranked club left in the competition, have the chance 
of hosting Leeds United if the National League’s 14th-placed team defeat AFC 
Wimbledon in their replay next week.

FA Cup fourth-round draw: Tottenham v Wycombe, Chelsea v Brentford, Derby v 
Leicester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/09/fa-cup-fourth-round-draw-live>
Sutton have faced Leeds once in their history, in a Cup tie on 30 January 
1970, when the U’s lost 6-0 at Gander Green Lane. Regarding the prospect of 
playing Leeds again, Micky Stephens, the Sutton assistant manager, said: “There 
is a lot of football to be played before that one.”

Bruce Elliot, the Sutton chairman, said: “We have a tough game in the replay 
but for nostalgia reasons if nothing else Leeds would be absolutely wonderful 
if can get past AFC Wimbledon.”

The Premier League champions Leicester City, winners against Everton on 
Saturday, will travel to Derby County in an enticing east Midlands derby. The 
pick of the round’s other ties includeTottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> hosting League Two’s 
Wycombe Wanderers and Manchester City travelling to either Bolton Wanderers or 
Crystal Palace.

Pep Guardiola, whose City team were emphatic 5-0 winners at West Ham United in 
the opening third-round game at the London Stadium on Friday night, has hinted 
that he will take the competition seriously but he may now have the chance to 
rest players should Bolton defeat Sam Allardyce’s men in their replay.

Arsenal, who with Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> are the joint-record 
winners with 12 FA Cups, are away at either Norwich City or Southampton.

Chelsea, who have claimed the trophy five times this century, have a short 
trip for a west London derby withBrentford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brentford>. Antonio Conte, like 
Guardiola, will be confident he can push for the title and FA Cup double.

All matches are scheduled to take place across the weekend of 27-30 January. 
The precise dates of all ties will not be confirmed until television 
broadcasters decide which matches are to be covered.

FA Cup fourth round draw

Tottenham Hotspur v Wycombe Wanderers

Derby County v Leicester City

Oxford United v Newcastle United/Birmingham City

Wimbledon/Sutton United v Leeds Utd

Plymouth/Liverpool v Wolverhampton Wanderers

Southampton/Norwich City v Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>

Lincoln/Ipswich Town v Brighton

Chelsea v Brentford

Manchester United v Wigan Athletic

Millwall v Watford

Rochdale v Huddersfield Town

Burnley/Sunderland v Fleetwood/Bristol City

Blackburn Rovers v Barnsley/Blackpool

Fulham v Hull City

Middlesbrough v Accrington Stanley

Crystal Palace/Bolton Wanderers v Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>

Ties to be played on the weekend of 27-30 January
 