
One of London’s most famous nightclubs will reopen its doors on Friday night, 
ending five months of enforced closure after a council inquiry found it had a 
“culture of drug use”.

Fabric was shut down in September after the drug-related deaths of two 
18-year-old clubbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/04/teenager-who-died-at-fabric-nightclub-took-mdma-jack-crossley-inquest-told>
 who had purchased or taken illegal substances in the venue. The club’s owners 
struck a deal with Islington council in December to keep their licence under 
stricter conditions.

Fabric: a nightclub that thrived by taking dance music seriously
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/fabric-closure-dance-music-london-nightlife>
The central London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> club’s door 
security will be backed up by Metropolitan police officers when it reopens at 
11pm, and staff have made a renewed appeal to clubbers not to attempt to bring 
drugs into the venue.

New licensing regulations include a ban on entry to anyone under 19 on main 
nights, more comprehensive CCTV monitoring, ID scanners, and lifetime bans for 
anyone caught asking for drugs.

Friday’s line-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/06/fabric-reopening-night-mystery-line-up-london-club>
 is a closely guarded secret, with the reopening night billed simply as “Fabric 
friends and family”. Tickets have sold out.



Scotland Yard said that while police routinely patrolled the club’s Farringdon 
district on Friday nights, officers would also be stationed atFabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fabric> “to support the door team who may 
need our help”.

Supt Nick Davies said: “As things settle down and it becomes business as 
normal for Fabric they will be subject of the same police and licensing visits.”

Fabric’s co-founder Cameron Leslie said there was little “relief or pleasure” 
attached to the club reopening, and said he would rather forget the past few 
months when the club’s future was in question.

“I don’t think there’s any kind of pleasure or relief that we’ve reached this 
point,” he told the BBC. “We’re obviously delighted we’re going to be reopening 
but I don’t think we’re going to be looking over this particular chapter with 
any kind of fond memories.

“There was definitely a belief amongst us that we would be able to get the 
project back open again. But there’s been moments when we’ve been deeply 
concerned. It would be wrong of me to say otherwise.”

Fabric’s managing director, Gary Kilby, posted a statement on the club’s 
website last month warning people not to bring drugs into the club.

“Our longevity also relies on you our supportive clientele who we are so 
dependent on, we still need your help,” he wrote. “We need you to come with the 
conditions of our reopening in mind and help us achieve a drug-free 
environment. Come with respect for our zero-tolerance policy and remember, 
there are no safe ways to take drugs.”

Jack Crossley, from Worcester Park, Surrey, died on the morning of 6 August 
after becoming unwell at the club. His inquest, held earlier this week, heard 
he had smuggled MDMA into the venue in his underwear and paid for more drugs 
once inside.

Ryan Browne died in hospital on 25 June after taking ecstasy at Fabric. His 
inquest was told the death was caused by “recreational drug use gone wrong”.

After the club’s licence was revoked, a campaign to save Fabric was set up and 
supporters donated £320,000 to assist with legal costs.

The club’s appeal against Islington council’s decision was made up of 41 
witness statements. Fabric accepted that the police investigation was 
“reasonable” and that “procedures in relation to searching were insufficient, 
as were its procedures to prevent the consumption and dealing of drugs within 
the club itself”.
 