
In the cavernous space below Farringdon, it was almost a night like any other. 
Blue, green, red and orange strobes flashed and bounced off the club’s rugged 
walls, every molecule in the air pulsed with the bassline and the crowds moved 
in a frenzy across the dancefloor. But there was one difference: smiling down 
upon them all in Room 1 was a banner bearing a happy face and the words: “You 
Saved Fabric”.

Fabric prepares for reopening night with mystery line-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/06/fabric-reopening-night-mystery-line-up-london-club>
After a tense five months, this was Fabric’s first time reopening to the public
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/06/fabric-reopening-night-mystery-line-up-london-club>
, and the crowds who queued outside from 11pm were in high spirits.

Paramedic Jimmy, 25, hadn’t been to Fabric for a few years but threw his 
weight behind the SaveFabric <https://www.theguardian.com/music/fabric> 
campaign and said he wanted to be at the “historical moment” of its reopening.


“We wanted to come and support it on its opening night,” he said. “After all 
the club closures thatLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> has had, 
this is the one that has finally fought back and won the battle to stay open.

“It’s a nice middle finger up to the gentrification of the area. I’m a 
paramedic and so I’ve seen how people take drugs everywhere, at festivals it’s 
way worse, so it feels like Fabric was just used as a scapegoat.”
Time Out London (@TimeOutLondon) 
#yousavedFabric <https://twitter.com/hashtag/yousavedFabric?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/2avwG2ZLuI <https://t.co/2avwG2ZLuI>
 <https://twitter.com/TimeOutLondon/status/817524432507957249> January 7, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/TimeOutLondon/status/817524432507957249> 
He was accompanied by Jenny, 23, who donated £30 towards the Save Fabric 
campaign. She too felt like Fabric had been made an example of. “I’ve been here 
before it closed and it’s absolutely insane and I hope it will stay that way,” 
she said. “People love it for what it is. London nightlife is under attack and 
drugs are just being used as an excuse.

“Ironically I think Fabric already had the most stringent checks in London, it 
was like coming through an airport. Last time I was here, when I came out they 
made me type my password into my phone to make sure it wasn’t stolen. So it was 
already extreme.”

It’s a nice middle finger up to the gentrification of the area.

The future of the famed London club had been called into question after two 
18-year-olds died after taking drugs on the premises last year. The police 
accused the venue of having a “culture of drug use” and temporarily took away 
its licence, which was perceived by many as an outright declaration of war on 
London’s already diminishing nightlife.

The Save Fabric campaign got backing from clubbers and famous DJs from around 
the world: £320,000 was raised in support and eventually in DecemberIslington 
council agreed to let the club reopen with a new set of even stricter 
regulations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/fabric-nightclub-to-reopen-under-strict-new-licensing-conditions>
. They include no entry for those under 19 and a lifetime ban for anyone found 
asking for drugs.

On Friday night, club-goers were searched and patted down thoroughly as they 
entered and signs reminding patrons of the zero-tolerance to drugs were placed 
along the queue barriers. Inside the club a new welfare area was set up for 
those who had lost their friends or needed assistance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffabric-reopens-crowds-in-high-spirits-as-legendary-club-returns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97b8e2326568ac17a6642e7d6f88fba647a750d3%2F0_290_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fabric%20reopens%3A%20crowds%20in%20high%20spirits%20as%20legendary%20club%20returns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffabric-reopens-crowds-in-high-spirits-as-legendary-club-returns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fabric%20reopens%3A%20crowds%20in%20high%20spirits%20as%20legendary%20club%20returns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffabric-reopens-crowds-in-high-spirits-as-legendary-club-returns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97b8e2326568ac17a6642e7d6f88fba647a750d3%2F0_290_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Patrons of the reopened Fabric nightclub are warned about drugs. Photograph: 
Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
The new security regulations had support among many of the clubbers. JJ, 30, 
bought tickets for the reopening night a month ago. “I love the atmosphere, it 
stands out compared to all other London venues but I think the new restrictions 
are a good thing,” he said. “I was approached by drug dealers a few times in 
the club before and saw people openly taking drugs, so I think them trying to 
make things safer and stop this is a positive move.”

Sophie, 24, who travelled from Kent for the night, said: “I’ve been to Fabric 
a lot of times and I did lose interest in it. It got a bit boring and a place 
people went to take drugs, so now I’m hoping its reopening will draw a new 
crowd. Obviously because it’s open late people use it for the wrong reasons, 
I’m not going to lie, I’ve used it for the wrong reasons, but I’m hoping now it 
will be a bit different.”

The line-up had been kept a secret but was revealed to include drum and bass 
acts such as Chase and Status, Dillinja and Metrik; grime DJ Sir Spyro; and 
Manchester DJ Chimpo. Tickets for the night sold out before opening and by 1am 
the queue was hundreds of metres long.

Fabric nightclub to reopen under strict new licensing conditions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/fabric-nightclub-to-reopen-under-strict-new-licensing-conditions>
The hype generated by the Save Fabric campaign drew many people to the 
reopening who had never been to Fabric before and had worried they might never 
get the chance.

Shakice Hay, 23, from east London, said: “I never really came to Fabric before 
but heard it got shut down and so thought I’d come and see it for myself on my 
night off. I think them being stricter about drugs is how it should be, 
particularly if people don’t know how to control themselves when they take them 
and don’t know their limits. I don’t see why everyone can’t have a great night 
on a bit of alcohol.”

Connor, 20, had travelled all the way from Corby, Northamptonshire, for the 
night. “I was worried for a while that I had missed my chance to see Fabric,” 
he said. “After everything that happened with it closing, and all the drum and 
bass and grime acts who have played here, it holds such an important place in 
British music. I wanted to see it for myself.”
 