
Fabric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/fabric-nightclub-to-reopen-under-strict-new-licensing-conditions>
 will reopen its doors to the pubic in January. The London club will host a 
series of events during the first full weekend of the new year, from 6 to 8 
January.

The venue was threatened with permanent closure in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/london-nightclub-fabric-close-permanently-licence-revoked-drugs>
 after Islington council revoked its licensing, claiming that “a culture of 
drugs” existed at the club that its management was unable to control. After an 
appeal – and much petitioning from those opposing Fabric’s closure – the 
council went on to agree to strict new licensing conditions, including an 
over-19s policy and ID scanners at entry to the venue.

“It’s pretty much impossible for us to put a measure on just how much 
gratitude we are feeling right now to be able to announce our reopening proper,”
said a statement on Fabric’s website 
<https://www.fabriclondon.com/blog/view/newsflash-announcing-our-fabric-friends-family-reopening-weekend>
.

 “The credit for this is shared among hundreds of thousands of petition 
signers, letter writers, donors, T-shirt bearers, artists and party promoters. 
A community of people from the world over who came together and continued the 
principal of unity that was central to the foundation of our culture – to save 
us.”

'Landmark clubs are evidence of creativity and energy in a city’: why Fabric’s 
closure matters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/08/landmark-clubs-fabric-closure-matters-britain-clubland-shrinking>
The statement says Fabric’s return will feature new sound-systems, including 
“our new Pioneer Pro Audio Room Two setup, pushing out mesmeric high-level 
sound”
and will be kicked off with a weekend of events “with family very much at its 
core”.

Friday is cited as a “FABRICLIVE” event, while Saturday will star tech-house 
DJs Craig Richards and Terry Francis. The weekend closes with WetYourSelf! 
restarting their weekly residency.


The move to revoke Fabric’s licence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/london-nightclub-fabric-close-permanently-licence-revoked-drugs>
 came after 18-year-olds Ryan Browne and Jack Crossley died after taking 
ecstasy at the club in June and August respectively.

The decision to close the world-renowned venue, which opened its doors in 
1999, met strong criticism from fans, artists and politicians including local 
MP Emily Thornberry. London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, announced the reopening last 
month, saying: “Fabric <https://twitter.com/fabriclondon> will reopen. Thanks 
to all who helped find a solution that protects the club’s future and keeps 
clubbers safe.”
 