
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> has unveiled 
measures to establish stronger ties between the social network and the news 
industry, allowing for collaboration on product development, new ways for 
publishers to make money, and training for newsrooms and readers.

The announcement of the Facebook Journalism Project comes in the wake of 
heightened scrutiny of the social network’srole as a distributor of news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/22/mark-zuckerberg-appears-to-finally-admit-facebook-is-a-media-company>
, which saw the company accused offailing to tackle the spread of misinformation
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
 in the run-up to the US presidential election. At the same time, Facebook and 
Google are taking thelion’s share of online advertising revenue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jun/15/google-facebook-publishers-network-collaborate-trends-report>
 while newsrooms cut costs and make lay-offs.

Many of the measures in the Facebook Journalism Project have been unveiled 
separately before, but the announcement highlights the company’s commitment to 
the content news organizations provide.

“We’ve been working on this for a long time. Our media partners want a deeper 
engagement, not just at a business level, but a product/engineering level,” 
said Fidji Simo, Facebook’s director of product, who is leading the project.

She said the program is linked to the news feed values 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2016/06/building-a-better-news-feed-for-you/> that 
Facebook announced in June 2016. In ablogpost 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2016/06/building-a-better-news-feed-for-you/>, 
Facebook’s VP of product management, Adam Mosseri, revealed the news feed’s 
primary role was to show content from friends and family, but the other two 
roles are to inform and entertain.

Simo said: “We are making sure that journalism thrives as part of the ‘inform’ 
axis.”

“We are not a traditional media company and we are not a traditional tech 
company,” she added, reiteratingMark Zuckerberg’s words from late December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/22/mark-zuckerberg-appears-to-finally-admit-facebook-is-a-media-company>
. “We build technology that helps people connect and be informed. This means 
working well with the news industry.”

The announcement comes the week after Facebook appointed former CNN anchor 
Campbell Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/06/facebook-hires-campbell-brown-media-partnerships>
 to lead the news partnerships team.

Major news organizations already talk to Facebook’s news partnerships team 
regularly, but now they will gain access to the technology company’s engineers 
to develop products – whether that’s a new storytelling or ad format – 
collaboratively. This will take the form of roundtables, hackathons and shared 
online groups.

An example of the types of products that will be launched include a way to 
present packages of stories on Facebook (a feature requested by newsrooms) 
called “collections”; ads that appear in the middle of videos and live streams; 
and a tool that allows readers to subscribe to publications directly from 
Facebook. WithFacebook Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/facebook-live-social-media-live-streaming>
, publishers will be able to designate journalists as contributors so they can 
broadcast live on behalf of the page without needing login details for the 
publisher’s Facebook account.

“I’m pleased to see the scale of the program and it’s a recognition that 
Facebook see themselves as part of the news ecosystem,” saidClaire Wardle 
<https://firstdraftnews.com/author/cwardle/> from First Draft News. “In the 
past, it’s been difficult for news organizations to have access to engineers 
and the engineers didn’t have any understanding of the news business.”

The Washington Post’s chief information officer, Shailesh Prakash, agreed. “We 
often hear about a product only after they are pretty much done,” he said, 
citingInstant Articles as an example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/13/bbc-news-guardian-facebook-instant-articles>
. “Even with an early partner roll-out, the big decisions have been made in 
terms of user interface and workflow. It’s much more effective if we can be in 
on the beginning.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffacebook-journalism-project-news-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e971342e412f7b12a9b541ea38508b6815c273d%2F0_274_2234_1340%2F2234.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facebook%20unveils%20measures%20to%20promote%20stronger%20ties%20with%20news%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffacebook-journalism-project-news-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facebook%20unveils%20measures%20to%20promote%20stronger%20ties%20with%20news%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ffacebook-journalism-project-news-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e971342e412f7b12a9b541ea38508b6815c273d%2F0_274_2234_1340%2F2234.jpg>
 Facebook is partnering with outside fact checkers to sort honest news reports 
from fake stories. Photograph: AP 
According to Prakash, the announcement means that weekly phone calls between 
the Washington Post and Facebook will be supplemented by monthly face-to-face 
meetings. It is not clear how many other organizations will gain this level of 
access.

For Vox Media publisher Melissa Bell, there is value in collaborating more 
effectively not only with Facebook but with other publishers.

“In the past, there were a lot of questions everyone was trying to answer 
independently and that slowed down progress,” she said. “It’s imperative as an 
industry that we are collaborating to create profitable, trustworthy and 
productive media.”

With regards to tackling the spread of misinformation on the platform, 
Facebook repeated the recently announced partnership with third-party fact 
checkers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/15/facebook-flag-fake-news-fact-check>
 and its plans to stop placing advertisements onwebsites dedicated to “fake 
news” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/15/facebook-google-fake-news-sites-ad-networks>
.

The company also pledged to promote news literacy among Facebook users through 
measures including a series of public service ads.

“I think there’s more the platforms could be doing here,” Wardle said, 
suggesting they should embed media literacy tools into the platform, for 
example, through messaging at the point of sharing a story – something Facebook 
is doing for stories that have been fact-checked by third-party partners.

“What do you do when crazy Uncle Bob is systematically sharing problematic 
content? Rather than telling him to go on a Facebook media literacy course you 
need tools baked into the platform,” she said.

The project will also expand the training that Facebook offers major newsrooms 
to smaller local news organizations who have typically struggled to gain access 
to the social networking giant. Facebook will also launch e-learning courses in 
multiple languages and offer an analytics tool called CrowdTangle for nothing 
to its partners. Facebook will also help First Draft establish avirtual 
verification community 
<https://firstdraftnews.com/first-draft-prepares-big-year-ahead-support-40-new-partners/>
 for eyewitness media generated during breaking news events.

Both Wardle and Prakash said they would like Facebook to be more open with its 
data. For Wardle, it’s about helping independent researchers interrogate the 
decisions the social network is making. For example, there is social psychology 
research that indicates there’s a “boomerang effect” in debunking stories that 
makes some people more likely to click those stories. “This is such an 
important moment where we’re making big decisions. I’d love to see more of an 
evidence base,” she said.

Prakash, on the other hand, wants more data about how Facebook users are 
interacting with news content, for example how far down an Instant Article 
people are scrolling and how long they watch videos.

“I hope being involved in these [roundtable meetings] will give us more of a 
voice so that Facebook understands why we want that data,” he said.

“Not all of these initiatives are going to work, but the fact that they are 
trying all of them should only be seen as a positive thing,” said Wardle.

However, she is left with one major lingering request: “I really wish they 
would hire an editor-in-chief.”
 