
Facebook has hired former CNN anchor Campbell Brown to help build better 
relations with news organizations in the wake of thefake news scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
.

The social media giant already has a team of staff to liaise with media within 
the markets it operates but Brown – an Emmy-winning TV veteran who also worked 
at NBC – at will lead this team, reporting into Nick Grudin, vice-president of 
media partnerships.

Facebook Live is changing the world - but not in the way it hoped
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/facebook-live-social-media-live-streaming>
“I will be tapping my newsroom experience to help news organizations and 
journalist work more closely and more effectively with Facebook,” she said, 
announcing the news on herFacebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/campbell.brown.74/posts/1070729383056096?pnref=story>.

“Right now we are watching massive transformation take place in the news 
business – both in the way people consume news and in the way reporters 
disseminate news.Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> is 
a major part of this transformation.”

The social network has been under pressure to take more responsibility for the 
content that’s distributed on the platform since it has become one of the main 
ways many people get their news.

Facebook came under fire for failing to tackle the spread of misinformation on 
its network, particularly the “fake news” created byMacedonian teenagers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/facebook-clickbait-political-news-sites-us-election-trump>
 and other entrepreneurs to appeal to people’s political biases in the run-up 
to the US presidential election. As a response, the companystarted flagging 
fake news stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/15/facebook-flag-fake-news-fact-check>
 with the help of users and third party fact checking organizations.

Facebook reportedly testing new tool to combat fake news
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/06/facebook-tool-fake-news-rank-misleading-language-data-collecting>
At the same time the social network has been accused of censorship for 
deleting from the site an iconic Vietnam war photo, nicknamed “Napalm girl”, 
for showing child nudity. The company overturned the decision, but not before 
engaging in avery public squabble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/20/norwegian-editor-challenges-zuckerberg-to-discuss-censorship>
 with the editor of the Norwegian newspaper, whose journalist first posted the 
image, and theprime minister of Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/facebook-deletes-norway-pms-post-napalm-girl-post-row>
.

Despite these challenges and demands from critics for some sort of “public 
editor” <http://motherboard.vice.com/read/facebook-needs-a-public-editor>, 
Facebook insists that Brown won’t be making any editorial decisions about 
content. (Facebook’s founder Mark Zuckerberg has cautioned against the company 
becoming an arbiter of truth.)

Instead, Brown will be building bridges between news media and the social 
networking site.


News organizations increasingly rely on Facebook, which has 1.79 billion 
users, as a distribution channel. Meanwhile Facebook needs high-quality content 
to keep its users entertained and informed, which in turn generates advertising 
revenue for the platform.

Fake news: an insidious trend that's fast becoming a global problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
Facebook has been working closely with media companies to drive the adoption of
video streaming tool Facebook Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/facebook-live-social-media-live-streaming>
 andInstant Articles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/13/bbc-news-guardian-facebook-instant-articles>
, but media companies fear the deal they’ve struck is one-sided. At a time when 
traditional media companies are making layoffs, Facebook and Google are 
thriving, taking the lion’s share of online advertising revenue. One analyst 
estimated that in 2016 aloneFacebook sucked more than $1bn from the newspaper 
industry 
<https://www.poynter.org/2016/a-look-at-facebooks-billion-dollar-2016-hit-on-the-news-ecosystem/440471/>
.

“I will be working directly with our partners to help them understand how 
Facebook can expand the reach of their journalism, and contribute value to 
their businesses. That also means making sure there is ongoing feedback from 
publishers as Facebook develops new products and tools for news organizations,” 
said Brown.

Some critics argue that the appointment is an attempt to please news 
organizations at a time when they are questioning their relationship with their 
powerful frenemy.

Jessica Rovello, CEO of Arkadium, which creates tools to help publishers keep 
readers on their websites, described the hire as “window-dressing on the larger 
problem”.

“It doesn’t move them in the direction of solving their fake news issue. The 
role seems to be to placate the publishers whose lunch they’re eating.”
 