
A journalist was temporarily banned from Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> after a post in which he 
called Trump supporters “a nasty fascistic lot”, in the latest example of the 
social media platform’s censorship of journalists.

Facebook “reviewed and restored” the post by Kevin Sessums after being 
contacted by the Guardian and dropped the posting ban.

“We’re very sorry about this mistake,” a spokesman said. “The post was removed 
in error and restored as soon as we were able to investigate. Our team 
processes millions of reports each week, and we sometimes get things wrong.”

Sessums, who is well known for his celebrity profiles for Vanity Fair and two 
best-selling memoirs, says that he shared a Facebook post from ABC political 
analyst Matthew Dowd that read: “In the last few hours I have been called by 
lovely ‘christian’ Trump fans: a jew, faggot, retard. To set record straight: 
divorced Catholic.”

Sessums added his own commentary, writing: 

But as those who do hold Trump to the standards of any other person have found 
out on Twitter and other social media outlets these Trump followers are a nasty 
fascistic lot. Dowd is lucky he didn’t get death threats like Kurt Eichenwald. 
Or maybe he did and refuses to acknowledge them. If you voted for Trump and 
continue to support him and you think you are better than these bigoted 
virulent trolls, you’re not. Your silence enables them just as it did in the 
racist campaign that Trump and Bannon ran. In fact, hiding behind a civilized 
veneer in your support of fascism I consider more dangerous. We’re past 
describing you as collaborators at this point. That lets you off the hook. 
You’re Russo-American oligarchical theocratic fascists.

Soon thereafter, Sessums received a notification from Facebook that the post 
violated the company’s “community standards 
<https://www.facebook.com/communitystandards/>” and that he was barred from 
posting for 24 hours.


It’s chilling. It’s arbitrary censorship ... Do I have to be careful about 
what I say about Trump now?
Kevin Sessums 
“It’s chilling. It’s arbitrary censorship,” Sessums said. “I was like, ‘Wait a 
minute, do I have to be careful about what I say about Trump now?’”

I have been banned for 24 hours posting on Facebook because I shared a Matthew 
Dowd post about being trolled by Trump voters and his being called a "retard 
and faggot and Jew" even though he pointed out he is a divorced Catholic. I 
then called them Russo-American oligarchical theocratic fascists and was was 
flagged by someone - no doubt a fascist or fascist collaborator - and FB told 
me that what I posted did not meet its community standards and this would serve 
as a warning but they if I continued to post such things I would be permanently 
blocked. To be censored and blocked rightfully naming the rise of fascism is a 
form of fascism itself and corporate collaboration. On the same day that the 
celebrity fascist Milo Yiannopoulos gets a $250,000 advance from Simon $ 
Schuster to write a book they are spinning as one about free speech I am 
censored for my political speech and banned from posting on Facebook. We are 
living in dangerous Orwellian times. Maybe take a screenshot of this and post 
it on your own Facebook pages. Thank you. RESIST. 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BOpkKNMlJzq/>

A photo posted by Kevin Sessums (@kevsessums) on Dec 30, 2016 at 9:20am PST

The censorship of Sessums caps a year in which Facebook has increasingly 
struggled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/facebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship>
 to navigate its role as the world’s largest media platform, with unprecedented 
influence over the global flow of news and information.

In September, the company sparked controversy when it censored an iconic 
photograph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/08/facebook-mark-zuckerberg-napalm-girl-photo-vietnam-war>
 of a naked child fleeing a Napalm attack during the Vietnam war. That incident 
also began with the company banning an individual journalist for 24 hours but 
soon ballooned into global outrage. The company went so far as to censor a post 
by theprime minister of Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/facebook-deletes-norway-pms-post-napalm-girl-post-row>
 beforebacking down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/facebook-reinstates-napalm-girl-photo>
 and acknowledging the historic significance of the photograph.

2016: the year Facebook became the bad guy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/facebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship>
In October, the company responded to the controversy by announcing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/21/mark-zuckerberg-facebook-trump-hate-speech-censorship>
 that it would consider factors like newsworthiness and the public interest 
when deciding how to enforce its “community standards”.

Policing the platform became particularly tricky during the heated US 
election. Facebook did not respond to questions about why Sessum’s post was 
mistakenly censored, but the incident highlights the company’s ham-handedness 
when it comes to political speech.

The Wall Street Journal reported 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/facebook-employees-pushed-to-remove-trump-posts-as-hate-speech-1477075392>
 in October that one instance when the company relaxed its standards around 
hate speech came when it chose not to censor a post by then-candidate Donald 
Trump, despite the fact that the post violated the company’s rules barring hate 
speech.

“Mr Zuckerberg acknowledged that Mr Trump’s call for a ban [of Muslims] did 
qualify as hate speech, but said the implications of removing them were too 
drastic,” the Wall Street Journal reported.

For Sessums, the temporary banning was particularly significant because he 
uses his Facebook page as a “personal blog”.

The author has about 20,000 friends and followers, and he considers his 
frequent posts a “meta-memoir”. Since Trump’s election, however, Sessums’ posts 
have been largely political, with frequent invocations of “fascism”.

Sessums said that he was deeply disturbed by the fact that there was no 
appeals process for individuals facing bans.

“What will the cyber world be like under a Trump administration?” he asked, 
referencing Facebook board member Peter Thiel’s support of the president-elect. 
“This is chilling to me.”

 