
A Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> safety check for 
Bangkok, which the company claimed was prompted by a one-man protest near the 
prime minister’s office, helped spread a fake news report of an explosion in 
the city.

The incident is the latest example of the social media platform’s algorithms 
failing to distinguish between reliable and faulty news sources.

Fake news: an insidious trend that's fast becoming a global problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
Facebook’s safety check tool, which allows users to mark themselves safe in 
the event of a disaster or crisis, was activated in Bangkok on26 December 
<https://www.facebook.com/safetycheck/bangkok-thailand-explosion-dec27-2016/?uid=533916541>
, citing “media sources” as confirmation of an explosion.

A Facebook spokesperson subsequently shared local media reports of a man 
protesting on a roof, throwing “ping pong bombs 
<http://www.khaosodenglish.com/news/crimecourtscalamity/2016/12/27/man-tosses-small-bombs-gov-house-justice/>
” or “giant firecrackers 
<http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/security/1169340/man-creates-chaos-demands-justice-at-govt-house>
” in the direction of Government House, where the prime minister works. No one 
was injured, according to theBangkok Post 
<http://www.bangkokpost.com/news/security/1169340/man-creates-chaos-demands-justice-at-govt-house>
.

Facebook’s activation of the feature sowed confusion, however, because the 
platform also promoted a link to a false news report of a major “explosion”.

A screenshot of the feature shared by Saksith Saiyasombut, a local journalist, 
shows that Facebook promoted a 26 December article by BangkokInformer.com in 
conjunction with the safety check.

That article consisted of a link to 17 August 2015 BBC video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=am5a0zI65io> about the bombing of the Erawan 
Shrine, according to acopy of the article 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20161227114426/http://bangkokinformer.com/190721/thailand-explosion-rocks-central-bangkok-bbc-news-bangkok-video/>
 preserved by the Internet Archive.
Saksith Saiyasombut (@SaksithCNA) 
The "source" of the @Facebook <https://twitter.com/facebook> Safety Check for 
Bangkok: A fake news site that scrapped stuff from elsewhere…!
pic.twitter.com/i6Q2k8XBxP <https://t.co/i6Q2k8XBxP>
 <https://twitter.com/SaksithCNA/status/813757830788366336> December 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SaksithCNA/status/813757830788366336> 
“No, there was not a massive explosion Bangkok on Tuesday night,” wrote the 
local English-language newspaper Khaosod English in anarticle 
<http://www.khaosodenglish.com/news/2016/12/27/fake-news-prompts-facebook-bangkok-bomb-scare/>
 attempting to clarify the situation.

BangkokInformer.com is part of a network <http://bigcityinformer.com/> of 
local “news” websites that appear to simply repost articles from other sources. 
The company did not respond to a request for comment from the Guardian.

Facebook defended its activation of the safety check feature. 

“As with all safety check activations, Facebook relies on a trusted third 
party to first confirm the incident and then on the community to use the tool 
and share with friends and family,” a spokesperson said in a statement.


When the safety check tool was launched in October 2014 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2014/10/introducing-safety-check/>, it was only 
used for natural disasters. It was first used for a terrorist attack during the 
November 2015 Paris attacks. The company facedcriticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/18/facebook-activates-safety-check-nigeria-bombing>
, however, for its decision to activate the feature in some cases and not in 
others.

In November, the company announced 
<http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2016/11/facebooks-social-good-forum/> that it 
would no longer directly control the feature, instead relying on alerts of 
incidents from a “third-party source”. The company’s explanation of the changes 
suggest that the feature is now controlled by algorithms detecting whether 
“people in the area are talking about the incident”.


2016: the year Facebook became the bad guy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/facebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship>
The company declined to name its third-party source for incident reports.

Facebook has faced considerable criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
 over its role in the dissemination of false information, especially following 
the US presidential election, in which news hoaxes and partisan propaganda ran 
rampant on the site.


On 15 December, the company announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/15/facebook-flag-fake-news-fact-check>
 that it would begin working with third-party fact checkers to flag viral fake 
news stories. Five fact-checking organizations are participating in a pilot 
program to combat fake news on the platform, but thepilot is limited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/facebook-fake-news-system-problems-fact-checking>
 by the staff capability of the independent organizations.

The pilot also requires the fact-checkers to address each false story 
individually – a challenge given that fake news stories can rapidly multiply 
across numerous websites.

The BangkokInformer.com article, for example, was subsequently copied on to 
msn.com 
<http://www.msn.com/en-ph/news/world/thailand-explosion-rocks-central-bangkok-%C3%A2%E2%82%AC%E2%80%9C-bbc-news/ar-BBxBHna>
, creating another misleading headline featured on the safety check tool.

A Facebook spokeswoman, Anna White, pushed back against the idea that the tool 
was connected to the company’s fake news problem.

“Safety Check the product is in no way connected with any news articles – real 
or fake,” White told the Guardian by email. “People seeing that [the 
BangkokInformer.com article] at the end of the product flow may have gotten old 
information but that information did not trigger the activation in the first 
place like some outlets are reporting.”

The false BangkokInformer.com article remains the top search result for 
Facebook users searching for “Thailand explosion”. It has not been flagged as a 
fake news story by the independent fact checkers.
 