
Until last week, Falls festival was reputed to be the most relaxed of 
Australia’s mainstream music festivals.

It is now facing a safety investigation into the management of its flagship 
event at Lorne,Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>, 
and police are investigating alleged sexual assaults at the event in Tasmania’s 
Marion Bay.

Just before 11pm on Friday, 30 December, more than 80 people were injured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/31/many-seriously-injured-after-crowd-crush-at-falls-festival-in-lorne>
 as they left the Grand Theatre tent in Lorne, where the Sydney band DMA’s had 
been playing.

The crush was slow, but inevitable. The celebratory crowd, funnelled through 
an exit narrowed by the construction of a new bar, began to trip and fall, with 
each body bringing down more behind them.

It was loud, as music festivals are, and pushy. A push back into the tent 
rebounded like a wave in a mosh bit and sent the crowd surging back, adding to 
the crush. Soon, people couldn’t move.

Falls Festival to continue despite 19 people being seriously injured in crowd 
crush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/31/many-seriously-injured-after-crowd-crush-at-falls-festival-in-lorne>
Tim Hunt was at the bottom of the pile. The 29-year-old South Australian had 
been near the front of the crowd leaving through the exit that faced the 
festival’s main stage, where the British band London Grammar were about to 
start.

He described it as like being caught in a riptide. Not a rush of people, but a 
steady flow pushing the crowd together and forcing it onwards.

“I don’t think anyone at that point had realised – no one knew what was going 
on, it just felt like it was a bit pushy,” Hunt told Guardian Australia.

“No one really realised how serious it was going to be, sort of, ‘Oh yeah, 
whatever, we’ll get over it in a sec.’ But because the front had fallen and 
just the immense force of people were still walking out, not really knowing 
what was happening, there was just no room to move, so it was sort of like 
dominos. Everyone has just fallen.”

Then the panic started.

“Everyone realised they couldn’t breathe, people started screaming, and there 
was people on top of me apologising and still yelling at the same time,” he 
said. They could see how much people on the bottom were copping it as well. 
That’s when everyone started struggling and trying to get out and we were just 
sort of slowly sliding down like an avalanche, down there.

“You were just trying to breathe, because you couldn’t breathe. People were 
pushing up, and then you could hear bones snapping from pressure on funny 
angles on arms and things from people trying to get on there.”

Hunt believed he would die.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffalls-festival-crush-victim-you-could-hear-bones-snapping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbb15fb9e423cd285bc53418e5988b179dbc24ef%2F5_261_2226_2783%2F2226.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Falls%20festival%20crush%20victim%3A%20'You%20could%20hear%20bones%20snapping'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffalls-festival-crush-victim-you-could-hear-bones-snapping%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Falls%20festival%20crush%20victim%3A%20%27You%20could%20hear%20bones%20snapping%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffalls-festival-crush-victim-you-could-hear-bones-snapping%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbb15fb9e423cd285bc53418e5988b179dbc24ef%2F5_261_2226_2783%2F2226.jpg>
 Tim Hunt’s injuries from the crush at Falls festival in Lorne. He says gravel 
wore through flesh ‘like a cheese grater’ 
“You stopped struggling,” he said. “A lot of people did. It’s just sort of, 
‘Oh well, this is it.’ You didn’t think you were going to come out of it.”

The ground sloped away from the tent, on to a patch of gravel. Hunt was pushed 
flat on the ground, his ankles splayed out. The gravel acted “like a cheese 
grater”, he said, wearing through the muscle and exposing bone.

Nineteen people were taken to Lorne or Geelong hospitals with serious 
injuries, and 60 more were treated for minor injuries by paramedics on site.

Hunt is now in a wheelchair. He has had surgery to clean out the wounds, which 
look like something you would see after a motorcycle accident, and to clear 
infection from the bones. Another round of surgery will apply skin grafts.

He insists he was lucky. Others had broken bones, spinal injuries or head 
injuries, prompting comparisons to the 2001 death of Jessica Michalik, who was 
crushed in the mosh pit of the Sydney Big Day Out festival.

That death prompted a slew of reforms for festival sites, including barriers 
around mosh pits and increased requirements for security guards.

Falls festival had 15 security guards stationed in the Grand Theatre at the 
time of the crush, paramedics on site and a medical bay 100 metres away. It did 
not foresee the crush.

On 1 January the festival co-producer Jessica Ducrou released a statement 
citing the event’s long safety record.

“Despite 24 years of successful operation of Falls Lorne, a confluence of 
events resulted in a serious incident that will require an investigation into 
the various contributing factors which will take some weeks to determine, but 
please be assured it is our utmost priority,” she said.

Ducrou said the festival would be in touch with those injured. “To those that 
were affected, on behalf of the Falls festival, we would like to apologise and 
let you know that we are deeply upset by this incident and your experience,” 
she said.

Falls Festival organisers blame crowd crush on 'confluence of events'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/01/falls-festival-organisers-blame-crowd-crush-on-confluence-of-events>
But organisers have been criticised for their initial response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/01/falls-festival-organisers-blame-crowd-crush-on-confluence-of-events>
 on 30 December, which told patrons to “stay calm and be very patient moving 
between bands”.

The statement, posted on the festival’s Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/pg/fallsfestival/posts/>, was not well received, with 
some saying it looked as though organisers were blaming the crowd.

Many of those caught in the crush have told the media they believed it was 
caused by a decision to install a bar along one side of the tent, significantly 
narrowing the area that could be opened up as an exit.


Organisers removed a large section of the side of the tent before reopening 
the stage on Saturday.

WorkSafe has opened an investigation into the crush, and Ducrou said the 
organisers were conducting their own investigation.

The law firm Maddens Lawyers says it has spoken to numerous people caught up 
in the crush and isassessing the potential for a class action 
<http://www.theage.com.au/national/falls-festival-organisers-could-face-lawsuit-over-crowd-crush-as-more-sex-assault-allegations-emerge-20170105-gtmjaa.html>
.

The crush wasn’t the only bad news to come out of this year’s Falls. On New 
Year’s EveTasmania <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tasmania> police 
issued a “personal safety message” to festival goers at the Marion Bay event, 
near Hobart, saying they had received reports that three teenage girls had been 
allegedly sexually assaulted at the festival over the preceding two days.


The first attack allegedly occurred in the campgrounds between 9.30pm and 
11.30pm on 29 December; the second between 10.45pm and 11.45pm in the mosh pit 
of DJ Hot Tub Time Machine on the same night; and the third just after 2pm in 
the mosh pit during a set by the Australian rapper Illy on 30 December.

Police asked for photos of the mosh pit during the second two alleged sexual 
assaults, andthis week Detective Inspector Steve Burk said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/05/two-more-women-report-sexual-assault-at-falls-fesitval>
 footage provided by the public “indicates at least two other women were 
inappropriately touched at Falls”.

Two more women report sexual assault at Falls Festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/05/two-more-women-report-sexual-assault-at-falls-fesitval>
Susan Fahey, manager of Women’s Legal Service Tasmania, said that while the 
alleged sexual assaults were deplorable, the fact that five incidents had been 
reported at the Tasmanian event this year, and none last year, was actually a 
positive.

“Every woman who has ever attended a festival like this knows that this 
behaviour is not uncommon, it’s actually significant that women are now 
reporting it,” she told Guardian Australia.

“It’s criminally entitled behaviour on behalf of the perpetrators, it’s 
absolutely not on … [but] I think it’s extremely positive that people felt that 
they were able to report it, and that police are obviously very serious about 
finding the perpetrators.”

A spokeswoman from New South Wales police said they had received one report of 
an indecent assault at the Falls festival in Byron Bay.

Ducrou’s co-producer, Paul Piticco, said he was “deeply saddened and disturbed 
by the allegations” and “the safety and wellbeing of our festivals patrons is 
of upmost importance to us”.

“Like everyone else we are disgusted and angry that some people feel they can 
inappropriately touch others without their consent,” he said in a statement to 
Guardian Australia.

“We would like to see the conversation turn from telling our women and girls 
to be on guard and vigilant, to telling our boys and men to have some respect 
and stop taking these liberties.”

After a week of negative publicity the festival organisers, and their line-up 
of 50-plus bands, headed to Western Australia for a two-day festival in 
Fremantle, beginning on Saturday.
 