
The families of four young men murdered by the serial killer Stephen Port 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/25/serial-killer-stephen-port-jailed-for-life>
 have made an appeal for witnesses ahead of possible legal action against the 
Metropolitan police over the force’s handling of the investigation.

Former chef Port, 41, was sentenced in November to spend the rest of his life 
in prison for the murders of the four men he drugged and raped before dumping 
their bodies near his eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> flat. 
His trial heard he had a fetish for sex with unconscious boyish-looking men 
whom he sought out on dating apps and social media before drugging them with 
the date-rape drug GHB.


The Independent Police Complaints Commission has launched an investigation 
into the handling of the case. Police initially failed to link the deaths 
despite striking similarities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/stephen-ports-freedom-kill-difficult-questions-met-police>
.


The families of Anthony Walgate, 23, Jack Taylor, 25, Daniel Whitworth, 21, 
and Gabriel Kovari, 22, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/stephen-ports-victims-anthony-walgate-gabriel-kovari-daniel-whitworth-jack-taylor>
 have now instructed civil liberties and police action specialist lawyers 
Hudgell solicitors and barrister Leslie Thomas QC.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffamilies-of-stephen-ports-victims-seek-witnesses-for-possible-action-against-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5193841a5c7510b7f0d0e12f4c78f9754e9246b5%2F0_0_3500_1018%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Families%20of%20Stephen%20Port's%20victims%20seek%20witnesses%20for%20possible%20action%20against%20police&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffamilies-of-stephen-ports-victims-seek-witnesses-for-possible-action-against-police%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Families%20of%20Stephen%20Port%27s%20victims%20seek%20witnesses%20for%20possible%20action%20against%20police&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffamilies-of-stephen-ports-victims-seek-witnesses-for-possible-action-against-police%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5193841a5c7510b7f0d0e12f4c78f9754e9246b5%2F0_0_3500_1018%2F3500.jpg>
 (Left to right) Daniel Whitworth, Jack Taylor, Anthony Walgate and Gabriel 
Kovari. Photograph: Metropolitan police/PA 
In a statement, Neil Hudgell said: “The Metropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> have publicly acknowledged 
that the evidence heard at Stephen Port’s trial identified potentially missed 
opportunities to catch Port sooner.


“There are many serious questions which the families of these young men need 
answering through the ongoing IPCC investigation and any future inquests. It is 
essential that we establish whether the police response to the deaths of these 
young men was thorough and appropriate, including whether discrimination played 
any part in their actions.


“The families expect the IPCC to fully scrutinise the investigative work 
undertaken by the police and examine how any potential similarities between the 
cases were considered.


“The families rightly want the police to be held to account but it is too 
early at this stage to say what form any legal action may take. The emphasis 
right now is on information-gathering.


“We urge anyone with information they believe could be relevant to the IPCC 
investigation to contact the IPCC directly on 0800 151 0021 or email
barking&dagenham@ipcc.gsi.gov.uk <mailto:barking%26dagenham@ipcc.gsi.gov.uk> or 
portenquiry@hudgellsolicitors.co.uk <mailto:portenquiry@hudgellsolicitors.co.uk>
.”


Earlier this week the Guardian reported how one witness in the investigation 
felt he had “hit a brick wall” with police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/03/stephen-port-victims-landlord-i-felt-i-hit-a-brick-wall-with-the-police>
 and felt compelled to raise concerns over the deaths, which detectives 
initially failed to link. John Pape, 38, who was Kovari’s London landlord, said 
he believed homophobia was a factor.


The IPCC has said it will examine whether discrimination played any part. 
Seventeen police officers are facing investigation for possible misconduct over 
the failure to catch Port earlier. The Metropolitan police are re-examining 58 
unexplained deaths involving the drug GHB from a four-year period across London.

All four men died from overdoses of GHB, also known as G or liquid ecstasy. 
The body of Walgate, Port’s first victim, was found just outside the communal 
entrance to Port’s one-bedroom Barking flat. The other three were discovered in 
a churchyard near Port’s home.

All were propped up in a sitting position, with signs they had been dragged 
there. None had their mobile phones. An apparent suicide note found on one was 
taken at “face value” by police, Port’s trial heard, but was later found to 
have been written by Port.


Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> questioned Port at the time of 
Walgate’s death in June 2014. He lied about how he had discovered the body and 
was arrested, charged with perverting the course of justice, and released. He 
then went on to murder Kovari and Whitworth in August and September 2014.


In March 2015, Port was convicted of making a false statement to police about 
finding Walgate collapsed outside his flat when in fact he had died inside. He 
was jailed for eight months for perverting the course of justice, but then 
released on an electronic tag in June. He killed Taylor in September.


Port was convicted of 22 offences against 11 men, four murders, four rapes, 
four assaults by penetration and 10 of administering a substance. He was 
cleared on three counts of rape.

 