
Twenty years ago Ingmar Bergman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ingmarbergman> reached the peak of his career 
and plumbed the depths of his spiritual despair with Through a Glass Darkly, 
Winter Light and The Silence, his unremittingly bleak chamber-trilogy on the 
solitariness of man. He immediately followed this with his first colour movie, 
About All These Women, a brightly-lit comedy about the menage of a much 
misunderstood womanising musical genius in the 1920s that sourly reflected on 
his own relations with obtuse critics and a prying press.

Bergman then reverted to his customary pessimism, and two years ago concluded 
his German exile with the starkly monochrome, nihilistic, From the Life of the 
Marionettes. Now, returning to Sweden, he has made, in Fanny and Alexander 
(Lumiere, 15), another glowing movie also set earlier in this century and again 
consciously autobiographical.

This magnificent three-hour film (which also exists in a five-hour television 
version) is proposed as his farewell to the cinema and is certainly 
testamentary in character. Peter Cowie's illuminating, admirably researched 
critical biography of Bergman (Secker and Warburg Â£12.50), published to 
coincide with the picture, shows just how much Fanny and Alexander draws on the 
director's own early life, recapitulates characters, themes and motifs from his 
work, and seeks to reconcile conflicting aspects of his thinking.

Set in a Swedish provincial town, the film begins on Christmas Eve 1907 at the 
opulent apartment of Helena Ekdahl, a wealthy widow and ex-actress with three 
middle-aged sons: Oscar (Allan Edwall, an actor-manager of much good will and 
little talent who runs the family's prosperous theatre; Gustav (Jarl Kuller, a 
successful Pan-like restaurateur; and Carl (Borje Ahlstedt), a drunken, 
embittered academic.

Gradually we work out the relationships between the family, their friends and 
servants as the Christmas festivities proceed, and the film comes to centre on 
Oscar's young wife Emilie (the strong, handsome Ewa Froling) and their 
children, the 10-year-old Alexander and the eight-year-old Fanny.

The town is clearly Bergman's birthplace, Upsala, the elegantly cluttered 
apartment we recognise as his grandmother's home, and the enchanting opening 
shot of Alexander raising the curtain of a toy theatre to look through the 
stage at the world is the first of numerous references to the theatre.

Oscar and Emilie are first glimpsed as Joseph and the annunciatory angel in 
their theatre's nativity play, and soon after Christmas Oscar has a fatal heart 
attack playing the Ghost in a rehearsal of Hamlet. As part of the film's 
supernatural dimension, Oscar returns to haunt the family with characteristic 
ineffectuality when Emilie marries a sadistic, puritanical bishop (Jan 
Malmsjo), who takes her away from the theatre to live a life of 'austerity and 
purity'.

In the bishop's spartan palace Fanny and Alexander are subjected to a regimen 
reminiscent of testing Dickensian childhoods or Kipling's Ba Ba Black Sheep. 
The implied notion of the theatre as true father and the church as stepfather 
reverses the course of Bergman's own life, for the bishop has much in common 
with the stern Luheran cleric who was the director's own father.

He is called Vergerus, a recurrent name in the Bergman movies from The Face 
(1959) onwards, always attached to those opposed to the mystical, intuitive, 
sensuous. There ensues a contest of power, magic and will for the possession of 
Emilie and the children between the bishop's household and the Ekdahls, 
involving the family's devoted Jewish friend, Jacobi (Erland Josephson).

This exuberant, richly textured film, packed with life and incident, is 
punctuated by a series of ritual family gatherings for parties, funerals, 
weddings, and christenings. Ghosts are as corporeal as living people. Seasons 
come and go; tumultuous, traumatic events occur - yet, as in a dream of 
childhood (the film's perspective is that of Alexander), time is oddly still.

The enormous cast, mostly members of the repertory company Bergman has created 
during 40 years in the theatre and cinema, is uniformly excellent. The 
photography of Sven Nykvist is as fine as ever, conveying with great subtlety 
the differences of moral between the bishop's icy palace, the Ekdahls' warm 
household and the mystical Aladdin's cave where the antique-dealer Jacobi 
provides a refuge for the fugitive children.

The Ekdahl sequences have a depth of focus rare in Bergman's colour movies and 
are framed and lit to evoke the geometric composition and shadowless, all-over 
light of Carl Larsson, Sweden's most perennially popular artist, who celebrated 
the attractions of middle-class family life at the turn of the century. It is 
part of the magnanimity and maturity of Bergman's vision that this film can pay 
tribute simultaneously to Larsson and Strindberg.
 