
The winner: Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them

For the fourth weekend in a row, Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/13/fantastic-beasts-review-jk-rowling-eddie-redmayne-harry-potter>
 has topped the UK box office. Weekend takings of £2.73m take the cumulative 
total to £42.4m. After 24 days of play, the JK Rowling-scripted wizarding 
adventure has overtaken the lifetime box office of every 2016 release except 
three films: Bridget Jones’s Baby (£47.9m), The Jungle Book (£46.2m) and 
Finding Dory (£42.8m).

In 2016, although quite a few titles managed three weeks at the top spot – The 
Revenant, Deadpool, Captain America: Civil War, The Secret Life of Pets, 
Finding Dory, Bridget Jones’s Baby – none has extended its reign to a fourth 
week, until now. Fantastic Beasts seems to be cruising towards top box-office 
honours for 2016, but faces a big challenge with the arrival on Thursday of
Rogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story>. On the other 
hand, the start of the school holidays later this month should provide another 
boost. Either way, Fantastic Beasts looks a dead cert to overtake the 
lowest-grossing Harry Potter film, 2004’s The Prisoner of Azkaban (£46.1m). 
(That comparison is not adjusted for inflation.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-eddie-redmyane-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fantastic%20Beasts%20cast%3A%20'A%20bunch%20of%20squirrels%20together%20...%C2%A0that's%20pretty%20fantastic'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-eddie-redmyane-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fantastic%20Beasts%20cast%3A%20%27A%20bunch%20of%20squirrels%20together%20...%C2%A0that%27s%20pretty%20fantastic%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-eddie-redmyane-video-interview&media=>
Fantastic Beasts cast: ‘A bunch of squirrels together ... that’s pretty 
fantastic’ – video interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/17/fantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-eddie-redmyane-video-interview>
The runner-up: Moana

Dropping just 13% from its opening session, Moana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/01/moana-review-disney-polynesian-adventure>
 enjoys the strongest hold of any film in the Top 10. But after 10 days, box 
office is a troublingly low £4.77m – and the picture has a long road to travel 
to reach a number that would be respectable for a major release from Disney 
Animation (£20m, although Zootropolis did £24m). Disney-Pixar’s The Good 
Dinosaur had reached £5.12m at the same stage of its run, and that film ended 
on a disappointing £15.1m. Disney may now be wondering if Moana would have done 
better in the traditional late January/early February spot, positioned for 
February half-term – this worked in recent years for Disney Animation’s Big 
Hero 6 and Wreck-It Ralph. Instead, Universal Illumination has nabbed that slot 
forSing <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3470600/reference> (out 27 January).

The top new release: Office Christmas Party

Landing at fourth place in the chart, Office Christmas Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/office-christmas-party-review-jennifer-aniston-jason-bateman>
 begins with a decent £1.20m, including previews of £288,000. That compares 
with a debut of £799,000 forBad Santa 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/bad-santa-2-review-same-old-dirty-tricks>
 a couple of weeks ago. Distributor eOne will now hope to grab as much cash for 
both these titles this week and next; from Boxing Day onwards, Christmas-themed 
works tend to evaporate at the box office.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPwab8lY2uuk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPwab8lY2uuk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPwab8lY2uuk&media=>
 Office Christmas Party film trailer 
Office Christmas Party’s formula of festive high jinks might seem a fairly 
safe commercial bet, but Seth Rogen, Joseph Gordon-Levitt and Anthony Mackie 
struck out with the drug-fuelledThe Night Before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/03/the-night-before-review-film-seth-rogen-stoner-christmas>
 in December 2015, debuting with a poor £273,000 from 279 cinemas. Office 
Christmas Party has the benefit of a highly relatable premise, and arguably 
also a something-for-everyone cast (including Jason Bateman, Jennifer Aniston 
and TJ Miller – AKA the barman from Deadpool).

The live event: The Nutcracker

Missing from the official comScore weekend chart – because it occurred last 
Thursday – isThe Nutcracker ballet 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/the-nutcracker-by-peter-wright>, beamed live 
from London’s Royal Opera House. The event grossed £796,000 on Thursday, with 
weekend encores pushing the total to £921,000. That would have been enough to 
earn The Nutcracker fifth place in the chart, had comScore combined all the 
takings into a single figure.

While crowds flocked to The Nutcracker, the usually reliable New York Met 
Opera fell horribly flat on Saturday withL’Amour de Loin 
<http://www.metopera.org/Season/2016-17-Season/amour-de-loin-saariaho-tickets/>
. The live event grossed a poor £81,000 from 173 cinemas, which compares with 
£254,000 from 177 venues for Mozart’s Don Giovanni in October. It’s fair to say 
that the composer of L’Amour de Loin – Finland’s Kaija Saariaho – is not so 
familiar to the target audience. L’Amour de Loin was first performed in 2000, 
and hardly qualifies as a beloved classic.

The arthouse battle

Two major new indie films struggled to engage significant audiences. Oliver 
Stone’sSnowden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/snowden-review-oliver-stone-joseph-gordon-levitt>
, released into 184 cinemas, managed an OK-sounding £209,000, but that figure 
is boosted by £68,000 of previews. Strip those out, and the site average falls 
to a poor £768. Nate Parker’sThe Birth of a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-nat-turner-nate-parker>
 achieved £135,000 from 196 venues, but again this number includes fairly hefty 
previews of £49,000. Remove them, and the site average falls to a weedy £441.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsnowden-new-trailer-for-oliver-stones-thriller-starring-joseph-gordon-levitt-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Snowden%3A%20new%20trailer%20for%20Oliver%20Stone's%20thriller%20starring%20Joseph%20Gordon-Levitt%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsnowden-new-trailer-for-oliver-stones-thriller-starring-joseph-gordon-levitt-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Snowden%3A%20new%20trailer%20for%20Oliver%20Stone%27s%20thriller%20starring%20Joseph%20Gordon-Levitt%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsnowden-new-trailer-for-oliver-stones-thriller-starring-joseph-gordon-levitt-video&media=>
Snowden: new trailer for Oliver Stone’s thriller starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jul/22/snowden-new-trailer-for-oliver-stones-thriller-starring-joseph-gordon-levitt-video>
Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/film/snowden> is the latest biopic of a 
controversial contemporary figure to disappoint at the box office, following 
The Fifth Estate (about Julian Assange) and The Program (Lance Armstrong). As 
for The Birth of a Nation, which won both the grand jury prize and audience 
award in the US Dramatic Competition at the Sundance film festival and sold for 
$17.5m in a huge bidding war to Fox Searchlight, the film’s sad commercial fate 
must be a crushing blow to the film-makers. This is a title that always needed 
anointing by awards voters to help connect to audiences, but the Oscar campaign 
collapsed under the weight of the historical rape allegations that resurfaced 
in August concerning Parker and creative collaborator Jean McGianni Celestin. 
(Parker was acquitted in 2001, and Celestin had his conviction overturned in 
2005. The pair’s accuser committed suicide in 2012.)

Two highly praised smaller releases – documentary Life, Animated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/life-animated-review-documentary-disney-owen-suskind-autism>
 and dramaThe Pass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/the-pass-review-ambitious-and-insightful-drama-about-gay-footballers>
, starring Russell Tovey as a closeted gay football star – failed to convert 
the critical buzz into bums on seats. If previews are stripped out, both earned 
site averages below £1,000. The indie space is already occupied by the likes of 
Arrival, A United Kingdom, Paterson and Nocturnal Animals, as well as reliable 
festive re-releaseIt’s a Wonderful Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/dec/14/family.drama>, meaning that the 
indie box-office cake is being split into quite a number of pieces.

The future

Thanks to the paucity of major new releases, box office takings are down 23% 
on the previous frame, but nevertheless 44% up on the equivalent weekend from 
2015, which suffered an even more desperate lack of strong new product. The 
reason for that void a year ago was the imminent arrival of Star Wars: The 
Force Awakens, and it’s the same story this year –Rogue One: A Star Wars Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/rogue-one-a-star-wars-story> arrives this 
Thursday. Cinema bookers have long been counting on Rogue One to end the year 
with a big commercial flourish, and rival distributors are giving this weekend 
a wide berth. The only alternatives are a handful of small arthouse releases, 
including documentaryThe Eagle Huntress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/08/the-eagle-huntress-review-otto-bell-kazakh-falconry-mongolia>
, narrated by Daisy Ridley. Next Monday sees the arrival of Ballerina, an 
animation featuring the voice of Elle Fanning.

Top 10 films , 9-11 December 

1. Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them>, 
£2,734,960 from 620 sites. Total: £42,392,249 (4 weeks)

2. Moana <https://www.theguardian.com/film/moana>, £1,911,784 from 563 sites. 
Total: £4,773,161 (2 weeks)

3. Sully: Miracle on the Hudson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sully>, 
£1,222,683 from 592 sites. Total: £4,308,008 (2 weeks)

4. Office Christmas Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/office-christmas-party-review-jennifer-aniston-jason-bateman>
, £1,198,176 from 479 sites (new)

5. Allied <https://www.theguardian.com/film/allied>, £363,767 from 436 sites. 
Total: £3,634,915 (3 weeks)

6. Arrival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arrival>, £268,329 from 283 
sites. Total: £8,604,881 (5 weeks)

7. Trolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/11/trolls-review-anna-kendrick-a-candy-coloured-return-for-the-famed-ugly-lovable-creatures>
, £248,619 from 490 sites. Total: £22,530,783 (8 weeks)

8. Snowden <https://www.theguardian.com/film/snowden>, £209,352 from 184 sites 
(new)

9. Bad Santa 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/24/bad-santa-2-review-same-old-dirty-tricks>
, £154,758 from 302 sites. Total: £1,726,290 (3 weeks)

10. Befikre, £152,957 from 95 sites (new)

Other openers

The Birth of a Nation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-birth-of-a-nation>
, £135,162 (including £48,704 previews) from 196 sites

L’Amour De Loin – Met Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera>, £80,742 
from 173 sites (event)

Life, Animated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/life-animated-review-documentary-disney-owen-suskind-autism>
, £25,706 (including £12,920 previews) from 25 sites

The Pass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/the-pass-review-ambitious-and-insightful-drama-about-gay-footballers>
, £18,673 from 24 sites

Chennai 600028 II: Second Innings, £11,382 from 8 sites

I Am Not a Serial Killer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/11/i-am-not-a-serial-killer-review-mark-kermode>
, £11,233 from 12 sites

The Super Parental Guardians, £11,023 from 3 sites

Little Screen December, £8,474 from 101 sites

A Trip to Jamaica, £5,996 from 1 site

Kattappanayile Rithwik Roshan, £5,461 from 19 sites

The Young Offenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/the-young-offenders-review-knockabout-irish-caper>
, £3,011 from 11 sites (Northern Ireland release)

A Christmas Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/12/a-christmas-star-review-snow-globe-northern-ireland>
, £2,379 from 11 sites (Ireland release)

Black Hen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/the-black-hen-review-min-bahadur-bham>
, £2,343 from 2 sites

Suddenly Seventeen, £957 from 4 sites

The Ardennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/08/the-ardennes-review-belgian-drama>
, £719 from 2 sites

Heritage of Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/01/heritage-of-love-review-wretched-retchworthy-russian-romance>
, £345 from 3 sites

 * Thanks to comScore <https://twitter.com/cSMoviesUK>. All figures relate to 
takings in UK and Ireland cinemas.
 