
The far-right Israeli education minister, Naftali Bennett, has vowed to 
introduce a bill this month to formally annex Maale Adumim, one of Israel’s 
largest settlement blocks in the occupiedPalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories>.

In remarks made at a museum in the city of 40,000 located outside Jerusalem, 
Bennett said <http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.762480>: “After 
being here for 50 years, the time has come to end military rule.”

The hardline leader of the Jewish Home party also made clear that he saw the 
annexation of Maale Adumim as a first step in annexing all of “area C”, the 
part of the occupied territories still under full Israeli control.

“For this reason,” said Bennett, “by the end of the month, we will submit the 
bill for applying [Israeli] law to Judea and Samaria [the name used by Israelis 
for the occupied territories] and will embark on a new path. We will present to 
the cabinet a bill for applying Israeli law in Maale Adumim.”

Israelis now face a fateful choice as hope for a two-state solution fades | 
Dahlia Scheindlin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/john-kerry-netanyahu-israel-palestinians>
The timing of Bennett’s announcement, and of his plan to introduce the 
legislation in the first place, appears to have been designed to exploit the
inauguration of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/donald-trump-inauguration> on 20 January. 
The US president-elect has indicated he will be more supportive of Israel in 
international arenas that regard the settlements as illegal.

Bennett’s call also comes soon after the adoption by the UN security council 
of a resolution reiterating that Jewish settlements on land intended for a 
future Palestinian staterepresent a “flagrant violation” of international law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 and an obstacle toa two-state solution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/the-two-state-solution-in-the-middle-east-all-you-need-to-know>
.

Bennett, who has long set out his political stall as a nationalist, 
settlement-supporting and pro-annexation opponent of such a two-state solution, 
told supporters he sawTrump’s inauguration as a “small window of opportunity” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
 to annex Area C, starting with Maale Adumim.

His view is opposed by both allies of the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin 
Netanyahu, and the leader of the opposition,Isaac Herzog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/17/isaac-yitzhak-herzog-profile-israeli-political-dynasty-zionist-union>
, who warned at the weekend that supporting annexation was “brainwashing the 
public with lies, such as claiming that we can annex Area C and the world will 
allow it”. Netanyahu has instructed the ministers in his coalition not to talk 
about annexation.

The prime minister, whose support in the polls has been slipping, was 
interviewed on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/benjamin-netanyahu-denies-corruption-ahead-of-police-questioning>
 by police as part of their investigation into whether he broke the law by 
receiving gifts from wealthy businessmen. He denies any wrongdoing, and has 
decried “years of daily persecution against me and my family”.

The two-state solution in the Middle East – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/the-two-state-solution-in-the-middle-east-all-you-need-to-know>
Amid Netanyahu’s political and legal problems, Bennett appears to have become 
increasingly emboldened 
<https://972mag.com/the-annexation-of-palestine-could-be-closer-than-you-think/124077/>
, seeking in recent weeks to capitalise on indications that a Trump presidency 
may align more closely with his political viewpoint.

It began with a speech to the Saban forum in Washington in December and 
continued with an interview in the rightwing, English-language Jerusalem Post 
on Monday in which Bennett again made clear his opposition to a Palestinian 
state.

“I do not believe in a second Palestinian state beyond what we have in Gaza,” 
Bennett told the paper, saying that instead he proposed a staged end of Israeli 
military rule in Area C while offering full Israeli citizenship to the 80,000 
Palestinians living there.

For their part Jewish settlements in the West Bank would be incorporated into 
Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> while the remaining areas 
under Palestinian administration – known as Areas A and B – would be given a 
degree of autonomy short of statehood.

“This would be less than a state, but [it would still be] a lot,” he said. 
“They would have a central government with elections, if they so choose.”

In a question and answer session with the Washington Post on Monday 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2017/01/02/qa-with-israeli-minister-with-trump-coming-in-its-time-to-annex-much-of-the-west-bank/?utm_term=.bb280cc941b3>
 Bennett denied that his plan violated international law, despite the clear 
view of UN security council resolutions over the years as well as widespread 
international consensus on the issue.

“It does not violate international law because that would suggest that we 
occupy a state,” he said. “We don’t. There was never a Palestinian state. The 
British conquered the land from the Turks, the Jordanians illegally conquered 
the West Bank from the British, and then we released it.”

Bennett’s proposal does not tally with Israeli political consensus, with only 
about a third of voters supporting annexation.

However, his recent success pushing a weakened Netanyahu into supporting 
another piece of legislation – a proposal to retroactively legalise illegal 
Jewish outposts built on private Palestinian land – has underlined Bennett’s 
skills in leveraging the right of the country’s political debate.
 