
Hometown: London. 

The lineup: Lias Saudi (vocals), Saul Adamczewski (vocals, guitar), Adam J 
Harmer (guitar), Nathan Saudi (organ), Joseph Pancucci (bass) and Dan Lyons 
(drums).

The background: Fat White Family feel subversive or transgressive even before 
you move beyond their name, although what exactly there is left to subvert in 
thistwerking, dope-on-daytime-TV 
<http://guardianlv.com/2013/11/miley-cyrus-twerking-and-toking-on-amsterdam-stage/)>
 day and age we're not sure. "Fat" suggests they're siding with society's 
marginalised, any skin-colour referent in a band's monicker always seems like a 
provocation, and the "family" bit inevitably leads to thoughts of Charles 
Manson's coterie of twisted like-minds - in fact, one of the "also recommended" 
on YouTube in the sidebar next to FWF's live performance of a track entitled 
Wet Hot Beef isan interview with Dennis Wilson's old buddy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSTIke5So0M>. 

 Reading on mobile? Click here to listen 
<https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=http://api.soundcloud.com/playlists/14353534&show_artwork=true>

So there are intimations of ugliness from the get-go. Then reading up about 
them heightens the idea of them as intelligent malfaisants, members of an 
emergent underclass of literate but degenerate squatters abstaining from 
conventional life and generally being surreally silly because there's nothing 
better to do (one of them rode a donkey into a pub, that kind of avant-caper). 
The NME described them thus: "as dark, deviant and disgusting as the '70s", 
with a concomitant sense of the band subsisting in conditions familiar to sepia 
footage of three-day-weeks andpiled-up debris on the streets 
<http://i.telegraph.co.uk/multimedia/archive/01717/dustbin_1717416c.jpg>. And 
the Quietus called them "sick" - to denote, in the contemporary vernacular, 
"good", but also as in, "seriously not well". Apparently a journalist friend of 
the Quietus writer had been horrified (in a secretly delighted way) by how 
"utterly depraved the band looked" in one of their videos, possibly the one for
Cream of the Young <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r95X2tXd8b0> which features 
a grotesque meat and seafood bacchanal, a disgusting orgy of octopus, cow 
lungs, chicken skin and pigs' heads. Of course, the title of the song didn't do 
much to shift one's perception of them as unhealthily preoccupied with the 
illicit, but then, their debut album is called Champagne Holocaust while other 
titles on it include Is It Raining In Your Mouth?, Without Consent and Bomb 
Disneyland.

"We are being antagonistic and trying to wind people up a bit but at the same 
time the lyrics are not entirely serious," they told Quietus editor John Doran, 
adding that class war was one of the motives. The latter is not immediately 
apparent from their music, a scrappy mess of country, blues, country-blues and 
assorted detritus of pop'n'roll. From their album, Auto Neutron is slow white 
gospel worthy of Spacemen 3 with vocals reeking of narcotic ennui. Is It 
Raining in Your Mouth?, with its Johnny Cash-deep vocals and Velvets chug, is 
completely different - already FWF are coming across as deranged yet eclectic, 
capable of switching between genres at will. The lyric - "five sweaty fingers 
on the dashboard" - does little to dispel that "sick" feeling. Who Shot Lee 
Oswald? is porch blues, only the porch is in Hackney not Virginia. Rough, raw, 
lo of fi, snarky: this is how you imagine the Fugs might have sounded, or the 
Mothers of Invention if they'd recorded an album-length bluegrass tribute not a
doo wop one 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/7/7b/Frank_Zappa_-_Cruising_With_Ruben_%26_the_Jets.jpg>
. Without Consent is dark disco in the vein of 23 Skidoo or Cabaret Voltaire. 
Special Ape is mental glam, like Denim doing Mouldy Old Dough. Wild American 
Prairie recalls the rowche rumble of the Fall. Heaven on Earth is so close to 
the new pop lunge of Fire Engines' 1981 indie hitGet Up and Use Me 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZaqFaIX1cwE> they could conceivably sue. Garden 
of the Numb, meanwhile, betrays their past as a country band touring the 
dirt-boxes of the capital for chump change and includes a line that nails their 
gash aesthetic ("You will sell your mother's cunt to open doors"). Borderline 
is another genre exercise, this time sardonic bluegrass. "It's all been a waste 
of time," they sing. Yes, but an enjoyably odious one.

The buzz: "They're the filthiest band to stumble out of an East London squat 
in recent years." <http://crackmagazine.net/music/fat-white-family/> 

The truth: Their disgustingness is their best feature, as Woody Allen would 
have it.

Most likely to: Lick your decals off. 

Least likely to: Find heaven on earth. 

What to buy: Heaven On Earth is released digitally on November 18 by 
Trashmouth. On November 25 Champagne Holocaust is issued on CD for the first 
time.

File next to: Birthday Party, Fall, Gun Club, Fire Engines.

Links: fatwhitefamily.bandcamp.com <http://fatwhitefamily.bandcamp.com>. 

Thursday's new band: Ruen Brothers.
 