
Are Fat White Family “an invitation, sent by misery, to dance to the beat of 
human hatred”? Are they leading us on a journey “from the blinding white heat 
of a midday Mediterranean shore to the embattled boudoir of Ike and Tina 
Turner, from the clotted grey of Dr Harold Shipman’s waiting room to the final 
hour of the Third Reich in the Berlin bunker”? God, I do hope so.

Fat White Family – a ramshackle, rancid mess of a band that spawned in Peckham 
in 2011 and mutated in Brixton – are not your usual chart-tickling troubadours. 
They write their own album descriptions (above). They look terrible, if your 
idea of good-looking is Bradley Cooper: they don’t wash; they never seem to 
change their clothes; their skin – no matter what colour it started out – is a 
uniform rat-grey. They come with a reputation, built on a drug-addled lifestyle 
and wild, willy-waving gigs. Their songs are calledBomb Disneyland 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-28iGlY7fF8>, Tinfoil Deathstar 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YSwxWZLeCEM> and Lebensraum; their lyrics 
concern paedophilia, bad fellatio, Goebbels and Hitler. They have a spin-off,
the Fat White Manson Family 
<https://fatwhitefamily.wordpress.com/tag/fat-white-manson-family/>, that plays 
covers of Charles Manson songs.

Nothing is settled, everything is always teetering on the edge of collapse. 
They’re on to their third drummer, their third manager, they’ve added a new 
bassist. Having brought out their first album,Champagne Holocaust 
<https://fatwhitefamily.bandcamp.com/album/champagne-holocaust>, in 2013, 
they’ve found it almost impossible to make their second, moving between four 
different studios, including one owned by Sean Lennon (who loves them). “Until 
quite recently, nobody thought this album would work out,” says singer Lias 
Saoudi. Lias, 29, from various places, is one of Fat White Family’s two central 
characters. The other is Saul Adamczewski, 27, from Peckham, guitarist/backing 
vocals. Then there’s Nathan, Lias’s younger brother, who plays keyboards, and 
Adam J Harmer, another guitarist; plus Taishi Nagasaka, the new bassist, and 
Severin Black, the new drummer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYKNt_qq6N7o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYKNt_qq6N7o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYKNt_qq6N7o&media=>
 Watch the video for Fat White Family’s Whitest Boy on the Beach. 
There is a difference between confrontational art and a confrontational 
person. But with Fat White Family the line is not so clear. They’re a rabble 
with various causes, mostly anti-establishment and anti-gentrification. When 
Margaret Thatcher died, Saul, Lias and Nathan painted “The Witch Is Dead” on a 
sheet and hung it outside the Queens Head, a one-drink-stay-for-days pub in 
Brixton where they were living at the time. Their picture wasfeatured in 
several papers 
<http://metro.co.uk/2013/04/10/top-10-most-provocative-responses-to-margaret-thatchers-death-3591399/>
. They’ve staged protests outside corporate-owned Brixton Village restaurants 
and made online videos depicting a nice chap called Frank Boxer on fire, 
because he started a cool bar in Peckham. They’re venomous about other 
musicians, such as Slaves or Arctic Monkeys. Though, also, to be fair, about 
themselves. “You have to be a social retard or a fucking cripple to be in this 
band,” Saul toldNME last year. Lias tells me: “The most rebellious act is to 
revel in your own misery and patheticism.”

If none of this is making you want to switch over from Radio 2, fair enough. 
Here’s my last try. As a musical force, Fat White Family are good and getting 
better.Touch the Leather <https://vimeo.com/86395869>, a track that came out 
afterChampagne Holocaust (it was included in the US album release), has become 
an anthem. Their new LP,Songs for Our Mothers 
<http://store.fatpossum.com/products/songs-for-our-mothers>, has plenty of 
woozy, sleazy tunes on it; and its first single,Whitest Boy on the Beach 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?vu003dYKNt_qq6N7o>, is a 6 Music favourite. Plus 
– and it’s a big plus – live, Fat White Family are untouchable. I’ve seen them 
play a few times, and they are always different, always teeth-rattling, 
ramshackle, extreme; Lias, in particular, utterly committed to the intensity of 
whatever moment he finds himself in. They are a brilliant, brilliant live band. 
Everyone should see the Fat Whites at least once before they die.

I hate that we row like that, because I love him to bits. He’s my brother, 
essentially
Lias Saoudi 
My interview with Saul and Lias is set for a Saturday afternoon in December, 
in another Brixton pub, the Trinity Arms. Saul is there on time, with Steve the 
press officer, and while we wait for Lias he holds forth. He’s starting a new 
band, he says, and describes his ideas behind it: there will be trumpets, and 
everyone in white, in a row, like angels. “It will be called Formal,” he says. 
Saul’s full of vitriol and jokes: he’s a sharp-tongued, shadow-eyed queen 
bitch. Thin, with one tooth missing, he wears braces to hold up his suit 
trousers. He has a skinhead (as does Lias, after their last video, directed by 
YBATim Noble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/apr/20/thesaatchigallery.art13>, 
required them to have their heads shaved on camera). He orders a bowl of pasta 
and sucks it up like water.

When Lias arrives, about 45 minutes late, low-key in a crap jumper and jeans, 
the atmosphere changes. I don’t notice at first, though I spot an odd moment. 
Steve leaves, putting £20 on the table to fund our drinks. Saul puts one finger 
on the £20 note and moves it across the table towards him, looking at Lias as 
he does so. Lias holds Saul’s gaze, puts his own finger on the note and moves 
it back, away from Saul, and pockets it.

We start by talking about the music; it’s often lost in the chatter about the 
Fat Whites, and I like the new album – its sludgy far-away-ness, pretty tunes 
and unexpected disco/Hawaiian elements. But there is something off about our 
conversation. A kind of argument is going on, one that seems to have picked up 
right where it was last left. When Lias makes a point, Saul makes another, 
contradictory one. They talk over each other. They disagree about Lias’s lyrics 
on the album: Saul says they’re abstract, Lias insists that they’re personal. 
Within minutes, I feel like a referee.

Lias says: “I love playing live. I think you find things in songs as you 
perform them, the songs reveal different things as you go along. You experience 
them in a different way.”

Saul, as Lias is talking: “What? It’s boring, playing live. You play the same 
songs every night, and I hate it. It’s boring.”

Lias (to me): “He’s edging towards the Brian Wilson-recluse stereotype. He 
just wants to be in a wooden box with a microphone.”

Saul (to me, but looking at Lias): “That’s why his thing is the live thing and 
my thing is the studio. In the studio is when I’m leading the band, and on 
stage, Lias leads the band.”

Saul looks at Lias a lot. I can’t tell if he’s goading him, or wanting him to 
join in, or do something differently. Lias looks at the table, but his voice is 
louder than Saul’s, his sentences longer. At one point, they call the band a 
marriage and say that they don’t mind getting divorced. I start to feel less 
like a ref, and more like a gooseberry.

What do you fight about? I ask. They answer, but they’re talking to each other.

Saul: “Drug… habits.” Lias: “Saul’s drug habits.” Saul: “That’s about it.” 
Lias: “Saul’s belligerence, Saul’s aggressiveness. He’s not going to argue with 
the fact that he can be a bit of a bully.” Saul: “Well… Your sexism.” Lias 
(affronted): “My SEXISM? Excuse me!” Saul: “I’m serious.” Lias: “Let’s not go 
down that road.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffat-white-family-social-protest-face-offs-interview-songs-for-our-mothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67dc98d2b371b7eb3f7798c8a0b687526cf87d3c%2F0_25_4184_2510%2F4184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fat%20White%20Family%3A%20'I%20hate%20that%20we%20row%20because%20I%20love%20him%20like%20a%20brother'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffat-white-family-social-protest-face-offs-interview-songs-for-our-mothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fat%20White%20Family%3A%20%27I%20hate%20that%20we%20row%20because%20I%20love%20him%20like%20a%20brother%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffat-white-family-social-protest-face-offs-interview-songs-for-our-mothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67dc98d2b371b7eb3f7798c8a0b687526cf87d3c%2F0_25_4184_2510%2F4184.jpg>
 Lias Saoudi from Fat White Family performs at La Cigale, Paris on 13 November, 
2015. Photograph: David Wolff-Patrick/Redferns 
I manage to calm them down by reminding Lias that when I met him before, about 
a month ago, he was just married. His wife a charismatic American. But, oh 
dear, they’re getting a divorce, and Lias is homeless. None of the four 
original band members have anywhere to live now the Queens Head has shut. They 
can’t afford London rents and they can’t claim housing benefit, so they crash 
wherever they can. Saul is at his girlfriend’s. Lias spent last night at his 
aunt’s in Tooting, in his niece’s room, in a single bed under a life-size 
cutout ofThe Vamps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/29/the-vamps-wake-up-review>.

Our interview trundles on. Saul has a go at Lias for ordering bruschetta. We 
discuss their various collaborations outside of the band. Saul is planning to 
record a track for Dan Carey’sSpeedy Wunderground 
<http://speedywunderground.com/> project, with his other band, Warmduscher 
<https://warmdscher.bandcamp.com/>. They both helped out Adrian and Dean of 
Sheffield band Eccentronic Research Council with their projectthe Moonlandingz 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G-f_yV3N2e8>. Lias is more positive than Saul 
about this; Saul says that Adrian doesn’t know his arse from his elbow.

Lias: “I like it when I don’t know my arse from my elbow. I’m interested in 
what happens when people collaborate, in chance mutations. My own ideas don’t 
interest me; they’re static in my brain.”

Saul (as Lias talks): “That’s very convenient.”

Lias: “When you have things that travel between different people, then you get 
something completely new… some Frankenstein… that’s what’s more curious for me.”

Saul: “Bollocks. That’s just bollocks.”

Lias: “Why is it bollocks?”

Saul: “Because what you’re saying is, it’s nice when you have someone who can 
write songs for you, and you can write the words. Which is fine, but call a 
spade a spade. That’s what it is.”

Lias: “Well, who wrote Hits Hits Hits 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VTaToi83Rz4> (off the new album)?”

Saul: “Well, me.”

Lias: “Who wrote the melody?”

Saul: “I don’t know.”

Lias: “I wrote the melody.”

Saul: “Well, I’m not sure about that.”

Lias: “On banjo.”

Saul: “Sorry? Oh yeah, a collaboration. It’s a collaboration, yeah, fine.”

Lias: “You turned it into something that I never could, but I had a skeleton 
of a song, and then you turned it into something much more interesting.”

Saul: “Oh whatever, I can’t be bothered. I’m going, sorry.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDOxPAaQSW_o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDOxPAaQSW_o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDOxPAaQSW_o&media=>
 Watch Fat White Family perform Bomb Disneyland live at London Calling 
festival, May 2014. 
And Saul walks out. I go after him. He is fine with me, but he wants to leave. 
I arrange to talk to him two days later, at the photo shoot. Then I go back 
into the pub. Lias and I continue.

“I can’t have that, him saying that no one else contributes anything,” says 
Lias. “I wrote that song, and that’s what my point is about transmutation. What 
he found in the song was something that was totally beyond my capabilities. I 
can’t sit in a studio and arrange 10 different instruments, I’m perfectly aware 
of my shortcomings. I’m an outsider musician. My lyrics on this album are about 
abuse and they’re descriptions of my working relationship with Saul. I’m not 
sure whether he’s Hitler and I’m Goebbels, or he’s Goebbels and I’m Hitler… I’m 
definitely Tina Turner.”

Lias is rattled and upset, so I stop talking about the band and ask him about 
himself. His mum is from Huddersfield, and his dad’s family is Berber, from 
Algeria. The Saoudis moved around a lot when Lias was young, from Southampton 
to Galway to Ayr. “I’ve got a northern accent from my mum, because that was the 
only constant,” he says. After his parents split up, his mum got together with 
a new guy and they all moved to Cookstown, in Northern Ireland. Lias, who knew 
nothing of the sectarian ins and outs of Northern Irish history, went to the 
local school and was asked by some kids if he liked The Sash (the Ulster 
Loyalist song). Thinking they meant Sash!, a European dance act, he said no and 
was promptly beaten up. “I thought, God they must really like terrible German 
dance music.”

Lias saw no live music when he was growing up, other than the occasional pub 
session with local folk musicians. He was bored. He read Matthew Collings’sThis 
Is Modern Art 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Books-This-Modern-Art-Matthew-Collings/dp/1841881007> 
and decided to move to London. When his older brother went to art school in 
Leeds, Lias saw that it could be done; he applied to the Slade School of Fine 
Art, and got in. But he didn’t like it, and left.

He feels grateful the Fat Whites got together when they did; he thinks just a 
few years later the band wouldn’t have happened, because there would have been 
nowhere for them to rehearse, put on gigs or crash out afterwards. London is 
closing its doors. “I work literally all the time now,” he says. “Every day I’m 
on the phone or in the studio or on the road, and I still can’t break even. It 
feels like every year they move the goal posts. At what point am I going to be 
able to rent a flat and have a record player, so I can listen to other people’s 
music for a bit?”

Living in the Queens Head was fun, but not good for long-term health. Lias got 
pneumonia while touring withthe Black Lips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/dec/19/black-lips-review-heaven-london>
, and at one point was so ill his bandmates thought he might be HIV-positive. 
Also, heroin came on the scene and changed the general ramshackle druggy vibe, 
as it does. That’s what Tinfoil Deathstar is about. “It’s a sudden descent,” 
says Lias. “Five years ago, I don’t think I’d ever seen anybody smoke heroin. 
Now, half of the people I know are on it on a regular basis. It’s the norm now, 
you know?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffat-white-family-social-protest-face-offs-interview-songs-for-our-mothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210ef0d4cf00a31be8afb92334895ba3bcc77e35%2F0_51_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fat%20White%20Family%3A%20'I%20hate%20that%20we%20row%20because%20I%20love%20him%20like%20a%20brother'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffat-white-family-social-protest-face-offs-interview-songs-for-our-mothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fat%20White%20Family%3A%20%27I%20hate%20that%20we%20row%20because%20I%20love%20him%20like%20a%20brother%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffat-white-family-social-protest-face-offs-interview-songs-for-our-mothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F210ef0d4cf00a31be8afb92334895ba3bcc77e35%2F0_51_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Saul Adamczewski performing with Fat White Family on the John Peel stage at 
Glastonbury in 2014. Photograph: Ollie Millington/WireImage 
I switch off my recorder and sit with Lias for a while. He wants to talk about 
Saul. He tells me about how brilliant Saul is in the studio; how, when they 
started, Saul would shout at him for being rubbish, chuck a tambourine at 
Lias’s head until he made better music. He lived at Saul’s parents for a time 
(as we talk, he takes a call from Saul’s dad). He was with Saul when Saul ran 
out of money from his previous, major-label band, the Metros. He says he pleads 
with him, sometimes, to get out of bed and play a gig.

Lias has other stories, including an enjoyably libellous one about a member of 
the Village People, but, today, everything comes back to Saul. “I hate that we 
row like that, because I love him to bits. He’s my brother, essentially. I love 
him like a brother,” he says. “But the stress he brings… When I get on stage, 
and people shout, I think, God, you don’t know how much shit I’ve had just to 
get us all on stage.”

On Monday, Saul doesn’t turn up to the photoshoot. He tells Steve that he’ll 
talk to me another day, but that doesn’t happen either. He goes to the US, 
where he is due to stay until February, and promises to email or call. Nothing. 
The Fat Whites play a series of gigs before Christmas, with Dale Barclay (ex-
the Amazing Snakeheads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/13/amazing-snakeheads-amphetamine-ballads-review-promise-unfulfilled>
) taking Saul’s place on stage.

I write up this piece, without anything more from Saul. The Fat White Family 
are teetering again. But then, just before we go to press, I get notice from 
Steve that Saul wants to talk. He’s in Palm Springs, California, staying at the 
band’s manager’s house. I call, and after a bit of to-ing and fro-ing (Lias is 
there too, and they’re both asleep), Saul is on the line. At least, I think 
it’s him. He appears to have been replaced by someone completely different. 
Someone younger, lighter, less slurred and nasty.

“Yes, I’m better than when I saw you last,” he says, and laughs.

What have you been doing in the US?

“I’ve been in rehab,” he says. “I went from being a smack addict to being 
completely clean in two days. I went to Mexico and took ibogaine (a strong 
hallucinogenic made from a plant). Ibogaine is like ayahuasca, but it’s 
horrible, a horrendous, terrifying trip into your mind.And then you come out of 
it. But it knocks the smack out of your system. I don’t have any cravings or 
withdrawal; it’s like resetting your brain.”

Saul spent five weeks “with these spirit world people”. And then, for 
aftercare, went to a rehab place in Vegas. He hated Vegas, “it’s like the 
apocalypse with fake tits”, but quite liked rehab.

“It’s run by these DJs who were big in the 90s,” he says. “They played all the 
Vegas casinos, and then they left and set up this holistic rehab, which plays a 
lot of EDM. At the rehab, they made me go to the gym, which was horrible. They 
tried to get me lifting weights, but I could only lift the bar that the weights 
go on…”

I laugh. He’s still very funny, Saul. How are his other emotions, though, 
without heroin to keep them at bay?

“I’m getting used to feeling normal,” he says. “It’s hard. I feel shocked. 
It’s weird and scary. I like to think of myself as being in control, and I was 
convinced I was all right. You know, we played in Paris on the night of the 
terrorist attacks, and we had to stop. They told us and the audience that there 
had been an attack on the venue next door. And I don’t really remember it. I’d 
disintegrated. I was in a bad state. You completely lose it.

“I was living in a basement in a block of flats in Stockwell, it was horrible. 
I wasn’t aware of how numb I’d become. Now, I feel… I feel a lot of guilt and 
shame, to be honest. I’ve made up with Lias. My family are happy, especially my 
mum. She thought I was going to die.”

Songs for Our Mothers… So, The Fat White Family are going to continue?

“Yes. We’re going to go on tour and I’m playing. I’ve written loads of new 
songs, I’ve almost got an album’s worth of material. I was neglecting the 
creative side of myself. That’s the salvation.”

I hope so. We shall see.

Songs for Our Mothers is out now on Fat Possum Records. Fat White Family tour 
the UK 20 Feb - 9 March.
 