
Some call it the dead zone; some a no-man’s land; some the green line. For 
more than four decades, a United Nations-patrolledbuffer zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/apr/12/cyprus-buffer-zone-photographs-agencies>
 has bisected Nicosia, running through the middle of the Cypriot capital and 
dividing its historic heart.

It was a casualty of war: at first, the result of inter-communal fighting that 
took the form of Turkish Cypriot ghettos in the 60s; then as a no-man’s land 
between ceasefire lines delineated by little more than what two opposing armies 
agreed were their last defended positions.

At 6am on 18 August 1974, the dead zone officially came into being. On account 
of it, Nicosia is Europe’s lastdivided capital 
<http://cyprus-mail.com/the-divided-island/>. 

Behind reinforced sandbags, barrels and barbed wire, it remains for the most 
part a lifeless strip – with the exception of the odd UN patrol, the exclusive 
terrain of feral cats and dogs. As such, the strip, which stretches across the 
whole island for 112 miles, but is sometimes barely yards wide within the 
Venetian ramparts of the old city, is both septic gash and effective partition: 
the ultimate divide between Cyprus’s Greek-Orthodox Christian majority and 
minority Muslim Turks. Its crumbling buildings and weed-infested interior are 
testimony to a conflict that is frozen in time.

But while, at intermittent points, Greek and Turkish Cypriot conscripts in 
national service still face each other down the barrel of a gun, this time warp 
also offers hope. For the past 18 months the island’s leaders, Nicos 
Anastasiades and Mustafa Akinci,have been holding peace talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/31/mustafa-ankinci-advocates-focus-future-for-splintered-cyprus>
 here, in an abandoned airport complex inside the dead zone. These talks are 
aimed at uniting the island’s internationally recognised Greek-run south, with 
its non-recognised Turkish-controlled north.

In this week’s crucial discussions in Geneva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
, which culminate today in a historic summit between Greece, Turkey and Britain 
– Cyprus’s post-colonial guarantor powers – the dead zone will have been 
uppermost in these politicians’ minds. For the first time, everyone agrees that 
the island possessesleaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/30/cyprus-reunification-erdogan-economic-gains-settlement-election-turkey>
 who are determined to overcome the division. In another first, they have 
agreed to pore over maps focusing, as never before, on the territorial 
trade-offs needed for a solution to a dispute that has defied international 
resolution for so long.
 A UN soldier walks by the abandoned buildings inside Nicosia’s no-man’s land. 
Photograph: Petros Karadjias/AP 
 A diet of propaganda

I first encountered the dead zone in 1977, three years after the Turkish 
invasion – itself prompted by the island’s failed attempt atenosis (union) with 
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>.

Forty three years later, it is still unclear how many casualties the military 
operation left in its wake. On the Greek side, around 6,000 are believed to 
have been killed, wounded or listed as missing; on the Turkish side, around 
1,000 are thought to have perished.

What could not be contested was the no-man’s land that divided the two – with 
its bullet-pocked houses, sandbagged barriers, hastily built gun ports and 
overgrown minefields. There was no street bordering the buffer zone that did 
not end in a makeshift blockade, brick wall, or conscript wearing a tired 
uniform.

Back then, the Cypriot capital was among a handful of metropolises to be split 
by war. Like Beirut, Belfast and Berlin, fear and loathing had left Nicosia 
fractured and confused; its noble monuments – legacies of every conqueror, 
usurper or passing invader army that had coveted the Levantine island jewel – 
scattered across its divergent ethnic sectors.

The fact that Nicosia, of all those cities, is the only one still partitioned 
says much about the enduring power of hate. In the 70s, it infected all aspects 
of life in Cyprus, and lay at the root of the mental diet of hate and 
propaganda on which schoolchildren were raised. I know because I was enrolled at
The English School <https://www.englishschool.ac.cy/schools-history> – founded 
by the island’s former colonial administration “to train English-speaking 
clerks for government offices”, and was raised on it too.

Unabashedly elitist, the school had introduced football, hockey and cricket to 
Cyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> and took pride in the fact 
that, after achieving independence from the British in 1960, much of the 
island’s political establishment – including Greeks and Turks who would go on 
to play a prominent role in Cyprus’s division – were educated under its 
sandstone arches.

In theory, the school also took pride in being open to all “communities, races 
and denominations”. Unlike local schools, it did not believe in marshalling 
students on rowdy flag-waving demonstrations marking national holidays or 
exhibiting maps of a greater Greece, whose boundaries stretched all the way to 
Constantinople, the heart of theByzantine empire 
<http://www.byzantium.ac.uk/home.html> now known as Istanbul. In practice, 
however, the school was a nationalist breeding ground for Greek-Cypriot 
Orthodox Christians, Armenians, Maronites and Latins from the tiny Catholic 
community.
 Helena Smith is fourth from the right with arms crossed and eyes closed. The 
picture was taken 1979 at the English School in Nicosia 
In my own class, Three Green, there was only one Turkish Cypriot among three 
still enrolled at the establishment as tokens of its founding pledge to ethnic 
tolerance (most had chosen to withdraw after the invasion). Four Britons, two 
London-born Cypriots and several deracinated Greeks recently returned from 
Canada, South Africa and Australia complemented the mix.

Modern Greek was obligatory for all. With memories of the invasion still 
fresh, it was the means by which the horrors ofTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> were inevitably invoked. Pupils, 
including a “floaters” class of itinerant internationals, were daily inculcated 
with the misdeeds of the “Terrible Turk”. I can still see our own teacher, a 
man of ample girth, wielding his large frame around the green-shuttered 
classroom, threatening to mete out the worse “Turkish punishments” if standards 
weren’t kept.

Even now, such poison is hard to erase

Truculent students who failed vocabulary tests frequently got the ear lobe 
treatment – a sharp tug delivered with the warning that the Ottomans had 
thought nothing of removing body parts from each and every Greek since their 
capture of the island in 1571. “You should know,” he would boom, “that the good 
Turk is the dead Turk.”

The fear, hate, loss and pain that both sides had engendered were as prevalent 
on the other side of the dead zone.

Turkish Cypriots, just a few miles away, were also being raised on hate speech 
and propaganda. From textbooks and teacher handouts, they, too, were being 
nurtured on the seeds of mistrust, lopsided views of history thatacademics 
would go on to study 
<http://file.prio.no/files/projects/Report-History%20Education%20low.pdf>. Had 
it not been for the invasion – a campaign that to this day Ankara prefers to 
call an “intervention” – the Turkish Cypriot minority, the argument went, would 
never have been able to sleep safely at night.

Even now, such poison is hard to erase. As I discovered during a visit four 
decades later, accusations of nationalist bias still haunt the English School – 
despite the intake of Turkish Cypriot students having increased dramatically in 
recent times, and the election of thefirst Turkish Cypriot head boy in 2015. 
<http://cyprus-mail.com/2015/04/04/turkish-cypriot-elected-english-school-head-boy/>

Likewise, young Turkish Cypriots on the other side of the ceasefire line speak 
openly of their nationalist education, including the assertion that Greek 
Cypriots actually welcomed the 1974 partition because it allowed them to create 
their own Turk-free state.
 A Turkish army tank passes through the Turkish section of Nicosia in 1974. 
Photograph: Anonymous/AP 
Competing forms of nationalism

Nicosia is the only capital to possess two museums of national struggle. Even 
now, with peace talks in full throttle, both indulge in competing forms of 
nationalism, with the past viewed as a way of laying claim to the island.

The Turkish-controlled north’s museum 
<http://www.whatson-northcyprus.com/interest/nicosia/north_nicosia/struggle.htm>
 stands behind a military complex (one of many erected to house some 40,000 
mainland troops stationed in the rump state), flanked by armoured personnel 
carriers and a large artillery cannon.

In a concrete building reminiscent of Soviet-era communism, visitors are 
exposed to gory photographs, exhibits and guns telling the history of the 
struggle of Turkish Cypriots from 1878, when the British took over the island 
from the Ottomans.

What have we got to unite us? The answer is nothing

“We have nothing in common with Greek Cypriots, neither religion, culture nor 
language,” says the museum’s young, blonde-haired warden, welcoming her first 
visitors in several days. “What have we got to unite us? The answer is nothing.”

In the south, the national struggle museum 
<http://www.cyprushighlights.com/en/2010/09/11/national-struggle-museum-eoka-1955-1959-nicosia/>
 is housed in a cavernous edifice opposite the Greek archbishopric, which 
co-funded its refurbishment in 2000 and for Hellenists is the keeper of the 
nationalist flame. Here, too, visitors are treated to a history of heroism, 
martyrdom and sacrifice – although this time through the lens of the1955-59 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/19/observer-archive-this-week-in-1958>
 national liberation movement against the British yoke, celebrated as the 
prelude toenosis with Greece. 

Turkish Cypriots are, at best, represented as British collaborators. “We have 
a lot of schoolchildren coming through,” says Marios Georgiou behind the 
reception desk. “Our fight for independence from the British was honourable, 
everyone should know about it. The Turks were always brutal, but things have 
changed now. Maybe we could live with them under the right circumstances, if an 
agreement was fair.”

In suggesting this, Georgiou is in tune with something new. Memories of 
co-existence are fading fast; memories of horrors past are fading too. Though 
rejectionists are vocal – with influential parts of the media on either side 
equating reconciliation with betrayal – many hope that, this time, the 
communities’ two leaders have gone too far to roll the clock back.

“We are literally in the process of writing history,” says Fikri Toros, seated 
in his pristine office where he has long-headedthe Turkish Cypriot chamber of 
commerce <http://www.ktto.net/en/>. “Both communities have come to terms with 
the reality that economic sustainability is impossible on an island that is 
politically conflicted.”

The time, Toros says, has finally come to reunify in a bi-zonal, bi-communal 
federal state.
 Barrels and sandbags mark the dividing UN buffer zone. Photograph: Petros 
Karadjias/AP 
Memory wars

The main gateway to the self-proclaimed Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is 
at the crossing where the Ledra Palace hotel still stands. This sandstone 
building – famous before the invasion for its brandy sours – is now a 
bullet-spattered billet for British squaddies seconded to the UN.

Since 2003, when the breakaway republic eased restrictions announcing that 
cross-border travel would be free for all, Greek and Turkish Cypriots have been 
able to cross at will. But passage through the checkpoint is as much 
psychological as anything else. For Greeks (nearly 200,000 of whom lost their 
homes in the invasion), compulsion to identify themselves at the checkpoint 
still weighs heavily.

“It makes me feel uncomfortable that I have to show my passport in my own 
country,” saysLakis Zavallis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/06/turkish-invasion-divided-cyprus-40-years-on-eyewitness-greek-cypriot-family>
 as we cross the line. “But it won’t stop me doing it.”

Zavallis, a sprightly 72-year-old who commanded a platoon during the invasion, 
belongs, by his own admission, to the “silent majority” now hoping that their 
nation will at last be united in peace. So, too, does Dervish Yashar, six years 
younger, but no less moderate. Yashar was among the first Turkish Cypriots who, 
with his pre-1974 identity card in hand,crossed the Ledra Palace checkpoint on 
23 April 2003 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/2969089.stm>.

“I kept my old passport, I kept my Republic of Cyprus identity card, I kept my 
old driving licence waiting for that day,” Yashar says. “Turkish Cypriots have 
been isolated for 60 years – it is enough,” he tells me, referring to 
Greek-Cypriot raids against Turkish Cypriot villages in the late 1950s. “No one 
but Turkey recognises us. If a solution doesn’t come from the top, it will come 
from the bottom.”

For a long time the desire to end the ethnic divide seemed odd, even surreal. 
Only a hardy bunch of Greek and Turkish Cypriots, led mostly by trade unionists 
and civil society, indulged in bi-communal efforts.

Related: A walk to freedom: can Joburg's bridges heal the urban scars of 
apartheid? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/dec/16/corridors-of-freedom-johannesburg-bridges-heal-urban-scars-apartheid>

My classmates were the last generation that still had memories of the “other 
side”. After 1974, partition and the “memory wars” that both communities 
adopted took over, and history was re-written. The buffer zone was a place to 
be avoided, both menacing and dark.

“Don’t you remember?” says my childhood friend, Cleopatra Kitti. “It marked 
the beginning of the big dark unknown. We were always told: ‘Don’t drive near 
it, don’t go near it, lest you fall into the clutches of the Turks.’”

“In Cyprus we have two ethnic groups who, up to a point, shared the same time 
and space before they devised inherently opposed ‘memories’ of what the common 
past entailed,” says the anthropologist Yannis Papadakis. “Both insult the 
memory of the other.”

For decades, the dead zone was the most potent symbol of that division. But 
now, in itsHome for Cooperation <http://www.home4cooperation.info/> – a 
community centre opposite the Ledra Palace in the middle of the no-man’s land – 
has become a zone of life and interaction, a place of mingling and common 
dreams for people who no longer want to insult the memory of the other.

It is in the Home of Cooperation that I meet Marilena Spyrou, 32, and Hayriye 
Ruzgar, 25. One is Orthodox, the other Muslim, but neither wants me or anyone 
else to describe them as Greek or Turk. They are Cypriots who look only to a 
common future, beyond the obstacles of partition, in the fair isle that they 
share.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 