
So here we are. Johnny Rotten, scourge of the establishment, is influencing 
the wardrobe choices of pro-establishment prime minister,Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>.

Usually, beneath the political tension, it’s the shoes that betray May’s 
agenda. But heading to Lancaster House to set out her 12-point agenda 
yesterday, she diverted us with her familiar Black WatchVivienne Westwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/vivienne-westwood> suit, a two-piece that 
is fast becoming her trademark look for delivering a blow to the political 
landscape. Political commentators have called it her “lucky suit”. Punk fans, 
however, will note it’s a very similar model to the one Johnny Rotten used to 
collect fan spit on stage in 1977.

What does it mean that May has adopted the tropes of punk rock in order to 
make Britain Isolationist Again? The semiotic overtones between punk and May’s 
agenda couldn’t be further apart. Firstly, the suit cost £1,190. The Russell & 
Bromley crystal-studded brogues cost £215. The prime minister, who will also 
appear in Vogue the same month she intends to pull the trigger on Article 50, 
understands the importance of delivering a message in keeping with what you’re 
trying to relay to the public (note,those bitter chocolate leather trousers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/dec/07/theresa-mays-leather-trousers-you-need-a-tough-hide-to-wear-them>
and accusations of being “out of touch”). In leaving the single market and 
implementing all the barriers regarding trade and movement that that had 
previously been lowered by being part of the EU, the theme of Them vs Us has 
never been more keenly felt than via a £1,405 price-tag.

Second, the suit’s repetition is delivering a subliminal visual message: May’s 
role in carrying out the mandate of the referendum to see Brexit through to the 
bitter end, has not and will not change. If yesterday’s rhetoric focused on 
“keeping the union together”, wearing Black Watch tartan was a palpable nod 
towards Scotland, but one feels that’s where this unity ends.

So did she wear it for luck, or was it simply the sensible option when 
announcing a swift, clean separation from the EU? Her latest purchase (an 
Amanda Wakeley zip-up skirt, unzipped four inches, last worn in November 
<https://vg-images.condecdn.net/image/mW31Lwz366G/crop/1020>) might have 
diverted the media’s attention from this long-awaited speech. Nice try, May, 
but actually the media has been pretty diverted by the suit.
 Theresa May at the Conservative Party Annual Conference in 2013. Photograph: 
REX/Ray Tang 
First worn to the 2013 Conservative conference, where she raised some divisive 
thoughts on free movement, its most high-profile outing was at the launch of 
her party leadership bid last June. Dame Vivienne Westwood herself was not 
thrilled. A month later the designer told the Today programme: “Do I mind if 
Theresa May wears my clothes? No, but I certainly don’t admire her for 
anything. I think she’s awful.”

Two months later, however, she appeared at the annual Number 10 London Fashion 
Week reception wearing a slogan T-shirt “Theresa Talk Vivienne”. Friendship 
seems unlikely – the two have differing positions on fracking (Mayis for it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/06/fracking-local-people-payments-theresa-may>
, within reason. Anti-fracking is Westwood’s protest baby) – but Westwood is 
wise enough to know that an audience with the prime minister, even if it is 
under the cloak of a London fashion week blowout, is not to be shirked at.

It’s worth remembering that although Johnny Rotten remains resolute on 
Thatcher – “Nobody sensible voted for [her]”, he eventually moved from 
anarchist to political sympathiser: “I suggest everybody votes, everybody 
should try to make the best of a bad situation,” heonce told this paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/14/john-lydon-johnny-rotten-in-quotes-ukip-thatcher-arsenal-punk-knighthood-internet>
. “I despise the entire shitstem because it is corrupt, but that corruption has 
only come about because of the indolence of us as a population.” So maybe even 
the punks are for turning.
 