
The Ukrainian feminist protest group Femen has staged a two-woman 
demonstration againstVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> in Milan, where he is 
expected to attend a summit of world leaders on Thursday.

The protesters stood in front of Milan’s cathedral and poured buckets of red 
wine, which they said represented the blood of Ukrainian people, over their 
bare chests.

The message “Stop ignoring Ukrainian bloodshed” was written on one woman’s 
torso, while the other made direct reference to the two-day summit of more than 
50 European and Asian leaders: “ASEM allies of Putin,” read the message onFemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/femen> leader Inna Shevchenko’s chest.

“We believe that welcoming a killer, a person who is killing a whole nation 
right now – and this Ukrainian blood is right here, is on us – and shaking his 
hand, is ignoring the big torture, the big killing and the war inUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> that is started and supported by 
Putin,” she told AFPTV.

Although its main purpose is economic, the ASEM summit looks set to be 
dominated by the security situation in eastern Ukraine, where a fragile 
ceasefire struck last month has been repeatedly violated. An ongoing dispute 
over Russian gas supplies to Ukraine is becoming increasingly urgent as winter 
approaches.

Putin and the Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko, are scheduled to meet at 
a breakfast on Friday morning. The Italian prime minister, Matteo Renzi, will 
also host David Cameron, Angela Merkel, François Hollande and the EU’s top 
officials.

It is possible that Putin and Poroshenko may also meet face-to-face in a 
separate bilateral meeting on the sidelines of the summit. Poroshenko has been 
quoted as saying the whole world had “high expectations” of his talks with 
Putin.
 