
It was supposed to be a straightforward new postage stamp to mark Fran√ßois 
Hollande's presidency: a more youthful depiction of Marianne, the feminine 
symbol of the French Republic, reflecting the Socialist president's promise to 
help the younger generation.

Instead, the portrait has sparked a spat on the political right after one of 
its designers said it was partially inspired by Inna Shevchenko, a leading 
member of the feminist activist groupFemen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/sep/22/femen-topless-warriors-global-feminism>
.

The designers, David Kawena and Olivier Ciappa, had previously said their 
inspirations ran from the Renaissance to French comic strips and Japanese 
manga. But after the stamp's launch on Sunday, Ciappatweeted 
<https://twitter.com/OlivierCiappa>: "For all those who are asking who the 
model was for Marianne, it's a mix of several women, but above all Inna 
Shevchenko, founder of Femen."

Christine Boutin, a former minister under Nicolas Sarkozy and founder of the 
Christian Democrat party, tweeted her disgust and her party called for a 
boycott of "this outrageous stamp", saying it was an attack "on the dignity of 
women and the sovereignty of France" and should immediately be withdrawn.
 Inna Shevchenko, a member of the women's rights group Femen. Photograph: 
Charles Platiau/Reuters 
Femen, which often stages topless street protests, was started in Ukraine but 
is now based in Paris after Shevchenko wasgranted political asylum 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jul/08/inna-shevchenko-femen-asylum-france-pussy-riot>
 following outrage at her felling of a giant cross in Ukraine in support of the 
Russian band Pussy Riot.

Femen's most high-profile protests in France have targeted the street 
demonstrations against same-sex marriage. It also recently staged an
anti-fascist protest in Notre Dame cathedral 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/may/22/femen-mock-suicide-notre-dame> and 
attempted to ambush the French president at an airshow.

Ciappa, whose exhibition of photographs of imagined gay couples was vandalised 
in Paris the anti same-sex marriage protests,wrote on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/olivierciappa/posts/10151617061258025> on Monday that 
he had received "messages of threats and hatred" against him on Twitter, "some 
violent and some funny, such as Christine Boutin's call to boycott my stamp".

Shevchenko tweeted <https://twitter.com/femeninna>: "Femen is on French stamp. 
Now all homophobes, extremists, fascists will have to lick my ass when they 
want to send a letter."

Several French artists have designed different Mariannes for French stamps, 
but this is thought to be the first inspired in part by a woman who isn't 
French.
 