
The rural town of Saylorsburg, Pennsylvania, seems unfazed by the attempted 
military coup that rocked Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/we-thought-coups-were-in-the-past-how-turkey-was-caught-unaware>
 overnight on Friday, and threatened to destabilise the region.

Fethullah Gülen: Turkey coup may have been 'staged' by Erdoğan regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/fethullah-gulen-turkey-coup-erdogan>
At a little over 5,000 miles away from Istanbul – Turkey’s biggest city and 
the heart of the country’s failed putsch – that is hardly surprising, save for 
the fact that the uprising’s alleged mastermind,Fethullah Gülen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/fethullah-gulen-turkey-coup-erdogan>
, has made his home in Saylorsburg.

His presence causes commotion from time to time. When Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> is sporadically plunged into 
political chaos, attention often turns towards his guarded compound. It was the 
same on Friday, when residents could hear helicopters circling over Gülen’s 
home.

Apart from mysterious choppers, there are also the occasional anti-Gülen 
protesters. Sometimes they drive up and down Mt Eaton Road, one of the main 
thoroughfares in the farming town, waving the Turkish flag out of their windows.

Apart from that, living next to the man who Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan> personally blames for 
trying to overthrow the government has few downsides. Indeed, it can have perks 
– invitations to Thanksgiving dinner, for example. Or, even, some claim, a trip 
to Turkey.


To the wider world, Gülen’s living arrangements are shrouded in secrecy. It is 
peculiar enough that the leader of the Hizmet movement, in self-exile from 
Turkey, lives in a smallPennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania> town, nestled in the Poconos.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fturkish-coup-attempt-gulenist-movement-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkish%20coup%20attempt%3A%20who%20is%20Fethullah%20G%C3%BClen%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fturkish-coup-attempt-gulenist-movement-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkish%20coup%20attempt%3A%20who%20is%20Fethullah%20G%C3%BClen%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fturkish-coup-attempt-gulenist-movement-video-explainer&media=>
Turkish coup attempt: who is Fethullah Gülen? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/16/turkish-coup-attempt-gulenist-movement-video-explainer>
Have you been affected by the attempted coup in Turkey?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/have-you-been-affected-by-the-attempted-coup-in-turkey>
He sleeps in a small and spartan room in a sprawling complex, the Golden 
Generation Worship and Retreat Center <http://ggwrc.org/>, where his movement 
offers religious instruction. At any given time, there are up to 80 visitors 
undergoing religious retreats. For a man widely described as reclusive, he has 
many guests, including Saylorsburg residents.


Chuck Parker, who lives down the road from Gülen, said: “When we have the 
traditional Thanksgiving, he has a dinner then. He also has a dinner for 
Ramadan.” He and many other residents have received invitations, which often 
come with a personal touch. “They usually hand-deliver it, or one of the guys 
brings it over.”

The dinners arouse much interest among some of the residents. One elderly man, 
who asked not to be named, said: “I went to a dinner four years ago. My mother 
was 97. She always wanted to go, because other neighbors from the area went. 
And then we went.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fhead-of-gulenist-movement-turkish-coup-attempt-staged-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fethullah%20G%C3%BClen%20suggests%20Turkish%20coup%20attempt%20could%20have%20been%20staged%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fhead-of-gulenist-movement-turkish-coup-attempt-staged-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fethullah%20G%C3%BClen%20suggests%20Turkish%20coup%20attempt%20could%20have%20been%20staged%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fhead-of-gulenist-movement-turkish-coup-attempt-staged-video&media=>
Fethullah Gülen suggests Turkish coup attempt could have been staged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/16/head-of-gulenist-movement-turkish-coup-attempt-staged-video>
World leaders express support for Turkey after attempted coup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/17/world-leaders-express-support-for-turkey-after-attempted-coup>
The man, who was taking a break from picking cucumbers from his vegetable 
patch, said: “I’ve been to his dinners a couple of times. They treat you nice. 
You don’t see him,” he said, referring to Gülen. “They escort you to the 
building. They tell you where to park. There is an escort there, and an escort 
back.”

Residents agree that the warm welcome and hospitality that Gülen offers 
residents is a defining feature of the group’s presence in the town. Holly 
Parker, a stained-glass artist who has received invitations to the dinners, 
said: “According to the Muslim culture, they invite the neighbors for things … 
They do it to extend themselves out into the community a little bit. I think 
they realize that there might be a few people in the community who might be 
wary.”

Though none of the people the Guardian met in Saylorsburg had anything bad to 
say about the neighborliness of Gülen, Parker suggested that some residents 
might “feel iffy” about the group being headquartered in their town. “Some 
people are a little wary, and have questions like: why are they here? Why are 
they in the country?” But, she insists, she has no complains to make of them. 
“They’ve been very nice.”

Some residents have gotten very close to Gülen. “Some of the neighbors have 
had more personal and close contact,” Parker said. “A friend of ours, whose 
mother lives next door to the camp, he’s a contractor in the area. He did a lot 
of building for them, when they were building the resort situation back there.”


The Guardian was not able to reach the contractor, Howard Beers Jr, but two 
residents confirmed that he had worked for Gülen. “Several years ago, they 
offered to take him and his wife to tour Turkey,” said Parker. Beers wasn’t the 
only resident to have been invited to Turkey by the organization. “At the time, 
they offered to take our pastor as well. He didn’t go.” Parker added that, back 
then, the members of the movement, which often promotes interfaith dialogue, 
would visit her non-denominational church “every once in a while”.

Some locals see the presence of the well-funded Hizmet movement as a business 
opportunity. “When I am ready to sell this house, I am going to go to the 
Turks, and see if they want to buy it,” said the elderly neighbor who was 
taking a break from the vegetable patch. He added that a contractor, presumably 
Beers, had “made his millions” working for Gülen.

'We thought coups were in the past': how Turkey was caught unaware
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/we-thought-coups-were-in-the-past-how-turkey-was-caught-unaware>
Others in the area are catering to the movement in different ways. Parker 
recalled: “It’s interesting, the local K-Mart for a while was playing what I 
think was popular Turkish music down at [the nearby town of] Wind Gap. There 
are a lot of Turkish families moving in. You see them in the local stores 
sometimes.”

Fleeting glimpses of the Turkish community prompts different responses among 
longtime residents. “If you drive early in the morning, you see moms standing 
out with their children along the road waiting for the bus. I look and think, I 
just hope there is enough of a community ... It must be very lonely to be a mom 
and isolated in this area.” Chuck Parker, her husband, added: “I always wave to 
the ladies. Sometimes they are a little shy.”


If Gülen is extending a hand of friendship to his neighbors, many are 
returning the gesture. “We’re all immigrants here,” said Parker. “In my family, 
we’re part French, Hungarian, English. This is what America is about. We 
weren’t liked when we arrived either. But we’re Americans now.”
 