
Fetty Wap lost his left eye before his first birthday, the result of 
congenital glaucoma. Nowadays, the vacant space is bloodshot when he lifts his 
eyelid, but it usually just looks as if he’s squinting from smoking too much 
weed.

During childhood, however, classmates were constantly making fun of the boy 
born Willie Maxwell II, provoking him into fights. As an elementary school 
student in Paterson, New Jersey, he says, he regularly brawled, once even 
throwing a desk at another kid. But he gradually became more comfortable with 
his disability, and as an adolescent abruptly decided one day to remove his 
prosthetic eye.

These days, at 24, he is fully comfortable in his skin, and has become as 
ubiquitous as anyone in hip-hop since emerging on the scene last year with his 
hitTrap Queen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i_kF4zLNKio> – a love story set 
in a crack house. He’s more melodic thanFuture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/12/future-rap-rock-hendrix-honest>, 
to whom he is often compared, grittier thanDrake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/drake>, with whom he has collaborated, and, 
his drug-dealing days now behind him, a better public citizen than his 
imprisoned idolGucci Mane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/29/gucci-mane-rap-music-surge>. 
Kanye West gave him some important early support last year, but Wap is much 
less likely to stick his foot in his mouth.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di_kF4zLNKio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di_kF4zLNKio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di_kF4zLNKio&media=>
In fact, Wap would just as soon skip interviews altogether, although I get a 
chance to pick his brain in early April before theiHeartRadio Music Awards 
<http://news.iheart.com/features/iheartradio-music-awards-15/> at the Los 
Angeles Forum. Inside the trailer he is sharing with Chris Brown, he has just 
finished smoking a joint, and is in a good mood. “I heart weed,” he snickers, 
posing for a photographer. He is soon reminiscing about his five-year-old boy 
Zoovier (who is now old enough for Wap to call when he is on the road) and his 
one-year-old daughter Zaviera (with whomhe once made it rain cash at a New 
Jersey mall 
<http://abc7ny.com/society/video-rapper-fetty-wap-makes-it-rain-cash-at-nj-mall/1096507/>
). His publicist, however, lets it be known that he’s not interested in talking 
about his brand-new baby girl, Khari Barbie Maxwell, born to Masika Kalysha, 
star of reality show Love & Hip-Hop: Hollywood the week before. (Though Wap 
visited mum and baby at the hospital, he has yet to publicly claim the child.)

It has been a whirlwind for the ascendant MC, whose love songs and tough raps 
are as unusual as his personality. He has got little polish, and maintains 
eccentric habits such as riding quad bikes at high speeds on New Jersey streets 
and pavements. While most rappers will while away an afternoon talking about 
their influences and hip-hop heroes, Wap has little regard for many besides 
Gucci Mane – whose alter ego Guwop informs Fetty Wap’s moniker (“Fetty” means 
“money”). New Jersey has a rich hip-hop history; Lauryn Hill and Jay Z are 
among those to have called it home, and the genre’s first hit,Rapper’s Delight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tUqvPJ3cbUQ>, was created there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ffetty-wap-i-didnt-even-get-to-use-no-bed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe52b60e6b6bd040c6a8b082ccab4a90025fae6bb%2F0_252_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fetty%20Wap%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20even%20get%20to%20use%20no%20bed%20%E2%80%93%20I%20was%20lucky%20to%20have%20a%20carpet%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ffetty-wap-i-didnt-even-get-to-use-no-bed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fetty%20Wap%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20even%20get%20to%20use%20no%20bed%20%E2%80%93%20I%20was%20lucky%20to%20have%20a%20carpet%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ffetty-wap-i-didnt-even-get-to-use-no-bed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe52b60e6b6bd040c6a8b082ccab4a90025fae6bb%2F0_252_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
 Fetty Wap in Los Angeles, April 2015. Photograph: Michael Schmelling 
But Wap is unfamiliar with that song; in fact, he has been rapping for only 
about three years. It’s all the more extraordinary, then, that he has been on a 
nearly unprecedented roll when it comes to lighting up the US charts. Which all 
raises the question: how did the bullied and broke Willie Maxwell II become 
celebrated hitmaker Fetty Wap?

Wap’s first exposure to performance came while banging the drums in the band 
at his childhood apostolic church in Paterson, called Solomon’s Temple. His dad 
played keyboards, his brother played bass, and his uncle was the lead drummer. 
“You had to get nice to play on Sundays,” Wap says, and his uncle made him 
practise diligently until he got up to speed. Wap played in his high school 
band, too – until he got into another fight and broke his hand.

His teen years were a mess; he dropped out of high school and began dealing 
drugs. At one point, practically homeless, he slept on friends’ floors. “I 
didn’t even get to use no bed,” he says. “I was lucky to have a carpet.” What 
little funds he had, he squirrelled away after his son was born to make sure he 
could support him.

How rap got weird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/09/how-rap-got-weird-singalong-hip-hop-drake-fetty-wap-young-thug-asap-rocky>
Once he and his longtime friend Monty – who has featured on many of Wap’s 
tracks – started rapping, they quickly began taking things seriously.Hip-hop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/hip-hop>, it became clear, was an escape 
route from their dire circumstances. They trawled for beats on a site called 
SoundClick, rapping demos over instrumentals they found there. “We used to surf 
through there all day, listening to beats,” says Monty, whose real name is 
Angel Cosme, and who is as animated as Wap is low-key (what they share is a 
love of facial tattoos).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPzz4Z-O7710&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPzz4Z-O7710>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPzz4Z-O7710&media=>
Wap found the beat for Trap Queen online, courtesy of an unknown Belarusian 
producer named Tony Fadd, who posted it on his website. (Fadd barely speaks 
English, but they later linked up to work out a royalty-sharing agreement.) 
Wap’s camp brought the beat to a New Jersey producer named Brian “Peoples” 
Garcia, who touched it up, and before long Wap made a rough cut of Trap Queen. 
He still remembers the snowy day in December 2013 when he first played it to 
Monty, in the unfurnished Paterson apartment where they were staying. “I was 
like, ‘This gon’ be the one that’s gonna get us where we need to be at,’” Wap 
remembers.

Monty was impressed, but an affiliate named Nitt Da Gritt was blown away. 
“When Gritt heard it he was on the phone, and he was like: ‘Yo, I’m gonna call 
you back!’” Wap says. Gritt runs the independent label that gave Wap and Monty 
their start – RGF Productions, meaning “Real Good Fellas” or “Rich Good Fellas”.
Gritt told Complex 
<http://uk.complex.com/music/2015/08/the-making-of-fetty-wap-trap-queen> that 
Wap had originally titled the song What’s Up Hello, but that Gritt made the 
decision to call it Trap Queen instead.

Wap became obsessed with the track, refining his combination sung-and-rapped 
delivery until it was time to officially record it in March 2014. Trap Queen 
got radio play in New York later that year, but received its biggest boost when 
it came on to the radar of a new record label called 300, co-founded by a crew 
of Warner Music Group alumni. The label saw the track bubbling online and 
tracked down Wap for a meeting. In person, he charmed 300’s Todd Moscowitz. “I 
told him: ‘I know you already rich, but if you give me a chance I’m gonna make 
you a lot richer.’”

Trap Queen almost single-handedly launched 300, and Wap’s fortunes as well. 
Telling the story of an ex-girlfriend – a ride-or-die type who was ready to go 
to jail for him – it’s a singular song, immediately striking for its slightly 
alien, Auto-Tuned melody and sweet-yet-gritty story. “I can ride with my baby / 
I be in the kitchen cookin’ pies with my baby,” he sings. It has found fans in 
all corners, many of whom have no idea what is meant by “the trap” or “cooking 
pies”. (Answer: the location and method, respectively, of preparing crack 
cocaine.) The lyrics are so seemingly innocuous that a pudgy, 10-year-old white 
boy from Tennessee named George Dalton madea popular PG version of the song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zvo0Vm_3XIQ> without changing all that many of 
the lyrics. Trap Queen is now approaching half a billion YouTube views.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ffetty-wap-i-didnt-even-get-to-use-no-bed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc20fa729c5e5afaec609a7820c674a248b40f51c%2F0_125_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fetty%20Wap%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20even%20get%20to%20use%20no%20bed%20%E2%80%93%20I%20was%20lucky%20to%20have%20a%20carpet%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ffetty-wap-i-didnt-even-get-to-use-no-bed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fetty%20Wap%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20even%20get%20to%20use%20no%20bed%20%E2%80%93%20I%20was%20lucky%20to%20have%20a%20carpet%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Ffetty-wap-i-didnt-even-get-to-use-no-bed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc20fa729c5e5afaec609a7820c674a248b40f51c%2F0_125_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Performing Trap Queen with Taylor Swift, August 2015. Photograph: Suzi 
Pratt/LP5/Getty Images for TAS 
When Trap Queen broke, it seemed Wap might be a standard-issue one-hit wonder, 
arriving from nowhere and presumably headed quickly back there. But he soon 
followed up with a pair of top 10 Billboard hits,679 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pzz4Z-O7710> and My Way 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YS-5oD2Y4Wk>; three more songs charted as 
well. His ascent has been so fast that he went from handing out free copies of 
his songs outside the 2014 BET Awards in Los Angeles to closing out the 2015 
incarnation of the show onstage. In August,Taylor Swift brought him onstage at 
her Seattle concert and the pair performed Trap Queen together 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zQILU_IW9hE>.

Still, not everything has changed. Accustomed to dirty money, Wap still deals 
in cash, stashing his savings in various nooks and crannies, rather than in a 
bank account. “At the end of the day, if the bank freeze, the cash won’t,” he 
insists.

He is now focused on helping the careers of collaborators such as Monty, who 
is in the process of putting together a solo album. But Wap has so many crew 
affiliations that it’s hard to keep track of them all. He and Monty are part of 
a music group called Remy Boyz, named for their former preferred drink, Remy 
Martin 1738 Cognac (though Wap now prefers Patrón tequila). Wap also has 
another music crew of his own called Zoo Gang (“Zoo” referencing the wild, 
untamed urban streets of his hometown), and GHB Zoo is the collective with whom 
he rides ATVs and dirt bikes. GHB stands for Go Hard Boyz, a biking crew that 
originated in Harlem and has taken Wap under its wing. Though ATVs are “all 
terrain vehicles”, Wap’s crew doesn’t do off-roading because, well, their areas 
don’t have much in the way of accessible wooded trails. But he notes that urban 
riding crews tend to keep kids off the streets and reduce crime; indeed, a 
bodyguard standing outside his Los Angeles trailer wears a shirt reading: 
“Bikes Over Bang ’N”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS-5oD2Y4Wk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS-5oD2Y4Wk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYS-5oD2Y4Wk&media=>
Riding ATVs has become Wap’s great passion; not long ago he obtained a 
tricked-out Yamaha Banshee quad bike. With its twisted chrome, it resembles 
something out of Mad Max, and can go up to 70mph, members of his crew tell me. 
Wap suffered a motorcycle accident last year, and aggravated his knee filming a 
segment in advance of the iHeartRadio Music Awards on a quad. But shortly 
before the awards are scheduled to begin on this April day, he’s feeling better 
and ready to perform. Clad in a jean jacket and a shirt with American 
flag-coloured stars on his arms, he looks like a hip-hop Evel Knievel.

It may seem unlikely that a guy with one eye could inspire people by driving 
an obscenely loud ATV at high speeds, but that is Wap. He is the guy nobody saw 
coming; the one nobody thought would stick around. Having helped bridge the gap 
between the trap and the mainstream, he is a star who didn’t have to recast 
himself in order to succeed.

Fetty Wap plays the O2 Institute, Birmingham, on 27 May and Hammersmith Apollo 
on 29 May. He returns to the UK to play the Reading and Leeds festivals on 26 
and 27 August.
 