
Joni Mitchell – The Jungle Line

When pressed for an answer, I’ll say The Jungle Line is probably my favourite 
Joni Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/may/02/10-of-the-best-joni-mitchell-readers-choice>
track. It’s not really like anything else. It sounds like both the invention 
and end of a genre. Acoustic, Moog-riffing, Burundi-drum sampling poetry rock! 
Leaving aside the arrangement (if that’s possible), the song itself is a great 
example of what she’s capable of. The structure is definite but unconventional; 
melodies echo each other and seem to leap through the chords. The lyrics are 
great, too. Metaphors aren’t always easy for me to swallow, but this picture of 
city as jungle asRousseau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2005/nov/06/art> painting is smart, 
beautiful and rare.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvF2_1Jfgo4I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvF2_1Jfgo4I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvF2_1Jfgo4I&media=>
Medications – Kilometres and Smiles 

Just when you think the music world is out of ideas when it comes to guitar 
riffs, something like this comes along. Catchy, powerful, experimental yet 
accessible and unashamedly “rock”. Medications are for me one of the great 
underground American bands. A little too underground for my liking, as not many 
people over here seem to have heard of them. They, along with others bands on 
labels such as Dischord, Kill Rock Stars, Thrill Jockey and Drag City, were a 
big influence on me and my pals in the north-east of England when we were 
starting out in the early 2000s.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-EbVzTgveVE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-EbVzTgveVE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-EbVzTgveVE&media=>
Punishment of Luxury – Puppet Life 

While Field Music <https://www.theguardian.com/music/field-music> looked to 
the US for inspiration, we seemed to have missed a few older things closer to 
home. Punishment of Luxury were based in Gateshead around the post-punk era and 
yet I’d never heard of them till 2008. When I did hear them I was thrilled by 
their totally off-the-wall concoction of punk, prog, political theatre and dark 
humour. Their first album, Laughing Academy, is well worth tracking down and 
Puppet Life is one of the great tracks from it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6V_DndqBPBM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6V_DndqBPBM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6V_DndqBPBM&media=>
Richard and Linda Thompson – Shoot Out the Lights 

Every now and again I need something to get me back into playing the guitar. 
Richard Thompson has been responsible for this a couple of times now. His solo 
on Shoot Out the Lights is inspiring and gives credence to the practice of 
getting rock guitar ideas from places outside of the rock guitar world. There’s 
a great live version of this from an early 80s TV appearance whereRichard 
Thompson’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/jun/08/richard-thompson-still-exclusive-album-stream>
 guitar and Dave Mattacks’ drums are brilliantly wild and intertwined.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuDZpzJ2KKss&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuDZpzJ2KKss>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuDZpzJ2KKss&media=>
Donna Summer – Dinner With Gershwin 

1987 was the year I started getting into the pop charts – taping them from the 
radio and watching Top of the Pops and so on. Everyone says this sort of thing 
about “their” year, but 1987 really was a hell of a year, right? (Check out the 
top 100 of 1987, wow 
<http://www.officialcharts.com/chart-news/all-the-number-1-singles__7931/#1980s>
). Although it wasn’t a super-massive hit, Dinner With Gershwin made its way on 
to one of my mam’s compilation tapes via its parent album and was played scores 
of times in the Brewis household and car. I’d not heard it for years, but when 
I recently raided my mam’s records it sounded even better than I remembered. 
Hard-hitting drums, multiple bass lines, funky clean guitar, crystalline synths 
and slightly ridiculous lyrics. I know much of my love for this track is 
nostalgia for 1987, but I don’t feel quite the same love forStar-Trekkin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FCARADb9asE>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du1P5lHH9fx8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du1P5lHH9fx8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du1P5lHH9fx8&media=>
 * Field Music play Electric Fields festival 
<http://electricfieldsfestival.com/> which takes place in Dumfries and Galloway 
on 26 and 27 August.
 