
Fifa is facing legal action in the Swiss courts over its alleged complicity in 
the mistreatment of migrant workers in Qatar ahead of the 2022World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>, the Guardian can 
reveal.


Since Fifa voted in December 2010 to hold the World Cup in the tiny Gulf state,
Qatar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> has faced intense criticism 
over the plight of an army of migrant workers that soared to 1.7 million as the 
country embarked on a construction spree to build the stadiums and 
infrastructure required.

But the legal challenge, brought by the Netherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> Trade Union Confederation (FNV) 
on behalf of a Bangladeshi migrant worker called Nadim Sharaful Alam, is the 
first time that Fifa has been made directly accountable in the Swiss courts.

BK Gulf dragged its heels over Qatar labour abuses, claim migrant workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/25/bk-gulf-labour-abuses-qatar-migrant-workers-nepal-balfour-beatty>
In a letter sent to world football’s governing body, which almost collapsed in 
the wake of a 2015 corruption scandal, on Sunday night lawyers acting for FNV 
and Alam have given Fifa’s new president, Gianni Infantino, three weeks to 
accept its complicity and pay damages before going to court.

While the damages sought by Alam are relatively modest, if the action is 
successful it could open the door for hundreds of thousands of migrant workers 
to make similar claims that could run into tens of millions of pounds.

Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> has consistently argued that 
while it does not have responsibility for wider “societal problems” in host 
countries, it is doing what it can to make the Qatar World Cup a catalyst for 
change by engaging with the Qatar government to ensure satisfactory conditions 
for workers on World Cup stadium sites.

But critics including major NGOs and trade unions have argued that Fifa should 
do more to use its influence to push for improvement for workers on related 
infrastructure projects and for wider changes to thekafala system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/feb/26/time-to-end-kafala> 
that has been compared to a form of modern slavery.

In a letter to Infantino accompanying a draft writ that could be lodged in the 
Swiss courts, lawyers call on Fifa to “acknowledge that it has acted wrongfully 
by awarding theWorld Cup 2022 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2022> to Qatar without 
demanding the assurance that Qatar observes fundamental human and labour rights 
vis-à-vis migrant construction workers whose work is related to the 2022 World 
Cup”.

It says that Fifa should have demanded the abolition of the kafala system, the 
guarantee of the right of migrant workers to change jobs, freedom for them to 
leave Qatar if and when they chose to and the right to unionise.

The letter adds: “Alternatively Fifa should acknowledge that it should not 
have awarded the World Cup 2022 to Qatar.”

Infantino is also called upon to acknowledge that Fifa violated the rights of 
Alam, a Bangladeshi who worked in Qatar as an unskilled labourer between 2014 
and 2016, and asks for compensation for material damages of 5,390.53 Swiss 
francs and “just satisfaction to the amount of CHF 5,000 for the hardships he 
endured”.

Under the heading “wrongful acts committed by Fifa”, the summary of the writ 
says that “Swiss law, but also Qatari law and international law oblige Fifa to 
respect fundamental human rights and refrain from wrongdoing”.

It adds: “Fifa’s legal responsibility arose at two distinctive moments in 
time: (1) when it allowed Qatar to participate in the bidding contest for the 
World Cup 2022 and subsequently selected Qatar as host of the 2022 World Cup; 
and (2) when it failed and still is failing to take responsibility for the 
present fate of the migrant workers by not demanding Qatar to reform its labour 
system.”

While the initial focus following the controversial decision was on possible 
health problems for players and fans associated with playing the tournament in 
temperatures of 45C and the corruption allegations that surrounded the vote, a 
series of damning reports fromAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/migrant-workers-suffer-appalling-treatment-in-qatar-world-cup-stadiums-says-amnesty>
, Human Rights Watch and aGuardian investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/25/bk-gulf-labour-abuses-qatar-migrant-workers-nepal-balfour-beatty>
 led to a global outcry.

The Qatari government commissioned law firm DLA Piper to write a report but 
more than two years after it wasmade public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/14/qatar-admits-deaths-in-migrant-workers>
 in May 2014 its recommendations have not yet been implemented in full and no 
progress has been made on cataloguing how many migrant workers are killed or 
injured while working in the country.

Some practical changes have been made, such as the requirement to pay salaries 
electronically, and new laws proposed, but campaigners believe they will do 
little to address the underlying structural issues and represent a rebranding 
rather than a repealing of the kafala system.

The 2022 organising committee has built much improved accommodation for those 
working directly on stadium developments, but for the vast majority of workers 
on related infrastructure projects conditions remain abject.

Critics also complain that too little is being done to clamp down on 
unscrupulous recruitment agencies in countries such as Nepal, India and
Bangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh> that charge large 
sums for workers to find jobs in Qatar and then demand repayment.

As recently as June Qatar was accused of “appalling treatment” of migrant 
workers by a criticalAmnesty International 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/campaigns/2016/03/qatar-world-cup-of-shame/> 
report.

Fifa, which earlier this year published a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/14/fifa-qatar-world-cup-report-human-rights>
 from human rights expert Prof John Ruggie of Harvard University and promised 
to implement his recommendations, has continually claimed that it can’t be held 
responsible for working conditions but hopes to use the World Cup to bring 
about change. It has also attempted to suggest that its responsibility only 
extends as far as the World Cup stadiums.

But the lawsuit argues that the World Cup has “vastly accelerated Qatar’s 
construction development efforts”, pointing to new metro lines, the new city of 
Lusail that will house the stadium set to host the final and new highway and 
bridge projects.

“The World Cup 2022 is the motivating force behind all these vast 
infrastructural projects, all scheduled to be completed before the tournament, 
on time for the influx of tourists expected,” it says.

The writ further argues that Fifa has the required mechanisms to force host 
countries to comply with whatever conditions it sets down.

The construction industry must step up on human rights | Mariam Bhacker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/19/construction-industry-must-step-up-on-human-rights-migrant-workers-qatar>
“In order to host the World Cup, Qatar had to take part in a bidding 
procedure. Fifa defines the terms for participation in the bidding procedure 
and is able to create legally binding obligations of the host state vis-à-vis 
Fifa,” it said.

Prof Liesbeth Zegveld, an attorney for Dutch human rights lawyers Prakken 
d’Oliveira, is bringing the case alongside David Huesmann of Swiss law firm 
Shadenanwaelte.

“Fifa may claim that it can do nothing but that is not the case. The union 
would rather see the World Cup stay in Qatar and for the country to meet its 
responsibilities to migrant workers but Fifa could still move the World Cup if 
it wanted to,” said Zegveld.

“We met with senior Qatari officials and they said they needed time to 
introduce new laws. They may say they need time but in reality they are just 
buying time. In any case, the new laws do too little to change the fundamental 
problems facing migrant workers and will mean little unless they are enforced.”

A spokesperson for FNV, the biggest union in the Netherlands with 1.1 million 
members, said that while there had been some progress towards improving 
conditions, things were moving far too slowly.

“The FNV takes the view that by awarding the World Cup to Qatar, the suffering 
of migrants increases. In any case, in situations like these, the number of 
migrant workers will increase. The FNV holds the Fifa responsible for this and 
wants to address the issue by means of this lawsuit,” the spokesperson said.

“Of course there have been improvements. Some of the migrant workers have 
better housing. But it is moving too slowly for the migrant workers themselves. 
It is really going too slowly. Migrant workers die under suspicious 
circumstances every year,” added the spokesperson.

“The world must do everything that is possible in order to change this 
situation. And if you expect the world to do this, you have to begin by taking 
responsibility yourself. That is why FNV is taking the matter to its source, 
and is holding the Fifa responsible.”

The new Fifa council, rebranded from the old disgraced executive committee and 
expanded to 36 members, meets in Zurich this week. Since Infantino took over 
from Sepp Blatter in February, he has insisted that Fifa is turning over a new 
leaf.

“While Fifa cannot and indeed does not have the responsibility to solve all 
the societal problems in a host country of a Fifa World Cup, Fifa has taken 
concrete action and is fully committed to do its utmost to ensure that human 
rights are respected on all Fifa World Cup sites and operations and services 
directly related to the Fifa World Cup,” said Fifa’s head of sustainability, 
Federico Addiechi, in June in response to the critical Amnesty International 
report.
 