
When it comes to running Olympic rings around everyone else there has never 
been a dream team like Fiji’s glorious rugby men. This has already been a 
momentous week for the sport of union, perhaps its most significant in history 
in terms of attracting new fans, and there could be no more inspirational 
champions. Fiji’s long wait for a gold medal is over and the celebrations in 
the Pacific islands will last for months, if not longer.

For GB’s gallant silver medallists there can be no disgrace in losing against 
a squad of such athletic, powerful genius. Simon Amor’s players will return 
home with their own rich haul of Brazilian memories, having beaten New Zealand, 
Argentina and South Africa en route to a final few expected them to reach. When 
it came to the final, though, they found themselves confronting opponents who, 
in every respect, were several classes apart.

How Fiji manhandled Team GB to claim first rugby sevens Olympic gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2016/aug/12/how-fiji-manhandled-team-gb-to-claim-first-rugby-sevens-olympic-gold>
All too often it was gallant red men against rampaging white giants. How 
ironic, then, that the master coach who has brought order and rigour to the 
Harlem Globetrotters creative chaos is an Englishman. Ben Ryan fetched up inFiji
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/fiji> only after becoming disillusioned 
with Twickenham politics and being repeatedly overlooked for the Premiership 
club jobs his intelligence and ability should have demanded. When they make the 
feelgood Hollywood movie about Fiji’s golden generation, as they probably 
should, the role played by the flame-haired Ryan will be key. Damian Lewis 
should keep his phone on.

As with Australia in the women’s final, Fiji also saved their best until last. 
There were five galloping tries in the first half alone, the traffic entirely 
one way. The only time GB made it into their opponents’ half, unfortunate to 
report, was during the pre-match anthems. In sevens the scoring team kick off 
again and even the repeated restarts seemed to mostly end up in Fijian paws.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Ffijians-celebrate-the-countrys-first-ever-olympic-medal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fijians%20celebrate%20the%20country's%20first%20ever%20Olympic%20medal%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Ffijians-celebrate-the-countrys-first-ever-olympic-medal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fijians%20celebrate%20the%20country%27s%20first%20ever%20Olympic%20medal%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Ffijians-celebrate-the-countrys-first-ever-olympic-medal-video&media=>
Fijians celebrate the country’s first ever Olympic medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/12/fijians-celebrate-the-countrys-first-ever-olympic-medal-video>
It helps to some extent that the Gilbert ball used in sevens is designed 
slightly differently to the 15-a-side version. Extra pimples, according to the 
manufacturer, make it a bit easier to catch but harder to kick accurately. This 
may just explain GB’s and Argentina’s drop-goal issues in the quarter-final but 
when a Fijian is holding it a different type of physics seems to apply. In 
terms of offloads – front, back, reverse, overhead – there is no more sublime 
team on the planet, in sevens or 15s, when they are in the mood. Occasionally 
they do something ridiculously daft but the overall effect is frequently 
stunning.

Josua Tuisova, among the standout players of the tournament, is a 21-year-old 
force of nature but it was no coincidence the massively impressive Fiji captain 
Osea Kolinisau scored his side’s opening try. “He’s an incredible role model,” 
Ryan said beforehand. “He’s teetotal and religious but in my first tournament 
in charge the selectors told me not to pick him because he was a troublemaker. 
I wouldn’t have been able to survive the three years I’ve had in Fiji without 
him.”

In truth, though, Ryan has had untold riches at his disposal. Fiji had shown 
signs of genuine intent in the semi-final when they brushed aside Japan 20-5 
but Ryan, who is now stepping down with his mission accomplished, had made it 
clear that anything less than gold would be unacceptable. He also insisted his 
side would relish the pressure because it brought the best out of them, and so 
it proved. By the time the former Glasgow lock Leone Nakarawa had stormed away 
for his team’s fourth try the outcome was long since settled, with the 
ever-present Semi Kunatani instrumental at least half of Fiji’s seven 
touchdowns.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fbritain-take-silver-rugby-sevens-phelps-wins-again-olympics-rio-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain%20take%20silver%20in%20rugby%20sevens%20as%20Phelps%20wins%20again%20in%20Rio%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fbritain-take-silver-rugby-sevens-phelps-wins-again-olympics-rio-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%20take%20silver%20in%20rugby%20sevens%20as%20Phelps%20wins%20again%20in%20Rio%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fbritain-take-silver-rugby-sevens-phelps-wins-again-olympics-rio-video-highlights&media=>
Britain take silver in rugby sevens as Phelps wins again in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/12/britain-take-silver-rugby-sevens-phelps-wins-again-olympics-rio-video-highlights>
Dan Norton, outstanding en route to the final along with James Davies, Dan 
Bibby and Tom Mitchell, did manage one consolation score, converted by Marcus 
Watson, but the only numbers that really mattered were Fijian ones. This result 
is a massive deal for a country shattered by tropical cyclone Winston in 
February, which killed 44 people and caused millions of pounds in damage; 
experts estimate the economy will now benefit to the tune of 500 million Fiji 
dollars (£161 million) in additional tourism and investment revenue generated 
by more people wanting to visit the place where rugby magic happens.

This has also been a big week for everyone with a stake in rugby’s future 
global health. Japan, 500-1 outsiders for the title before the Games, could not 
quite claim a bronze medal, losing 54-14 against South Africa in the medal 
playoff, but there is now guaranteed to be a clamour for tickets when the 
Olympics come to Tokyo in 2020, the year after Japan are also due to host the 
next 15-a-side Rugby World Cup.

Bill Beaumont, the World Rugby chairman, is also optimistic that the IOC will 
already be tempted to confirm sevens as a core sport beyond 2020 at its next 
general assembly in Lima next October. “Nobody in World Rugby is conceited 
enough to think we have a divine right to be here but hopefully we have earned 
the right to be a permanent sport. All the people I have spoken to have been 
nothing but encouraging. To be a part of it is just fantastic. In rugby you 
tend to think you know it all. Then you come to events that are far bigger than 
anything we normally stage.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ffiji-great-britain-rio-2016-rugby-sevens-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca2134b350894e6c4004e952174406fb9a83f5aa%2F419_281_4943_2966%2F4943.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fiji%20waltz%20to%20Olympic%20rugby%20sevens%20gold%20against%20outclassed%20Great%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ffiji-great-britain-rio-2016-rugby-sevens-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fiji%20waltz%20to%20Olympic%20rugby%20sevens%20gold%20against%20outclassed%20Great%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Ffiji-great-britain-rio-2016-rugby-sevens-final%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca2134b350894e6c4004e952174406fb9a83f5aa%2F419_281_4943_2966%2F4943.jpg>
 Vatemo Ravouvou breaks through to score one of Fiji’s seven tries. Photograph: 
Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Any IOC member who imagines the Games would be better off without Fiji’s rugby 
team, in particular, needs his or her head examining. We do not know yet 
whether sevens, like cricket’s Twenty20, will start to steal the thunder of 15s 
but it is a fair bet that, around the world this week, a good deal more kids 
will be practising their offloads.

“The boys were on another scale of phenomenal, they were brilliant,” the 
estimable Ryan said. “The game has changed ridiculously ... it is expanding at 
a phenomenal rate.” Good luck to all those hoping to catch Fiji’s supermen any 
time soon.

Fiji: Veremalua, Kunatani, Nakarawa, Kolinisau (capt), Tuwai, Viriviri, 
Ravouvou.Replacements: Domolailai. Mata, Taliga, Tuisova, Dakuwaqa.

Tries: Kolinisau, Tuwai, Veremalua 2, Nakarawa, Ravouvou, Mata. Conversions: 
Kolinisau 2, Ravouvou, Taliga.

Great Britain: Burgess, Rodwell, Davies, Norton, Mitchell (capt), Bibby, 
Bennett.Replacements: Robertson, McConnochie, Lindsay-Hague, Cross, Watson.

Try: Norton. Conversion: Watson.

Referee R Rasivhenge (South Africa). Att 13,000.
 