
Jim Jarmusch has worked with stars ranging from Johnny Depp 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0112817/> to Tilda Swinton. But in many of his 
movies, like Dead Man andOnly Lovers Left Alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/only-lovers-left-alive>, the most emotional 
moments come not from the fine actors on screen, but from the music he chooses 
to score the films – and increasingly makes himself.

When he was working on the score for his 2009 film The Limits of Control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/11/the-limits-of-control>, Jarmusch 
wanted to use existing songs from doom metal bands like Boris,Earth  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jun/21/earth-godfathers-of-drone-metal>
andSunn 0))) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/feb/24/sunn-doom-metal>, but 
found that when it came to certain cinematic moments, nothing was quite right. 
Jarmusch, who had played in bands for years, had a back-up plan hatched with 
his producer, Carter Logan.

“I suggested we go in the studio and see if we could make something that 
worked. We made these loose, layered, psychedelic tracks with drums and guitars 
and some strange keyboards and samples. The music worked really well for that 
and we thought, let’s just make a band and keep doing it.”


Jarmusch and Logan, a longtime drummer, teamed up with sound engineer Shane 
Stoneback, who Jarmusch had conscripted to help him remix the White Stripes’ 
Blue Orchid 
<http://thirdmanstore.com/blue-orchid-remixed-by-michel-gondry-and-jim-jarmusch-import-12-vinyl>
. “[Jack White] wanted to put out a limited edition vinyl 12” with my remix on 
one side and Michel Gondry’s on the other,” explained Jarmusch. “I did that 
with Shane and that’s how we first met.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSKjDXzEbkf0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSKjDXzEbkf0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSKjDXzEbkf0&media=>
The band’s first EP debuted under the name Bad Rabbits, which was soon changed 
to Sqürl. “That’s when our band really started,” said Jarmusch, who refuses to 
elaborate on the origins of the name. “We’re not going to tell you that, just 
to be mean,” he jokes, instructing interested parties to Google until they find 
the reference.

The members of Sqürl are all multi-instrumentalists who move from guitar to 
keyboards, from bass to vocals, incorporating samples and loops as they go. The 
resulting sound is something akin to the Jesus and Mary Chain teaming up with 
My Bloody Valentine.


They find that music allows them to connect with their audience much more 
quickly than with films, which can take months or years before the are 
released. “There’s an immediacy to music and a relative ease of doing it,” said 
Logan. “You can write and record a song and have it out there in an afternoon. 
That’s a bit more difficult with a film.”


“I love making films. I love collaborating with people. I love editing, where 
you shape it. I love the whole process. But it is a million questions that have 
to be answered constantly,” said Jarmusch. “Music is very different. To me it’s 
just a release. It’s communicating with just a few other people, not with words 
and just seeing where it goes.”


In addition to contributing to the score for Limits of Control, Sqürl teamed 
up with Jozef Van Wissem for the award-winning soundtrack ofOnly Lovers Left 
Alive <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zdeNU2bxX18>, which was released on 
blood red vinyl (“We’re very proud of that one,” said Jarmusch). They have 
released a set of three beautifully packaged, limited edition EPs onthe ATP 
record label <http://www.atpfestival.com/recordings/artist/squrl>.


Logan and Jarmusch are also preparing to do live scores of Man Ray’s films, 
practicing by playing along to the films to create “maps” to follow for their 
live performances. “We try to follow the map, but we never do,” says Jarmusch, 
preferring a freeform approach to their droney sound. “Sometimes we just start 
playing and see what happens.”


Sqürl is also planning a website called SqürlWorld that will feature a 
constantly rotating stream of their sonic experiments. In addition to the band, 
the website, and the live scores, Logan is in another band and producing films, 
including two upcoming projects for Jarmusch.

“We’re busy people,” notes Logan. 

“Workaholics,” adds Jarmusch, who goes on to list a handful of other projects 
they are working on simultaneously, including a photo book and a film they want 
to be projected on to them while they perform.


“That’s why we like EPs,” said Jarmusch. “We can go into the studio every 
three months and record enough music for a new EP. We’ll probably put an album 
out eventually with things culled from this plus a few other tracks. We have a 
new instrumental EP that is done, but we’re waiting to put that out.”


Their busy schedules mean the band is unlikely to go on a world tour, instead 
playing one-off shows at festivals and event spaces. “We’d also love to do a 
residence at a club,” said Jarmusch. “We could play once a week for a month and 
invite other bands to join us.”

Jarmusch and Logan will be back in the movie business soon. “We’re making a 
film now about the Stooges 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/jim-jarmusch-promises-ambitious-stooges-doc-20100909>
,” said Jarmusch. “Not Iggy [Pop]’s life. It’s a love letter to the Stooges; an 
unconventional documentary. We’re still in the middle of it, but it’s starting 
with their fall and brings in a lot of clips of found material.”


But as they work on the film, there’s more music to make. Jarmusch has an 
iPhone filled with recordings that he finds inspirational and intriguing. They 
include the bells of the Cathedral in Cologne, a winding down Victrola and 
Tilda Swinton’s Limits of Control German stand-in cracking dirty jokes in 
heavily accented English.


Whether any of those will be used as samples in a future Sqürl track will be 
figured out in the studio. “We try things that don’t work all the time,” said 
Logan. “But problems can result in creative solutions. Like the battery in my 
pedal will be dying, but it sounds great right now, so we record it.”


“We’re very open,” said Jarmusch. “When you’re making a movie, you’re very 
regulated by time and location and scheduling and actors. Since I started 
making films, it’d be like ‘oh shit, it started raining.’ Do we pack everything 
up or make it work in the rain?’ Or the actor says something jokingly in 
response to a line and you realise it sounds great and do a take with it. It’s 
thinking on your feet and being open.”
 