
A filmy pastel sketch of a young girl in her best frock – one of the most 
patient girls in the history of art, since her finished portrait by the 
American artist James Whistler took more than 70 sittings – is going into a 
public collection for the first time at theFitzwilliam Museum 
<http://www.fitzmuseum.cam.ac.uk/> in Cambridge.

The sketch with two other Whistler pastels, has been allocated to the museum 
through the Arts Council, after the government accepted it in lieu of tax owed 
by the descendants of the child’s family.


The sketch was made for one of Whistler’s most valuable patrons, the banker 
William Alexander, who was buying his work when many thought his art was 
recklessly modern. He had bought the first of the artist’s famous Nocturnes. A 
later one would lead to a famous libel action whenWhistler sued the critic John 
Ruskin 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/turner-whistler-monet/who-what-when/ruskin-v-whistler>
 for describing it as “flinging a pot of paint in the public’s face”, and was 
almost bankrupted when he won but was awarded a farthing damages.

Alexander also bought Arrangement in Grey and Black No 1, better known as 
Whistler’s Mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/mar/29/how-whistlers-mother-became-a-powerful-symbol-of-the-great-depression-in-pictures>
. The artist then offered to paint the banker’s eight-year-old daughter, and 
gave him the pastel sketch – his first ideas for the portrait. He was already 
working on a portrait of her older sister May, but promised that Cicely would 
get his full attention.

Whistler said: “I should work at the present moment with more freshness at 
this very fair arrangement I propose to myself than any other.” The final 
portrait became one of his most admired works, now in the Tate collection: 
Harmony in Grey and Green – Miss Cicely Alexander.


The sketch leaves her face as an outline, but shows the lines of her white 
dress and hat, and determined stance.

It comes to the museum with two more Whistler pastels from the same family 
collection, all in pristine condition and regarded as exceptional examples of 
his work on paper.

 