
A court has convicted five men of gang-raping a Danish tourist in New Delhi in 
2014, a crime that putIndia’s record on sexual violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/15/india-shamed-sexual-violence-narendra-modi-prime-minister-independence-day>
 in the spotlight.

The five were found guilty of the rape and robbery of the 52-year-old woman, 
who was attacked at knifepoint after losing her way while returning to her 
hotel.

“I pronounce all the accused guilty. Arguments [on sentencing] to be held on 
June 9,” the additional sessions judge Ramesh Kumar told the court inDelhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/delhi>, where media and relatives of the 
accused had gathered.

Three others charged over the attack are being tried separately in the 
juvenile justice system. A ninth accused, an adult, died before the end of the 
trial.

Under new tougher laws the minimum punishment for gang rape is 20 years’ 
imprisonment along with a fine, while the maximum is life imprisonment.

The woman, travelling alone after visiting the Taj Mahal, had approached a 
group of men for directions as she returned to an area popular with 
backpackers, reports at the time said.

The assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/15/danish-tourist-gang-raped-delhi-india>
 was the latest in a series of sex attacks on foreigners that reignited 
concerns about women’s safety in India.

Shortly before the attack on the Danish woman, a Polish woman had been drugged 
and raped as she travelled to Delhi with her young daughter in a car.

The Indian government toughened jail sentences for rapists and overhauled 
policing procedures in the wake of thegang rape of a Delhi student 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/29/india-gang-rape-six-men-charged-murder>
 on a moving bus in December 2012. She later died in a Singapore hospital.

That attack sparked mass street protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/04/rape-protests-spread-beyond-india>
 over high levels of violence against women, as well as global headlines about 
thetreatment of women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/dec/10/india-gender-violence-women-activism>
 in India.

The five accused showed little emotion as the verdicts were read out. Neither 
the victim nor members of her family were in court.

Immediately after the incident, the victim had given a detailed statement to 
police at the Danish embassy in Delhi before leaving for home.

She returned to India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> in July 2015 
to record her in-camera testimony before the trial court judge, and identify 
the accused.

The prosecution submitted that the evidence irrefutably proved the case 
against the accused but the suspects pleaded not guilty, claiming they had been 
framed by police.
 