
1 Justin Bieber

Whether he’s throwing up milk or angering metal fans with Metallica-ish merch, 
Bieber’s tours are relentless headline generators. But the one fact that 
doesn’t often get printed is that he is an extremely good live performer, which 
is why he can do massive tours in the first place and charge a quarter of your 
rent for the privilege.

O2 Arena, SE10, 11, 12 & 14 October; touring to 2 November 
<http://www.theo2.co.uk/events/detail/justin-bieber>

2 Mø

There is a chill in the air. Chances are you’ve already rotated your wardrobe 
for winter. We’re in it for the long haul. Fortunately, Mø is touring and 
everything she’s released has been an instant sound of the summer even if it 
drops in February, so there is warmth left for us yet.

Brighton, 11 October; Leeds, 12 October; Glasgow, 14 October; touring to 22 
October <http://www.songkick.com/artists/139369-mo> 

3 Jamie T
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fjustin-bieber-jamie-t-mabel-kano-mo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24beaf8b42d167aee880a8d9e4da804d5befb2a8%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20of%20the%20best...%20rock%20%26%20pop%20gigs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fjustin-bieber-jamie-t-mabel-kano-mo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20of%20the%20best...%20rock%20%26%20pop%20gigs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fjustin-bieber-jamie-t-mabel-kano-mo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24beaf8b42d167aee880a8d9e4da804d5befb2a8%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Jamie T. Photograph: Mike Lewis Photography/Redferns 
It may seem surprising that Jamie T <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jamie-t>
 can sell out three nights at Brixton Academy, but the south Londoner has built 
a cult empire on fusing genres hitherto unfused and injecting them with cheeky 
wit. He’s basically the only troubadour the UK has left.

London, 8 to 10 October; Bournemouth, 12 October; Liverpool, 13 October; 
touring to 22 October 
<http://www.getmein.com/rock-and-pop/jamie-t-tickets.html?cid=googlea&gclid=CjwKEAjwydK_BRDK34GenvLB61YSJACZ8da3VpFlIu9ZTmkQlRTwAPPTKJJD4U04Ys84BlWKZjFLbhoCaDPw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds&dclid=CP_1poHpw88CFcFg2wodfBIDAw>

4 Mabel

Mabel’s emotionally raw jams are somehow both exactly what you want in R&B 
while coming as a complete surprise. Singing primarily about relationships with 
a youthful poignancy that will cause a cynic to search their emotions to check 
for gathered dust, seeing her live should be a party for the senses that may 
end in drunk dialling.

Moth Club, E9, 12 October <http://www.mothclub.co.uk>

5 Kano

Kano <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kano> is currently touring Made In The 
Manor - his Mercury-nominated album, six years in the making. After a year 
spent ticking off achievements – appearing on Jools; a definitive set at Glasto 
– this month will see him doing what he does best: mic in hand, crowd bouncing, 
with Little Simz supporting on selected dates.

Coventry, 8 October; Cardiff, 9 October; Perranporth, 11 October; Edinburgh, 
12 October; Manchester, 13 October; Birmingham, 14 October; touring to 16 
October 
<http://www.viagogo.co.uk/Concert-Tickets/Rap-Hip-Hop-Reggae/Kano-Tickets?AffiliateID=49&adposition=1t1&AdID=116905556815&PCID=PSGBGOOCONKANOA4E5114B55E-000563&MetroRegionID=&psc=hp-1&gclid=CjwKEAjwydK_BRDK34GenvLB61YSJACZ8da3LrAG0bYgHpk2YPprGZTkZQB8FHW1L6VTrAunsRl2KRoCFKXw_wcB>
 