
Young Guns (Go For It!)

Just days before George Michael died, pop threw up one of its strange 
coincidences. The Top of the Pops repeats on BBC4 featuredWham!’s debut 
performance on the programme <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xNX3xA3wx5c>, an 
appearance so effervescent that even John Peel, presenting that evening in late 
1982, was moved to comment – without any apparent sarcasm – on its excellence. 
Michael and Andrew Ridgeley – in tandem with Dee C Lee and Shirlie Holliman – 
burst on to and almost through the screen, suggesting that here was a form of 
suburban expression that was neither angst-ridden nor angry, but joyous and 
self-confident. Michael was the cocky lad about town, living for dancing, 
contemptuous of those already shackling themselves. He was a fresh-faced boy, 
bursting with life, and eager to live it: “I said ‘Soul Boy, let’s hit the 
town!’ / I said ‘Soul Boy, what’s with the frown?’ / But in return, all you 
could say was / ‘Hi George, meet my fiancee.’” It was glorious. It formed a 
pair withthe equally ebullient Wham! Rap 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BsyHQgiem8c>, which suggested that being out 
of work was less a hindrance than something you should twist to your advantage: 
“Gonna live my life, sharp as a knife / I’ve found my groove, and I just can’t 
lose / A1 style, from head to toe / Cool cat flash, gonna let you know / I’m a 
soul boy, I’m a dole boy /Take pleasure in leisure, I believe in joy .” This 
wasn’t the way George Michael presented himself or his music for very long, but 
it deserves to be recalled that Wham! burst into British pop as a dose of aural 
sunshine – their blinding white teeth, their lustrous tans, their penchant for 
dressing like it was summer in St Tropez even if it was winter in Watford – 
selling a dream, which is what great pop has always done.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdoZ6wOJHu_E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdoZ6wOJHu_E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdoZ6wOJHu_E&media=>
A Different Corner

Michael had already had one solo single while he was still in Wham!, Careless 
Whisper reaching No 1 in 1984 (and gifting the world the perfect couplet “I’m 
never going to dance again / Guilty feet have got no rhythm”). His second solo 
single, released before they finally split in summer 1986 – and which also 
appeared on the Wham! compilation The Final – was an even starker signal that 
the days of shuttlecocks down the shorts were past. It was bleak and empty, 
entirely synthetic in its musical textures, both chilly and – thanks to 
Michael’s extraordinary performance – warm and enveloping. His voice is by 
turns tender, hurt, defiant, soaring. Songs of heartbreak are nothing new, but 
Michael managed to make this one feel as if he was the first person to feel the 
terror of the loss of love. And, like Careless Whisper, it demonstrated his 
gift for a couplet that captures the mood of the song: “Take me back in time, 
maybe I can forget / Turn a different corner and we never would have met.” 
Those of us – me among them – who foolishly took the view at the time that 
Michael was a teen poppet really should have learned differently from this.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIPWHkK-_a_A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIPWHkK-_a_A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIPWHkK-_a_A&media=>
Faith

Michael’s first solo single after Wham! split was I Want Your Sex, but Faith 
became his signature solo hit. It takes what was a fairly common pop style at 
the time – the ultra-modernised rock’n’roll pastiche that bands like Westworld 
and Sigue Sigue Sputnik had taken bashes at – but Michael did it better than 
anyone else, by far. It opens with a brilliant joke – Chris Cameron on organ, 
playing a churchified version of Wham!’s Freedom – before an acoustic guitar 
hits the Bo Diddley “shave-and-a-haircut-two-bits” rhythm. Michael wrote, 
arranged and produced everything on the Faith album, and the title track was a 
triumph of arrangement and production, not just in the sleekness of the verses 
and chorus, but the perfect faux James Burton twangy guitar solo. Once we 
learned that Michael was gay, the lyric – he is turning away from a woman who 
wants him – took on a different cast. Perhaps he was trying to tell us 
something when he told us “I’ve got to think twice before I give my heart 
away.” Maybe, of course, he was just pastiching rock’n’roll. Either way, this 
was perfect pop, looking backward and forward at the same time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Cs3Pvmmv0E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Cs3Pvmmv0E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Cs3Pvmmv0E&media=>
Father Figure

Faith’s crowning achievement was Father Figure, another of those ballads – 
like A Different Corner – that was hushed, intimate, in which Michael appeared 
to be singing directly to the listener. Father Figure shimmers, a mirage that’s 
always just out of reach, that dissipates as soon as you try to pin it down. 
And, like so much of Michael’s best solo work, it aches with a profound and 
inconsolable sadness from its opening lines: “That’s all I wanted / Something 
special, something sacred / In your eyes / For just one moment / To be bold and 
naked / At your side.” Michael was slowly stripping himself before the eyes of 
his audience. Five years earlier, they had been the teenagers who screamed at 
gigs – just a year earlier, those same kids had been filling Wembley Stadium 
for the last Wham! show. Now he was daring them to step into adulthood with 
him, and finding a new audience at the same time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DudtByWgt1Mk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DudtByWgt1Mk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DudtByWgt1Mk&media=>
Jesus to a Child

Jesus to a Child is a remarkable record: a display of restrained, dignified 
grief that lasts nearly seven minutes and was a huge worldwide hit. He wrote 
the song for his lover Feleppa Anselmo, whom he met in Rio de Janeiro in 1991 
and who died just two years later of an Aids-related brain haemorrhage. 
Anselmo’s death left Michael in such grief that he couldn’t write, until this 
song emerged, apparently in only an hour. Michael was still not out as gay when 
Jesus to a Child was released, but it was fairly unambiguous. Whereas Father 
Figure, for example, did not offer any clues as to the sex of its subject, the 
very fact that “you smiled at me / Like Jesus to a child” identified Michael’s 
lost love as a man. And the loss in this song, even if you don’t know the story 
behind it, is profound. The hints of bossa nova, the effortless chord changes, 
show not just that Michael could write brilliant ballads, but that he could 
write brilliant ballads that would have sounded as good in any decade, to any 
generation. On Jesus to a Child, Michael sounded like a man who understand not 
just his own pain, but yours, too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzNBj4EV_hAo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzNBj4EV_hAo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzNBj4EV_hAo&media=> 