
Curtis Davies <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/8484/Show/Curtis-Davies>, Hull

At 31 years of age, time is not on Curtis Davies’ side as he strives for 
international recognition. Yet, the centre-back has enjoyed a blistering start 
to life back in the Premier League,with his rating (8.44) the fourth best in 
the division <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/8484/Show/Curtis-Davies> and 
top for players to start both games so far. Hull, meanwhile, are one of four 
teams to have won both of their games, including an opening day victory over 
defending champions Leicester City.

As the club’s only fit centre-back, Davies has been instrumental at the heart 
of the defence. He has made more interceptions (16) and blocked more shots 
(five) than any other player, ranks joint-first for headed clearances (13), and 
third for total clearances (18) in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> after two games. Sam 
Allardyce will be keen to avoid defeat in his first game against Slovakia next 
mont and Davies’ performances so far, coupled with his experience, suggest his 
call up could be worth exploring.
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Jack Cork <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/22847/Show/Jack-Cork>, Swansea 
City

Like Davies, Jack Cork is yet to earn that precious first England cap, despite 
his consistent outings for Southampton and now Swansea in the Premier League. 
The 27-year-old is no stranger to the international stage, having played his 
way through theEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> youth 
ranks and again for Team GB at the 2012 Olympics. Yet, it’s been four years 
since Cork was handed an international call-up of any kind, during which time 
he has established himself as a key player for Swansea.

His rating (7.42) is the third best for Swansea this season, with Cork winning 
possession in the midfield third more times (19) than any other player in the 
Premier League this season. An average of 70.5 passes per game also ranks 
highly, with Cork maximising his impressive reading of the game to not only rob 
the opposition of possession, but to retain the ball. Both are key assets on 
the international stage and, after the England midfield struggled at Euro 2016, 
Cork’s inclusion could provide the shot in the arm the international regulars 
require to ensure their performance levels do not drop.

Mark Noble <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/8247>, West Ham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fsam-allardyce-first-england-squad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2b3ebfe81338e44c1f11bfec1dc12dc148497ee%2F0_169_4420_2653%2F4420.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20outsiders%20Sam%20Allardyce%20should%20consider%20for%20his%20first%20England%20squad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fsam-allardyce-first-england-squad%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20outsiders%20Sam%20Allardyce%20should%20consider%20for%20his%20first%20England%20squad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fwho-scored-blog%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fsam-allardyce-first-england-squad%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2b3ebfe81338e44c1f11bfec1dc12dc148497ee%2F0_169_4420_2653%2F4420.jpg>
 Mark Noble catches up with some summer reading. Photograph: James 
Griffiths/West Ham United via Getty Images 
The fact that Mark Noble is yet to win an England cap is criminal. His 
tireless work off the ball helps to shield the defence, with Noble capable of 
dropping deeper to win possession. Indeed, only Ahmed Elmohamady (18) has won 
possession in the defensive third more times than the West Ham captain (17) 
this season.

His retention qualities shows Noble doesn’t needlessly sacrifice possession 
once he has the ball at his feet. Of central midfielders to play all 180 
minutes in the Premier League this season, only three have a better pass 
success rate than Noble (90.8%), while no player has been fouled more times 
than him (seven). His ability to ease pressure on his team’s goal is one of 
Noble’s strongest assets. Allardyce is a big fan of Noble and it wouldn’t be a 
huge surprise if he were called up.

Nathan Redmond <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/86425>, Southampton

Following Norwich’s relegation, Nathan Redmond was one of a handful of players 
who was expected to return to the Premier League this season. Indeed, it came 
to pass when Southampton paid around £10m to make him Claude Puel’s first 
signing. It was a hefty fee for a player who had scored just seven goals in 69 
appearances across two spells in the Premier League but Puel had every 
intention of turning Redmond from a tricky winger into a striker in his 
favoured 4-3-1-2 formation.

That proved to be the case when Redmond impressed in the opening day 1-1 draw 
with Watford, as the 22-year-old scored Southampton’s equaliser to earn his 
side a point. While he couldn’t follow that up with a strong showing against 
Manchester United, the youngster’s commendable start to life on the south coast 
suggests a first senior cap will come about sooner rather than later.

Only two players have made more key passes from open play than Redmond (six) 
in the league so far this season, with his creative qualities in the final 
third something Allardyce could exploit, particularly if he opts for a two-man 
striker partnership. Given Redmond’s searing pace and willingness to get in 
behind the opposition defence, he could prove to be a viable asset for the new 
England boss.

Sam Allardyce: Joe Hart will definitely be in England squad – for now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/22/sam-allardyc-joe-hart-england-squad-manchester-city>
Andros Townsend <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/71522/Show/Andros-Townsend>
, Crystal Palace

The appointment of Allardyce has brought given every England outcast a chance. 
Andros Townsend hasn’t exactly been cast to the abyss – he was included in Roy 
Hodgson’s preliminary squad for their doomed Euro 2016 campaign – but only made 
a 15-minute cameo in the 2-1 win over Australia at the Stadium of Light before 
being cut. Townsend enjoyed a notable end to the season with relegated 
Newcastle, which resulted in a switch to Crystal Palace. The club have lost 
both of their games so far but Townsend has been one of their better performers 
in defeats to West Brom and Tottenham,as his rating (7.53) suggests 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/71522/Show/Andros-Townsend>.

The 25-year-old winger has attempted more crosses from open play (17) than any 
other player in the league so far. Should Allardyce look to implement a system 
where a target man leads the attack, Townsend’s willingness to put the ball 
into the box could be very useful. Having last made a competitive appearance 
for the national team from the bench last October, his international career 
could be revived under Allardyce.

Premier League team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
La Liga team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Serie A team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Ligue 1 team of the week
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Ben McAleer <https://twitter.com/benmcaleer1> on Twitter
 