
Match&Fuse festival <http://www.matchandfuse.co.uk/> comes to London this 
weekend with new and experimental jazz from across Europe. In a genre in which 
women are still few and far between, almost 50% of the festival’s acts are 
female. Dave Morecroft, themusician <http://www.worldserviceproject.co.uk/>, 
promoter <http://jazzpromotionnetwork.org.uk/about-us/> and the festival’s 
founder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/30/match-and-fuse-festival-review> 
picks five of his favourite current female acts.

Lauren Kinsella
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNQmkrIm0hfo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNQmkrIm0hfo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNQmkrIm0hfo&media=>
 Video:Snowpoet perform Butterflies <https://youtu.be/NQmkrIm0hfo> 
Irish-born Lauren Kinsella is a leading light of the improvised music scene in 
London, Dublin and further afield. Her bandSnowpoet <http://www.snowpoet.co.uk/>
 released their debut album earlier this year and are garnering great 
attention. She won the vocalist of the year gong at the2016 Jazz FM awards 
<http://www.jazzfm.com/on-air/jazz-fm-award-winners-2016/>, and is very much on 
an upward trajectory.

Ellen Andrea Wang
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVox5kcc4cY0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVox5kcc4cY0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVox5kcc4cY0&media=>
 Video:Ellen Andrea Wang performs Perfect Danger <https://youtu.be/Vox5kcc4cY0> 
Ellen Andrea Wang <http://ellenandreawang.com/> first came to my attention 
leading Pixel, her Norwegian pop-jazz quartet. A commanding presence in any 
ensemble she plays in, her soft tone and vocal precision are always 
counterbalanced with heavy and assertive grooves from her double-bass, 
interlocking with drummers, jazz, pop and groove alike.

Cath Roberts
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da6dzonhjPeU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da6dzonhjPeU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da6dzonhjPeU&media=>
 Video:Cath Roberts’s Quadraceratops live at the Jazz Meet, London 
<https://youtu.be/a6dzonhjPeU> 
Fresh from a stint as artist-in-residence at the Lancaster jazz festival 
<http://www.lancasterjazz.com/>, Cath Roberts is one of the founding partners of
LUME <http://lumemusic.co.uk/> with saxophonist Dee Byrne, an improvised music 
collective and festival. Her duoRipsaw Catfish 
<http://cathrobertsmusic.co.uk/ripsaw-catfish/> (with guitarist Anton Hunter) 
on theSaturday night at this year’s Match&Fuse festival 
<https://www.cafeoto.co.uk/events/match-and-fuse-2016/> will be intense, gnarly 
and experimental.

Laura Jurd
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm5qCRWR4kTw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm5qCRWR4kTw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm5qCRWR4kTw&media=>
 Video:Dinosaur perform Hardanger <https://youtu.be/m5qCRWR4kTw> 
Laura Jurd <http://laurajurd.com/> seems to be picking up more five-star 
reviews than anybody else at the moment, and thoroughly deserved they are; her 
skills as a trumpeter and composer are unsurpassable. She’s truly cemented 
herself as a leading figure of the UK jazz scene.

Isabel Sörling
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKxa32QPTmXw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKxa32QPTmXw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKxa32QPTmXw&media=>
 Video:Isabel Sörling performs ELD <https://youtu.be/Kxa32QPTmXw> 
Isabel Sörling <http://www.isabelsorling.com/> is an absolute joy to watch on 
stage and her bandSoil Collectors <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MsDLVlSqxFc> 
is the purest representation of her theatricality and intensity. Hailing from 
Gothenburg, Sweden, she’s a longstanding associate of Match&Fuse, she recently 
teamed up with Leafcutter John for the second time at theM&F Toulouse 
<http://www.matchandfuse.co.uk/festivals/match-fuse-toulouse-2016/> edition in 
September.

 * Ripsaw Catfish play Café Oto, Dalston, on 29 October; Soil Collectors play 
the Vortex Jazz Club on the same date – both as part ofMatch&Fuse London 
festival 2016 <http://www.matchandfuse.co.uk/festivals/match-fuse-london-2016/>.
 