
1 | Involve all urban residents, including slum-dwellers, in planning their 
own cities


Despite the excellent work leading up to Habitat III and the adoption of the 
New Urban Agenda, we continue to see certain groups and individuals living in 
our cities that are not able to participate in negotiations. Slum dwellers are 
one such group. We need to speak to the most marginalised in ways that 
articulate their everyday realities. When ever we have taken the time to do 
this, we find they are the experts of their own condition – they do not make 
unreasonable demands and they are prepared to make the trade-offs needed to 
make the city work.Jaideep Gupte, co-leader of the cities cluster at the 
Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex,@JaiGupte 
<https://twitter.com/JaiGupte>

A recent study 
<http://thewire.in/33693/indias-urbanisation-is-dangerously-exclusionary-and-unequal/>
 found that religious minorities, recent migrants and people living in poor 
neighbourhoods and slums, of the Indian cities surveyed, lack municipal 
governance and institutions that enable access to services such as all-weather 
roads, drainage, sanitation and reliable drinking water. 
Structurally-exclusionary decision-making processes reinforce patterns of 
inequity that determine who suffers during, for example, extreme climate events.
Timon McPhearson, assistant professor of urban ecology,environmental studies, 
The New School 
<http://www.newschool.edu/public-engagement/ba-bs-environmental-studies/>, 
@timonmcphearson <https://twitter.com/timonmcphearson>

2 | Design cities that protect the needs of older people

 Many think that cities are places for the young to find work and forget that 
an increasing proportion of the urban population is growing old. People aged 
over 60 actually represent the fastest growing cohort of urban populations. We 
need to look beyond design and basic physical accessibility and consider 
whether the shared and public spaces of our cities – streets, roads, squares 
and parks – are actually pleasant places. For example, you could make a street 
physically accessible by designing ramps, railings, signage but if the space is 
overwhelmed by fast moving vehicles, thick pollution and narrow pavements, it’s 
not a space people would want to be in. Unless people have to go out, they will 
stay at home, seeing friends and family less, accessing services less 
frequently and, in the end, risk loneliness and social isolation.Sion Jones, 
urbanisation policy officer,HelpAge International <http://www.helpage.org/>, 
@AgeingCities <https://twitter.com/AgeingCities>

3 | Put resilience thinking at the heart of city planning


Until recently, rivers in the San Salvador flooded regularly, sometimes with 
devastating consequences for people living on the banks. Some years back a 
bridge was washed away with a whole bus full of people. Unops [UN office for 
project services] rebuilt the bridge, enforced the banks, and redesigned the 
gorge so that it will withstand future flash floods. Grete Faremo, 
undersecretary general and executive director,UNOPS 
<https://www.unops.org/english/Pages/Home.aspx>, @UNOPS 
<https://twitter.com/UNOPS>

4 | Pay attention to what women need 


In the New Urban Agenda <https://habitat3.org/the-new-urban-agenda/> there are 
several mentions on how to address the needs of women and other vulnerable 
population groups: age, gender and environment-responsive solutions within the 
continuum of land and property rights [and] security of land tenure for women; 
and urban life without fear of violence and intimidation and recognising the 
working poor – particularly women – in the informal economy, including the 
unpaid, domestic, and migrant workers to the urban economies. Addressing issues 
such as land rights, housing, informality and urban violence in a more 
strategic way to address women’s, older and vulnerable people’s needs is 
fundamental. Anaclaudia Rossbach, regional adviser for Latin America and the 
Caribbean, Cities Alliance <http://www.citiesalliance.org/>, @CitiesAlliance 
<https://twitter.com/CitiesAlliance>

We have to focus on directing funds to the most vulnerable sectors with 
integral policies, not only for housing or services, but also for social 
activities and culture. The priority has to be where the inequality aggravates 
most.Fernando Duarte, TECHO International <http://www.techo.org/paises/us/>, 
leading the department of development of habitat.@choferd 
<https://twitter.com/choferd>

Women experience the lack of services in a particular way. The threat of 
violence [is] limiting women’s mobility in the urban space. This includes 
violence experienced while accessing services on public transport, fetching 
water from a common water point, navigating through poorly-lit neighbourhoods 
and even at police stations where they go to report such violence. On top of 
that, when governments fail to deliver services like water, childcare and 
hospitals it is women who subsidise them through their care work.Wangari 
Kinoti, women’s rights policy manager,Action Aid International 
<http://www.actionaid.org/>, @wangkinoti <https://twitter.com/wangkinoti>

We need to make sure girls have the same opportunities, schools need to be 
built for both genders in the first place. It’s not only about the teachers; 
it’s about the facilities, the sanitation, the involvement of the local 
communities.Grete Faremo

5| Share stories of positive action 


We need to gather and share <https://goodanthropocenes.net/> examples of 
positive visions and actions on the ground. To meet the real social, 
ecological, economic and technical-infrastructural challenges we face, we need 
toscale up <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/fee.1309/abstract> those 
actions, narratives and visions that are seeds of a positive future. TheGood 
Anthropocenes <http://goodanthropocenes.net/> project is collecting positive 
sustainability actions from around the world as both a research project, but 
also as a knowledge sharing platform.Timon McPhearson

Read the full Q&A here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/21/live-qa-how-shall-we-plan-the-cities-of-the-future>


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 