
Despite their onstage pretence to be close friends and inextricably linked, 
walking on hand in hand and singing to each other, Fleetwood Mac’s shawl-loving 
singerStevie Nicks <https://www.theguardian.com/music/stevie-nicks> revealed 
that her relationship with bandmate and ex-boyfriend Lindsey Buckingham remains 
tense.

“Relations with Lindsey are exactly as they have been since we broke up,” said 
Nicks, in an interview withRolling Stone 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/stevie-nicks-looks-back-inside-rolling-stones-new-issue-20150114>
. “He and I will always be antagonising to each other, and we will always do 
things that will irritate each other, and we really know how to push each 
other’s buttons.”

Fleetwood Mac: new album and tour will be our swansong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/02/lindsey-buckingham-says-fleetwood-mac-to-enter-last-act>
Nicks and Buckingham joining Fleetwood Mac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fleetwood-mac> was the precursor to their 
period of greatest commercial success, following the release of their eponymous 
album in 1975. By the time 1977’s Rumours was released, and spawned four hit 
singles that catapulted the band – complete with a poppier sound – to 
stadium-gig fame, Nicks and Buckingham’s romantic relationship had fallen 
apart, and was documented on the album in songs such as Nicks’s Dreams and 
Buckingham’s Go Your Own Way.

During the peak of their Rumours-era stardom, the members of Fleetwood Mac 
earned a reputation for enduring a series of volatile and tumultuous 
relationships and breakups. Founding member Mick Fleetwood discovered his wife 
had cheated on him, with his best friend. Bassist John McVie and songwriting 
keyboard player Christine McVie split, and Christine wrote the song You Make 
Loving Fun about her new boyfriend, who was part of the band’s touring 
organisation. Nicks and Fleetwood briefly dated.

Fleetwood Mac's Stevie and Christine: 'We were like rock'n'roll nuns'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/12/fleetwood-mac-stevie-nicks-christine-mcvie-nuns>
“We know exactly what to say when we really want to throw a dagger in,” Nicks 
said of she and Buckingham. “And I think that that’s not different now than it 
was when we were 20. And I don’t think it will be different when we’re 80.”

Even with their personal ups and downs, Fleetwood Mac reunited in 2013 to 
record an album, and begin a series of tours. Christine McVie returned, after 
leaving the band in 1998, joining John McVie, Nicks, Buckingham and Fleetwood. 
The five-piece are currently on aNorth American tour 
<http://www.fleetwoodmac.com/events>. They are due to play London’s O2 Arena in 
May.
 