
An investigation has been launched into how two Auckland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/auckland> homes were sold five times in four 
days as the practice of “flipping” continues to boom in New Zealand’s largest 
city and hottest property market.

The two houses are located side by side in the suburb of Mangere Bridge in 
south Auckland, where flipping is most common, according to an analyst from 
CoreLogic.

Flipping is loosely defined as properties which are sold twice or more within 
a single year, and properties sold twice or more within the space of six months 
raise particular concerns for regulators.

Related: Why Auckland is the hottest property market in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/07/why-auckland-is-leading-the-worlds-housing-market-boom>

Last year, 1,831 Auckland properties changed hands twice or more within a 
single year, and 74 within a single month, according to CoreLogic.

One of the properties, a sprawling Victorian homestead, was sold for NZ$1.45m 
(US$1m) in February of last year, sold again on 4 August for NZ$2.4m and bought 
four days later by property investor Treasure Plus for NZ$2.8m.

Within a six month period the value of the property nearly doubled, making it 
a classic example of flipping.

A modest family home next to the historic villa was sold three times in the 
same week of August, eventually falling into the hands of the same developer 
who bought the homestead next door, Treasure Plus.

On 4 August the humble bungalow sold for NZ$1.9m dollars – four days later its 
value had risen by NZ$150,000 when it was bought by Treasure Plus for NZ$2.05m 
dollars.

The New Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand> Herald reported 
the developer had no knowledge of the prior transactions on the properties and 
planned to demolish both homes and build 18 townhouses.

Kevin Lampen-Smith, chief executive of the Real Estate Agents Authority, said 
his agency would investigate both transactions because the speed of how quickly 
they changed hands had raised red flags. He was also concerned that flipping 
had been on the rise in Auckland, wherethe average house price has reached NZ$1m
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/06/new-zealand-tops-world-house-price-list>
.

“The natural question is if the property has been bought and sold a couple of 
times and the price keeps on going up, was the initial vendor looked after?,” 
said Lampen-Smith.

“Any time transactions take place very quickly you have increased concern to 
make sure all parties are fully informed of the decisions they are making.”

Nick Goodall, a senior research analyst for CoreLogic, said while 
contemporaneous transactions were not illegal there were ethical concerns if 
unscrupulous developers took advantage of less-educated vendors.

Related: Housing affordability and the changing debt burden of a typical 
mortgage | Philip Soos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/18/the-history-of-housing-affordability-and-the-changing-debt-burden-of-a-typical-mortgage>

Goodall said 7.4% of Auckland property transactions were identified as 
potential “flips” in 2016, with high net migration and a shortage of housing 
pushing up prices.

The cities of Hamilton and Tauranga, both within a two-hour drive from 
Auckland, had also been identified as flipping hot-spots, with 6.4% of sales in 
Hamilton held for less than one year, and 4.9% in Tauranga.

“Flipping can mean buying a property and doing it up to sell it on, or buying 
a property, holding onto it, and then selling it on.” said Goodall.

“I am not sure if you can call it deception but there are definitely cases 
where someone who is educated on the market can take advantage of someone who 
is not. And that situation could well be one of those.”

Auckland Council said they would also investigate the heritage value of the 
homestead sold for NZ$2.8m, as it may be of historical significance and to be 
demolished for redevelopment would need archeological approval from Heritage 
New Zealand.
 