
There has been a good deal of bellyaching about delayed flights in Italy over 
the past few days, after Milan’s charter for the Supercoppa in Qatar was 
grounded by a mechanical fault. From a competitive standpoint, their complaints 
are merited. They will have had one day fewer than Juventus to get over their 
jet lag and acclimatise to the desert heat.

If Macaulay Culkin taught us anything, though, it’s that sometimes there is 
more fun to be had from staying home at this time of year. At this point, the 
Supercoppa would need to be very entertaining indeed to top Serie A’s final 
round of fixtures for 2016.

Serie A roundup: Roma rally to see off Chievo and make ground on leaders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/serie-a-roundup-roma-rally-to-see-off-chievo-and-make-ground-on-leaders>
There were seven goals in Sardinia, as Cagliari came back from 3-1 down with 
more than an hour gone to beat Sassuolo 4-3. There was a record-breaking debut 
for Genoa’s Pietro Pellegri, who became the youngest player ever to feature in
Serie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. Best of all, 
though, was a spectacular game of football at the Stadio Artemio Franchi.

It began with an outrageous goal from Lorenzo Insigne. The Napoli winger was 
in an offside position when he took a pass from Marek Hamsik by the left 
touchline, but made up for it by stepping back up the pitch, allowing six 
defenders to get between himself and the goal,and then curling the ball into 
the top corner anyway <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l-EMckyNvRc>. If this 
was an early contender for strike of the season, then by full time it might not 
even have been the best goal of the match.

That title was contested by Mauro Zarate, who ran onto a majestic 30-yard pass 
from Federico Bernardeschi in the 82nd minute andvolleyed it past Pepe Reina 
from the edge of the box <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bmhJ-RbRd440>. Cue 
weeks of lament about Paulo Sousa’s failure to integrate Zarate more fully into 
his Fiorentina team, until everyone remembers that this is the same player who 
has spent the past decade teasing us with such moments, only to let us down 
right after.


Bernardeschi is another matter. This was the latest eye-catching performance 
from a 22-year-old who has grown into his responsibilities in Florence. He had 
scored the Viola’s first two goals himself on Thursday: cancelling out 
Insigne’s opener with a deflected free-kick, and then equalising againwith a 
classy long-range finish <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pmxLWtHRFIs> after 
Dries Mertens restored Napoli’s lead.


The criticism of Bernardeschi last season was that he lacked the end product 
to go with his evident ability. No such criticisms could be levelled nowadays. 
He heads into the winter break as Fiorentina’s leading scorer, on nine goals. 
If it is true that he has still blown hot and cold, then that might have less 
to do with him and more with the endless tinkering of Sousa, who has deployed 
him everywhere from No10 to full-back, via stints on both wings.


Accused of presumptuousness by some sections of the media when he requested 
the No10 shirt last season, Bernardeschi was hailed in Friday morning’s papers 
as a worthy heir to Roberto Baggio and Giancarlo Antognoni. It would probably 
be better to have avoided both shades of hyperbole, but what is undeniable is 
that both he and Insigne represent a generation of emerging stars who have 
helped to restore a sense of optimism about the future of the Italian national 
team.


Their match ended in a stalemate on Thursday, Manolo Gabbiadini coming off the 
bench to score a penalty with the last kick of the game and make the final 
score 3-3. It was a frustrating result forNapoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli>, who had hoped to close the gap 
on Juventus at the top of Serie A, but probably a fair one. Of small 
consolation to the Partenopei might be the knowledge that they scored 101 goals 
in 2016.


Roma were more ruthless, recovering from a half-time deficit to win 3-1 at 
home to Chievo and closing the gap at the top to four points. But the most 
eye-catching result of this round came a day earlier, when Inter thrashed Lazio 
3-0.


Gazzetta dello Sport had riffed on the national anthem on Monday, asking, 
“L’Inter s’è desta?” (“has Inter awoken?”) following their win away to 
Sassuolo. It is beginning to look like they have done. Including Thursday’s 
result, they have now won four in a row across all competitions. They have a 
perfect record at San Siro since Stefano Pioli took over as manager.


Lazio’s Senad Lulic receives 20-day suspension for racist insult
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/22/senad-lulic-suspended-racist-insult-antonio-rudiger>
It was not all plain sailing against Lazio, who had the better of the 
firsthalf, but the Nerazzurri grew into the game and were rampant at times 
after the interval. Ever Banega gave his best performance yet in an Inter 
shirt, contributing not only a goal and an assist but also a relentless 
harrying of Lucas Biglia to disrupt Lazio’s attempts to build attacks from deep.


He is not the only player who has begun to appear rejuvenated under Pioli, 
with Geoffrey Kondogbia and Marcelo Brozovic also combining to provide a robust 
platform in midfield. Mauro Icardi was scoring goals even before the new 
manager arrived, but there was a deliberateness to the movement with which he 
freed himself up to convert Banega’s free-kick delivery for the third which 
suggested this routine had been practiced on the training ground.


For all the calamities of the past few months, Inter finish the year just five 
points outside the Champions League places. And if any further injection of 
optimism was required, then it arrived in the form of a late cameo for Gabigol, 
whose minimal playing time following a £25m summer transfer from Santos has 
been much remarked upon. He entered to a loud ovation on Thursday, and 
proceeded to delight Inter’s fans furtherwith a series of dribbles, feints and 
stepovers <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lOy5uqP96zw&feature=youtu.be>. 

Pioli was in curmudgeonly form afterwards, saying that he “would like to see 
fewer spectacular plays and more concrete ones” from the Brazilian. But every 
Christmas story needs its Ebenezer Scrooge. If Macauley Culkin and Home Alone 
taught us one more thing, it’s that audiences will always cheer for the 
forgotten kid with the bag of tricks.


Talking points

• So, Pellegri. There is some disagreement about whether he has broken Amadeo 
Amadei’s record as the youngest player ever to feature in Serie A. By my own 
calculations, Pellegri was 15 years, nine months and five days when he came on, 
whereas Amadei was 15 years, nine months and six days on the occasion of his 
debut for Roma back in 1936. Genoa, however, only seem to think he equalled the 
record, so perhaps I’m missing something.
Genoa CFC (@GenoaCFC) 
Pietro #Pellegri <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Pellegri?src=hash> più giovane 
esordiente nella storia della@SerieA_TIM <https://twitter.com/SerieA_TIM>, 
eguaglia il record di Amedeo#Amadei 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Amadei?src=hash>. #TorinoGenoa 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/TorinoGenoa?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/Q3iGDGq4t4 
<https://t.co/Q3iGDGq4t4>
 <https://twitter.com/GenoaCFC/status/812047948141957121> December 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GenoaCFC/status/812047948141957121> 
In the end, it doesn’t really matter. What you need to know is simply that 
Pellegri is a tall and robust forward, dubbed unhelpfully as the “new Leo 
Messi” by Genoa owner Enrico Preziosi last year. He appeared to be on his way 
to Manchester United - who reportedly even had a flight booked and two tickets 
set aside for him to watch their game against Chelsea, only for Pellegri to 
back out at the last minute. Born and raised in Genoa, he appears for now to 
want to take his first steps with his local team.

• Roma’s victory means that they got through the entire calendar year without 
losing a domestic game at home. They have not even dropped a point at the 
Stadio Olimpico since the start of this season. Sustaining such perfection will 
only get trickier as Mohamed Salah departs for the Africa Cup of Nations, but 
there was encouragement to be found on Thursday in a goal for Stephan El 
Shaarawy. He has found himself bumped to the fringes this season, but his pace 
could be invaluable during the Egyptian’s absence.


• I touched on Serie A’s fresh wave of talented young Italians above another, 
Andrea Belotti, ended his year on a high with a winning goal for Torino at home 
to Genoa. His 13 strikes this season already represent a new personal best, and 
we’ve not even reached the halfway stage.

• It’s hard not to feel underwhelmed by the prospect of the Supercoppa being 
played half a world away once again for such unashamedly commercial reasons, 
and amongst the most ridiculous aspects to Milan’s delayed journey was the fact 
that they could, for any other game, have simply called in a favour from their 
sponsors Emirates to get the players onto a regular commercial flight (or 
flights). Instead, apparently because of agreements with organisers, they had 
to stick with the planned charter company and consequently wound up losing a 
day of on-site preparation. Still, they have beaten Juventus already once this 
season, and it would certainly be a huge boost to the club’s youth project if 
they could repeat the trick on Friday.


Results Atalanta 2-1 Empoli, Cagliari 4-3 Sassuolo, Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> 3-3 Napoli, Inter 3-0 Lazio, 
Palermo 1-1 Pescara, Roma 3-1 Chievo, Sampdoria 0-0 Udinese, Torino 1-0 Genoa.
 