
League One

• When Bristol Rovers score, it’s usually Matty Taylor. The former Forest 
Green Rovers forward has 18 goals this season alone. But not at the Memorial 
Stadium on Saturday, where there was another striker in rich form by the name 
of Ellis Harrison, who hit a seven-minute hat-trick after Billy Bodin’s opener. 
All four goals arrived inside 25 minutes, leavingNorthampton Town with a 
second-half mountain to climb. And things got worse after the break with 
Harrison adding his fourth and Rovers’ fifth of the afternoon 10 minutes into 
the second half. Rovers have been Jekyll and Hyde of late, especially on the 
road, but this was their fourth straight home win. “It’s nice to see we’ve 
scored some goals and a clean sheet is another Brucie bonus,” Darrell Clarke, 
theBristol Rovers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> manager, 
said.

• Sheffield United offered another timely reminder of why they are the team to 
beat, after thrashing play-off hopefulsSouthend United 4-2 in Essex. Ethan 
Ebanks-Landell got Chris Wilder’s side off to a flyer, opening the scoring 
after three minutes before Kieron Freeman sealed the victory with his third in 
three matches, and his side’s fourth of the afternoon.Bradford City will be 
feeling optimistic about their promotion chances after a 2-0 win at home to
Chesterfield handed them fourth spot, with Rochdale busy in FA Cup third round 
action.

Millwall admit council scheme could force club to leave Lewisham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/millwall-admit-council-scheme-leave-lewisham>
• Bury beefed up their defence with a triple signing on Friday, two of whom 
started, as they attempted to stop the rot on the road at Glanford Park against
Scunthorpe United. Bristol City loanee Taylor Moore and Reece Brown, brother of 
the former Manchester United defender Wes, started in defence but they had 
conceded three goals by half-time, including Josh Morris’s 17th of the season. 
Morris scored in consecutive matches after going eight games without finding 
the net. Bury found the net through George Miller and Kelvin Etuhu but they 
counted for little.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-ellis-harrison-hits-seven-minute-hat-trick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F312475544deb774f13c033bb7ba8a6782efd4338%2F0_186_4309_2585%2F4309.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Ellis%20Harrison%20hits%20seven-minute%20hat-trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-ellis-harrison-hits-seven-minute-hat-trick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Ellis%20Harrison%20hits%20seven-minute%20hat-trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-ellis-harrison-hits-seven-minute-hat-trick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F312475544deb774f13c033bb7ba8a6782efd4338%2F0_186_4309_2585%2F4309.jpg>
 Swindon Town’s James Brophy leaves the pitch after being sent off against 
Shrewsbury Town. Photograph: Catherine Ivill - AMA/Getty Images 
• Elsewhere, former Birmingham City and Watford defender Mat Sadler rescued a 
point for Shrewsbury Town at the County Ground, where both teams were reduced 
to 10 men.Swindon Town had opened the scoring from the penalty spot through the 
former England C midfielder Johnny Goddard.


League Two

• Carlisle United have not lost many this season but suffered their third 
league defeat – and second in a week – at in-formColchester United. The striker 
Kurtis Guthrie had labelled his team a “shambles” and accused the U’s of 
“looking like kids” after a 2-1 defeat at Yeovil in November, with Colchester 
on a miserable winless run of 13 matches. The U’s are a different prospect 
altogether now, though, after a fifth straight victory, a 4-1 win over 
Carlisle, moved them up to fifth. Guthrie completed his hat-trick in 
injury-time and it’s very much all change under John McGreal. “The small window 
I’ve had as a manager, it has been a roller-coaster,” McGreal, who took charge 
as manager in the summer, said.

Alan Smith named as Notts County’s caretaker manager
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/notts-county-alan-smith-caretaker>
• What does £100,000 get you nowadays? Ricardo Santos, the 21-year-old 
Portuguese who arrived atBarnet from Peterborough on New Year’s Eve. After a 
low-key debut in Monday’s win over Plymouth Argyle, the defender scored twice 
in three second-half minutes to clinch a 2-1 win atLeyton Orient and a place in 
the play-offs.

• After going 14 matches without scoring, Adi Yussuf made it two goals in six 
days after scoring the only goal of the game asGrimsby Town won 1-0 at lowly 
Hartlepool United. Ahead of Pools on goal difference remain Crewe Alexandra, 
who lost 3-0 at Mansfield Town after goals from Yoann Arquin, Rhys Bennett and 
theSheffield United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> 
youngster Ben Whiteman.

• Newport County have made more January signings (six) than any other club in 
the country but they are yet to reap the fruits of them.Stevenage cruised to a 
3-1 win over Graham Westley’s team, who remain rock bottom of the fourth tier. 
Godden’s first hat-trick in the Stevenage strip hoisted his team into 13th 
while Newport’s winless run now stands at 10 matches.

• And things go from bad to worse for Notts County, who were quite literally 
left humiliated by Cambridge United on Monday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/fa-cup-third-round-fever-nba-all-star-talk-and-the-perfect-frozen-putt>
 Alan Smith, the former Leeds United and Manchester United midfielder,was named 
caretaker manager on Tuesday. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/notts-county-alan-smith-caretaker>
 A difficult trip toMorecambe got tougher inside 120 seconds, when Lee Molyneux 
opened the scoring before the hosts cruised into a 3-0 lead at half-time. It 
proved unassailable, even though the Shrimps had Andrew Fleming sent off.
 