
Championship 

• When Neil Warnock took charge of Cardiff City in early October, it was never 
going to be dull. Last week there wasSol Bamba’s bizarre behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/sol-bamba-neil-warnock-sending-off-cardiff>
 and subsequent red card, and this week another entirely different escapade, as
Barnsley snatched victory with a 95th-minute winner in south Wales. There were 
six other goals, Sean Morrison’s opener inside three minutes before Ryan 
Williams dug deep down the back of the sofa for a winner after Cardiff had 
pulled level at 3-3. “It was an exciting game for the neutral – on how not to 
defend,” Warnock said. Cardiff have now kept just one clean sheet in their last 
22 matches.

Glenn Murray grabs win for Brighton in Zola’s first Birmingham match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/birmingham-city-brighton-hove-albion-championship-match-report>
• Newcastle United will be top of the tree at Christmas after seeing off B
urton Albion, in the first-ever meeting between the two teams. Dwight Gayle’s 
17th goal of the season sent Rafael Benítez’s side on their way to victory but 
Lloyd Dyer equalised for the hosts five minutes later. But when Gayle strikes, 
Newcastle usually win (winning eight out of nine matches) and Mohamed Diamé’s 
first-half goal was enough to clinch three points.Brighton kept pace with the 
Magpies after adramatic comeback win at Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/birmingham-city-brighton-hove-albion-championship-match-report>
. Lukas Jutkiewicz gave the hosts the lead inGianfranco Zola’s first game in 
charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/gianfranco-zola-birmingham-city>
 before Anthony Knockaert’s equaliser eight minutes from time, and Glenn 
Murray’s dramatic injury-time winner, extended Brighton’s unbeaten run to 16 
games.

• Reading, meanwhile, continued their unlikely assault on the automatic 
promotion places, after George Evans’s injury-time winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/blackburn-rovers-reading-championship-match-report>
 atBlackburn Rovers ensured they remain third. Blackburn twice levelled through 
Danny Graham and then Wes Brown, a former Manchester United team-mate of the 
Reading manager Jaap Stam. But Evans found a 92nd-minute winner from Garath 
McCleary’s cross.Huddersfield Town stay fourth after Elias Kachunga’s double 
secured victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/norwich-city-huddersfield-town-championship-match-report>
 over out of sortsNorwich City at Carrow Road on Friday night. 

Reading steal points against Blackburn thanks to George Evans’s late winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/blackburn-rovers-reading-championship-match-report>
• The rest of teams in the play-off pack left it agonisingly late, too, with 
Sheffield Wednesday and Leeds United both securing narrow victories with little 
time remaining. Steven Fletcher struck in the fourth minute of added time at 
Hillsborough as Wednesday beatRotherham United while Kyle Bartley headed past 
Dan Bentley with only 60 seconds left of normal time as Leeds eked pastBrentford
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7530c63e35870955b6e4cb96444618fbdd3512ea%2F0_91_3076_1846%2F3076.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Newcastle%20top%20of%20the%20tree%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Newcastle%20top%20of%20the%20tree%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7530c63e35870955b6e4cb96444618fbdd3512ea%2F0_91_3076_1846%2F3076.jpg>
 Kyle Bartley celebrates scoring Leeds United’s winner against Brentford. 
Photograph: John Clifton/Reuters 
• Finally a bump in the road, of sorts at least, for Derby County at Fulham. 
Steve McClaren’s side travelled to Craven Cottage on the back of seven straight 
wins and without conceding in 458 minutes. Thomas Ince opened the scoring for 
Derby before their watertight defence was eventually broken by Floyd Ayité, 
bagging his fourth goal in three games on the brink of half-time. Stefan 
Johansen then put Fulham in front before Alex Pearce salvaged a draw for Derby, 
who now sit just a point outside the top six.

Alex Neil vows not to quit as Norwich lose at home to Huddersfield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/16/norwich-city-huddersfield-town-championship-match-report>
• It was a bad day for Bristol City, who were condemned to a third straight 
defeat by Preston North End at Ashton Gate byPreston North End. Simon Makienok 
and Daniel Johnson scored the goals either side of 37-year-old Aaron 
Wilbraham’s equaliser.Nottingham Forest lost 2-0 at home to Wolves, who scored 
through Hélder Costa and club-record signing Ivan Cavaleiro. Elsewhere,Ipswich 
Townmanager Mick McCarthy made five changes after admitting it would be 
“bonkers” not to change his team for the trip toWigan Athletic. David 
McGoldrick, who kept his place on the teamsheet, netted a 88th-minute winner to 
seal a first win in four matches as Wigan lost a fifth straight home match.

League One

• Bolton Wanderers missed the chance to regain second spot from Sheffield 
United after slipping up at lowlyChesterfield. Liam O’Neil scored the only goal 
of the game as Bolton’s five-match unbeaten run came to an abrupt end. Also at 
the top,Scunthorpe United, the league leaders, coasted past Millwall 3-0, 
largely thanks to Paddy Madden’s sixth and seventh goals of the season. 
Fourth-placedBradford City continue to stutter towards the top but earned a 1-1 
draw atWalsall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbd2b775c61d64833da42808a4e5ac1401575d7a%2F953_35_1456_874%2F1456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Newcastle%20top%20of%20the%20tree%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Newcastle%20top%20of%20the%20tree%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbd2b775c61d64833da42808a4e5ac1401575d7a%2F953_35_1456_874%2F1456.jpg>
 Liam O’Neil wheels away after scoring the only goal of the game at 
Chesterfield. Photograph: ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
• On the up are Rochdale and Peterborough United, with both nestled inside the 
play-off positions. Matty Lund, who had previously scored just once last 
season, bagged a hat-trick as Rochdale won 3-2 atNorthampton Town, who twice 
led. Lund’s first career hat-trick ensured Dale stay fifth, narrowly ahead of 
Grant McCann’s Peterborough, who won 2-0 atCharlton Athletic thanks to goals 
from Ryan Tafazolli and Gwion Edwards. Peterborough have now won their last 
four away matches.

• Nile Ranger, who was in court in London on Wednesday, charged with fraud and 
money laundering offences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/nile-ranger-southend-united-charged-fraud-money-laundering>
, opened the scoring asSouthend United recorded a 2-0 win at Oldham Athletic. 
Ranger’s third goal of the season helped to lift Phil Brown’s side to seventh 
in the table while Oldham remain rock-bottom.Shrewsbury Town earned a 2-0 win 
overBristol Rovers but still remain in the relegation zone. For Rovers, there 
was another goalkeeper error for manager Darrell Clarke to fret about, with 
Will Puddy handing Louis Dodds the opportunity to tap-in before Ian Black 
sealed the win. Clarke dropped on-loan Derby goalkeeper Kelle Roos earlier this 
month. “It’s another stupid goal we’ve conceded,” Clarke said. “Our fans booed 
us and rightly. It was not acceptable for this football club. I’ve got a big 
job on my hands for the second half of this season.”

• Chris Brass could be forgiven for thinking he had cracked it at Bury when 
James Vaughan opened the scoring inside five minutes against Oxford United. But 
then Brass, who was named Bury manager until the end of the season on Thursday, 
watched his side unravel as Chris Maguire’s double and a Greg Leigh own goal 
completed the turnaround for the U’s to go 10th. Elsewhere,AFC Wimbledon moved 
into ninth after trouncing Port Vale 4-0 to clinch their first win in four 
matches,Swindon Town drew 1-1 with Fleetwood Town and Gillingham beat MK Dons 
1-0.

League Two

• Derek Adams looked to his substitutes bench for inspiration as Plymouth 
Argylewon 1-0 at Accrington Stanley. On-loan Reading winger Craig Tanner 
replaced Jake Jervis on the hour mark before finding the net as Plymouth 
claimed their 14th win of the season. Only two points separate the division’s 
top three, and bothCarlisle United and Doncaster Rovers could have trumped 
Plymouth if the league leaders had slipped up.

• Doncaster had briefly gone top, for an hour or two at least, after beating 
Grimsby Town in the lunchtime kick-off. Teenage striker Liam Mandeville scored 
his ninth of the season while the Mariners were without top-scorer Omar Bogle 
who missed the trip with a thigh injury.Yeovil Town supporters who made the 
660-mile round trip to Carlisle were rewarded on arrival at Brunton Park by 
Darren Way and his squad, who left £300 behind the bar as a thank you for their 
efforts. “It’s important we give something back,” Way said. On the pitch, it 
wasn’t quite so rewarding, with Shaun Brisley putting Carlisle ahead inside 10 
minutes with a fine 35-yard volley. Charlie Wyke doubled their lead before 
Nathan Smith’s consolation strike. Keith Curle’s side have still only lost once 
in 21 league matches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3a8fd3198b91cb6eac90d3fc883a1df4e41315%2F0_213_3488_2092%2F3488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Newcastle%20top%20of%20the%20tree%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Newcastle%20top%20of%20the%20tree%20at%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-newcastle-united-top-championship-at-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3a8fd3198b91cb6eac90d3fc883a1df4e41315%2F0_213_3488_2092%2F3488.jpg>
 Hartlepool United supporters at Fratton Park. Photograph: 
Hunt/ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
• Portsmouth’s Jeykll and Hyde performances continue to damage their hopes of 
breaking into the automatic promotion places, after playing out a 0-0 draw 
against Hartlepool United at Fratton Park. Before kick-off, Portsmouth’s 
Supporters Trust (PST) unveiled a wall of fame, detailing the name of every 
shareholder who helped to save the club from extinction in April 2013. The PST 
also had a warm welcome for hardy visiting supporters, offering them free hot 
drinks and mince pies upon arrival.

Checkatrade Trophy may be scrapped, says head of English Football League
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/checkatrade-trophy-english-football-league>
• A few managers in the fourth tier have increasingly burgeoning reputations, 
none more so thanCambridge United’s Shaun Derry, Luton Town’s Nathan Jones and 
Wycombe’s Gareth Ainsworth. All three consolidated their position in the 
play-offs, earning respective wins overCrewe, Blackpool and Leyton Orient. 

• Ollie Watkins’s fourth and fifth league goals of the season earned Exeter 
Citya 2-0 win over Mansfield. Elsewhere, John Akinde scored his 16th goal of 
the season butBarnet lost 2-1 at home to Stevenage, 10-man Morecambe lost 2-1 
at home toCheltenham and Colchester won by the same scoreline against Notts 
County, who have now lost six league games in a row. And it might be an unhappy 
festive period forNewport County, who will be bottom of the Football League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> over Christmas after a 
3-1 defeat atCrawley Town.
 