
Championship

 * Derby continued their revival under Steve McClaren, winning their third 
league game on the bounce against rock-bottomRotherham. It was an eventful 
afternoon for Tom Ince, who won two penalties, and missed them both. He fired 
his first at Lee Camp but was able to convert the rebound, scored a second goal 
from open play – and then saw Camp deny him a hat-trick. The Rams won 3-0, and 
are now just four points off the play-offs. 
 * Reading climbed to third with a 3-0 win over Burton. Dominic Samuel opened 
the scoring in the Royals’ fourth straight win without conceding – Jaap Stam’s 
defensive nous is clearly rubbing off on his players.Huddersfield lost 3-2 at 
Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/cardiff-huddersfield-championship-match-report>
, whileNorwich continue to fall off the promotion pace after losing 2-1 at QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/qpr-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
. Second-placedBrighton drew 1-1 with Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/brighton-aston-villa-championship-match-report>
 on Friday, while leadersNewcastle go to Elland Road tomorrow. 
 * Blackburn gave their survival hopes a boost with victory over Brentford in 
a game that saw five first-half goals. Harlee Dean’s own goal gave Rovers the 
points after Danny Graham andBrentford’s Scott Hogan had both scored twice – 
Hogan now has 10 goals for the season, which will be cold comfort. Owen Coyle’s 
side move aboveWigan, who drew 0-0 at Barnsley. 
 * Birmingham moved into the top six after Che Adams’ late winner saw off 
Bristol City, while Britt Assombalonga scored twice as Nottingham Forest beat 
Ipswich in the late kick-off. Elsewhere, Paul Lambert began hisWolves career 
with a hard-earned point atPreston, and Scott Malone salvaged a late point for 
Fulham against fellow play-off chasers Sheffield Wednesday.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff738c98d56cc14772a6abef20589be61ca8a3e1f%2F0_298_3061_1837%2F3061.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Tom%20Ince%20in%20spot%20of%20bother%20but%20Derby%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Tom%20Ince%20in%20spot%20of%20bother%20but%20Derby%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff738c98d56cc14772a6abef20589be61ca8a3e1f%2F0_298_3061_1837%2F3061.jpg>
 Scott Malone can hardly believe it after snatching a point for Fulham at 
Craven Cottage. Photograph: Tom Jacobs/Reuters 
Isaac Hayden and Newcastle on a high under Rafael Benítez
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/rafael-benitez-newcastle-united-isaac-hayden-championship-football-leeds>
League One

 * Tim Sherwood’s curious new role at Swindon Town has got off to a shaky 
start. After being dumped out of the FA Cup by non-league Eastleigh in midweek, 
Swindon lost 4-0 atRochdale, with director of football Sherwood watching on 
from the stands, rather than the dugout this time. 
 * Also enduring managerial uncertainty are Bury, who sacked David Flitcroft 
after the 5-0 FA Cup defeat toAFC Wimbledon. They technically fared better on 
Saturday, going down 5-1 at Kingsmeadow, and have now gone 12 league and Cup 
matches without a win. 
 * Scunthorpe still lead the way with Sheffield United up to second, but both 
had to work for narrow wins against struggling sides. The Iron defeatedOldham 
through Scott Wiseman’s late winner, while the Blades beatShrewsbury 2-1. Bolton
 saw offMillwall at home but Bradford were surprised by Southend, Will Atkinson 
scoring twice at Roots Hall.Peterborough stay fifth after Chris Forrester’s 
injury-time winner for Posh atNorthampton. 
 * At the bottom, Chesterfield have now lost their last eight league games 
after a 2-1 defeat atFleetwood, while Coventry were thrashed 4-1 by Oxford. Jay 
Emmanuel-Thomas got the winner forGillingham at Walsall, while Charlton beat 
Port Vale at the Valley, and Bristol Rovers drew 0-0 with MK Dons.  <> Facebook 
 
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e7c49eb1679a8ed2020d97fdca9519faff53b79%2F0_217_3278_1967%2F3278.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Tom%20Ince%20in%20spot%20of%20bother%20but%20Derby%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Tom%20Ince%20in%20spot%20of%20bother%20but%20Derby%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e7c49eb1679a8ed2020d97fdca9519faff53b79%2F0_217_3278_1967%2F3278.jpg>
 Amari’i Bell and David Ball celebrate as Fleetwood take the lead against 
rock-bottom Chesterfield. Photograph: Stephen White/CameraSport via Getty Images
League Two

 * Surprise result of the day came at Home Park, where leaders Plymouth saw 
their 14-game unbeaten run ended emphatically byGrimsby. Omar Bogle danced 
through the home defence twice as Marcus Bignot’s side won 3-0.Newport also 
pulled off a big away win, with Graham Westley’s team winning 3-0 atNotts County
 – their third league win on the bounce. 
 * Newport’s win meant Exeter would be bottom of the Football League with 
defeat at high-flyingCarlisle. Fans making the long trip to Cumbria saw their 
team leading 2-1 with 89 minutes gone – before two late goals earned Carlisle 
all three points. Let’s hope the Exeter fans at least left early. Keith Curle’s 
team closed the gap on Plymouth, as did third-placedDoncaster, who also needed 
a late winner to see offHartlepool. 
 * Steve Evans made a winning start to his Mansfield tenure, defeating former 
clubCrawley at Field Mill. Leyton Orient’s miserable home run – seven straight 
defeats – continued againstBlackpool. Equally hopeless at home are Morecambe, 
also making it seven defeats in a row with a 2-0 loss toLuton.

 * Colchester made it ten league games without a win in the cruellest fashion, 
letting a 1-0 lead slip late on to lose 2-1 atYeovil. They fall into the bottom 
two, below Newport andCheltenham, who earned a useful point at home to 
Portsmouth. Elsewhere, Stevenage won at Accrington, Aaron Pierre scored a 
last-gasp winner forWycombe at Cambridge, and Barnet drew 0-0 with Crewe.  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bd5deaf5e4587fe70723c05fe7551ac7cd601dc%2F0_69_3374_2024%2F3374.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Tom%20Ince%20in%20spot%20of%20bother%20but%20Derby%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Tom%20Ince%20in%20spot%20of%20bother%20but%20Derby%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-jaap-stams-rock-solid-reading-win-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bd5deaf5e4587fe70723c05fe7551ac7cd601dc%2F0_69_3374_2024%2F3374.jpg>
 Blackpool’s Colin Daniel takes on Leyton Orient goalkeeper Alex Cisak during 
the Tangerines’ win. Photograph: Kevin Barnes/CameraSport via Getty Images  