
What if there were no transfers? What if everyone just stayed where they are? 
Would that be so bad? Lots of people would save some money, there would be much 
less messing around, and the Mill could take a rest from the constant churning, 
churning, churning. Maybe we could talk about other things. Maybe we could 
write that novel.
We mention it, at least partly, because going on the transfer whispers on the 
wind this morning, there might not be too many moves.Diego Costa is apparently 
‘willing’ to remain with his current employers, martyr that he is, despite an 
offer of £600,000-a-week to join Jiangsu Suning;Robert Snodgrass has his eyes 
on the job at Hull rather than the £4.99 bid made by West Ham;Mauricio 
Pochettino reckons the lads from the Chinese Super League aren’t sniffing 
around any of his players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/maurico-pochettino-chinese-super-league-broken-market-no-offers-tottenham>
. Maybe there really won’t be any transfers.

Here’s one, though. Word in Spain suggests that the prospect of Gerard Piqué 
moving to England isn’t the most outlandish in the world. And why? Because 
Shakira, who as you’ll know happens to be married to Gerard, wants him to move 
away from Barcelona because of all the stick he gets in Catalonia. Apparently 
she thinks that it’ll all be much nicer in England, which does lead us to think 
she hasn’t been to England much, but if it means sheisn’t so stressed while 
watching matches <https://twitter.com/_AndyHa/status/805718400215449600>, we’re 
all for it. Who’d be keen? London would be their preferred destination, 
presumably for either Madame Tussauds or the proliferation of rustic burger 
joints, so that would be Chelsea or Arsenal. We’ll leave you to decide which is 
more likely to stump up the necessary.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Speaking of Barcelona, apparently they need some money to pay for Lionel 
Messi’s new contract, money they will reportedly raise by selling Ivan Rakitić. 
Who’d be up for taking him off their hands? Why, Manchester City of course, who 
definitely have a deficiency of quick, technical attacking midfielders.

Dimitri Payet looks like he’ll be on the move, whether West Ham like it or 
not. It is slightly curious thatMarseille seems to be his preferred destination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/dimitri-payet-west-ham-marseille>
, although going from playing in one of Europe’s worst grounds to one of its 
best is a fairly solid reason. If West Ham get an offer of £30m then they will 
probably take it, even if you wouldn’t necessarily trust them to spend it 
wisely.
Good news for the Proper Football Men of the world, especially those keen that 
their mate with no experience gets a job:Ryan Giggs is on the shortlist for the 
Nottingham Forest gig. Actually, given that Forest are an absolutely flaming 
bin doubling for a football club at the moment, maybe that isn’t the greatest 
news after all.Mike Phelan, Kenny Jackett and Oscar Garcia are the other lucky 
punters under consideration.

As for the rest, it’s broadly odds and ends. Real Salt Lake fancy taking the 
19-year-old American strikerBrooks Lennon on loan from Liverpool; Mark Hughes 
wants to keepMr Bojan ‘Goals’ Krkić, despite interest from Middlesbrough; Boro 
will dry their eyes onPatrick Bamford; Aston Villa could fill the gaping hollow 
in their midfield by lashing £3m onAdlène Guedioura; Newcastle are ploughing on 
with their policy of having a billion players by moving for Fulham’sTom Cairney.
And with that, good day.

Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window with ourFacebook Messenger alerts 
<https://m.me/theguardian?ref=football_transfers>. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at 
the bottom of the screen to receive the latest alerts.
 