
 * Birmingham City earned their first point under Gianfranco Zola but had to 
fight back from two goals down – and with Barnsley down to 10 men for most of 
the second half, may feel disappointed not to emerge with all three points. Tom 
Bradshaw and Sam Winnall put the hosts ahead at Oakwell, before Jacques Maghoma 
reduced the deficit. Early in the second half, Marc Roberts was sent off after 
bringing down Che Adams in the area, and Lukas Jutkiewicz made it 2-2 from the 
penalty spot. 
 * Derby and Sheffield Wednesday both missed the opportunity to edge closer to 
the top of the table, with the Rams held to a goalless draw byWigan, and 
Wednesday earning a 1-1 draw againstPreston through Adam Reach’s last-gasp 
leveller at Deepdale. 
 * QPR ended their six-game losing streak in dramatic fashion, with Pawel 
Wszolek scoringan 87th-minute winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/wolverhampton-wanderers-qpr-championship-amtch-report>
 againstWolves at Molineux. Idrissa Sylla had given Rangers a second-half lead 
before Dave Edwards volleyed in an equaliser – but the Polish winger Wszolek 
tucked away a loose ball to grab the win. 
 * In the lunchtime kick-off, Blackburn Rovers almost pulled off a surprise 
win atHuddersfield, with Danny Graham putting Rovers ahead in the 81st minute. 
Nakhi Wells’ stoppage-time free kick earned the hosts a 1-1 draw, but the early 
pace-setters are now nine points behind leadersNewcastle. 
Ian Holloway reprieved after late Pawel Wszolek winner lifts QPR
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/wolverhampton-wanderers-qpr-championship-amtch-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d3fd031640c2577dc54ae0dd021449d57db9c8f%2F114_0_2839_1703%2F2839.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bolton's%20Henry%20spoils%20party%20for%20Scunthorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bolton%27s%20Henry%20spoils%20party%20for%20Scunthorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d3fd031640c2577dc54ae0dd021449d57db9c8f%2F114_0_2839_1703%2F2839.jpg>
 Huddersfield’s Nakhi Wells (No21) watches his free-kick head for the corner of 
the net. Photograph: Craig Brough/Reuters 
 * The Magpies sealed the year-end top spot with a 3-1 win over Nottingham 
Foreston Friday. Matt Ritchie gave the hosts an early lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/newcastle-united-nottingham-forest-championship-match-report>
, before Nicolao Dimitru equalised – but two more goals for Dwight Gayle in the 
second half sealed the year-end top spot. Gayle has 19 league goals this season 
– more than in his three Premier League campaigns combined. 
 * Friday night’s other result saw Ipswich gain revenge over Bristol City. The 
Robins’ only win in 10 league games was against Mick McCarthy earlier this 
month, but a late acrobatic strike from Brett Pitman secured a 2-1 win for 
Ipswich at Portman Road.

 * Fog put a stop to Brighton’s Friday night game with Cardiff – bad news for 
the title chasing hosts, and the away fans.Reading’s game with Fulham also fell 
foul of the fog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/championship-roundup-reading-fulham-frozen-fog>
, abandoned while goalless at half-time. 
 * On Thursday night, Jonathan Kodjia’s ninth goal of the season earned Aston 
Villa a point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/aston-villa-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
 against Garry Monk’s high-flyingLeeds United. Kodjia struck from the spot in 
the 86th minute after Pontus Jansson had put the visitors ahead.Rotherham United
’s survival hopes took a hefty blow intheir six-pointer against Burton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/29/rotherham-united-burton-albion-championship-match-report>
 – despite dominating the second half, the Millers could not respond to two 
quickfire first half goals from Albion’s Chris O’Grady and Jackson Irvine.  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e99ba39e6bc33d3b7331aac573d81b3acdfab7d%2F0_217_3045_1827%2F3045.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bolton's%20Henry%20spoils%20party%20for%20Scunthorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bolton%27s%20Henry%20spoils%20party%20for%20Scunthorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e99ba39e6bc33d3b7331aac573d81b3acdfab7d%2F0_217_3045_1827%2F3045.jpg>
 Brett Pitman scores a spectacular winner for Ipswich against Bristol City. 
Photograph: Shaun Brooks/Rex/Shutterstock 
League One

 * Scunthorpe United’s New Year party will be a muted affair after the Iron 
fell from first to third in the table thanks to James Henry’s last-gasp winner 
forBolton. Neal Bishop had cancelled out Josh Vela’s opener on the hour mark in 
the heavyweight clash at the Macron Stadium. 
 * Bolton go second, with Sheffield United the new leaders after lunchtime 
victory over Northampton – but Chris Wilder’s team left it late against his old 
club, Kieron Freeman scoring the only goal in the 89th minute.Charlton also got 
a late result in an early game, endingSouthend’s run of three straight wins 
through Andrew Crofts’ last-minute equaliser.

 * Bury continued their Christmas revival with an unlikely point at Bradford 
City. After ending a 12-game losing streak with a draw at Fleetwood on Boxing 
Day, Scott Burgess gave Bury the lead at half-time – but Nicky Law struck to 
spare the play-off chasing hosts’ blushes.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1890b8aeeaea1503a2b41cb34a08b349e32a9865%2F0_95_3808_2285%2F3808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bolton's%20Henry%20spoils%20party%20for%20Scunthorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bolton%27s%20Henry%20spoils%20party%20for%20Scunthorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1890b8aeeaea1503a2b41cb34a08b349e32a9865%2F0_95_3808_2285%2F3808.jpg>
 Matty Taylor finds the net again for Bristol Rovers, this time against AFC 
Wimbledon. Photograph: Thomson/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
 * It was a tough day for the league’s bottom two sides, as Oldham and 
Coventry Cityboth conceded in stoppage time. Michael Bostwick denied the Sky 
Blues a rare win atPeterborough, while a Josh Law own goal gave Fleetwood Town 
victory over the Latics, who are now winless in nine league games. 
 * Matty Taylor took his goal tally for the season to 18 with a quickfire 
double forBristol Rovers as they defeated Wimbledon. In Saturday’s other game, 
Oxford United and Walsall drew 0-0. 
 * On Friday night, Kieran Agard scored twice as MK Dons overcame Swindon 3-2, 
Lee Gregory opened the scoring asMillwall boosted their play-off push with 
victory overGillingham at The Den, Rochdale beat Shrewsbury – and a late pitch 
inspection at Spotland – and Jerome Thomas got his firstPort Vale goal in the 
1-0 victory overChesterfield. 
Sport picture of the day: footballers in the mist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/dec/31/sport-picture-of-the-day-footballers-in-the-mist>
League Two

 * Six games ago, Colchester United were in the bottom two and facing a battle 
for Football League survival. Now, after five wins from six, John McGreal’s 
side are two points off the play-offs.Stevenage were their latest victims, with 
the U’s taking a 2-0 lead, getting pegged back to 2-2, then taking all three 
points through late Chris Porter and Tarique Fosu goals. 
 * Plymouth Argyle are back on top of the table after finding a way past 
mid-tableCrawley, Oscar Threlkeld and Craig Tanner getting the goals. Previous 
leadersDoncaster Rovers drew 1-1 at Mansfield in the lunchtime kick-off, 
escaping with a point after Liam Mandeville equalised from the penalty spot. 
 * Carlisle United also leapfrogged Rovers, moving up to second with a 3-2 win 
over strugglingNotts County. The Magpies have now lost eight in a row but made 
life difficult for Keith Curle’s team, taking a first-half lead before Jason 
Kennedy’s second-half goal sealed an away win.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde5c563aa4e5fd4f7b6f9816375ab1b733587b35%2F0_257_2730_1637%2F2730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bolton's%20Henry%20spoils%20party%20for%20Scunthorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bolton%27s%20Henry%20spoils%20party%20for%20Scunthorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-boltons-henry-spoils-scunthorpe-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde5c563aa4e5fd4f7b6f9816375ab1b733587b35%2F0_257_2730_1637%2F2730.jpg>
 Charlie Wyke celebrates after scoring for Carlisle United at Notts County. 
Photograph: JMS Photography/Rex/Shutterstock 
 * Newport County enjoyed a brief improvement under Graham Westley in 
November, but that run is very much over. The 4-1 home defeat byExeter City 
leaves the Exiles five points adrift of safety, as the visitors edged into the 
top half thanks to an Ollie Watkins hat-trick. 
 * Luton Town held steady in the play-off places with a 3-1 home win over 
Barnet, with Cameron McGeehan scoring his 10th goal of the season, while 
Accrington eased their relegation worries with a win at Crewe and Grimsby drew 
0-0 withBlackpool. 
 * In the early kick-off, Leyton Orient fans could have been forgiven for 
leaving early, with their team facing a 10th home defeat of the season – but 
Ollie Palmer earned a point againstCambridge in the 94th minute. 
 * Hartlepool enjoyed their Friday night against Morecambe, racing to a 3-0 
lead inside 24 minutes, although second-half goals from Andrew Fleming and Ryan 
Edwards kept it interesting. Scott Kashket fired an early winner asWycombe beat 
Cheltenham at Waddon Road, and there was not much to see at Huish Park – Yeovil 
drew withPortsmouth as fog descended in Somerset.  