
Championship

• There was a tale of two streaks in the Championship, one of which came to an 
end and one that continues unabated.Newcastle United welcomed Blackburn Rovers 
to St James’ Park in expectation of a ninth straight league win butCharlie 
Mulgrew’s goal provided the shock of the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/newcastle-united-blackburn-rovers-championship-match-report>
 for a Rovers side who began the day in the bottom three. Somewhat less 
surprising wasNorwich City’s fifth straight defeat. Bradley Johnson, who played 
over 150 games for the Canaries, scoredDerby County’s goal in their 1-0 win and 
piled the pressure on the under-fire Alex Neil.

• Newcastle’s defeat allowed Brighton & Hove Albion to close the gap to two 
points at the top but they survived a scare againstFulham, who took a 
first-half lead at the Amex thanks to Kevin McDonald. Sam Baldock and Glenn 
Murray, though, scored second-half goals to extend Albion’s own unbeaten streak 
to 12 games.

• It was a good day for those chasing the top two with Reading (2-1 winners at 
home to Bristol City),Birmingham City (2-1 winners away at Brentford) and 
Sheffield Wednesday(2-0 winners at Wolves). The other side in the top six – 
Huddersfield Town – face Wigan Athletic on Monday.

• Before Cardiff City’s trip to Aston Villa, City’s manager, Neil Warnock, 
revealed he had been overlooked for the Villa job in the summer in favour of 
Roberto Di Matteo. Di Matteo lasted just 124 days but his replacement, Steve 
Bruce, is faring rather better. He’s now seven games unbeaten as Villa manager, 
thanks to a 3-1 win over Warnock’s Bluebirds. Ian Holloway, on the other hand, 
tasted defeat for the first time since returning toQPR, his team going down 3-0 
atIpswich Town. Town manager Mick McCarthy was in particularly prickly form 
post-match 
<http://www.eadt.co.uk/sport/reaction_mick_mccarthy_gets_on_the_front_foot_after_3_0_home_win_over_queens_park_rangers_1_4794002>
, defending his selection of a combative central midfield pairing with: “Yeah, 
we might lose a bit of that sexyness but who gives a fuck? I just want to win.”

League One

• It has not been easy being a Bury fan of late. They welcomed Millwall to 
Gigg Lane on the back of nine successiveLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> losses but were 2-0 up 
thanks to James Vaughan, who grabbed his second of the game after 67 minutes. 
The euphoria didn’t last long. A minute later Niall Maher was sent off and by 
the full-time whistle it was 3-2 to the visitors, with Aiden O’Brien getting an 
injury-time winner.

• At the other end of the table it was a mixed bag for the leading quartet of 
Scunthorpe, Sheffield United, Bolton Wanderers and Bradford City. Scunthorpe 
were held at home byOxford United, the Blades are now 14 games unbeaten but 
conceded a 93rd-minute equaliser at the Valley in a 1-1 draw againstCharlton 
(whose fans bombarded the pitch with tiny foam taxis early on), and Bradford 
were surprisingly beaten away atSwindon Town.
Louis Mendez (@LouisMend) 
The Taxis were thrown onto the pitch in protest against Roland Duchatelet's 
ownership of#cafc <https://twitter.com/hashtag/cafc?src=hash> - he's just hired 
his 8th manager in 3 yearspic.twitter.com/hVV4zPY5Fq <https://t.co/hVV4zPY5Fq>
 <https://twitter.com/LouisMend/status/802528574033055744> November 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LouisMend/status/802528574033055744> 
• The big winners, then, were Bolton, who leapfrogged Sheffield United into 
second thanks to a 1-0 away win atNorthampton Town, Zach Clough scoring the 
only goal of the game and his seventh of the season. Indeed Wanderers were the 
only side in the top eight to win on Saturday.

• At the bottom, Chesterfield clawed their way up a place with their second 
successive 3-2 win, withBristol Rovers this time the victims. Coventry City 
sink into the bottom four after defeat at the Ricoh againstMK Dons – their 
fourth defeat on the bounce.

League Two

• The nailed-on result of the day seemed set to be at the Globe Arena. 
Morecambe had lost seven on the bounce at home and hosted the league leaders, 
Plymouth Argyle, who were on a club-record streak of seven straight away wins. 
But Morecambe proved coupon-busters with a 2-1 win, Peter Murphy’s winner 
coming after Jordan Slew had been sent off for the visitors. Such is the 
congested nature of theLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> table that Morecambe, 
who began the day two points of the relegation zone, end it four points from 
the play-off places.

• That result gave Carlisle United the chance to leapfrog Argyle at the summit 
and they duly did so with a comprehensive 5-2 win overMansfield. Young striker 
Charlie Wyke helped himself to a hat-trick, condemning Steve Evans to his first 
defeat as Stags manager.

• There briefly appeared to be a bit of relief at the end of – yet another – 
very long week for sufferingLeyton Orient fans when their side went 1-0 up away 
atDoncaster. But Jordan Houghton equalised just before half-time and two Liam 
Mandeville goals in the second half gave third-placed Rovers three points.
 