
Championship

• With leaders Huddersfield Town hosting Sheffield Wednesday in Sunday’s 
Yorkshire derby, relegatedNorwich City and Newcastle United both had the chance 
to climb into the automatic promotion places, and both obliged with comfortable 
home victories. Wes Hoolahan led the Canaries to top spot, scoring a crafty 
solo opener and setting up Cameron Jerome for the second in the 3-1 win over
Rotherham. Newcastle won by the same score at St James’ Park, Dwight Gayle’s 
double againstBrentford taking his goal tally to nine for the division’s top 
scorers.

Pigs fly at the Valley as Charlton and Coventry fans stage joint protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/charlton-coventry-pigs-owner-protest-valley>
• The game of the day came at Oakwell, with six goals and a sending off as 
Fulham twice fell behind before rallying to win 4-2. Scott Malone and Chris 
Martin, scoring his first goal forFulham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fulham> after a 20-game goal drought, 
made the difference asBarnsley’s Josh Scowen saw red in the second half. There 
was also entertainment on the south coast, asBrighton & Hove Albion failed to 
keep pace with the leading pack againstPreston North End. Glenn Murray’s sixth 
goal of the season had given the Seagulls the edge, but Simon Makienok struck 
in stoppage time to salvage a point.

• The second Steve McClaren era at Derby County began with a narrow win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/derby-county-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
, as Johnny Russell scored the only goal againstLeeds United. That result, 
coupled withWigan Athletic’s goalless draw against Burton Albion, meant that 
the Steve Bruce era kicked off at teatime withAston Villa in the bottom three. 
They held on for a 1-1 draw againstWolves to rise to 20th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/aston-villa-wolves-championship-match-report>
, but have still won just once all season.Blackburn Rovers, in 23rd place, and 
Ipswich Town, without a league goal in a month, played out a joyless stalemate 
at Ewood Park, while in the day’s other game,QPR and Reading drew 1-1 at Loftus 
Road.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Ffootball-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53afd7ab9603fcb9cfbfb2db7691eea3479b2f53%2F0_109_2330_1398%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Norwich%20and%20Newcastle%20on%20track%20for%20quick%20return&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Ffootball-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Norwich%20and%20Newcastle%20on%20track%20for%20quick%20return&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Ffootball-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53afd7ab9603fcb9cfbfb2db7691eea3479b2f53%2F0_109_2330_1398%2F2330.jpg>
 Simon Makienok equalises in stoppage time for Preston at the Amex Stadium. 
Photograph: Ashley Western - CameraSport/CameraSport via Getty Images 
League One

• After failing to win any of their first four fixtures, Sheffield United are 
unbeaten in eight (winning six and drawing two) after picking off Port Vale at 
Bramall Lane. Ethan Ebanks-Landell scored two as the Blades moved to within 
three points of second-placedBradford City, with a game in hand. The Bantams’ 
unbeaten start to the season was ended in dramatic fashion atOxford United, 
with Chris Maguire grabbing a last-gasp winner. Also leaving it late were
Bristol Rovers, with Ellis Harrison’s injury time goal completing their 
comeback againstGillingham.

• Scunthorpe took advantage of Bradford’s slip to go four points clear at the 
top with a comeback of their own againstMK Dons. Josh Morris had a rare off-day 
in front of goal, but provided a smart assist for Paddy Madden’s winner, 10 
minutes from time.Rochdale prevailed in a heavyweight Lancashire derby, beating 
Bury 2-0 as the visitors saw Kean Bryan and Jacob Mellis sent off. Also keeping 
pace in a distinctly northern promotion race areBolton Wanderers, who saw off 
strugglingOldham Athletic thanks to two goals from Zach Clough.

Nottingham Forest give Philippe Montanier a lift in win over Birmingham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/14/nottingham-forest-birmingham-city-championship-match-report>
• Coventry City remain rock bottom after defeat at The Valley. In a game 
dominated by porcine protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/charlton-coventry-pigs-owner-protest-valley>
 from both sets of fans,Charlton Athletic won 3-0, late goals from Ademola 
Lookman and Josh Magennis sealing victory.Shrewsbury Town are still 
managerless, and still in the bottom four after a painful 3-2 defeat atWalsall. 
Erhun Oztumer, once of Dulwich Hamlet, scored the late winner after the 
visitors had twice equalised, while at Roots Hall,Southend earned a useful win 
overChesterfield thanks to Adam Thompson’s first-half goal.

• Jak McCourt, Northampton Town’s hero at Scunthorpe last week, became the 
villain with a red card as the Cobblers lost 3-1 at home toMillwall. Elsewhere, 
Fleetwood defeated Peterborough 2-0 at Highbury, while AFC Wimbledon maintained 
their position above MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/09/afc-wimbledon-above-mk-dons-league-one>
 with a goalless draw againstSwindon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Ffootball-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fe463b2d49bdf54f1ef30ef4700ff25606e54c5%2F0_160_2688_1613%2F2688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Norwich%20and%20Newcastle%20on%20track%20for%20quick%20return&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Ffootball-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Norwich%20and%20Newcastle%20on%20track%20for%20quick%20return&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Ffootball-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fe463b2d49bdf54f1ef30ef4700ff25606e54c5%2F0_160_2688_1613%2F2688.jpg>
 Jak McCourt heads for an early bath at Sixfields. Photograph: 
ProSports/REX/Shutterstock 
League Two

• Carlisle’s unbeaten record was put to the test by Hartlepool at Brunton 
Park. The visitors equalised twice after Shaun Miller was sent off – but 
Michael Raynes ensured all three points for Keith Curle’s team, who are now the 
onlyFootball League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league> side 
without a loss. The Cumbrians cut the gap onPlymouth Argyle, who drew with 
Portsmouthat Home Park in the “dockyard derby” – Connor Smith’s 89th-minute 
equaliser earning a point for the league leaders. Second-placedDoncaster Rovers 
also closed on the Pilgrims, Tommy Rowe’s goal on the stroke of half-time 
proving enough againstColchester.

• Performance of the day surely belonged to Exeter City, the Grecians climbing 
out of the bottom two with a thumping 4-1 win atBarnet, who replace them in the 
relegation zone.Leyton Orient and Cambridge both slipped down the table after 
home defeats toLuton Town and Grimsby Town respectively, while Tom Eaves’ late 
goal earnedYeovil victory over bottom club Newport County. Promoted Cheltenham 
Town picked up just their second win of the season, beating Crawley Town 2-1 to 
improve their chances of staying in the division.

• It’s not easy being a Blackpool fan; their team led at Accrington Stanley 
with 89 minutes gone, only for Romuald Boco to equalise with a contentious 
penalty and then score a 94th-minute winner. Tangerines boss Gary Bowyer was
less than impressed <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MdVcNx75ks4> after the 
match. In the day’s other games,Stevenage won 2-0 at Morecambe, Mansfield Town 
andWycombe Wanderers drew at Field Mill, and Notts County took an 80th-minute 
lead at home toCrewe Alexandra, only for on-loan Alex Kiwomya to equalise a 
minute later. It finished 1-1.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Ffootball-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ceb3cfdd72828f526ace9be5799025caf7b7863%2F0_111_2238_1343%2F2238.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Norwich%20and%20Newcastle%20on%20track%20for%20quick%20return&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Ffootball-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Norwich%20and%20Newcastle%20on%20track%20for%20quick%20return&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Ffootball-league-thoughts-newcastle-norwich-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ceb3cfdd72828f526ace9be5799025caf7b7863%2F0_111_2238_1343%2F2238.jpg>
 Jabo Ibehre celebrates opens the scoring for Carlisle, now the only unbeaten 
team in the Football League. Photograph: Mark Fuller/REX/Shutterstock  