
Championship

 * Derby County scored more than one goal for the only the second time in a 
league match this season, beating Sheffield Wednesday, who drop to seventh, 2-0 
at home. Defenders Cyrus Christie and Alex Pearce scored the Rams’ eighth and 
ninth goals of the season against Wednesday for Steve McClaren’s side. McClaren 
has won two of his first three home games as Derby manager, after a winless 
home run that lasted six months. The Rams edge above local rivalsNottingham 
Forest, who lost at Reading. The Royals moved into fifth after Garath McCleary 
and Chris Gunter scored goals against their former club without reply. 
Chris Martin at the double as five-star Fulham knock Huddersfield off course
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/fulham-huddersfield-town-championship-match-report>
 * Fulham recorded their first league win at Craven Cottage since the opening 
day of the season, after a whopping 5-0 victory overHuddersfield Town. Three 
loanees got the ball rolling for Slavisa Jokanovic’s men, with Chris Martin, 
Tomas Kalas and Lucas Piazon – the latter two are on loan from Chelsea – 
putting the hosts three goals to the good before half-time. After the break, 
Martin doubled his tally before Kevin McDonald completed the rout. David 
Wagner’s sideare third after their blistering start, but have now lost three of 
their last four matches away from home.Brighton thrashed Norwich City by the 
same scoreline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/brighton-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
 to remain second, with Glenn Murray bagging a hat-trick. 
Murray hits hat-trick as Chris Hughton makes point with Norwich thrashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/29/brighton-norwich-city-championship-match-report>
 * Bristol City are sixth after throwing away their lead at Oakwell, as Lee 
Johnson returned toBarnsley for the first time since leaving the club in 
February. Marley Watkins, the former Hereford and Bath City forward signed by 
Johnson last year, opened the scoring before Lee Tomlin’s penalty levelled 
things up. Tammy Abraham then scored his first goal in five matches – and 12th 
of the season – to give the Robins the lead, before Barnsley winger Adam 
Hammill netted an injury-time equaliser. 
 * Newcastle United hit Preston for six at St James’ Park in midweek, and 
Aleksandar Mitrovic carried on where they left off at Deepdale on Saturday. The 
striker,who scored twice on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/newcastle-united-preston-north-end-efl-cup-match-report>
, hit another double for his third and fourth goals against Simon Grayson’s 
side this week.Leeds United are on the up, too. Garry Monk’s side maintained 
their good form at Elland Road, with Chris Wood and Souleymane Doukara striking 
late to down visitorsBurton Albion, and extend their unbeaten home run to seven 
matches.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe970f842c1f0f589b207dc174eba95d6cba4d97%2F0_192_3667_2200%2F3667.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Derby%20extend%20home%20run%20as%20Newcastle%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Derby%20extend%20home%20run%20as%20Newcastle%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe970f842c1f0f589b207dc174eba95d6cba4d97%2F0_192_3667_2200%2F3667.jpg>
 Newcastle United’s Aleksandar Mitrovic points to the club crest after scoring 
his second goal at Deepdale. Photograph: Serena Taylor/Newcastle Utd via Getty 
Images 
 * Neil Warnock’s unbeaten run as Cardiff City manager came to an abrupt end, 
after managerlessWigan Athletic took a 1-0 win away from south Wales, thanks to 
Jordi Gómez’s late goal. And it was a case of so close but so far for Kenny 
Jackett, whoseRotherham United side squandered their lead late on at Portman 
Road.Ipswich Town equalised through David McGoldrick’s 95th-minute effort, 
Danny Ward’s double giving the Millers an unlikely lead after going behind to 
Freddie Sears’s early strike. 
 * Finally, Blackburn Rovers missed the chance to climb out of the relegation 
zone after a 1-1 draw withWolves. Sam Gallagher’s volley gave Rovers an early 
lead, but Dave Edwards struck for managerless Wolves, on a night where home 
fans arrived late and left early in an ownership protest. Birmingham City host 
Aston Villa in the Second City derby on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/27/aston-villa-steve-bruce-fans-birmingham-derby-west-ham>
, while in another local affair on Friday, Brentford beat QPR to enda 52-year 
wait 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/28/queens-park-rangers-brentford-championship-match-report>
for a win at Loftus Road. 
Aston Villa’s Steve Bruce: ‘Who can forget Peter Enckelman’s mistake?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/28/steve-bruce-peter-enckelman-birmingham-aston-villa>
League One

 * Scunthorpe United blew Swindon Town away at Glanford Park to remain top of 
the tree, with striker Paddy Madden scoring twice. Kevin van Veen and Duane 
Holmes did the rest as Graham Alexander’s side racked up their tenth league win 
this term. Town defender Nathan Thompson scored a consolation goal for the 
visitors who suffered back-to-back defeats.Bolton Wanderers’ fifth straight win 
was done and dusted after just 16 minutes. Phil Parkinson’s side cruised into a 
3-0 lead overPort Vale – courtesy of goals from academy graduates Zach Clough 
and Josh Vela, before Lawrie Wilson struck a third. Around the corner, sort of,
Rochdale beat local rivals Oldham, courtesy of Matty Lund’s goal five minutes 
before the break.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F666f37651c7dc11962991eaaafd673f4fd604359%2F1137_202_1574_945%2F1574.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Derby%20extend%20home%20run%20as%20Newcastle%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Derby%20extend%20home%20run%20as%20Newcastle%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F666f37651c7dc11962991eaaafd673f4fd604359%2F1137_202_1574_945%2F1574.jpg>
 Scunthorpe United’s Paddy Madden celebrates scoring his second goal against 
Swindon Town at Glanford Park. Photograph: /REX/Shutterstock/Rex/Shutterstock 
 * Third-placed Bradford City left it very late to down AFC Wimbledon, with 
James Hanson scoring the winner in injury-time at Kingsmeadow. Jordy Hiwula, 
the former Manchester City striker, opened the scoring after three minutes 
before the hosts turned things around, taking the lead through Lyle Taylor from 
the spot after 68 minutes. It was then Hanson’s turn to slot home from 12 yards 
before sending a bullet header past the goalkeeper James Shea.Sheffield United 
beatMK Dons at Bramall Lane thanks to Billy Sharp’s late winner, after Darren 
Potter, formerly of neighbours Sheffield Wednesday, had pulled the visitors 
level. 
 * The Blades sit fourth, while Northampton Town moved into fifth after a 3-2 
win overBury. Veteran striker Marc Richards found the net twice before Matt 
Taylor’s goal put the Cobblers into a seemingly unassailable lead. But George 
Miller replied three minutes later before Zeli Ismail’s goal ensured a frantic 
finish.Bristol Rovers slipped out of the play-off picture, after surrendering 
their slender lead at home toPeterborough. Matty Taylor’s penalty put Darrell 
Clarke’s side in the driving seat but Shaquile Coulthirst and Tom Nichols 
completed the Posh turnaround at the Memorial Stadium. 
 * Elsewhere, Millwall came from behind to leapfrog Oxford United in the early 
kickoff, with Steve Morison and Aiden O’Brien grabbing the goals for Neil 
Harris’s side. Ashley Hunter securedFleetwood victory over Gillingham at the 
Highbury Stadium,Charlton beat Chesterfield 1-0 at the Valley thanks to Lee 
Novak’s late goal andSouthend United played out a 1-1 draw at home to 
Shrewsbury Town. 
League Two

 * Everything’s going right for Plymouth Argyle at the moment. Ryan Donaldson 
scored the winner for Derek Adams’ table-toppers side three minutes from time 
against Colchester, to ensure Plymouth’s best start to a season since 1930. 
Donaldson’s second goal of the season ensured victory after Craig Tanneropened 
the scoring at Home Park. Plymouth had to hold out for 16 minutes of stoppage 
time after an injury to referee Kevin Johnson, who collided with the hosts’ 
Jimmy Spencer. 
 *  Things are still going to plan for Carlisle United, too. Keith Curle’s 
side extended their unbeaten start to 15 matches with a comprehensive 3-1 win 
overCrawley. Jabo Ibehre, Jason Kennedy and Luke Joyce ensured Carlisle remain 
four points adrift of the league leaders.Doncaster Rovers are third after a 2-2 
draw at home toWycombe, in which John Marquis – labelled Marcreeps in Rovers’ 
Halloween-themed match-day programme 
<https://twitter.com/wwfcofficial/status/792343321276518400/photo/1> – scored 
his seventh of the season. Honourable mentions for James Coffinger and Harry 
Middletombstone, too. 
 * Portsmouth hung on at Cambridge United to take a 1-0 win back to the south 
coast. Conor Chaplin, the teenage striker, nodded home his second goal in as 
many games to keep Paul Cook’s side firmly in the mix towards the top. 
Meanwhile, Jamal Lowe, who will join Pompey in January, plundered his 19th goal 
of the season for Hampton and Richmond at Weston-super-Mare in the National 
League South. Elsewhere,Notts County played out a stalemate with Luton Town, 
whileCrewe took a 2-0 win away from Leyton Orient.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F105bdba4d98fc2eef5b250ebf0cffb207303f363%2F0_116_3032_1819%2F3032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Derby%20extend%20home%20run%20as%20Newcastle%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Derby%20extend%20home%20run%20as%20Newcastle%20win%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-fulham-hit-five-to-hand-huddersfield-reality-check%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F105bdba4d98fc2eef5b250ebf0cffb207303f363%2F0_116_3032_1819%2F3032.jpg>
 Jazzi Barnum-Bobb, formerly of Cardiff City, wheels away after his goal put 
Newport County 2-0 up at Accrington Stanley. Photograph: Huw 
Evans/Rex/Shutterstock 
 * There was another impressive away haul for Exeter City at Morecambe. David 
Wheeler, Joel Grant and Lee Holmes all struck inside 35 minutes to claw Paul 
Tisdale’s side away from the bottom two. Yeovil Town kept their fifth 
consecutive clean sheet after shutting outGrimbsy Town at Huish Park, who could 
badly do with the goals of Padraig Amond. That point moved the Glovers into the 
top half. Amond, who scored 33 goals for Grimsby last year, putHartlepool United
 ahead atBarnet, but the visitors ultimately lost 3-2 at the Hive. John Akinde 
bagged his 12th goal of the season, but it was Shaun Batt who notched the 
winning goal.

 * And – just listen to this – Jazzi Barnum-Bobb’s first professional goal 
sent Graham Westley on his way to his first win asNewport County manager. Josh 
Sheehan sealed the bottom club’s 3-1 victory atAccrington. “The players were 
terrific in their defensive resilience and credit to them for a fantastic win,” 
said Westley after the match. Finally,Cheltenham drew 2-2 at home to Blackpool, 
who twice levelled through Kyle Vassell, andStevenage won 2-1 at Mansfield.  