
Championship

• Aston Villa celebrated that all too unfamiliar winning feeling for the 
second time in five days after clinching a 1-0 win overFulham. Remarkably, 
Steve Bruce’s side are now just six points off the play-off pack after 
back-to-back wins in the league for the first time since May 2015. Jonathan 
Kodjia, the French striker signed from Bristol City over the summer for an 
initial £11m, scored for a third consecutive game under Bruce. Kodjia volleyed 
home his fourth goal of the season from Albert Adomah’s cross, ensuring Bruce’s 
first win at Villa Park.Brighton and Hove Albion extended their unbeaten run in 
the league to eight matches after a 1-0 win atWigan Athletic. Dale Stephens, 
who submitted a transfer request over the summer, bagged his first goal of the 
season to hoist Chris Hughton’s men into second. At the top remainNewcastle 
United, after their convincing win over Ipswich Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/newcastle-united-ipswich-town-championship-match-report>
 whileHuddersfield Town returned third after Elias Kachunga’s last-minute 
winner overDerby County.

Newcastle’s Ayoze Pérez and Matt Ritchie honour Sir Bobby Robson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/22/newcastle-united-ipswich-town-championship-match-report>
• Norwich City slipped up in the promotion race, as Preston North End tasted 
victory on the road for the first time in two months at Carrow Road. “The one 
thing we’ve not struggled to do is be creative, but for the first time we 
didn’t do that,” said manager Alex Neil post-match. Alex Baptiste’s header was 
enough to extend the Lilywhites’ unbeaten run to seven games, moving them up to 
ninth in the process.Sheffield Wednesday continued their good form with another 
routine home win, this time overQueens Park Rangers. Completing the play-off 
picture areBristol City, who struck two minutes from time against Blackburn 
Rovers. Aaron Wilbraham, who turned 37 on Friday, scored his third goal of the 
season for Lee Johnson’s side. “It makes me chuckle every time I see 
‘Wilbrahamovic’,” said Johnson of his nickname. “He’s got a part to play for 
us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb28d748c6437a5b8a006d0f058fb14bb6ffd422a%2F0_205_4435_2661%2F4435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Aston%20Villa%20on%20rise%20but%20Norwich%20slip%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Aston%20Villa%20on%20rise%20but%20Norwich%20slip%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb28d748c6437a5b8a006d0f058fb14bb6ffd422a%2F0_205_4435_2661%2F4435.jpg>
 Preston’s Alex John-Baptiste wheels away after scoring the only goal of the 
game at Carrow Road. Photograph: David Shipman/CameraSport via Getty Images 
• Reading returned to winning ways at the New York Stadium, to ruin Kenny 
Jackett’s bow asRotherham United manager. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/21/kenny-jackett-rotherham-united-manager-championship>
 The Royals stole victory – their first in five games – late on through the 
captain Paul McShane. Remarkably, the Wales defender Chris Gunter made his 85th 
appearance of 2016, for club and country in the win. The only bum note is that 
Gunter will miss Tuesday’s date with Arsenal in the EFL Cup through suspension 
after picking up his fifth yellow card of the season.Cardiff City moved out of 
the relegation zone after earning a 2-1 win atNottingham Forest. Cardiff are 
now three matches unbeaten under their new manager, Neil Warnock. Elsewhere, 
Kemar Roofe’s first goal forLeeds United was enough to clinch victory over 
Wolves at Molinuex and Barnsley secured their first win in eight games away at 
Brentford.


League One

• For a moment, it could have been a case of mistaken identity but in reality 
Josh Morris had just scored again – this time againstChesterfield. The 
Scunthorpe United forward bagged his 14th goal in all competitions before goals 
from Kevin van Veen’s and Sam Mantom strengthened the Iron’s grip at the top of 
the league. Morris scored just once last season forBradford City before his 
summer move. And ironically, Morris’s namesake north of the border bagged a 
hat-trick to help Hawick Royal Albert into the Scottish Cup third round. 
Bradford remain second after a six-goal thriller at Valley Parade against 
third-placedSheffield United. Timothee Dieng put the hosts in front after 68 
minutes before Chris Basham levelled four minutes later.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e2f8c4766d5fe32e193c689a8feaa6d7f5be2bd%2F249_133_2501_1500%2F2501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Aston%20Villa%20on%20rise%20but%20Norwich%20slip%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Aston%20Villa%20on%20rise%20but%20Norwich%20slip%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e2f8c4766d5fe32e193c689a8feaa6d7f5be2bd%2F249_133_2501_1500%2F2501.jpg>
 Scunthorpe United’s Josh Morris celebrates with team-mates after his 14th goal 
of the season. Photograph: Scunthorpe FC/Rex/Shutterstock 
• On-loan Chelsea striker Tammy Abraham may have failed to score for Bristol 
City, but two other Stamford Bridge loanees did the business for arch-rivals
Bristol Rovers.Charlie Colkett and Jake Clarke-Salter grabbed the goals to down 
Oldham Athletic for Darrell Clarke’s side, who moved up to fifth. The victory 
leaves Rovers targeting a staggering third successive promotion. Another 
promoted side,AFC Wimbledon, are in a feel-good mood themselves at the moment. 
Tom Elliott nodded home the only goal of the game atPeterborough to move Neal 
Ardley’s Wombles – unbeaten in nine – up to sixth. Seventh-placedPort Vale 
fought back from two goals down to draw 2-2 withOxford United. The former 
Newcastle full-back Ryan Taylor scored the equalising goal on his debut, after 
Chey Dunkley and Daniel Crowley, the Arsenal loanee, had put the U’s two goals 
to the good inside 19 minutes.


Merstham and Westfields rewarded with home ties in FA Cup first round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/fa-cup-first-round-draw-merstham-westfields>
• In contrast, MK Dons are in a miserable place at the moment. A 3-0 defeat by 
Southend United extended their run without a win at home in the league to 13 
matches. “Me and the chairman will have a chat tomorrow,” said the manager Karl 
Robinson after the latest chastening defeat, which leaves them a point outside 
the relegation zone. “It’s a decision for the chairman and not for me. I won’t 
walk away.” Elsewhere,Coventry secured back-to-back league wins for the first 
time this season with a 2-0 victory overRochdale, Gillingham drew 1-1 with 
Charlton and Millwall overcame Fleetwood 2-1 at the Den. Struggling Swindon 
lost 2-0 at home toWalsall, with Erhun Oztumer scoring both goals, including a 
fine lob. And bottom clubShrewsbury Town were on the receiving end of a 4-2 
scoreline againstNorthampton Town, despite Ivan Toney’s double. 

League Two

• Top beat bottom, unsurprisingly, as Plymouth Argyle saw off 10-man Newport 
County 3-1 at Rodney Parade. Graham Carey scored two penalties either side of 
Jon Parkin’s strike before Jordan Slew completed the scoring. Argyle have not 
tasted defeat in the league since August, after losing their opening two 
matches.Carlisle United won 2-1 at Stevenage to stretch their unbeaten record 
in the league to 14 games and move second. No doubt the travelling fans waxed 
lyrical about Keith Curle’s in-form side by belting out another rendition of 
“Mysterious Curle”, to the tune of Peter Andre’s 1996 hit hit Mysterious Girl.
Doncaster Rovers fell out of the automatic promotion places after a 4-2 defeat 
byBlackpool at Bloomfield Road.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98d47c34abdebc210fefb88252bd74b7c9eac06%2F0_81_1747_1048%2F1747.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Aston%20Villa%20on%20rise%20but%20Norwich%20slip%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Aston%20Villa%20on%20rise%20but%20Norwich%20slip%20up&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-aston-villa-norwich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd98d47c34abdebc210fefb88252bd74b7c9eac06%2F0_81_1747_1048%2F1747.jpg>
 Carlisle United’s Keith Curle celebrates victory. Photograph: Mark 
Fuller/Rex/Shutterstock 
• Inconsistency continues to trouble promotion-chasing Portsmouth, after 
defeat at home byNotts County. “We have an awful habit at the moment of 
conceding early goals,” said Pompey boss Paul Cook, who watched his team slip 
to consecutive home losses in the league. “I felt we were about to put a good 
run together but unfortunately it’s back to square one.” Adam Campbell scored 
either side of teenager Conor Chaplin to clinch a 2-1 win at Fratton Park and 
send County sixth. Also in the play-off picture,Luton Town stay fourth after a 
1-1 draw withMansfield, whose boss Adam Murray revealed he’d banned mobile 
phones in midweek. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/mansfield-town-manager-adam-murray-bans-mobile-phones>
 AndAccrington Stanley remain seventh after a bore draw at Crawley Town. 

Mansfield Town manager orders total ban on mobile phones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/mansfield-town-manager-adam-murray-bans-mobile-phones>
• Home comforts are plaguing Exeter City’s season too. Paul Tisdale’s side 
have won just two of their last 17 league matches, and 22 in all competitions.
Cambridge United were the latest team to enjoy their trip to Devon, taking a 
2-1 win away from St James Park. Exeter are currently second bottom with little 
to shout about and 13 points from 14 matches. Also at the bottom, John Akinde 
sealedBarnet’s 2-0 win at Wycombe, where the giant striker enjoyed two loan 
spells. Elsewhere,Cheltenham clinched a 1-0 win at Grimsby, Colchester and 
Morecambe shared a point after a 2-2 draw and Yeovil won at Crewe, courtesy of 
Matty Dolan’s first-half goal. And Alberto Cavasin, the former Sampdoria 
manager, toasted his first victory since taking overLeyton Orient at the start 
of the month with a 3-1 win atHartlepool. 

 