
League One

• Scunthorpe United’s Josh Morris scored his 15th goal of the season to down 
Coventry City and cement the Iron’s position at the top of the division. Morris 
may have arrived at the club on a free transfer over the summer but he’s 
proving pretty priceless to the Scunthorpe manager Graham Alexander at present. 
Morris’s former club,Bradford City, are not exactly goal-shy themselves, 
though, and put four goals past 10-manRochdale to clamber into second – with 
Bolton Wanderers not in action until Sunday. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-plymouth-argyle-enjoy-another-away-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13223c60cb7756893bc0fca3740788a42c384608%2F0_85_2285_1371%2F2285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Plymouth%20Argyle%20enjoy%20another%20away%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-plymouth-argyle-enjoy-another-away-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Plymouth%20Argyle%20enjoy%20another%20away%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-plymouth-argyle-enjoy-another-away-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13223c60cb7756893bc0fca3740788a42c384608%2F0_85_2285_1371%2F2285.jpg>
 Scunthorpe United’s Josh Morris, right, and Neal Bishop celebrate after 
victory at Coventry City. Photograph: Ed Sykes/Reuters 
• In the early kick-off, TIm Sherwood’s win ratio as the director of football 
atSwindon Town is looking pretty handy. Swindon steamrollered Charlton Athletic 
3-0 at the County Ground to pick up their first win in five matches, with 
Sherwood, Chris Ramsey and Brendan Rodgers all looking on from the stands. It 
was a bad day at the office forBristol Rovers, who lost their second match in 
three league games away atMillwall. Darrell Clarke’s side had Daniel Leadbitter 
sent off after 14 minutes, with Aiden O’Brien kickstarting the rout eight 
minutes later. There were red cards at Vale Park, too, where both sides ended 
with 10 men. VisitorsFleetwood went ahead in the second half through Chris Long 
butPort Vale secured victory thanks to Alex Jones’s late winner. 

Tim Sherwood watches Swindon Town ease past Charlton Athletic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/tim-sherwood-swindon-town-charlton-athletic-match-report>
• John-Joe O’Toole – forever explicitly honest in interviews 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/football/26275785> – scored his fifth goal of the 
season to put Northampton Town in front at Gillingham, but the hosts fought 
back to claim victory. First Max Ehmer replied before Jay Emmanuel-Thomas – who 
doesn’t do dull – bagged his ninth goal of the season from distance in 
stoppage-time. Elsewhere, Nile Ranger, the former Newcastle United striker, who 
last scored at Elland Road for Blackpool in November 2014 was at the double for
Southend United at Bury. Ranger bagged a goal in each half to help condemn Bury 
to a 3-1 defeat and leapfrog them in the process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-plymouth-argyle-enjoy-another-away-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ead52de1e64ae955c738840b9155f57b2117942%2F0_60_3287_1972%2F3287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Plymouth%20Argyle%20enjoy%20another%20away%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-plymouth-argyle-enjoy-another-away-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Plymouth%20Argyle%20enjoy%20another%20away%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-plymouth-argyle-enjoy-another-away-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ead52de1e64ae955c738840b9155f57b2117942%2F0_60_3287_1972%2F3287.jpg>
 Southend United’s Nile Ranger celebrates scoring their third goal against 
Bury. Photograph: Paul Burrows/Reuters 
• Meanwhile, Shrewsbury beat Oxford to pull them closer to the relegation mix, 
Oldham played out a bore draw with AFC Wimbledon and MK Dons dropped into the 
bottom four, despite rescuing a point at home toWalsall. Dean Bowditch netted 
an injury-time equaliser after Scott Laird’s first-half goal looked set to win 
it. Meanwhile, on Sunday,Chesterfield host Sheffield United and Bolton face 
Peterborough United. 


League Two

• And just like that – after more than 1350 minutes of football – Carlisle 
United’sunbeaten league run is over. Keith Curle’s side slipped up, losing 2-0 
atNewport County, who are now unbeaten in their last five matches under Graham 
Westley. Josh Sheehan and Rhys Healey were both on the scoresheet for the 
Football League’s bottom club, who seem to be making waves – albeit small ones 
– under Westley. “We intend to make sure that Carlisle know they’ve played a 
very good outfit by the time we finish at 5pm on Saturday,” the Newport County 
manager said. Westley can say that again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-plymouth-argyle-enjoy-another-away-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677162839b24a3b3ca58a43631847ce40bc30ed8%2F0_24_3896_2337%2F3896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Plymouth%20Argyle%20enjoy%20another%20away%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-plymouth-argyle-enjoy-another-away-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Plymouth%20Argyle%20enjoy%20another%20away%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-plymouth-argyle-enjoy-another-away-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F677162839b24a3b3ca58a43631847ce40bc30ed8%2F0_24_3896_2337%2F3896.jpg>
 Newport County players celebrate with goalscorer Rhys Healey. Photograph: Huw 
Evans/Rex/Shutterstock 
• Plymouth Argyle opened the season with two league defeats inside seven days. 
But Argyle have simply not looked back since, themselves now on a 14-game 
unbeaten run after setting a club-record seven consecutive away wins. After 
going behind atCrewe, the talented Graham Carey hit the winner to ensure 
Argyle’s impressive form goes on. Seven points is now the gap to Carlisle in 
second. Third-placedDoncaster Rovers scored three goals in 18 second-half 
minutes to denyExeter City their first home win this season. Portsmouth, 
meanwhile, recorded their first league win at Fratton Park since September, 
eventually overcoming nine-manMansfield, who had Kyle Howkins and Alex 
Iacovitti sent off. Noel Hunt, Gary Roberts and a Carl Baker double ensured all 
three points.

Keith Curle’s tough love helps Carlisle turn corner and reconnect with city | 
Louise Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/11/keith-curle-carlisle-louise-taylor>
• The Wycombe Wanderers manager Gareth Ainsworth revealed his players have 
been learning Spanish as well as practising shooting drills in training this 
week. And the lingo made an instant impact at home toMorecambe, who remain in 
mid-table after Aaron Pierre and Luke O’Nien sealing a 2-0 win.Yeovil Town 
rescued a late point atStevenage, with the Bournemouth loanee Ben Whitfield 
netting a 94th-minute equaliser, extending Darren Way’s side impressive rise up 
the table.

• Grimsby Town’s Omar Bogle can do some wrong after all. The striker missed an 
injury-time penalty after scoring his first goals since September to fire 
Marcus Bignot’s side into a two-goal lead against Barnet. “I can’t seem to get 
rid of him,” the Grimsby manager said before the game of the striker, who he 
coached at Solihull Moors, the National League club Bignot left earlier this 
week. But John Akinde – who else – levelled things up by scoring twice from the 
penalty spot before Bogle wasted his spot-kick.Luton, meanwhile, keep pace with 
the play-off pack after securing a 1-0 win overAccrington, thanks to Cameron 
McGeehan’s strike.

• Elsewhere, Blackpool thrashed Notts County 4-0 at Bloomfield Road, Hartlepool
beatCheltenham 2-0, Cambridge won 3-1 away at Crawley and Leyton Orient climbed 
out of the relegation zone atColchester United’s expense, after racking up a 
3-0 win in Essex.
 