
Championship

• It was a good time as any for Floyd Ayité to score his first Fulham goal, 
but his second carried a little more significance. Ayité and a spectacular Tom 
Cairney volley helped Slavisa Jokanovic’s side into a 3-1 lead at the break 
againstWolverhampton Wanderers but they trailed 4-3 in added time at Molineux. 
But then Ayité, the Togolese midfielder, who joined Fulham from Bastia over the 
summer, salvaged a 4-4 draw after heading Scott Malone’s cross home in the 93rd 
minute. “That’s why you play the game and that’s why I have got back into it,” 
Paul Lambert, the Wolves manager, said. “It’s not often you will see those 
types of games – it’s heart-attack material.” At the top,Newcastle United 
restored normal service witha convincing 4-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/newcastle-birmingham-championship-match-report>
 overBirmingham City.

• Jaap Stam was reluctant to talk up Reading’s promotion chances at his 
pre-match press conference but his team remain third after recovering from 
their 5-0 defeat at Fulhamto beat Sheffield Wednesday 2-1, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/reading-sheffield-wednesday-championship-match-report>
 with summer signing Roy Beerens scoring both goals. “I think after the month 
of December – if we’re still there I think we can have another discussion about 
staying there,” Stam said.Norwich City must have thought their wretched run of 
form was over after trouncing Brentford by five goals at Carrow Road last 
weekend. But they fell two goals behind inside 40 minutes atBarnsley, who 
secured back-to-back wins thanks to goals from Tom Bradshaw and Conor 
Hourihane, before Nelson Oliveira pulled one back.

Roy Beerens’ double punishes wasteful Wednesday to keep Reading flying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/reading-sheffield-wednesday-championship-match-report>
• Huddersfield Town recorded their first win in six matches to get their 
unlikely promotion push back on track. Elias Kachunga opened the scoring against
Bristol City before Tammy Abraham netted his first goal in five matches, after 
good work from 37-year-old Aaron Wilbraham – described as the teenager’s 
“bouncer” by head coach Lee Johnson – allowed the Chelsea loanee to poke the 
ball home. Bristol City’s goalkeeper Frank Fielding could later count himself 
lucky, after escaping with only a booking after handling the ball outside his 
box. But Huddersfield made Fielding pay for his next mistake when Nahki Wells 
slotted home after robbing the ball away from the goalkeeper. As a result, 
David Wagner’s men leapfrog Leeds United –who lost at Brighton and Hove Albion 
on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/brighton-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
 – in the table.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd93b27583c4f2d497a70cedeb37901e89c0ce11b%2F58_105_3029_1817%2F3029.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20and%20Fulham%20share%20spoils%20in%204-4%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20and%20Fulham%20share%20spoils%20in%204-4%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd93b27583c4f2d497a70cedeb37901e89c0ce11b%2F58_105_3029_1817%2F3029.jpg>
 Nahki Wells celebrates Huddersfield Town’s winning goal with team-mates. 
Photograph: John Clifton/Reuters 
Brighton hit top of the table as pair of penalties sees off Leeds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/brighton-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
• Ipswich Town and Cardiff City played out a score draw at Portman Road – Luke 
Varney and Aron Gunnarsson got the goals – but the real drama was nothing to do 
with the football. The Cardiff defender Sol Bamba wasinvolved in a 
confrontation with his manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/sol-bamba-neil-warnock-sending-off-cardiff>
, Neil Warnock, after shoving the club physio and fuming at the fourth 
official. Bamba was initially treated after going down injured following 
Jonathan Douglas’s tackle before appearing to lose his head. Aron Gunnarsson 
gave Cardiff the lead before Ipswich replied through Luke Varney. “I didn’t 
really want to talk to Sol after the game so I will see him tomorrow,” Warnock 
said. “He just lost his rag but it was an aggressive attitude and I don’t 
condone Sol’s behaviour”.

• Scott Hogan scored his 12th and 13th goals of the season either side of 
Jamie Ward’s equaliser asBrentford beat Burton Albion 2-1 at Griffin Park, in 
the first ever competitive meeting between the two clubs. Despite coasting to 
victory in his first game back atQueens Park Rangers, Ian Holloway will have 
not lost sight of the task in-hand at the club. The size of the task in front 
him is getting bigger week-on-week, too. QPR suffered a third straight defeat 
after losing 1-0 at rock-bottomRotherham United. 

• Jack Grealish is back in the headlines for the right reasons after scoring 
the only goal of the game asAston Villa returned to winning ways with victory 
overWigan Athletic. After their torrid start to the season under Roberto di 
Matteo, Villa sit now just three points off the play-off pack. Wigan stay in 
the bottom three, two points behindBlackburn, who lost a five-goal Lancashire 
derby toPreston. Daniel Johnson and Danny Graham scored two apiece before 
Callum Robinson’s late strike earned Preston victory.

Cardiff’s Sol Bamba clashes with manager Neil Warnock after red card
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/10/sol-bamba-neil-warnock-sending-off-cardiff>
League One

• There’s only one place to start, really. In the early kick-off, where MK Dons
recorded victory over AFC Wimbledon at stadium:mk in the first-ever league 
meeting between the two sides, thanks to Dean Bowditch’s second-half penalty. 
The MK Dons captain Dean Lewington was fouled by Chris Robertson, allowing 
Bowditch to convert from the spot, ensuring victory for Robbie Neilson’s team. 
A crowd of 11,185 witnessed the match-up, with almost 2,000 travelling 
Wimbledon supporters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4125104e8b0ed054dd07c1cb332e9cf6f8800e86%2F0_80_3568_2141%2F3568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20and%20Fulham%20share%20spoils%20in%204-4%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20and%20Fulham%20share%20spoils%20in%204-4%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4125104e8b0ed054dd07c1cb332e9cf6f8800e86%2F0_80_3568_2141%2F3568.jpg>
 Dean Bowditch celebrates MK Dons’ win over AFC Wimbledon with Samir 
Carruthers. Photograph: Joe Toth/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
• League leaders Scunthorpe United slipped up at Rochdale, coming out on the 
losing side of a five-goal thriller and extending their winless run to three 
matches. The Iron went 3-0 behind before grabbing two late goals.Sheffield 
United were in a similar vein of form themselves, winless in three before 
breezing pastSwindon Town 4-0 at Bramall Lane to close the gap on Scunthorpe to 
three points. Bradford City failed to close on Bolton Wanderers, who are not in 
action until Monday, with a goalless draw at home to Charlton. And Tom Nichols 
got the balling rolling before some had settled in their seats at sixth-placed
Peterborough United,who thrashed Chesterfield 5-2. Nichols, the former Exeter 
City striker, opened the scoring after just 25 seconds and added a second later 
on before captain Michael Bostwick completed the rout.

• Bristol Rovers were dumped out of the FA Cup by Barrow last Sunday, so after 
three defeats on the spin they were happy to call on top scorer Matty Taylor, 
who returned to the starting lineup and duly delivered with his 16th goal of 
the season at home toBury. Taylor put Rovers 2-1 in front before Ollie Clarke 
and Peter Hartley sealed the win to leave them two points off the top six. Also 
in the play-off mix areFleetwood Town and Southend United, who recorded wins 
overWalsall and Coventry City respectively. Elsewhere, Millwall lost at home to 
Shrewsbury Town, Northampton won 3-2 at Port Vale and Oxford United drew 1-1 
withOldham.

League Two

• Plymouth Argyle fought off Doncaster Rovers at Home Park to ensure top spot 
remains theirs this weekend, with Jake Jervis making sure of all three points 
from the penalty spot on the hour mark. Third-placed Doncaster had fans’ 
favourite James Coppinger sent-off late on.Carlisle United – who have still 
only lost once in the league this season – remain second after picking up a 1-1 
draw at high-flyingLuton Town while Portsmouth snatched victory late on at 
Grimsby Townthanks to Kal Naismith’s late strike. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20f0389b737340bebdaea1485e36b00008cd3f45%2F106_189_3080_1848%2F3080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20and%20Fulham%20share%20spoils%20in%204-4%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Wolves%20and%20Fulham%20share%20spoils%20in%204-4%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-wolves-and-fulham-share-spoils-in-4-4-draw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20f0389b737340bebdaea1485e36b00008cd3f45%2F106_189_3080_1848%2F3080.jpg>
 Kal Naismith is mobbed by his Portsmouth team-mates. Photograph: Robbie Jay 
Barratt - AMA/Getty Images 
• There were good wins for Wycombe Wanderers and Blackpool too, with both 
occupying play-off positions. Scott Kashket and Adebayo Akinfenwa grabbed the 
goals for the Chairboys at Notts County, while Akinfenwa was sent-off in the 
second half. Blackpool won 2-0 at Stevenage, who lost for the second time in 
seven matches.Yeovil Town and Barnet had a combined unbeaten run of 15 matches 
between them upon their meeting at Huish Park, so Alex Nicholls’ second goal of 
the season ended one and prolonged another for the Bees, who lost manager 
Martin Allen to Eastleigh at the start of the month. Barnet sit outside the 
play-off places on goal difference, just in front of Shaun Derry’sCambridge 
United, who scored five second-half goals at Hartlepool. 

• Accrington Stanley fans were filmed fighting amongst themselves in the first 
half atLeyton Orient, and Jay Simpson’s second-half strike will have done 
little to lift their spirits. Accrington remain perilously close to the 
drop-zone, although second-bottomCheltenham lost at home to Exeter City, while 
Newport County’s clash with Morecambe was abandoned at half-time due to a 
waterlogged pitch at Rodney Parade. Basement side Newport led 1-0 at the break 
courtesy of Tom Owen-Evans’s first goal for the club. Elsewhere,Mansfield 
played out a goalless draw withColchester and Crawley won 2-0 at Crewe.
 