
Reading came from two goals down to beat Bristol City 3-2 at Ashton Gate to 
stay third as they prepare for their FA Cup tieat Manchester United on Saturday.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/fa-cup-third-round-draw> 
Yann Kermorgant scored two late goals, the second from 25 yards, after the 
on-loan Chelsea striker Tammy Abraham’s double had put the home side 2-0 up. 
His second, and 17th of the season, came from the spot after Tyler Blackett had 
fouled Callum O’Dowda. But youngster Liam Kelly, a second-half substitute who 
recently signed a new contract until 2019, kick-started Reading’s comeback 
before Kermorgant’s injury-time winner clinched an unlikely victory. The 
striker beat Bristol City goalkeeper Frank Fielding with a low 25-yard drive 
from outside the box to make it three wins from three for Jaap Stam’s side.

Lee Johnson’s side, meanwhile, have now lost nine of their last 10 matches. 
“We don’t need radicalisation but we do need to bring some new faces in,” 
Johnson said. “I hope our supporters can stick with us because I do feel it 
will turn.”

Charlie Mulgrew strikes to hand Blackburn victory against Newcastle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/blackburn-rovers-newcastle-united-championship-match-report>
Leeds United beat Rotherham 3-0 in a Yorkshire derby at Elland Road, all the 
goals coming in the second half, to earn their ninth win in 12 league matches. 
Kyle Bartley headed home soon after half-time before Chris Wood struck twice.

“There were a few choice words at half-time, we lacked urgency and it was the 
poorest I had seen us in a long time,” the Leeds manager, Garry Monk, said. “We 
can’t afford to be under 100%, we need to give the crowd a performance for 90 
minutes, not just for 45.”

At the summit, Brighton and Hove Albion won 2-1 at Fulham to return top, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/fulham-brighton-hove-albion-championship-match-report>
 asNewcastle United slipped up at Blackburn Rovers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/blackburn-rovers-newcastle-united-championship-match-report>
Chris Hughton’s side extended their unbeaten run to 18 matches after two goals 
in two minutes turned the game around at Craven Cottage. Lucas Piazon’s fourth 
goal of the season had put Fulham in front before Tomer Hemed and then defender 
Lewis Dunk scored quickfire second-half goals. Brighton’s last league defeat 
came at home to Brentford in September.

Preston North End defeated struggling Burton Albion 1-0 courtesy of Callum 
Robinson’s goal on the brink of half‑time. Nelson Oliveira scored a hat-trick as
Norwich Cityovercame 10-man Derby County 3-0 at Carrow Road, ending Steve 
McClaren’s 10-match unbeaten run.

Huddersfield Town kept pace with Reading towards the summit after Nakhi 
Wells’s 80th-minute winner atWigan while Wolves held sixth-placed Sheffield 
Wednesday to a 0-0 draw at Hillsborough.

Pawel Wszolek had scored the winner for Queens Park Rangers at Wolves on 
Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/wolverhampton-wanderers-qpr-championship-amtch-report>
 and the Polish forward did the damage again as Ian Holloway’s side recorded 
back-to-back wins, scoring seven minutes from time to secure a 2-1 victory over
Ipswich Town at Loftus Road. “It’s all about points and we’ve just got six; 
that feels great,” Holloway said. “It’s about building on that now.”

Brighton take top spot after Lewis Dunk seals comeback win at Fulham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/fulham-brighton-hove-albion-championship-match-report>
Nottingham Forest suffered a fourth successive defeat after losing 1-0 at home 
toBarnsley, who struck late on through Conor Hourihane. Paul Heckingbottom’s 
side sit eighth in the table while Forest slid to 20th, behindCardiff City, 
after Neil Warnock’s side beat visiting Aston Villa 1-0.

Elsewhere, Gianfranco Zola’s wait for a first win in charge of Birmingham City 
goes on after losing 3-1 at home to Brentford. “I thought when we lost a little 
bit of confidence we started to make mistakes with the ball,” Zola said. “We 
were poor in transition and after the first half I did not expect that to be 
honest but that’s the way it is.”

League One

There were more away fans (3,157) than home supporters as Sheffield United 
recorded their first win of the new year, after coming from behind to beatBury 
at Gigg Lane. Billy Sharp inspired the comeback with an equaliser after 21 
minutes before Kieron Freeman completed the comeback for United who stay top. 
“It was a day where we did not want to get outbattled and outfought to make 
sure we came away with the right result,” Chris Wilder, the Sheffield United 
manager, said.Bolton Wanderers remain on their tails, after salvaging a point 
away atCoventry City, courtesy of Max Clayton’s injury-time penalty. Scunthorpe 
United’s Josh Morris struck his 16th goal of the season – and his first since 
November – but it was not enough to ensure victory, after Charlie Goode’s own 
goal handedPeterborough United a draw. Rochdale won 2-0 at Walsall to stay in 
the play-off picture whileBradford City came from behind to beat Northampton 
Town2-1 at Sixfields. Fleetwood Town make up the top seven, after Devante Cole, 
son of former Manchester United striker Andy, struck his first league goal of 
the season to beatShrewsbury Town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fchampionship-roundup-reading-bristol-city-jaap-stam%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c054f1d44c6c31b1f0e83220967403d6fde6f30%2F0_62_2128_1276%2F2128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20roundup%3A%20Reading%20stay%20third%20after%20comeback%20win%20at%20Bristol%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fchampionship-roundup-reading-bristol-city-jaap-stam%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20roundup%3A%20Reading%20stay%20third%20after%20comeback%20win%20at%20Bristol%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fchampionship-roundup-reading-bristol-city-jaap-stam%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c054f1d44c6c31b1f0e83220967403d6fde6f30%2F0_62_2128_1276%2F2128.jpg>
 Billy Sharp nets an equaliser for Sheffield United at Bury. Photograph: 
ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
Millwall’s three-game winning run came to an end as they had to settle for a 
draw atAFC Wimbledon in the early kick-off. Aiden O’Brien and Steve Morison 
twice put the visitors in front before goals from Lyle Taylor and Tom Elliott 
respectively.

Josh Magennis bagged a hat-trick as Charlton Athletic thrashed Bristol Rovers 
4-1 at the Valley, to record a second win in three matches for Karl Robinson’s 
side, who move into 11th. Also in mid-table areOxford United, who beat 
Gillingham 1-0, thanks to Chey Dunkley’s winner. Elsewhere, Chesterfield drew 
0-0 with MK Dons, bottom club Oldham drew 0-0 with Port Vale and Swindon Town 
played out a stalemate with high-flyingSouthend United.

League Two

Doncaster Rovers moved to the top of the table at the expense of Plymouth 
Argyle who slipped up, losing 1-0 at Barnet. Darren Ferguson’s side secured a 
narrow victory late on againstStevenage thanks to Fraser Franks’ own goal. 
Plymouth have now lost two of their last three away league matches.Carlisle 
United, meanwhile, squandered the chance to topple Plymouth after losing 3-1 at 
home toGrimsby Town. Omar Bogle scored twice to inspire victory for Marcus 
Bignot’s side, who sealed victory through Adi Yussuf with 12 minutes to play.

Southend make it a dozen and counting despite Charlton’s late leveller | 
Jeremy Alexander
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2017/jan/02/southend-charlton-league-one-roots-hall-phil-brown>
The bad run goes on for Newport County who lost a seventh straight match after 
Wycombe Wanderers won 2-1 at Adams Park, thanks to Paris Cowan-Hall’s late 
winner. As a result, Wycombe leapfrogLuton Town into fifth. Portsmouth beat 
Luton 1-0 at Fratton Park courtesy of defender Christian Burgess’s first-half 
striker. Shaun Derry’sCambridge United extended their unbeaten league run to 
seven matches with a convincing 4-0 win over his former club,Notts County. 
Piero Mingoia sealed the victory, adding the U’s fourth after 69 minutes, to 
keep Cambridge seventh and level pegging with Luton.

Exeter City had only scored five goals at home all season but coasted to a 4-0 
win overLeyton Orient at St James Park. Liam McAlinden sealed the rout for Paul 
Tisdale’s side. Elsewhere,Morecambe drew 0-0 at home to Crewe, Colchester beat 
Cheltenham Town2-0, Mansfield beat Blackpool 1-0 at Bloomfield Road and 
Accrington Stanleyand Hartlepool shared the spoils after a 2-2 draw.
 