
Africa’s agriculture sector is on the up. After decades of stagnation, the 
continent’s farms have registeredsustained growth 
<https://agrf.org/releases/new-report-finds-ten-years-on-african-countries-that-embraced-agriculture-saw-food-production-gdp-and-nutrition-all-improve/>
 in productivity every year since 2005. That’s good news for the520 million 
Africans 
<http://www.worldwatch.org/asia-and-africa-home-95-percent-global-agricultural-population-0>
 dependent on farming for their livelihoods, and the millions more who rely on 
them for their food.

But African farmers still produce far less food per hectare 
<http://reports.weforum.org/africa-competitiveness-report-2015/chapter-2-1-transforming-africas-agriculture-to-improve-competitiveness/>
 than the world average. Yields for cereal farmers in South Africa, home to one 
of the continent’s most productive agriculture sectors, areless than half those 
 
<http://www.nationmaster.com/country-info/stats/Agriculture/Cereal-yield/Kg-per-hectare>
of their UK counterparts. In central African states such as Niger and Eritrea, 
they are less than a 10th.

One of the key differences between the UK and Africa is the role of the 
private sector. In the UK, as in much of the developed world, corporations 
control a large chunk of the food chain. Not so inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. So should big business have a 
greater role in the continent’s agriculture sector? And, if so, what?

Panellists at a Guardian public debate, supported by the global beverage firm 
Diageo, had differing views but agreed that government, not corporate, 
leadership was the critical factor in developing agriculture.

What is ‘inclusive business’?

At the beginning of the debate Diageo’s John O’Keeffe introduced the idea of 
inclusive business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/31/unilever-africa-farmers-inclusive-business-agrifood-development>
, the latest buzzword in business and development circles. Behind the jargon, 
he explained, is a basic proposition: multinationals have lots of spending 
power, while Africa has lots of poor farmers hoping to increase productivity; 
when those farmers are integrated into the so-called “value chains” of big 
business and helped to improve their yields, they can see their livelihoods 
improve while corporations get the raw materials they need.

Related: Big brands like Unilever aren't the answer to helping Africa's farmers
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/31/unilever-africa-farmers-inclusive-business-agrifood-development>

In Kenya, the multinational brewer now sources sorghum (an alternative to 
millet in beer) from 30,000 contracted farmers. That’s 30,000 farmers with a 
stable income who didn’t have one previously, O’Keeffe noted. Plus, Kenyan 
consumers can now enjoy an affordable, locally produced pint of beer, while the 
government can benefit from new tax revenues.

Catherine Krobo-Edusei agreed, although with some qualifications. Her charity, 
Eden Tree, works with local vegetable producers in Ghana to help them grow and 
market their goods. The firm has one major corporate client that supplies food 
to the international airline industry. Get rid of multinationals and half of 
her business would disappear overnight, she said.

Even so, she has no illusions about the trade-offs of supplying large, 
powerful corporations. On the one hand, multinational buyers can offer new 
market opportunities and technical know-how, which African farmers need. On the 
other hand, they bring with them a raft of new (and not always) welcome 
commercial pressures.

“When you are working with a multinational, you are forced to keep reducing 
your margins. You then panic, because if you refuse you are then losing a chunk 
of your business … But there’s nothing you can do about it unless they decide 
to change,” she said.

When you are working with a multinational, you are forced to keep reducing 
your margins

Na Ncube, struck a more sceptical note. Speaking from her vantage point as the 
director of a charity working with small-scale farmers in Zimbabwe (where big 
agricultural businesses are few and far between), she said that the role of big 
business was “peripheral” at best.

Central to her vision is farming for Africans by Africans. That’s the surest 
way to guarantee food security and food diversity, as well as to retain 
domestic control over the region’s food systems and its agricultural land, she 
said. Farmers that join the commodity chains of big business, in contrast, risk 
losing their independence. “You become a manager within a chain; someone is 
telling you what to grow and when to grow it,” Ncube said.

Bill Vorley, principal researcher at the International Institute for 
Environment and Development, also expressed hesitation at what he saw as an 
over-reliance on big business. For reasons of enlightened self-interest, 
individual corporations might well end up creating “islands of excellence”.


These are one-off cases that work for one specific crop, yet expanding this 
model for all agricultural sectors across all of Africa is a different 
proposition entirely, said Vorley. So Kenya’s sorghum farms may be booming, but 
Diageo’s value chain does nothing for the country’s rice growers or livestock 
producers.

For Vorley, talk of involving big business in African agriculture detracts 
from companies’ core practices – treating suppliers fairly, for instance, or 
paying taxes. It also detracts from where the “real heavy-lifting” of farming 
in Africa is currently being done: the non-corporate sector, where smallholder 
producers proliferate.

There’s a danger, he added, of putting “too many of our expectations on big 
business rather than on SMEs [small and medium-sized enterprises] and the 
informal sector, which is doing so much of the trade between small farmers and 
consumers.”

Should African farmers be more commercial?

Asked from the floor if the ambition of smallholder farmers shouldn’t be to 
become more “commercial”, Ncube conceded that African agriculture needed to 
massively ramp up its productivity. Yet she said this could be achieved through 
improving existing agricultural practices, which were more ecological and 
oriented more towards local consumption, rather than resorting to the methods 
of multinational agribusiness.

For Ncube, African governments – not big business – were the lynchpin to 
driving change in the sector. Legislators should earmark 10% of state budgets 
for agriculture, she argued. Krobo-Edusei identified access to finance as a 
breakthrough issue too, suggesting that legislators mandate domestic banks to 
make preferential loans to poor farmers.

Businesses of all sizes – big and small – have a role to play, he said, as do 
governments and civil society

Several attendees also expressed concerns about big business, especially 
around the checks and balances needed to ensure that Africans profited from 
corporate investment and not just foreign shareholders. O’Keeffe responded by 
clarifying his belief that multinationals were neither the cause nor the 
panacea for “all the ills” in African agriculture. Businesses of all sizes – 
big and small – have a role to play, he said, as do governments and civil 
society.

So what specific role did O’Keeffe have in mind for large businesses? One 
suggestion centred on the responsible use of corporations’ massive buying 
power. Consider Africa’s large-scale food processing capacity, which is 
chronically ill-equipped at present. With the right kind of procurement 
guarantees, big companies could club together and persuade investors to put up 
the cash to make the critical improvements necessary.

Standard-setting is another area where all the panellists saw a role for 
business. O’Keeffe gave the example of recent efforts by Diageo to assess human 
rights abuses in its supply chain. “Just by asking the questions and forcing 
our suppliers to adhere to guidelines does raise the bar,” he said.


Krobo-Edusei agreed, noting that few regulatory authorities either enforce 
quality standards or promote sustainable agronomic practices. “With 
multinationals, they require these standards. So if you’re going to deal with a 
multinational as an SME, then you have to up your game,” she said.

On the panel: the role of multinationals in African agriculture

 * Eliza Anyangwe (Chair) International development journalist

 * John O’Keeffe president, Diageo Africa

 * Na Ncube director, Global Native

 * Catherine Krobo-Edusei founder and managing director, Eden Tree

 * Bill Vorley principal researcher, International Institute for Environment 
and Development
 