
Today South Korea’s national assembly voted overwhelmingly to impeach 
President Park Geun-hye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-koreas-parliament-votes-to-impeach-president-park-geun-hye>
. The unexpectedly decisive margin – 234 votes to 56 – means half of Park’s own 
conservative Saenuri (New Frontier) party, as well as the centre-left 
opposition, backed the move.

South Korea impeachment vote: the key facts behind a presidential crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-korea-impeachment-vote-the-key-facts-behind-a-presidential-crisis>
Impeachment is a momentous step, but lawmakers are only echoing the voice of 
the people, which has been loud and clear. Recent weeks have seen Park’s 
support in opinion polls sink to an unheard-of low of4% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/choi-gate-south-korean-presidents-approval-rating-tanks-at-4>
. On the streets, for six successive Saturdays, millions have demonstrated – 
peacefully, which is a welcome change in Seoul – for her to resign or be 
impeached.

Why? Because of a sordid scandal, still unfolding. The plot is complex, but 
briefly Park is charged with being in thrall to an old friend, Choi Soon-sil. 
Without security clearance or any official position, Choi and her cronies 
allegedly rewrote the president’s speeches, chose her wardrobe, ran cultural 
policy, and used their clout to shake down mighty multinationals such as 
Hyundai and Samsung for “donations” to two dodgy foundations set up by Choi.

Samsung gave a prize horse to Choi’s daughter, an equestrian who also got top 
grades at a prestigious university despite poor attendance and performance. The 
college head has resigned. All this is now subject to four separate inquiries.

On 6 December Koreans enjoyed the rare sight of secretive tycoons being 
grilled by parliament for three hours, live on television. If that seemed 
little more than reality TV, the serious work behind the scenes is being done 
by two teams of prosecutors. The state prosecution service has arraigned Choi 
and others for multiple counts – and formally charged Park as an accomplice, 
which is unprecedented.

A sitting president cannot face criminal prosecution – but after leaving 
office that rule no longer applies. Separately, the national assembly has 
appointed its own special counsel, whose 100-strong team has up to three months 
to investigate.

And now, impeachment means Park ceases her duties – she pretty much had 
already – while the constitutional court deliberates. That could take six 
months, and the outcome is far from certain, given the court’s conservative 
bias. Six out of nine judges must back impeachment or else it fails, and Park 
will return to finish her five-year term. She barely has a year left anyway: 
her successor is set to be elected in December 2017, and will take office in 
February 2018.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-facing-impeachment-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20faces%20impeachment%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-facing-impeachment-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Korean%20president%20Park%20Geun-hye%20faces%20impeachment%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsouth-korean-president-park-geun-hye-facing-impeachment-video&media=>
South Korean president Park Geun-hye faces impeachment – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/09/south-korean-president-park-geun-hye-facing-impeachment-video>
Months of government paralysis thus loom, and at a bad time. Against a 
backdrop of low growth, high youth unemployment and surging household debt loom 
two global challenges. First, North Korea, whose glee at Park’s fate is 
unrestrained, may use the South’s weakness to risk some new provocation. 
Recently Pyongyang allegedlyhacked 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/06/asia/south-korea-north-korea-hack/> into a 
southern military intranet.

And then there is Donald Trump. He has upbraided South Korea in the past, 
trashing a trade deal and telling Seoul to pay for more of its own defence. He 
also said he might talk to Kim Jong-unover hamburgers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-37932923>.

This is no time for the ship of state to drift rudderless. Park’s impeachment 
puts the prime minister in charge. In South Korea’s imperial presidency, the 
premier is little more than chief cook and bottle-washer. The incumbent –Hwang 
Kyo-ahn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/south-korean-prime-minister-pelted-with-eggs-by-protesters>
, a former prosecutor whom Park has already tried to replace – is contentious 
and unimpressive, and has facedethical accusations 
<http://www.koreaherald.com/view.php?ud=20150608000905>.

Park Geun-hye: South Korean MPs vote to impeach president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-koreas-parliament-votes-to-impeach-president-park-geun-hye>
It’s all a terrible mess. But it would have been less so, and still could be, 
if onlyPark Geun-hye <https://www.theguardian.com/world/park-geun-hye> had seen 
the writing on the wall and stepped down. A simple resignation would mean a new 
presidential election within 60 days. The squabbling and divided liberal 
opposition is unready, much less the conservatives. But they would just have to 
get their act together. That way, within weeks South Korea would have what it 
sorely needs and currently lacks: a fully functioning new government with a 
fresh popular mandate. Whereas this way, months of contested ambiguity loom.

No one can fathom what Park thinks she may gain by clinging grimly on. If the 
constitutional court rejects her impeachment, I fear the hitherto peaceful 
streets of Seoul will erupt in fury. For her country’s sake, as well as her 
own, Park must prolong the agony no further. She should simply go, and go now.

Months of government paralysis thus loom, and at a bad time
 