
Foreign companies with nationals working in Bangladesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>’s garment and building 
industries have suspended travel to the country and told workers to stay at 
home after a deadly attack by Islamic militants on a restaurant in Dhaka.

The hospitality sector is also seeing cancellations, hotels are tightening 
security and foreign embassies are looking at reducing staffing after the 
attack on Friday claimed the lives of nine Italians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/dhaka-bangladesh-cafe-attack-hostages-victims>
, seven Japanese, an American, an Indian and some Bangladeshi nationals.

Dhaka officials say they knew attackers, as details of victims emerge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/03/dhaka-officials-say-they-knew-attackers-as-details-of-victims-emerge>
Fast Retailing, the Japanese owner of the Uniqlo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/uniqlo> casual-wear brand, said it would 
suspend all but critical travel to Bangladesh and has told staff to stay 
indoors.

Bangladesh’s $26bn garment industry has been bracing itself for the fallout of 
Friday’s killings, fearing major retailers could rethink their sourcing plans 
after the latest attack targeting foreigners.

Bangladesh <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bangladesh>, one of the world’s 
poorest countries, relies on garments for about 80% of its exports and for 
about 4 million jobs,. It ranks behind only China as a supplier of clothes to 
developed markets such as Europe and the United States.

Uniqlo <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/uniqlo> has 10 Japanese staff in 
Bangladesh, one of its major production hubs outside China, and was among the 
first to confirm it would tighten travel restrictions already in place after 
attacks last year.

Shovon Islam, the head of Sparrow Group, which supplies brands including Marks 
& Spencer and Gap, said: “Obviously this is generating a lot of concern with 
all the brands my company works with.”

Dhaka cafe attack ends with 20 hostages among dead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
He said that after a foreigner was killed in Bangladesh last year, some 
overseas companies pared back travel to the country and asked for meetings to 
be held in Bangkok, New Delhi or Hong Kong instead.

Islam said: “This time the intensity of the threat is much higher and we will 
definitely see companies altering their plans.”

Sudhir Dhingra, the head of Orient Craft based in the Indian city of Gurgaon, 
said: “There’ll definitely be an impact on the garment industry. I was just 
speaking to a top label which said its official who was supposed to visit 
Bangladesh to inspect an order has refused to go.”

Bangladesh garment exporters who dealt with some of those killed in the attack 
were still coming to terms with what has happened. “I was doing business with 
six of the nine Italians who died. It’s shocking and heartbreaking,” said 
Meshba Uddin Ali, the managing director of Wega Fashion Sweater.

Amos Ho, a senior manager at Pou Chen, one of the world’s largest makers of 
trainers for brands such as Nike, Adidas and Puma, said: “We’ve urged our 
employees to be cautious. They have to pay attention to their personal safety.”

Industry analysts have suggested clothing brands may now consider shifting out 
of Bangladesh to less unsettled countries in Asia, such as Cambodia and Sri 
Lanka. No major companies have yet signalled official plans.

As Isis strikes, al-Qaida plays the long game in Islamist supremacy struggle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/02/isis-strikes-al-qaida-plays-long-game>
“There are no plans on changing any sourcing, but we are following 
developments closely,” Sweden’s H&M said in a statement echoed by other big 
retailers.


TheUS and British embassies in Bangladesh may reduce staff numbers, one 
diplomatic source said, and ask only essential staff to stay on.

The Japanese construction companies Obayashi and Shimizu, which both have more 
than a dozen employees working on bridge projects in Bangladesh, said they had 
advised staff to stay indoors.

At least two five-star hotels in Dhaka that cater primarily to business 
clients said they had received cancellations since Friday’s attack. “Whenever 
people book it’s usually within two or three days of their visit to Dhaka and 
now nobody is doing any bookings at all,” said a source at one of the hotels, 
adding that this week was typically quiet due to the upcoming Eid celebrations.
 