
Sixty years after his death, the peripatetic and violent life of one of the 
most remarkable minor characters in 20th-century history is being retold on the 
black, white and red pages of a graphic novel.


The anarchist Simón Radowitzky may be half-forgotten today, but his struggles 
in tsaristRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, banishment to the 
“Argentinian Siberia” and participation in the Spanish civil war made him a 
legendary figure in his own time.

In November 1909, Radowitzky, an 18-year-old Jew who had fled to Buenos Aires 
to escape the pogroms and political repression in what is now Ukraine, carried 
out a politically motivated murder.

Incensed at the brutal way in which Ramón Lorenzo Falcón 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ram%C3%B3n_Lorenzo_Falc%C3%B3n>, the chief of 
the Argentinian federal police, had suppressed recent protests by workers and 
strikers, Radowitzky threw a bomb into the carriage bearing Falcón and his 
personal secretary. Both men died from their injuries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fforgotten-anarchist-simon-radowitzky-life-graphic-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6735c2d56a0c74aa0ad6bb48d9fef651a910aed2%2F0_8_637_838%2F637.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forgotten%20anarchist%20Sim%C3%B3n%20Radowitzky%E2%80%99s%20life%20retold%20in%20graphic%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fforgotten-anarchist-simon-radowitzky-life-graphic-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forgotten%20anarchist%20Sim%C3%B3n%20Radowitzky%E2%80%99s%20life%20retold%20in%20graphic%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fforgotten-anarchist-simon-radowitzky-life-graphic-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6735c2d56a0c74aa0ad6bb48d9fef651a910aed2%2F0_8_637_838%2F637.jpg>
 Radowitzky throws a bomb at Falcón in Agustín Comotto’s graphic novel 155. 
Photograph: Agustín Comotto 
The killer was swiftly captured and, being too young for the death penalty, 
sentenced to life imprisonment. The term was to be served at the infamous 
Ushuaia prison in Tierra del Fuego, known as the jail at the end of the world, 
where he was issued with the prisoner number 155.


Radowitzky languished there for 21 years, contracting tuberculosis, enduring 
rape, torture, cold and hunger, but somehow managed to resist, and even briefly 
escape. In doing so he became a hero to his fellow inmates, who called him the 
Angel of Ushuaia for his leadership and extraordinary endurance.


In 1930, popular pressure forced the Argentinian government to release him. 
After a spell in Uruguay, he headed toSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> to fight for the republicans. With 
Franco’s victory in 1939, Radowitzky, along with many others on the losing 
side, headed to Mexico, where he eventually succumbed to tuberculosis at the 
age of 64.


While Radowitzky’s story has been told before – Bruce Chatwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/bruce-chatwin> dedicates five pages of In 
Patagonia 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/book-of-a-lifetime-in-patagonia-by-bruce-chatwin-7873053.html>
 to his life – it has never been told in quite the wayAgustín Comotto 
<http://www.agustincomotto.com/> tells it.


Through a series of flashbacks and over 270 pages, his novel, 155 
<http://nordicalibros.com/155-simon-radowitzky>, examines the agonies and 
survival of an exceptional individual.


Comotto, a fellow exile whose family fled Argentina for Spain after the 
military coup of 1976 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/25/argentina-junta-coup-videla-peron-1976-archive>
, first heard about Radowitzky from his father, a leftwing labour lawyer. As 
the years went by, he became more and more fascinated with the man, the myth, 
and the notion of how a person could spend a lifetime in the unwavering service 
of a cause.

“In Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>, he’s a bit 
forgotten, though some people will tell you he’s still celebrated,” says 
Comotto.


“He was one of the first people in Argentina to spontaneously rise up against 
a police chief who was very repressive towards the ordinary people and workers. 
Falcón was part of the most repressive police force that Argentina had had – a 
force that later became part of the dictatorship.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fforgotten-anarchist-simon-radowitzky-life-graphic-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc7d664ee546c1704b924dd837ec9b49fe46bb92%2F0_0_625_818%2F625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forgotten%20anarchist%20Sim%C3%B3n%20Radowitzky%E2%80%99s%20life%20retold%20in%20graphic%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fforgotten-anarchist-simon-radowitzky-life-graphic-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forgotten%20anarchist%20Sim%C3%B3n%20Radowitzky%E2%80%99s%20life%20retold%20in%20graphic%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fforgotten-anarchist-simon-radowitzky-life-graphic-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc7d664ee546c1704b924dd837ec9b49fe46bb92%2F0_0_625_818%2F625.jpg>
 Bombs from Italian air force planes rain down on Barcelona in 1939 in the 
graphic novel. Photograph: Agustín Comotto 
“He was one of the first popular heroes in the Robin Hood vein. He struck back 
at those who oppressed the people.”

Comotto, who now lives near Barcelona, was also enthralled by the idea of one 
man living through, and embodying, so much history.


“I really wanted to tell the story of a person who was born in tsarist Russia, 
lived in Argentina and then ended up fighting in the Spanish civil war before 
dying in exile in Mexico.”


The book took six years to research and create. Comotto’s investigations led 
him from Spain to the Netherlands and on to Ushuaia, where he found 
Radowitzky’s Argentinian gulag transformed into a tourist destination.


“It was a bit strange,” he says. “Half of the prison is a museum where you can 
do a guided tour, so I was walking around taking pictures of people who had got 
off a US cruise liner. What was a place of misery and horror has become an 
attraction, where you can pay to dress up as a prisoner.”


The author and illustrator’s greatest challenge, however, was figuring out how 
to render the two decades Radowitzky spent in Ushuaia. “It’s really hard to 
tell the story of someone who’s in a shoebox.”


To better understand his subject, Comotto read Primo Levi and other accounts 
of how people managed to survive the concentration camps. As he learned more 
about their strategies – their ability to separate the mental from the physical 
and to become desensitised to pain and humiliation – he got the idea of the 
imprisoned Radowitzky pondering his life in flashback.

A colour scheme also began to suggest itself. Among the black-and-white pages 
are eruptions of red, which symbolise violence, anarchism and exile.


“There’s red whenever there is violence of any kind. But you will also see it 
in the sea and in the sky, where it has to do with migration.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fforgotten-anarchist-simon-radowitzky-life-graphic-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4233ee973f8c7f9ac9ea6dcbf50ca47fffbfeb02%2F14_0_630_827%2F630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forgotten%20anarchist%20Sim%C3%B3n%20Radowitzky%E2%80%99s%20life%20retold%20in%20graphic%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fforgotten-anarchist-simon-radowitzky-life-graphic-novel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forgotten%20anarchist%20Sim%C3%B3n%20Radowitzky%E2%80%99s%20life%20retold%20in%20graphic%20novel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fforgotten-anarchist-simon-radowitzky-life-graphic-novel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4233ee973f8c7f9ac9ea6dcbf50ca47fffbfeb02%2F14_0_630_827%2F630.jpg>
 Radowitzky leaves Russia in 155. Photograph: Agustín Comotto 
As the son, grandson and great-grandson of immigrants, Comotto feels a certain 
kinship with Radowitzky. But despite the years he spent researching his life, 
the revolutionary remains an enigma: a committed humanist who never regretted 
the taking of two lives, a shy and sensitive soul with an almost preternatural 
gift for survival, and a man who changed his name in Mexico in the hope of 
sloughing off his own legend.

“I think I came to understand Simón a bit, but it’s impossible to put yourself 
in his shoes. What he lived through was comparable to the Nazi concentration 
camps and no one can know what that was like unless they were actually there. 
What I do sense, though, is that Simón was a great and spirited humanist who 
was committed to the cause of justice. As a Jew and an anarchist, he had to 
live in a world of deep injustices.”
 