
Thank God for private collectors. They follow their own tastes and 
enthusiasms, don’t have to listen to critics or follow fashion and, in buying 
the art they love, end up enriching us all.

Harry Hyams was that kind of collector. It has been revealed 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/13/centrepoint-developer-harry-hyams-leaves-huge-art-collection/>
 that this multimillionaire property developer – the man behind Centre Point, 
London – who died in December 2015 has left his art collection to the nation 
and dedicated £387m from his estate to pay for its maintenance and display. It 
is a collection that not only enriches us all, but offers a welcome corrective 
to the widespread and apparently growing ignorance of British art history that 
stops us valuing the real achievements of British artists down the ages.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fturner-stubbs-true-radicals-british-art-harry-hyams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52c30afdcfb489b198cb0bb5a034d2ad5122596f%2F29_24_2655_3383%2F2655.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20the%20modernists%20%E2%80%93%20Turner%20and%20Stubbs%20are%20Britain's%20true%20radicals%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fturner-stubbs-true-radicals-british-art-harry-hyams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20the%20modernists%20%E2%80%93%20Turner%20and%20Stubbs%20are%20Britain%27s%20true%20radicals%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fturner-stubbs-true-radicals-british-art-harry-hyams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52c30afdcfb489b198cb0bb5a034d2ad5122596f%2F29_24_2655_3383%2F2655.jpg>
 Harry Hyams, who has left his art collection to the nation in his will. 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Britain has become absurdly confused about the strengths and weaknesses of its 
own artistic tradition. Second-rate artists get huge amounts of attention while 
truly great ones are neglected. I am not talking about today’s art – let’s 
leave that aside. This is about the art from the past that speaks to us. I 
suppose all art speaks to someone. Yet I truly can’t hear what other people are 
hearing, see what they are seeing, when they get all moist-eyed about such 
second-rate British artists as Victor Pasmore, Dod Procter, Winifred Knights or
Vanessa Bell 
<http://www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk/about/press-media/press-releases/dulwich-announces-major-vanessa-bell-exhibition-for-2017/>
.

What all these artists have in common, apart from the fact that they either 
had exhibitions this year or will have shows early in 2017, is that they worked 
in Britain in the early and mid-20th century. This is currently the hot period 
in British art history with academics and curators. Which just goes to show 
that some people can look at an awful lot of art without learning anything 
about it. Anyone who has any real feeling for and knowledge of art should be 
able to see that bigging up British art from the first half of the 20th century 
is a highly provincial distortion of the facts.

It’s funny – I’m fairly sure the pillars of the art world who promote such 
stuff all voted Remain in the EU referendum, and yet in a very genteel and nice 
way, claiming thatHenry Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/henry-moore> 
andPaul Nash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/25/paul-nash-review-pain-wonder-menace-tate-britain-london>
 are giants of modern art is a narrow, nationalist perspective.

British art in the early 20th century was drab and staid in comparison to the 
modernist revolution on the continent. It’s not just that we produced noPicasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pablo-picasso> or Matisse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/matisse>. We nurtured no Mondrian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/piet-mondrian>, Ernst, Kandinsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/jun/24/art.art>, Magritte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/magritte>, Dix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/may/14/art-apocalypse-otto-dix-first-world-war-der-krieg-in-pictures>
,Miró <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/joan-miro>, Malevich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jul/20/malevich-tate-modern-review-intensely-moving-retrospective>
,Braque <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/braque>, Leger, Boccioni, 
Duchamp <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/duchamp> … do I need to go 
on? Britain simply played no real part in the golden age of modernist art.

So why all the endless bigging up of these dreary British artists who failed 
to be revolutionary in a revolutionary age? Search me. That’s why I am grateful 
to Harry Hyams. Did Hyams fill his house with Moores and Hepworths? No, he 
boughtThe Bridgewater Sea Piece 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/joseph-mallord-william-turner-dutch-boats-in-a-gale-the-bridgewater-sea-piece>
, one of JMW Turner’s most spectacular masterpieces, and loaned it anonymously 
to the National Gallery. The sea roils and vibrates in this incredible 
painting, so fluid and alive that it seems about to burst through the surface 
of the more than two-metre-wide picture and flood the room. It is not so much a 
ship in a bottle as the ocean in a jar, a wild beast barely contained. Turner 
painted it in 1801 at the zenith of the Romantic age. All the energy and dread 
of the revolutions and wars of his time can be felt in it. So can his youth, 
for he was just 26.

What am I saying – that we should all share the “conservative” tastes of Harry 
Hyams and look at paintings by Turner instead of British modernists such as 
Barbara Hepworth? Er, yeah, that is what I am saying – for it is Turner who is 
the real radical. The British version of modern art between 1900 and 1940 was 
pallid and mediocre, like an art teacher’s tame version of the creative mayhem 
going on in Europe at the time. Turner, by contrast, was at the forefront of 
European Romanticism and his art genuinely influenced the likes of Henri 
Matisse and Mark Rothko in the modern age. He still echoes in the art of today, 
fromAnselm Kiefer <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/anselm-kiefer> to 
Olafur Eliasson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/21/olafur-eliasson-i-am-not-special-interview-tree-of-codes-ballet-manchester>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fturner-stubbs-true-radicals-british-art-harry-hyams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa43b788893f4dc179414284b211b55239794cf34%2F144_157_1167_1385%2F1167.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20the%20modernists%20%E2%80%93%20Turner%20and%20Stubbs%20are%20Britain's%20true%20radicals%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fturner-stubbs-true-radicals-british-art-harry-hyams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20the%20modernists%20%E2%80%93%20Turner%20and%20Stubbs%20are%20Britain%27s%20true%20radicals%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fturner-stubbs-true-radicals-british-art-harry-hyams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa43b788893f4dc179414284b211b55239794cf34%2F144_157_1167_1385%2F1167.jpg>
 George Stubbs’s Whistlejacket (c1762). Photograph: National Gallery 
And it’s not just Turner. Hyams also collected the works of the 18th-century 
Briitsh painter George Stubbs, a true genius of world art – and a 
disconcertingly modern one. The visitors of all ages who contemplate the 
profound, sensitive eye of a horse in his masterpieceWhistlejacket 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/george-stubbs-whistlejacket> in 
the National Gallery can see this artist is something special. Stubbs can make 
you see the soul of a horse, in strangely isolating images that single out the 
mystery of being.

Like Turner, he was a true artistic leader of his age. That age was the 
Enlightenment, when people thought science and philosophy could change the 
world. Stubbs, both as a student of nature whodissected a horse 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/blogs/now-at-the-met/2015/anatomy-of-the-horse> and 
an eerily philosophical contemplative painter, is a visionary Enlightenment 
artist in the same league as his French equivalentChardin 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-Baptiste-Siméon_Chardin#/media/File%3AJean-Baptiste_Siméon_Chardin_007.jpg>
. He speaks to us as all great artists do, across the ages – after all, nature 
transfixes us as it transfixed him.

In collecting Stubbs and Turner, Hyams was collecting British artists who 
truly matter and are truly relevant today, and tomorrow, rather than getting 
confused as so many supposed experts are by a fashion for very ordinary 
“modern” British art. Still, it can be hard separating jewels from dross in the 
patchy history of art in Britain. Hyams also ownedCherry Ripe 
<https://www.wikiart.org/en/john-everett-millais/cherry-ripe> by John Everett 
Millais. Ugh, ugh, take it away. Sickly sweet Victorian sentiment is a dark 
chapter all on its own.

Yet at least this collection keeps us in touch with our cultural identity. Who 
are the British? This is what we need to work out now Brexit is inevitable. For 
answers, I would rather look to Stubbs and Turner than the wan studios of the 
Bloomsbury movement.

 