
Boris Johnson has placed himself at the head of cross-party group, including a 
former Tory attorney general and a Labour leadership contender, who are calling 
on Barack Obama to secure the release of Shaker Aamer, thelast British resident 
held in Guantánamo Bay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2014/dec/14/shaker-aamer-britains-last-guantanamo-bay-prisoner>
.

In an intervention timed to coincide with US Independence Day, six former 
cabinet ministers have joined leading writers, actors, directors, musicians to 
warn the White House that the continued detention of Aamer is undermining US 
standing in the world.

Open letter to Barack Obama requesting the return of Shaker Aamer to the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/03/open-letter-barack-obama-shaker-aamer-guantanamo-boris-johnson-russell-brand-natalie-bennett>
The Saudi-born Aamer was seized by bounty hunters in Afghanistan and handed 
over to US forces in December 2001. Two months later, he was rendered to theUS 
military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> prison on Cuba. US 
authorities have made it clear that they have no intention of charging him.

David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has raised 
the case of Aamer with Obama on two occasions this year – at their meeting in 
the White House in January and at the G7 summit in Bavaria earlier this summer. 
Ministers are privately frustrated that the White House appears not to be 
taking any concrete steps towards securing Aamer’s release.

In an open letter printed on Saturday, US Independence Day, more than 80 
prominent Britons, including the former Tory attorney generalDominic Grieve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dominicgrieve> and the Labour leadership 
contender Jeremy Corbyn, urge Obama “to facilitate the transfer from Guantánamo 
of Shaker Aamer ... and his return to his family in the UK - his British wife 
and his four British children”.


They add: “It has not escaped our notice that, while the US is celebrating its 
foundation under the rule of law, the continuing detention of men at Guantánamo 
– largely without charge or trial – continues to undermine America’s notion of 
itself and its international standing.”

The letter, drawn up by the We Stand with Shaker 
<http://westandwithshaker.org/> campaign, notes that Aamer has twice been 
approved for release from the base – in 2007, under President Bush, and in 
2010, by Obama’s Guantánamo Review Task Force. The letter is also supported by 
Sir Keir Starmer, the former director of public prosecutions, and six former 
Labour and Tory cabinet ministers, including Tessa Jowell and Andrew Mitchell.

The comedian Russell Brand <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/russell-brand>
, one of the signatories, said: “Barack Obama, who inspired so much hope and 
has presided over so much pain and disappointment, in this single act of 
compassion can alter history.”

The letter comes amid deep frustration in Whitehall at the apparent failure of 
theObama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> to take steps 
towards releasing Aamer. Obama told Cameron at their White House meeting in 
January that he would prioritise Aamer’s case, though he would only act in a 
way that protected national security.

The Foreign Office told the Guardian last month that Aamer’s case “remains a 
high priority for the UK government”. It added: “We continue to make clear to 
the US that we want him released and returned to the UK as a matter of 
urgency”. The FO said that after Cameron raised the case at the G7 summit, 
Obama “made assurances that, whilst there is no fixed timetable for a decision, 
it is under active, high-level consideration”.

Coalition government ministers made at least 15 requests to the US for Aamer 
to be transferred to the UK, the Guardian understands. British officials 
privately refer to extreme “sensitivities” surrounding the case.

Aamer has accused British security and intelligence officials of knowingly 
making false statements, notably that he was a member of an al-Qaida network in 
London.Clive Stafford Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/clive-stafford-smith>, founder of the legal 
charity Reprieve, who has regularly visited Aamer at Guantánamo Bay, says he is 
prevented from divulging evidence he knows about the case by a confidentiality 
agreement. He has told the Guardian that MI6 “stabbed him [Aamer] in the back” 
by giving US courts false intelligence.

The high court in London heard in 2010 that the police were investigating 
Aamer’s allegations of British security and intelligence agency complicity in 
his mistreatment. Aamer’s US lawyer, Brent Mickum, said: “I have seen records 
of interviews with him by the UK security services … They were fully aware that 
he was complaining about his treatment and had been tortured.”

Aamer has been on hunger strike, and his physical and mental health has 
deteriorated badly over the years.

In May, the former Conservative ministers Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> and David Davis, with 
the Labour MPs Jeremy Corbyn and Andy Slaughter, met senior officials in 
Washington to try to secure Aamer’s release.

“It is difficult for us to shake off the depressing notion that the Obama 
administration is indifferent to the repeated requests of the British 
government. It is a slap in the face for America’s staunchest friend,” the MPs 
wrote in a joint article in the New York Times.

Aamer married Zin Siddique, a Briton, in 1996. She lives in Battersea, south 
London, with their four children, the youngest of whom – Faris, now 13 - he has 
never met.

Downing Street has tried to show patience with the White House because it 
appreciates that the US Congress has to be given 30 days’ notice of the release 
of any inmate from Guantánamo Bay. Republicans, who have majorities in both the 
House of Representatives and the Senate, could scupper Obama’s plan to close
Guantánamo Bay <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay> by the end 
of his second term.

One signatory to the letter said: “The White House haven’t even informed 
Congress aboutShaker Aamer <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shaker-aamer>. 
This is spitting in the prime minister’s face.”

 