
Pakistan’s retired army chief has agreed to become the first commander of the 
“Muslim Nato”, a fledgling military alliance of mostly Sunni Islamic states led 
bySaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>.

The announcement led to a flood of criticism of Raheel Sharif, a general who 
until recently had been lauded for his three years leading Pakistan’s half a 
million-strong army.

The Pakistani defence minister, Khawaja Asif, revealed on television that 
Sharif would become the first commander-in-chief of the Islamic Military 
Alliance to Fight Terrorism (IMAFT), a proposed coalition of 39 countries that 
will have its headquarters in the Saudi capital, Riyadh.


The IMAFT was announced in late 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/saudi-arabia-announces-military-alliance-terrorism>
 as a foil against Islamic State and terrorism in general but it has not been 
supported by Iran, Saudi Arabia’s regional nemesis.


Islamabad has long struggled to find a balance between Saudi Arabia, a rich 
patron that is home to thousands of Pakistani expatriate workers, and 
neighbouring Iran that hopes to sell gas to energy-starvedPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>.

Analysts say the decades-long standoff between Sunni Saudi Arabia and 
predominantly Shia Iran has helped fuel sectarian conflict in Pakistan.


Both countries have been accused of supporting their own favoured militant 
groups in Pakistan, where the Shia minority has been the target of relentless 
attacks.


In 2015, Pakistan declined to join military operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/10/pakistans-parliament-votes-against-entering-yemen-conflict>
 against Shia Houthi rebels in Yemen despite relentless pressure from Saudi 
Arabia, which has led the intervention in its impoverished neighbour.

The decision not to come to the aid of a close ally that a year earlier had 
bolstered Pakistan’s finances with a $1.5bn gift was widely praised by analysts 
who feared involvement in Yemen would exacerbate sectarian tensions at home.

But the plan to allow one of the most esteemed army chiefs in Pakistan’s 
history to take up command of IMAFT has been met with widespread criticism on 
social media.


The Majlis Wahdat-e-Muslimeen, a Shia political group, expressed concern over 
the appointment, which it urged Sharif to turn down.


Some hardline Sunni groups, including the banned Ahle Sunnat Wal Jamaat, said 
they fully supported the development.


Hasan Askari Rizvi, a Pakistani defence analyst, cautioned that the IMAFT was 
not yet operational and it was unclear whether it would follow the model of 
Nato or something more like the United Nation’s peacekeeping operations.


“But there is a question of how far this force would be a non-partisan force,” 
he said. “At the moment it appears to be dominated by conservative Arab 
kingdoms so Iran, Iraq and Syria will not welcome it.”


He cautioned against Pakistan being dragged into conflicts at the behest of 
others.


“Pakistani troops have been in Saudi Arabia since the mid-1960s but the 
guiding principle has always been that they would serve only within the 
territorial boundaries of Saudi Arabia. If you create a kind of force of so 
many countries then one day the Saudis might want it to go to Yemen or Syria.”


Sharif became highly popular after an army crackdown on the Pakistani Taliban 
led to sharp falls in violence and an army-led public relations campaignthat 
contrasted him with the country’s civilian leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/14/pakistan-press-freedom-army-journalists-military>
, who are widely viewed as ineffectual and corrupt.


He retired in November despite fevered speculation that he would be given an 
extension or elevated to the position of field marshal.
 