
An exhibition celebrating 250 years of snarling over the missing piece of blue 
sky or the final corner piece opens this week at the Museum of Brands inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

Robert Opie, collector and social historian, and creator of the museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/07/museum-of-brands-robert-opie-london-showcases-history-of-brands>
, believes his will be the largest exhibition of jigsaws ever held, from one of 
the earliest, a chopped up map of Britain dating from 1766 intended to teach 
geography, to the Bay City Rollers, Andy Pandy, and the rules of the road in 
the 1960s and 70s.

How I fell late but hard for jigsaw puzzles | Andrew Martin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/30/jigsaw-puzzles-boredom> 
He still has the first jigsaw he remembers making, a circular puzzle 
celebrating the Queen’s coronation – his whole family joined in and it took 
them all Christmas. “It exactly fitted a little circular table so we could all 
sit around it and help, but it was quite tricky, no straight bits and you 
couldn’t just find the corners and start from there.”

John Spilsbury, a map maker and engraver, is credited with making the earliest 
commercial jigsaws by glueing maps on to wooden backing and cutting them up as 
educational toys.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjigsaw-exhibition-london-250-years-found-it-robert-opie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e2894acc96df69e9835a71446e1653ac4d6b660%2F0_0_2657_4000%2F2657.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Found%20it!%20250%20years%20of%20jigsaws%20%20are%20celebrated%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjigsaw-exhibition-london-250-years-found-it-robert-opie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Found%20it%21%20250%20years%20of%20jigsaws%20%20are%20celebrated%20in%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fjigsaw-exhibition-london-250-years-found-it-robert-opie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e2894acc96df69e9835a71446e1653ac4d6b660%2F0_0_2657_4000%2F2657.jpg>
 The Churchill jigsaw created despite rationing of cardboard during the second 
world war 
The hand-cut puzzles remained luxury toys for the wealthy, often issued to 
mark historic occasions including one of the Battle of Trafalgar, which was in 
the shops within weeks of the battle in 1805, until the introduction of 
mass-produced cardboard jigsaws.

Opie’s collection includes a second world war jigsaw showing Winston 
Churchill, considered sufficiently morale-boosting to produce despite the 
rationing of cardboard. Advertisers poured out promotional jigsaws, often given 
away free, including a splendid example for “Turog bread for vim andvigour”. 
Despite the advent of video games, they remain immensely popular, and many are 
still created as spin-offs from television programmes and films.

“They seem a very appropriate pastime for these days,” Opie said, “finding the 
right piece and fitting it all together until the true picture emerges.”

• 250 Years of Jigsaws, from 15 December, Museum of Brands, Notting Hill, 
London W11.
 