
Until the spasm in the markets interfered, Davos 2016 was supposed to be about 
how humankind will cope in the new age of the smart machine. Whileshare prices 
were gyrating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/24/why-is-global-economy-suffering-turbulence>
, the bigger picture was obscured. There is afourth industrial revolution 
happening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/fourth-industrial-revolution-set-to-benefit-richest-ubs-report-says>
 and it is likely to be as profound in its effects as the previous three.

The first Industrial Revolution was about harnessing steam power so that 
muscle could be replaced by machines. The second was driven by electricity and 
a cluster of inventions from the late 19th century onwards – including the 
internal combustion engine, the aeroplane and moving pictures. A third 
revolution began in the 1960s and was based on digital technology, personal 
computing and the development of the internet. Industrial Revolution 4.0 will 
be shaped by a fresh wave of innovation in areas such asdriverless cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/11/driverless-cars-roll-out-trials-uk-roads>
, smart robotics, materials that are lighter and tougher, and a manufacturing 
processbuilt around 3D printing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/11/3d-printing-not-yet-a-new-industrial-revolution-but-its-impact-will-be-huge>
.


Fourth industrial revolution set to benefit richest, UBS report says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/fourth-industrial-revolution-set-to-benefit-richest-ubs-report-says>
A pity then that the World Economic Forum was overshadowed by falling share 
prices and the cost of oil because the impact of the fourth industrial 
revolution will be felt long after investors have stopped fretting about ahard 
landing in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/22/chinese-steel-production-abandoned-mills-broken-lives>
.

Davos was, in some ways, a good forum for the gathering of technology 
pioneers, business leaders and politicians to consider some of the implications 
of what will be a very different sort of economy. Just to take one example, 
smart machines will soon be able to replace all sorts of workers, from 
accountants to delivery drivers and from estate agents to people handling 
routine motor insurance claims. On one estimate, 47% of US jobs are at risk 
from automation. This isJoseph Schumpeter’s “gales of creative destruction”  
<https://www.quora.com/What-is-creative-destruction>with a vengeance.

There are three myths about Industrial Revolution 4.0. The first is that it 
won’t really have as big an impact as the previous periods of change, most 
especially the breakthroughs associated with the second industrial revolution. 
In the past, it has always taken time to feel the full effects of technological 
change and many of today’s advances are in their infancy. It is far too early 
to say that the car or air travel will prove to be less important than the 
sequencing of the human genome or synthetic biology.

The second myth is that the process will be trouble free provided everything 
is left to the market. It is a fantasy to believe that the wealth created by 
the fourth Industrial Revolution will cascade down from rich to poor, and that 
those displaced will just walk into another job that pays just as well.

Robot revolution: rise of 'thinking' machines could exacerbate inequality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/05/robot-revolution-rise-machines-could-displace-third-of-uk-jobs>
Indeed, all the evidence so far is that the benefits of the coming change will 
be concentrated among a relatively small elite, thus exacerbating the current 
trend towards greater levels of inequality.

This was a point stressed by the Swiss bank UBS in a report launched in Davos 
<https://www.ubs.com/global/en/about_ubs/follow_ubs/highlights/davos-2016.html>
. It notes that there will be a “polarisation of the labour force as low-skill 
jobs continue to be automated and this trend increasingly spreads to middle 
class jobs.”

A similar argument is made by Klaus Schwab, the man who runs Davos, in a book 
on the Fourth Industrial Revolution 
<http://www.weforum.org/pages/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-by-klaus-schwab>
handed to each of the delegates at this year’s World Economic Forum.

Schwab compares Detroit in 1990 with Silicon Valley in 2014. In 1990 the three 
biggest companies in Detroit had a market capitalisation of $36bn (£25bn), 
revenues of $250bn and 1.2 million employees. In 2014, the three biggest 
companies in Silicon Valley had a considerably higher market capitalisation 
($1.09tn) generated roughly the same revenues ($247bn) but with about 10 times 
fewer employees (137,000).

It is easier to make money today with fewer workers than it was a quarter of a 
century ago. Setting up and running a car company was an expensive business and 
required a lot of workers. A company that makes its money out of a smart app 
requires less capital, doesn’t have to pay for storage or transport in the way 
that car companies do and incurs virtually no extra costs as the number of 
users increases. In the jargon of economics, the marginal costs per unit of 
output tend towards zero and the returns to scale are high. This explains why 
tech entrepreneurs can get very rich very young.

Technological change has always been disruptive. There was a polarisation of 
income and wealth in the first wave of industrialisation at the beginning of 
the the 19th century, and this gave rise to political and institutional change 
over the 100 years between 1850 and 1950: the spread of democracy; the 
emergence of trade unions; progressive taxation and the development of social 
safety nets. These helped create bigger markets for the consumer goods that 
were spawned by the second Industrial Revolution: TVs, radios, vacuum cleaners 
and the like.

But over the past four decades a political model that both facilitated the 
spread of technology and provided some protection against its disruptive 
consequences has come under attack. Welfare states have become less generous, 
levels of long-term unemployment are much higher, taxation has become less 
progressive, politics has increasingly been dominated by those with the deepest 
pockets who can lobby the loudest.

Philip Jennings, general secretary of the global UNI union said: “We need some 
governance to ensure a democratic evolution and that requires public policy 
discussion. There is the opportunity to shape technology to improve people’s 
lives; through connectivity, education, health. We shouldn’t be fearful and 
fatalist about it.”

There is, though, a third and final myth: namely that all will be well 
provided the fruits of an economy dominated by artificial intelligence and 
smart robots can be redistributed, perhaps through a citizen’s income so that 
we can all have more leisure time when machines do all the work.

But redistribution, even assuming it happens, is only part of the story. 
Making his first visit toDavos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>, 
the Archbishop of Canterbury said the changes likely to be brought about 
required not just an economic but also a spiritual response. “This is not just 
about money, it is about what it is to be human”, said Justin Welby.

Schwab said: “The changes are so profound that, from the perspective of human 
history, there has never been a time of greater promise or potential peril. My 
concern, however, is that decision makers are too often caught in traditional, 
linear (and non-disruptive) thinking or too absorbed by immediate concerns to 
think strategically about the forces of disruption and innovation shaping our 
future.”

He’s right, although there is a simpler way of putting it: faced with the 
challenge of disruptive new technology, the current political framework is no 
longer fit for purpose and its shortcomings are likely to lead to a backlash 
that could turn very nasty. That should concern not just Schwab and the 
Archbishop of Canterbury but also the investment bankers of Wall Street and the 
tech billionaires of Silicon Valley.
 