
A French woman who was convicted of murdering her allegedly violent husband 
has been freed from prison after a second intervention from the country’s 
president.

Two hours after François Hollande gave her a complete pardon, Jacqueline 
Sauvage, 69, was seen leaving a prison southeast of Paris after spending more 
than three years behind bars.

Hollande had issued a partial pardon at the end of January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/french-president-pardons-jacqueline-sauvage-over-killing-of-violent-husband>
, butthe courts twice rejected applications for her release. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/13/french-court-refuses-to-release-woman-pardoned-for-killing-her-abusive-husband>
 The case drew public attention to the issue of domestic abuse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ffrancois-hollande-pardons-woman-for-of-husband%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc4bbd212900ae2a3d2a292313258cad35dba9fb%2F1049_271_4209_3236%2F4209.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%20pardons%20woman%20for%20murder%20of%20husband&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ffrancois-hollande-pardons-woman-for-of-husband%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%20pardons%20woman%20for%20murder%20of%20husband&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ffrancois-hollande-pardons-woman-for-of-husband%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc4bbd212900ae2a3d2a292313258cad35dba9fb%2F1049_271_4209_3236%2F4209.jpg>
 ‘Total pardon for Jacqueline Sauvage’ – a protester at a demonstration calling 
for the release of Jacqueline Sauvage. Photograph: Francois Guillot/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Two different juries had sentenced Sauvage to 10 years in prison for fatally 
shooting her husband, Norbert Marot, three times in the back with a hunting 
rifle in 2012.


During the trials in 2014 and 2015, Sauvage said her late husband had beaten 
her for 47 years. The couple’s adult daughters also claimed Marot had abused 
them. Neither Sauvage nor the daughters ever filed a complaint against him.

The three women said they were too humiliated to seek help and instead 
suffered violence that included sexual abuse silently behind closed doors.

In a statement, the Elysée Palace said Hollande decided: “The place of Ms. 
Sauvage was no longer in prison, but with her family.”

Women’s rights advocates, politicians and sympathisers around France had 
mobilised to support Sauvage, with a petition calling for her to be pardoned 
signed by hundreds of thousands.

Nathalie Tomasini, one of Sauvage’s lawyers, told RTL radio the pardon was a 
“very strong message sent by François Hollande to all women victims of domestic 
violence.”

Actress Éva Darlan, who chairs a support committee that advocated for Sauvage, 
said on BFM television that the presidential pardon is a “strong gesture toward 
men who hit [women]”.

In January, Hollande granted a partial pardon to Sauvage, allowing her to seek 
parole. But two more courts made up of professional magistrates refused to free 
her. The president of the main union of French magistrates said Hollande made a 
“deplorable” decision “to please the public and to respond to a media request.”

“It is a political decision … that challenges the functioning of our 
institutions,” Virginie Duval said on BFM.

The French constitution allows a president to pardon convicts and to reduce 
prison sentences.
 