
Since the Paris attacks <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> on 
Friday night, France has been living under a nationwide state of emergency not 
seen since 1961, when army generals attempted a coup d’état during the Algerian 
war. On Monday the government could seek to extend the powers for several 
months.


Paris attacks: Belgian prosecutor releases brother of suspect – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/16/paris-attacks-france-airstrikes-isis-raqqa-syria-live>
What does state of emergency mean? 

The procedure harks back to the start of the Algerian war in the 1950s, giving 
exceptional powers to authorities, including the right to set curfews, limit 
the movement of people, forbid mass gatherings, establish secure zones where 
people can be monitored and close public spaces such as theatres, bars, museums 
and other meeting places. It can also allow for controls to be imposed on the 
media (though the government has said there would be no controls on media in 
this case).


Most significant for the French state in the current context are the powers 
given to the security services and police to act without judicial oversight. 
They can conduct house searches at any time, enforce house arrest and 
confiscate certain classes of weapons, even if people hold them legally.

What’s happened so far? 

Using the special measures, 168 homes have been raided and 104 people have 
been placed under house arrest in the past 48 hours. These have led to 23 
arrests and the seizure of 31 weapons.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fparis-attacks-francois-hollande-declares-state-emergency-france-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F14%2F1447460152971%2FKP_596177_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20attacks%3A%20Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%20declares%20state%20of%20emergency%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fparis-attacks-francois-hollande-declares-state-emergency-france-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20attacks%3A%20Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%20declares%20state%20of%20emergency%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F14%2Fparis-attacks-francois-hollande-declares-state-emergency-france-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F14%2F1447460152971%2FKP_596177_crop_640x360.jpg>
François Hollande declares a state of emergency on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/nov/14/paris-attacks-francois-hollande-declares-state-emergency-france-video>
Has anything like this been done before? 

France had used the state of emergency rules twice in the past 30 years – but 
only for specific geographical areas, never nationwide. In 1985 a state of 
emergency was declared in the French overseas territory of New Caledonia after 
unrest. In 2005,during the riots on suburban housing estates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/22/nothings-changed-10-years-after-french-riots-banlieues-remain-in-crisis>
, a state of emergency was declared in several areas, allowing curfews in some 
parts, but the full powers of the emergency measures were not put into practice.

How long will it go on for? 

A state of emergency can only last 12 days, after which a vote is needed to 
define and prolong the measures. On Sunday the French president, François 
Hollande, was reported to have told parliamentarians he was considering an 
extension of three months.
 