
France’s No8 Louis Picamoles has revealed that he will join Northampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints> next season, when his 
contract with Toulouse expires.

Louis Picamoles to start for France in group decider against Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/09/louis-picamoles-france-ireland-rugby-world-cup>
Picamoles, 29, told the French radio station RMC Sport 
<http://rmcsport.bfmtv.com/rugby/exclu-picamoles-je-pars-pour-northampton-927000.html>
 on Monday that he will leave at the end of the season and sign a three-year 
deal with the Saints. The club later confirmed the news on their website.
Northampton Saints (@SaintsRugby) 
Coming soon to a @premrugby <https://twitter.com/premrugby> ground near you 
from summer 2016 - French international no 8 Louis Picamoles
pic.twitter.com/DJN40OoKGW <https://t.co/DJN40OoKGW>
 <https://twitter.com/SaintsRugby/status/661182521355423744> November 2, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/SaintsRugby/status/661182521355423744> 
“I made my decision. I have told my current club,” he said. “Next year, I’m 
off to Northampton. And for the next three seasons. Above everything it is a 
lifestyle choice. I have this opportunity that is open to me.

“Since I will soon be 30 years old, to go abroad is something that has always 
attracted me and now that the opportunity has been presented, I think it is the 
right time for me to try this experiment.”

Picamoles had been linked with a move to the Premiership in recent weeks, with 
Bath also thought to have shown an interest.

Northampton director of rugby Jim Mallinder welcomed the capture of a 
respected 51-cap international who is in his prime.

“Louis is a world-class player and a proven performer at the highest level of 
club and international rugby,” Mallinder said.

“He was France’s standout performer at the World Cup and we’re excited by the 
prospect of him linking up with the quality players we have here already.

“He’s still young and we believe that his best years are still to come. When 
we met it was clear that he has the drive and ambition to improve and be 
successful, and we’re delighted that he will be doing that here with us at 
Franklin’s Gardens.”

Picamoles is the second high-profile recruit recently secured by Northampton 
with South Africa’s veteran lock Victor Matfield starting a one-year deal now 
the World Cup is over.
 