
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is considering appointing an 
official internet ombudsman to regulate complaints about online material in 
order to prevent excessive censorship and preserve free speech.

A bill establishing a “content qualification assessment procedure” has been 
tabled in the French senate <http://www.senat.fr/leg/ppl16-151.html> and the 
initiative was debated last week at a high level meeting attended by senators 
and judges as well as policy officers from Google and Twitter.

The aim is to provide a simple procedure that will support firms operating 
online who are uncertain of their legal liabilities and to prevent over-zealous 
removal or censorship of material merely because it is the subject of a 
complaint. It could be copied by other European jurisdictions.

Dan Shefets, a Danish lawyer who works in Paris has developed the proposal 
with the French senator Nathalie Goulet, said: “The problem which an internet 
ombudsman addresses applies to all countries inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> [because] member states have to 
work with the e-commerce directive.

“According to the directive, internet service providers (ISPs) face both penal 
and civil liability as soon as they are made aware of allegedly illicit 
content. One consequence of such liability is that smaller companies take down 
such content for fear of later sanctions.

“The risk to freedom of speech is real and significant as a consequence not 
only of the directive, but also of growing pressure onISPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/isps> all over Europe and the world for 
that matter”.

The idea is that a rapid response from the internet ombudsman, whose office 
would need to be appropriately staffed, would either order the material to be 
taken down or allow it to remain. As long as ISPs complied with the rulings, 
they would not face any fine or punishment.

David Wright, of the UK Safer Internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Centre, said the closest 
existing model was Australia’s e-safety commissioner which provides a 
complaints service for children experiencing cyber-bullying.

Shefets, who founded the Association for Accountability and Internet Democracy 
(AAID) in 2014, is also working withUnesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> to develop the project particularly 
to deal with material deemed to be encouraging radicalisation.

He is also planning to present his scheme to the parliamentary assembly of the 
Council of Europe. Shefets became interested in regulating online complaints 
aftertaking a case against Google in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/13/google-french-arm-fines-right-to-be-forgotten>
 which resulted in the US firm being fined €1,000 a day until an online 
defamatory article was removed.

He believes an internet ombudsman will help smaller companies that cannot 
afford large legal departments to assess the risks of material they host 
online. “It would help them compete against the big players, who already have 
massive legal departments and access to lawyers without any financial 
difficulties,” he explained.

“If we don’t put in place some sort of mechanism which will protect freedom of 
speech while at the same time increasing accountability, it will be too easy to 
justify repressive [legislative] regimes.”

 