
Two former Barclays bankers could face a retrial over allegations that they 
plotted to rig theLibor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/04/libor-rigging-scandal-three-former-barclays-traders-found-guilty>
 rate.

The Serious Fraud Office <https://www.theguardian.com/law/serious-fraud-office>
 (SFO) announced it is seeking a retrial of Stylianos Contogoulas, 44, and Ryan 
Michael Reich, 34, on a charge of conspiracy to defraud after a jury failed to 
reach a decision during a recent trial.

It had been alleged that they manipulated the US dollar London interbank 
offered rate between 2005 and 2007.

Libor trial: former Barclays bankers were 'driven by money'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/05/libor-trial-former-barclays-bankers-money-interest-rate-rigging>
An SFO statement said: “The two defendants are charged with conspiracy to 
defraud in relation to an investigation by the SFO into the manipulation of US 
dollarLibor <https://www.theguardian.com/business/libor>. A jury failed to 
reach verdicts for the two individuals after an 11-week trial at Southwark 
crown court.”

No further details have been given regarding the case against Contogoulas, 44, 
of Greece, and Reich, who lives in the US. Three other formerBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> bankers and a Libor submitter 
were last week found guilty of conspiracy to defraud and will be sentenced at 
Southwark crown court on Thursday.

A jury found Jonathan James Mathew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/08/libor-trial-ex-barclays-banker-says-he-only-did-what-his-boss-told-him>
, 35, of Shenfield, Essex,Jay Vijay Merchant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/06/libor-trial-barclays-bonuses>
, 45, and Alex Pabon, 37, who both live in the US, guilty of manipulating the 
US dollar Libor rate between 2005 and 2007.

The Libor submitter Peter Johnson, 61, of Tunbridge Wells, pleaded guilty to 
conspiracy to defraud in October 2014. The Libor rate is used to set millions 
of pounds worth of financial deals, including car loans and mortgages. It is 
also used in complex overseas financial transactions.

To maximise profit from their trades, the convicted men rigged the US dollar 
Libor to put themselves at an advantage and to disadvantage the people they 
were dealing with.

The traders were dealing with “eye-watering” sums of money when they 
manipulated the rate between 1 June 2005 and 31 August 2007, said the 
prosecutor James Hines QC.
 