
Frauke Petry is, unusually for her, a little flustered. The 41-year-old 
politician has turned up for a television interview very late, wearing a 
checked shirt, a no-go for the camera, she quickly realises. Swiftly changing 
into a cream jacket borrowed from the TV presenter, she pleads for the camera 
not to show her scuffed boots. “It was all a bit of a dash this morning,” she 
admits afterwards. Two of her four children are at home sick – “on the sofa, 
headache, stomach ache” – and she didn’t want to leave them until she knew they 
would be OK on their own.

But this, she insists, is how she wants it to remain, with family as her 
number one priority, despite her swiftrise up the political ladder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/07/frauke-petry-smiling-face-resurgent-right>
 since becoming leader of the Alternative für Deutschland (AfD). Afterdramatic 
gains in March’s regional elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/13/anti-refugee-party-makes-big-gains-in-german-state-elections>
, it is now the most threatening challenger to Angela Merkel’s coalition 
government, and she is the most talked-about female German politician after 
the chancellor.

“It’s not a problem as such, being a woman in politics – in fact, it’s easy to 
move up precisely because you’re in a minority,” she says. “The problem has to 
do with actually managing to still see your children and to look after them.”

Time management, she says, has become even more crucial since she recently 
separated from her husband, a Lutheran pastor, and formed a romantic attachment 
with the AfD’s representative in the European parliament,Marcus Pretzell 
<https://www.theparliamentmagazine.eu/articles/news/german-far-right-mep-marcus-pretzell-expelled-ecr-group>
, himself a father of four, who has advocated forming closer ties with France’s 
Front National. “Before last summer I left family almost completely to my 
husband, but since the autumn we have separate times with the children. So I’m 
forced to organise my appointments so I can have breakfast with them, take them 
to school, read the goodnight story, all that normal stuff.”

It’s hard to reconcile this woman – affable, intelligent, quoting philosophy 
and making references to classical music – with the cold, hardboiled image she 
has projected since she became the party’s de facto leader last year.

AfD has a strong profile in the former communist east of Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> but a growing following in western 
parts as well. She calls the party “liberal-conservative”, rejecting labels 
such as rightwing populist, far right, anti-immigrant…

“The idea of the party is embodied in its name, ‘Alternatives’,” she says, a 
response to Merkel’s repeated insistence that her policy on the euro was “
alternativlos” (“without alternative”). “Basically we are a very necessary 
corrective in German and European politics.”

She predicts that, like the far-right Freedom party (FPÖ) in neighbouring 
Austria, the AfD will benefit from “a breakdown of the big parties”.

But any attempts she makes to dismiss the far-right labels might seem hollow 
after the party’s recent announcement of a European alliance with the FPÖ. 
“True, our meeting with the FPÖ could be seen as moving the party to the right, 
but on the other hand the FPÖ is something you just cannot ignore from a German 
point of view because it’s so near in terms of language and political structure 
– it would be stupid not to talk to each other. We found similar 
characteristics with other parties, whether the Danish People’s party, the 
Swiss People’s party, the Sweden Democrats, the True Finns, also the Front 
National,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffrauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47d0624f8a2736b7813aba21aeb1d4e51b079942%2F0_278_4500_2702%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frauke%20Petry%3A%20the%20acceptable%20face%20of%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20new%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffrauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frauke%20Petry%3A%20the%20acceptable%20face%20of%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20new%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffrauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47d0624f8a2736b7813aba21aeb1d4e51b079942%2F0_278_4500_2702%2F4500.jpg>
 A Pegida rally in Berlin in August 2015. Photograph: Sean Gallup/Getty Images 
The growing cosiness between the parties found no better expression than when 
Petry and Pretzell joined the FPÖ for beer and goulash under the linden trees 
at their election celebrations in Vienna earlier this month, with “Pretzy” – 
the name given to the couple by the German media – clearly in awe of the FPÖ’s 
success after its candidate, Norbert Hofer,narrowly missed being elected 
Europe’s first far‑right president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/far-right-candidate-defeated-austrian-presidential-election-norbert-hofer>
.

Petry took to the helm at AfD after the ousting of founding member Bernd Lücke 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-33593500>, who complained that the 
party had become too xenophobic and pro-Russian. Formed in 2013, the party was 
originally focused on its opposition to the euro but gained real prominence 
through fears triggered by last year’s influx of refugees, which saw an 
estimated 1.1 million newcomers arriving in Germany.

“The migration crisis was the catalyst for our success,” Petry admits, 
although she angrily rejects the phrase used by Alexander Gauland, the party’s 
leader in the Brandenburg state parliament, who called it “a gift from heaven”. 
She also rejects the idea that her party is opposed to Germany having welcomed 
refugees. “Not the real refugees,” she says, arguing that many of the arrivals 
are not genuinely in need. “There is enough space for refugees in Germany but 
the problem is that we don’t distinguish any more between migrants and asylum 
seekers.”

Now that new arrivals have largely ceased – due to the closure of the Balkans 
route, the erection of fences and sealing of borders aroundEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – the AfD has markedly shifted 
its campaign agenda to one of stopping the “Islamification” of Germany.

Among Petry’s concerns are separate swimming classes in schools for boys and 
girls, the rise in sexual harassment, which she puts down to migrants (she 
quotes a website she follows daily that collects new data from police reports), 
and the destruction of Christian prayer rooms in asylum-seeker homes.

Well, sometimes, I don’t deny, we think we have to use provocative arguments 
in order to be heard

Meanwhile, Petry complains, her party’s other policies get little media 
attention. They want to see more balance between the state and the individual 
(“at the moment the state interferes in everything”). They want to improve 
state television (“a regimen of football, telenovelas and American movies with 
no sign of its legal obligation to inform and educate”). And they oppose plans 
to introduce sex education to toddlers (“How can you possibly teach 
three-year-olds about masturbation?”).

Such issues have been buried, she says, while headlines are made by the 
party’s frequent confrontations with religious, cultural and political 
figureheads and its more “colourful” controversial remarks. There was outrage 
from liberal Germans when AfD’s Thuringia chief, Björn Höcke, who is on the 
right of the party’s nationalist faction, claimed that Europe’s readiness to 
accept refugees would only encourage Africans to reproduce. In a lecture, he 
referred to an “African life-affirming propagation type” which had led to the 
“overpopulation” of Africa, insisting “as long as we are prepared to take on 
this population surplus, Africans’ reproductive habits will not alter”.

Then there were Petry’s remarks in an interview – repeating comments made by 
Pretzell some months before – that, according to German law, border police were 
allowed to “use firearms if necessary” in their attempts to control the 
refugees. The reporter suggested she had used the term “order to shoot” – to 
German ears, a chilling reference to the orders East German guards had to shoot 
anyone trying to escape illegally from the GDR. Petry denied having used the 
term, insisting no policeman “wants to shoot a refugee, and I don’t want that 
either. Armed force is the last resort.”

Newspapers widely reported 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/german-police-should-shoot-refugees-says-german-party-leader-a6844611.html>
 that Petry had advocated firing on refugees. Even the party’s unofficial organ,
Compact 
<http://www.compact-online.de/ein-starkes-zeichen-polizei-in-jena-bekennt-sich-zu-afd-und-compact/>
, said Petry had not tried to withdraw the statement “perhaps because she 
recognises that 25% of Germans are in favour of deploying firearms, even on 
unarmed refugees”. For two days she failed to respond to her critics. Deputy 
AfD head and MEP Beatrix von Storch thenadded fuel to the fire 
<https://euobserver.com/migration/132100> by answering “yes” to a question on 
Facebook as to whether firearms should be used against women and children 
trying to cross the German border.

Von Storch – whose real title is Duchess Beatrix Amelie Ehrengard Eilika of 
Oldenburg, and whose grandfather served as finance minister under Hitler – 
later suggested her computer mouse had slipped.

Petry is at pains to address the controversies. “The [storm] about the ‘order 
to shoot’ was a clear case of people wanting to purposefully misapprehend me,” 
she said. “What I said is that the use of armed force if necessary is in line 
with German law, even though it’s not something I would personally ever want.”

As to Höcke, she appears to find it hard to contain her rage towards him or 
her desire to see him thrown out of the party. “Björn Höcke is a very difficult 
figure, to be honest,” she says, lowering her voice as if someone might be 
listening in. “He’s sometimes just beyond the line. When he talked about 
Africans and Europeans, putting a genetic argument to it – well, having studied 
genetics myself at university for a couple of years, I can distinguish very 
clearly between fairytales and facts.”

She talks about the intentions of some within the AfD to try to shift the 
party further to the right by saying things that are outrageous, or what she 
repeatedly refers to as “beyond the line”. Is it not the case that therein lies 
the AfD’s key strategy for gaining social acceptance and respectability? To put 
a message out that is then withdrawn, but as it’s already in the public realm – 
on social media, and perhaps most crucially at the Stammtisch (the German term 
for a regulars’ reserved table in the pub) – it usefully sticks and cannot be 
properly recalled?

German deputy chancellor compares AfD party to Nazis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/12/german-deputy-chancellor-compares-afd-party-to-nazis>
“Well, sometimes, I don’t deny, we think we have to use provocative arguments 
in order to be heard,” Petry says. “Because we tried very hard at the beginning 
of 2013 to be heard with lots of very sensible thinking and arguments, and we 
simply couldn’t get through to anyone. So what do you do? You put forward a 
provocative argument, and sometimes you are given the chance to explain what 
you meant. I know it’s a difficult choice to make but sometimes, for us, it 
feels like the only way.”

She was at it again at the start of June when she appeared to criticise one of 
Germany’s biggest heroes, Arsenal midfielder and member of the national 
football team Mesut Özil, after he posteda picture of himself 
<https://www.facebook.com/mesutoezil/photos/a.552832191462024.1073741825.552825254796051/1430547847023783/?type=3&theater>
 on Facebook, standing outside the Kaaba, the Muslim shrine in Mecca, just days 
after other party members had condemned the visit as an “anti-patriotic signal”.

“Was it necessary to present it to the whole world?” Petry asked in an 
interview. “One could ask Özil whether he intended to make a political 
statement with this confession of faith.” She went on to suggest that the way 
he lived his life “contravened sharia law” because “the women with whom he 
appears in public certainly don’t wear headscarves”.

The party’s relationship with the Dresden-based hardline protest movement 
Pegida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/pegida-germany-anti-immigrant-group-polarising-dresden>
 (Patriotic Europeans Against the Islamisation of the West), which thinks 
nothing of demonstrating with mock-up models of Merkel in a noose, has come 
under much scrutiny, with the AfD often referred to as the group’s political 
arm, “which it never was,” Petry swiftly insists. But the overlaps are 
undeniable. Not only are the complaints of Pegida and AfD supporters very 
similar (everything from anti-Muslim sentiments to opposition to Russian 
sanctions, and even to Germany’s high television licence fee), many at the 
demonstrations who are often disillusioned Christian Democrats, desperately 
negative in their outlook, call the AfD their natural home.

“You’re totally right about the overlap,” Petry says. “Pegida started as a 
small group of friends demonstrating against German weapons deliveries to the 
[Kurdish] PKK and then morphed into a movement critical of asylum and 
immigration laws. They were simply expressing that something is wrong in 
society, and expressed it on the streets. I think that’s fine, as long as it’s 
peaceful.” Patriotism and the fear of “Islamisation” are as central to the 
AfD’s raison d’etre as they are to Pegida’s. In its new manifesto, the party 
recently called for a ban on minarets, Muslim calls to prayer, headscarves and 
halal slaughter.

Petry says she sees a direct connection between the rise of radical Islam and 
the often allergic reaction in Germany – as a response to the country’s past – 
to showing national pride. “Germans are always apologising for their own 
identity, especially politicians, but the country has to find its balance 
again. For many leftists, the answer has been to dissolve ourselves into 
Europe, which I think is not good.” It has led to an unquestioning acceptance 
of Islam in every form, from moderate to radical, she argues.

“We have Qur’an schools in Germany teaching young children that the ultimate 
goal is to get rid of Judaism and Christianity. So when we say Islam doesn’t 
belong to Germany, we don’t mean those who have fully integrated here over 
decades, who are completely fine living in Germany as Germans. It’s a reaction 
to those politicians who stated: ‘Islam belongs to Germany’ without allowing 
any discussion on the topic.”

Petry was born in Dresden in the days of the communist east. The experience 
taught her a lot about free speech and freedom of the individual. “I couldn’t 
speak freely in school,” she says. “You could not even say the word Germany but 
had to say German Democratic Republic [for the east] or Federal Republic of 
Germany [for the west] or else risk the teacher’s wrath. They even tried to 
find out from kids whether their parents were secretly watching West German 
television, by asking what the clock on the evening news looked like, because 
it was different in east and west.”

Petry left for the west at 14 – just months before the fall of the Berlin Wall 
– after her father, who had spent a decade trying to plot the family’s escape, 
managed to obtain an official tourist visa for himself, and then got permission 
for his wife and two daughters to follow. “I never expected the paradise in 
West Germany that some easterners dreamed of,” Petry recalls. “I had family in 
the west, and the cold war situation was a constant topic of conversation at 
the kitchen table. Of course, there were disappointments when we got there 
[they moved to North Rhine-Westphalia], such as in school, where the level of 
education in maths and science was not as high as in the east.” What disturbed 
her most, she says, was how westerners looked down on the girl from the east, 
“which is why I decided at the age of 14 or 15 to abolish all signs of an 
accent or dialect, speaking only high German, so that I wouldn’t stick out”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffrauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d324b10aac1acd33cc0aceb35288fcaf10bb2b6%2F0_73_2200_1321%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frauke%20Petry%3A%20the%20acceptable%20face%20of%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20new%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffrauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frauke%20Petry%3A%20the%20acceptable%20face%20of%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20new%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffrauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d324b10aac1acd33cc0aceb35288fcaf10bb2b6%2F0_73_2200_1321%2F2200.jpg>
 A demonstration in Cologne, with an anti-mosque placard. Petry’s party 
manifesto calls for a ban on minarets. Photograph: Wolfgang Rattay/Reuters 
It was that experience that gave her the thick skin that lets her appear to 
laugh off the criticism she regularly receives in Germany, she says. She is 
rarely out of the headlines. Recently shewalked out of a meeting with the 
Central Council for Muslims <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-36362210>, 
saying that it had refused to withdraw its comparison between the AfD’s 
manifesto and the policies of the Third Reich. Aiman Mazyek, the council’s 
president, countered by saying that talks broke down because Petry “wants to go 
further along the path of populism, defamation and above all prejudice”.

Petry also appeared to praise Donald Trump in an interview, calling him a 
“refreshingly alternative apparition”, who represented a new style of politics. 
“That wasn’t even authorised,” she says, referring to the common practice among 
German print journalists to allow leading figures to authorise interviews 
before publication. “Sometimes I don’t find what he has to say very attractive, 
particularly about women. But he is refreshing in a way that shows how 
[similar] the others are.”

She was lampooned for the original remarks by German fashion designer Karl 
Lagerfeld, who drew amischievous sketch 
<http://www.faz.net/aktuell/stil/mode-design/2.2576/lagerfelds-karikatur-trump-trifft-auf-frauke-petry-14174344.html>
 of Trump with one hand on the shoulder of his wife, Melania, and the other on 
Petry’s. “Mrs Petry,” he says, “you see my beautiful wife, and you’ll surely 
understand that I can’t be at all interested in you as a woman, but 
politically, your ideas are very pleasing to me.” Shrugging it off, she says: 
“I just have to accept this as a side effect of deciding to be a public person 
and heading this party.”

It’s for such treatment, though, that she often refers to the media as 
“Pinocchio press”, and sees herself as a victim of its attempt to “put us into 
the brown [Nazi] camp right from the start”. That includes a cover story in the 
news magazineSpiegel which, she says, “gave me the dubious honour of depicting 
me as Adolfina 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/interview-with-frauke-petry-of-the-alternative-for-germany-a-1084493.html>
, with a Leni Riefenstahl look”.

More distressing than the media attacks, she says, were criticisms from two of 
her former teachers, in particular the man who taught her chemistry – a subject 
in which she excelled – who said that while she was intelligent he could 
certainly not call her wise. Heinrich Peuckmann wrote on his Facebook page: 
“Wisdom is linked to morality, and I can’t recognise that in her any more.”

“It was very hurtful,” she says. “They think it’s unacceptable to be so 
provocative. But that just shows me that the idea of controversy as a normal 
element of free society has got lost, and the fight between the political left 
and right is always being defined as a fight between the morally good and 
morally bad. I find that appalling.”

Her own party has done its utmost to cash in on her image as a youthful breath 
of fresh air in contrast to Merkel’s stodgier persona. The party’s unofficial 
organ,Compact, is full of articles praising her, and describes in almost erotic 
terms the allure of her smile, how the “corners of her mouth reach her ears, 
puckering at the ends, her eyes twinkle mischievously, her chin lifts with 
restrained arrogance”. “Who,” editor-in-chief Jürgen Elsässer goes on to ask, 
“is not reminded of Audrey Hepburn inBreakfast at Tiffany’s?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffrauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a159bb93fa8c250e421d595cdd8639b2612859%2F364_35_2007_2508%2F2007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frauke%20Petry%3A%20the%20acceptable%20face%20of%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20new%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffrauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frauke%20Petry%3A%20the%20acceptable%20face%20of%20Germany%E2%80%99s%20new%20right%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ffrauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a159bb93fa8c250e421d595cdd8639b2612859%2F364_35_2007_2508%2F2007.jpg>
 Frauke Petry and Marcus Pretzell, Alternative für Deutschland’s representative 
in the European parliament, at the 2015 Bundespresseball, Berlin. Photograph: 
Clemens Bilan/Getty Images 
In the same piece, Elsässer argues that Petry would be “the better chancellor” 
and is far more deserving of the epithet “Mutti” (Mummy), the popular nickname 
for Merkel. “In contrast to ‘Mutti’, she really does have children, no less 
than four of them – without having lost her fresh youthfulness,” he writes.

What she has in common with Merkel, apart from her East German heritage, is 
her science background. Petry did a chemistry degree at Reading University, 
spending three years in the city – “not a pretty place”, but a happy time 
“where I found good friends”. It’s also where she learned her impeccable 
English, which she speaks fast and almost without an accent.

Like Merkel, she gave up her scientific career to pursue politics, 
relinquishing control of the Leipzig company she set up nine years ago to 
manufacture environmentally friendly polyurethanes, for which she holds a joint 
patent with her mother.

The time she spent in Britain also taught her a lot about the fundamental 
differences between British and German attitudes to Europe. “When Britons talk 
about Europe, it never seems to include Britain,” she laughs, whereas talking 
about Europe in Germany can only mean inclusion of Germany.”

While AfD is critical of Europe and supportive of lots of the Brexit arguments 
(Petry says she agrees with many of the ideas put forward by Gisela Stuart, 
Labour MP and chair of the Vote Leave campaign), it does not share Ukip’s 
desire to leave the union. Her partner Pretzell’s invitation to Nigel Farage to 
discuss his views with the party caused an internal bust-up.

“What we need,” she says, “is to start with a white piece of paper to decide 
what Europe should be for all of us. If we don’t do it, I think that Europe 
will break apart anyway.” She worries that if Britain leaves, not only would 
Germany have to shoulder more of the costs of the EU, “but we’d also lose the 
motivation for reform which Britain provides”.

It is in her effort to steer away from the “Adolfina” depictions, as she puts 
it, and with an eye on entering the Bundestag following the 2017 election, and 
government the one after that (in around 2021), that she’s now on an offensive 
to project a different image of herself in the media, embracing the very forces 
she has frequently condemned for what she perceives as their false portrayals 
of her.

“It’s not a strategy as such, but I think it’s necessary for people to get to 
know our human side,” she says.

The apogee of this was a three-page article in the gossip magazine Bunte in 
which Petry and Pretzell (pronounced, by the way with the stress on the last 
syllable, so as not to mistake him for the knotted bread roll of the same name) 
posed, apparently at home, in jeans and open‑necked shirts. They were asked 
questions such as “who wears the trousers?” as well as those addressing her 
“shooting at refugees” remarks. She was described as “girlish and tender”, he 
as a “provocateur”. They gave details of the holiday they had taken with the 
eight children they have between them. When asked to describe his new love, 
Pretzell called her “devilishly beautiful”.

“[But] if I was just a nice face,” says Petry, “there would be much more 
conflict between the base of the party and myself than there is. I’m one of the 
few who can bring us the stability we need.”

The waitress of the Leipzig restaurant in which the interview takes place 
orders Petry a taxi, but when she pops to the toilet, the waitress returns with 
a request from the owner to please not mention its name in the newspaper. “He 
does not want bad publicity,” she says.

As Petry returns and switches her phone on again, it buzzes with an SMS. “Oh 
it’s Markus – his divorce has just come through. We plan to get married as soon 
as possible,” she smiles, quickly adding: “For ourselves, not for the party.”
 