
Freezing fog and plummeting temperatures have brought fresh travel disruption 
to the UK.

The AA warned motorists that roads could become lethal due to poor visibility 
and the onset of ice.

Heathrow was hit by delays as fog blanketed England, and London City airport 
was affected for a second day with more than a dozen flights cancelled or held 
up.

Luton airport also faced disruption after a technical issue with its air 
traffic control slowed departures.

Subzero temperatures swept across the UK on Thursday morning, with the mercury 
dipping to freezing levels in areas such as Suffolk, Gloucestershire, Cumbria, 
Devon and northern Scotland, the Met Office said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffreezing-fog-ice-travel-disruption-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525ded34b1dc79c0165fb05a979011bb87a3bea3%2F0_49_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freezing%20fog%20and%20ice%20cause%20more%20travel%20disruption%20across%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffreezing-fog-ice-travel-disruption-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freezing%20fog%20and%20ice%20cause%20more%20travel%20disruption%20across%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffreezing-fog-ice-travel-disruption-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525ded34b1dc79c0165fb05a979011bb87a3bea3%2F0_49_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The river Lea in London. Photograph: David Mirzoeff/PA 
A fatal pile-up on the A40 in treacherous conditions on Wednesday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/28/several-injured-in-multiple-car-pile-up-on-a40-in-oxfordshire>
 left one woman dead and many injured.

The Met Office issued a “yellow” fog warning 
<http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/public/weather/warnings/#?tab=map&map=Warnings&zoom=5&lon=-3.50&lat=55.50&fcTime=1482969600>
 for much of England, saying visibility could drop below 100 metres in some 
areas.

“Combined with temperatures below freezing, there is also the risk of ice 
forming on some untreated surfaces, particularly later in the night and early 
on Thursday morning,” it said.

“The fog patches are expected to slowly thin during Thursday, although some 
patches may persist throughout the day – most likely in a zone from the West 
Country to eastern England.”

A spokesman said on Thursday morning that fog had been recorded across England 
and was particularly thick in areas such as Lincolnshire.

The AA advised motorists to take “extreme caution”, adding that extra time 
should be allowed, tyres properly inflated and screens de-iced.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffreezing-fog-ice-travel-disruption-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91378258fde07a46e072825acf31e29cd36831fa%2F0_116_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freezing%20fog%20and%20ice%20cause%20more%20travel%20disruption%20across%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffreezing-fog-ice-travel-disruption-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freezing%20fog%20and%20ice%20cause%20more%20travel%20disruption%20across%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffreezing-fog-ice-travel-disruption-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91378258fde07a46e072825acf31e29cd36831fa%2F0_116_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Tynemouth beach an hour before sunrise on Thursday. Photograph: Owen 
Humphreys/PA 
A spokesman, Ian Crowder, said: “We have got the worst possible conditions 
really, of fog and icy roads, and that can be lethal. I think the message is 
extreme caution and to prepare for the worst and make sure all windows are 
clear.”

He added that failure to do so could “lead to disaster”. 

At London City airport, passengers were warned to expect knock-on delays 
throughout Thursday and advised to check details with their airlines.

A spokeswoman for Heathrow said staff hoped delays would end by mid-morning, 
adding: “When there is fog we allow for a little extra space between aircraft. 
This is standard operating practice.”

One of Britain’s busiest roads was closed in both directions after a truck 
laden with straw burst into flames. Fire services were called to the blaze on 
the A1, south of Scotch Corner, north Yorkshire, at about 7.45am.

Pictures showed fire ravaging the main cabin, but a spokesman for North 
Yorkshire fire and rescue service said there had been no injuries.


He said: “They have managed to sort [the fire] out before it took all the 
straw. It did cause a lot of havoc on the A1 with it being closed in both 
directions.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffreezing-fog-ice-travel-disruption-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf7b9d8db59d00b34fb36b3401ca4000a3e0f21f%2F0_212_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Freezing%20fog%20and%20ice%20cause%20more%20travel%20disruption%20across%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffreezing-fog-ice-travel-disruption-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Freezing%20fog%20and%20ice%20cause%20more%20travel%20disruption%20across%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ffreezing-fog-ice-travel-disruption-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf7b9d8db59d00b34fb36b3401ca4000a3e0f21f%2F0_212_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Ice forms on a fence post in Clapham Common, south London. Photograph: Dan 
Kitwood/Getty Images 
Parts of the road were reopened later in the morning, he added.

On Wednesday, Public Health England issued advice for the over-65s and those 
with long-term illness or who are not mobile.

Dr Thomas Waite, consultant in extreme events and health protection, said: 
“The effects of cold can be severe, in particular for those who are over 65, 
have a long-term illness, or are not mobile. Our advice to these groups is when 
indoors, have plenty of warm food and drinks and try to maintain indoor 
temperatures to at least 18C.

“If mobility isn’t an issue, keep active as best you can. If you need to go 
out wear lots of thin layers, and shoes with a good, slip-resistant grip to 
prevent any accidental falls.

“It is particularly cold at night this week, so drawing the curtains at dusk 
will keep the heat in.”
 