
Freezing temperatures across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> have caused more than a dozen 
deaths and major disruption to power, water supplies and transport networks in 
recent days.

Temperatures as low as -26C (-15F) caused ice to form on the Adriatic sea, the 
Danube and many smaller rivers, lakes and ponds.

In Italy eight deaths were blamed on the extreme cold and the authorities said 
there were two more inPoland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> on 
Saturday, bringing the nation’s death toll from winter weather to 55 since the 
beginning of November. The dead in Italy included a man living in the basement 
of an unused building in Milan and another on a street flanking Florence’s Arno 
river. They were among at least half a dozen weather-related deaths of homeless 
people in the country.

Heavy snow and high winds also resulted in rerouted flights, delayed ferries, 
cancelled trains and closed roads inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>. With no indication of a letup, some 
schools in the south of the country were ordered not to open on Monday because 
of as much as a metre of snow, the Ansa news agency reported. In Rome the 
fountains in St Peter’s Square froze overnight.

In Bulgaria police said three people , including a man from Iraq and a Somali 
woman, had died from cold in the mountains nearTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> as they tried to make their way in 
to Europe.

Aid workers in Serbia helped hundreds of migrants sleeping rough in parks and 
makeshift shelters, and the authorities banned river traffic on the Danube 
because of the conditions.

Snow continued to fall on Istanbul, and Turkish Airlines grounded more than 
650 flights in and out of the city’s two airports. There was also notable 
transport disruption in Romania and Bulgaria, though many people in Russia 
braved the conditions. About 500 cyclists went on a five-mile ride along the 
Moscow river on Sunday.

Cold conditions were expected to hit the UK towards the end of this week, with 
snow a possibility across most of the country at some point. The wintry weather 
was expected to start in the north and spread southwards.


Steven Keates from the Met Office said: “On Thursday, the showers spread 
further south and east, putting most places at risk of showers. It is going to 
turn much chillier, particularly through Thursday and Friday. Some areas could 
see snow, and some pretty significant snow.”

Blizzards and freezing conditions persisted across Europe on Sunday. 
Temperatures in Poland dropped below -20C (-4F) on Saturday and an even colder 
night was forecast.

Eyewitness: Istanbul, Turkey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/picture/2017/jan/07/eyewitness-istanbul-turkey>
A man died in Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium> on Saturday 
when his truck slid off a highway.

Temperatures dropped to -7C in Greece’s second largest city of Thessaloniki 
and a low of -10C was expected on Sunday, according to the Norwegian 
Meteorological Institute. Roads were closed temporarily across large swaths of 
northern Greece because of snow and ice.

Turkey’s state-run Anadolu news agency reported that the Bosphorus Strait, 
which runs through Istanbul and is one of Europe’s busiest shipping lanes, was 
closed and ferry services halted.

Turkey’s private Dogan news agency reported one of the main highways in 
Istanbul practically turned into a car park after drivers deserted their 
vehicles on Friday night to walk home rather than battle snow and slippery 
roads.

In northern Europe, where residents are accustomed to sub-zero temperatures 
and snowy winters, Danish police warned about icy and slippery roads after 
dozens of minor traffic accidents.

 