
A rightwing French mayor has named a street in his town “rue de Brexit”, but 
the joke quickly rebounded on him when it emerged that the thoroughfare in 
question was a circular road to nowhere.

Julien Sanchez called his decision to name the street in the southern town of 
Beaucaire a “homage to the decision of the sovereign British people” to leave 
theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

The town council selected for the honour a previously unnamed street located 
near the rue Robert Schuman and avenue Jean Monnet – both named after founding 
fathers of the EU.

A rising figure in Marine Le Pen’s Front National, Sanchez, 33, announced his 
salute to the UK referendum result via Twitter. Accompanying his message was 
the 23-to-nine vote sheet by Beaucaire’s city council on 22 December giving 
birth to rue du Brexit.
Julien Sanchez (@jsanchez_fn) 
Europe : Le conseil municipal de Beaucaire crée la "rue du Brexit" pour rendre 
hommage au choix du peuple Britannique souverain.pic.twitter.com/X2as1czVQO 
<https://t.co/X2as1czVQO>
 <https://twitter.com/jsanchez_fn/status/813395903096782848> December 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jsanchez_fn/status/813395903096782848> 
French tweets were split between approval and denunciation, with critics 
lamenting the use of jargon for a street name, “and an Anglicism to boot”. Some 
noted gleefully that the street itself is a circular road to nowhere through a 
rather bleak part of town.

Others commented that the street’s situation between Schuman and Monnet meant 
that it was leading from Europe back toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> again.


“It’s a street in an industrial zone, and isn’t going to shake up the daily 
lives of Beaucaire residents,” Sanchez told radio France Bleu. But he added 
that so many streets inFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> are 
named after founders of a “Europe smothering the people” that he felt the 
creation of rue du Brexit “is justified to rebalance things”.


By giving Brexit a fixed anchor in Beaucaire, meanwhile, Sanchez created an 
attention-grabbing reminder of Le Pen’s promise to hold a referendum on 
France’s EU membership should she win next year’s presidential elections.

Situated in the Gard department, about 18 miles (30km) east of Nîmes, 
17th-century Beaucaire lies in what became one of the FN’s first electoral 
strongholds. Nearby Saint-Gilles elected France’s first Front National mayor in 
1989, with Sanchez’s 2014 election in Beaucaire one of its more recent wins on 
pledges to halt immigration and restore law and order.
 