
From the stage in a packed concert hall, France’s youngest presidential 
candidate looked up at the thousands of people who had come to witness his 
trademark thunderous speaking style.


“Never accept those who promote exclusion, hatred or closing in on ourselves!” 
Emmanuel Macron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/emmanuel-macron-will-frances-young-economy-minister-launch-presidential-bid>
 urged the audience in Lille, a city surrounded byFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>’s leftwing northern heartlands that 
are increasingly turning to Marine Le Pen’s far-rightFront National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/marine-le-pen-front-national-cameron-eu-referendum>
. “When the Front National promises to restore security points at the border, 
they are lying,” he said.

Then the maverick centrist, who is running an independent, outsider campaign, 
did something no others are doing. He hailed the European Union to a standing 
ovation. “Europe is us! Brussels is us! We need Europe!” he shouted. Cheering 
supporters, many in their 20s, stood up waving EU flags.

Emmanuel Macron launches outsider bid for French presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/emmanuel-macron-outsider-bid-french-presidential-race-election>
Macron is becoming a growing phenomenon in the highly unpredictable French 
presidential election campaign. In recent weeks, the maverick former economy 
minister has begun to rise so steadily in polls that he is now seen as capable 
of causing a major surprise in the spring vote – perhaps able to reach the 
final round by knocking out one of the current top contenders: the rightwing, 
social conservative, free-market reformistFrançois Fillon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-fillon> and the far-right, 
anti-immigration, anti-EU Marine Le Pen.

When Macron launched his outsider bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/emmanuel-macron-outsider-bid-french-presidential-race-election>
 to blow apart the inadequacies of the “vacuous” political class two months 
ago, he was bucking every trend in French politics. The 39-year-old former 
investment banker, who had been a chief adviser and then economy minister to
François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/francois-hollande-not-seek-second-term-president-france>
, was not a member of any political party. He had never run for any kind of 
election. He defined himself as “neither left nor right”, and only two years 
before, the public had never even heard of him. He was more than a decade 
younger than any serious presidential contender, and his disgruntled opponents 
inside French traditional parties said he was a “champagne bubble” waiting to 
burst.

But now, with huge numbers turning up to his rallies, rising ratings and one 
poll this week showing he wasFrance’s most popular politician 
<http://www.lesechos.fr/elections/presidentielle-2017/0211686201572-macron-et-melenchon-ont-le-vent-en-poupe-2056665.php>
, the political novice who haspromised to revolutionise the way France is 
governed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/emmanuel-macron-outsider-bid-french-presidential-race-election>
 is being eyed nervously by the other main candidates.

There are no foregone conclusions in the French presidential race, and the 
final line up of candidates for the two rounds in April and May is not yet 
known. But Macron wants to show he can buck a recent trend in western politics 
– he styles himself as a liberal “progressive” who believes he can triumph 
against the odds in a political landscape where support for the extremes is 
growing.

More than 4,500 people in Lille turned out to see Macron, a very high number 
in the historically Socialist city. Far from the well-heeled dotcom 
entrepreneurs who attended Macron’s first rally in Paris last summer, they were 
of all ages, from students and sixth-formers, to doctors, hauliers, teachers, 
pensioners and local business people. Macron is economically liberal and a 
pro-business reformist, but he is firmly on the left on social issues, 
including on the freedom to practise religion in a neutral state, on equality 
and immigration.

Emmanuel Macron: France’s political prince eyeing the Elysée | Observer profile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/emmanuel-macron-france-president>
“I’m afraid of the rise of Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> and if Macron proves a 
possible rampart against her then I’m interested,” said Franck Tronet, a former 
wedding photographer on disability benefit who lives near Calais and considered 
himself centre-left. “Macron represents something new in French politics. He’s 
young, he’s not aggressive, he’s always smiling and that’s a good thing.”


The growing curiosity about Macron and his fledgling movement, En Marche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/emmanuel-macron-will-frances-young-economy-minister-launch-presidential-bid>
 (Forward), is also linked to disappointment in other parties. The Socialists 
are in disarray and expected to fare badly no matter who they choose as their 
candidate in an open primary race this month. Fillon’s rightwing campaign is 
struggling to take off.

Fanny Brunet, 24, an engineering student from Aix-en-Provence, once voted 
Socialist. “Emmanuel Macron is young; he sees the world the way we see it,” she 
said. “I want realism; I’m fed up with politicians making promises that can’t 
be kept.”

Ghislaine Desbordes, 50, a trainer in office management and an independent 
local councillor from Wambrechies, near Lille, approved of Macron’s regular 
appearances on the front cover of celebrity magazines with his wife, who is 24 
years older and was once his drama teacher. “Having an older wife means he’s 
tolerant in life. He’s not closed-minded,” she said.


Macron’s critics say France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> has a 
long tradition of an outsider “third man” peaking before a presidential 
election but then fading away. There are many variables – such as whether or 
not the veteran centrist François Bayrou decides to run, and whether 
disgruntled Socialists defect to Macron, seeing him as the only way to stop the 
far right.

Macron’s trip to the north did not all go according to plan. His comments in 
the former mining heartlands that the difficulties, social and health problems 
in the area included high rates of“smoking and alcoholism” 
<http://www.francetvinfo.fr/politique/emmanuel-macron/trois-questions-sur-macron-et-ses-propos-sur-le-tabagisme-et-l-alcoolisme-dans-le-pas-de-calais_2018296.html>
 were attacked by one local Front National mayor as the Parisian elite 
stereotyping the northern working classes.

France's economy minister Emmanuel Macron launches political movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/07/frances-emmanuel-macron-launches-political-movement>
Yves-Marie Cann, political director at the Elabe polling group in Paris, said: 
“Some saw Macron as a bubble that would burst, so far that isn’t the case. The 
indicators show that he is now a weighty candidate.

“If the momentum around him continues, he could reshuffle the cards and 
disprove predictions that the final run-off will be between Fillon and Le Pen. 
He could re-orientate the second round into a battle that is Fillon versus 
Macron or Le Pen versus Macron. This is not yet the case – Fillon and Le Pen 
remain the frontrunners – but the campaign is about to begin in earnest and 
things could change.”

Pierre Mathiot, a politics professor at Lille’s Sciences Po university, said: 
“There are two questions. First: will French voters accept a candidate who says 
he is above the left-right divide? Second: is he credible when he says he 
embodies change, a break with the past and a new way of politically doing 
things?

“Those factors, added to the poor health of the Socialist party and the poor 
start for Fillon, could carry him far in terms of results,” said Mathiot.

One 28-year-old IT technician from Lille had come to the rally out of 
curiosity. He has always voted right but thought Fillon was “too socially 
conservative and wants too much austerity”. Afterwards he said: “Macron has 
really given me a boost. If enough people come to see him live, he’ll rise 
higher and higher. I found him quite exhilarating.”

 