
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>’s love-hate relationship 
with opinion polls is in the spotlight after a newspaper announced it would 
stop commissioning polls in the run-up to theFrench presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/french-presidential-election-2017> and 
instead do more on-the-ground reporting to sound out the public mood.


The unprecedented decision by the daily Le Parisien <http://www.leparisien.fr/>
 came after months of discussion in the paper’s newsroom following the UK’svote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> to leave the European 
Union andDonald Trump’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> in the US – both of 
which caught media and some pollsters by surprise.
French election candidates 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=bc33fbc9-d67c-4d13-a3b1-f3bac972ffe6>
Polls show the French presidential election is likely to see the rightwing Les 
Républicains candidate,François Fillon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/francois-fillon-french-right-favourite-election>
, face off against the far-right Front National’sMarine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/the-fear-of-marine-le-pen-will-the-next-political-earthquake-happen-in-france>
 in the final round.

But, with the maverick, independent centrist Emmanuel Macron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/emmanuel-macron-outsider-bid-french-presidential-race-election>
 making gains while the hard-leftJean-Luc Mélenchon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/jean-luc-melenchon-leftwing-enters-french-2017-presidential-race>
 eats into the Socialist party electorate, there is no certainty over who will 
make it to the final runoff.

“Rather than just talking about what some see as errors in the polls, we’ve 
decided to go back to the core of our profession: going out in the field, 
proximity to people,”said Stephane Albouy 
<https://www.franceinter.fr/emissions/l-instant-m/l-instant-m-03-janvier-2017>, 
editor ofLe Parisien <http://www.leparisien.fr>, which with its sister paper, 
Aujourd’hui en France, was historically among the biggest media users of 
political polls, which often dominated their front pages.


“I’m not attacking opinion polls,” Albouy added. “They don’t do their job 
badly – they give a snapshot. The problem is the way the media uses them.” He 
said he wanted his newspaper to stop obsessing about the “horse race” element 
of which candidate was in top position and do more in-depth reporting on the 
public mood and policy platforms.

France's far-right leader Marine Le Pen seen at Trump Tower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/marine-le-pen-donald-trump-tower-new-york>
Not commissioning polls would also save the paper tens of thousands of euros, 
he said, adding that Le Parisien was still free to comment on other media’s 
surveys.

France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> has one of the highest rates 
of political opinion polling in the world. In the year leading up to a 
presidential election, there are typically hundreds of major national polls, 
with about one a day dominating headlines.

Even before recent international debate about media overreliance on polling 
following the Brexit and Trump votes, as well as the 2015 UK election and 
Israeli elections, French commentators were questioning their national media’s 
addiction.


Some French politicians have begun to publicly turn on the polling culture. 
“Welcome to the unpollable,” quipped Fillon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/23/francois-fillon-french-right-favourite-election>
 in his new year’s address to the press this week, saying more information 
could be learned from listening to the “silent, feverish France” struggling on 
the periphery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ffrench-newspaper-le-parisien-abandons-opinion-polls-french-presidential-election-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34a629ac3a4e7c93cfa4f62ac255e4926d4d493c%2F1143_0_2186_2732%2F2186.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=French%20newspaper%20abandons%20opinion%20polls%20in%20run-up%20to%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ffrench-newspaper-le-parisien-abandons-opinion-polls-french-presidential-election-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=French%20newspaper%20abandons%20opinion%20polls%20in%20run-up%20to%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ffrench-newspaper-le-parisien-abandons-opinion-polls-french-presidential-election-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34a629ac3a4e7c93cfa4f62ac255e4926d4d493c%2F1143_0_2186_2732%2F2186.jpg>
 François Fillon, current favourite to become France’s next president. 
Photograph: Sebastien Nogier/EPA 
Fillon, currently seen as a favourite to win, had been written off as a 
no-hoper only months ago. He polled low throughout the right’s primary race to 
chose its candidate in November, then began to rise sharply in the polls in the 
last days of the campaign before securing a staggering win.


His surprise victory helped him try to style himself as an underdog and 
outsider to the “system”, despite five years as prime minister and several 
decades in politics.

France has had key moments when it questioned the pertinence of polls, namely 
the 2002 presidential election when Jean-Marie Le Pen created a political 
earthquake by knocking out the Socialists and reaching the final round.

But polling still influences politicians’ choices, namely about whether to 
stand for election.Macron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/emmanuel-macron-outsider-bid-french-presidential-race-election>
, the maverick former economy minister running as an independent for the 
presidency, decided to step into the ring bolstered by his good popularity 
ratings.

In 1995, the rightwing prime minister Édouard Balladur, encouraged by his good 
polling, ran in the presidential election only to be trounced by his party 
leader, Jacques Chirac.

“France publishes a massive amount of opinion polls and that won’t stop 
despite Le Parisien’s decision,” said Yves-Marie Cann, political director at the
Elabe <http://elabe.fr/> polling group in Paris. 

Who will rescue the French left after Hollande’s discredited presidency? | 
Pierre Haski
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/french-left-francois-hollande-far-right-candidate>
“The purpose of polls is to shed light on the public debate. They are a useful 
indicator but we always say they must not be the only indicator – on-the-ground 
journalism is just as important. We have to keep looking at the whole picture – 
including what is being said on social networks and what commentators are 
saying.”

With spring’s contest more open than ever before, some elements are proving 
almost impossible to poll, including the current Socialist primary race to 
choose its candidate.

The Socialist primary TV debates – which are pitting the former prime minister 
Manuel Valls against two leftwingers, Arnaud Montebourg and Benoît Hamon, and 
an outsider, Vincent Peillon – could change voters’ opinions.

But the debates are being held so close together, coupled with uncertainty on 
the final turnout and electorate, that many major polling firms prefer to hold 
off.

Some rival media felt Le Parisien’s decision was a publicity stunt and simple 
cost-cutting.

Roland Cayrol 
<http://www.cevipof.com/fr/l-equipe/les-chercheurs/chercheurs-associes/bdd/equipe/31>
, a veteran French pollster and political analyst, said: “Opinion polls are 
part of the tradition of French political campaigns. We are the world 
record-holders on the number of polls we produce.”

The fear of Marine Le Pen – w​ill the next political earthquake happen in 
France?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/the-fear-of-marine-le-pen-will-the-next-political-earthquake-happen-in-france>
He said there had always been French election night rows over polls and a 
perpetual questioning of them, “even when the polls are absolutely accurate”. 
But he felt polls were more useful than ever on the French political scene and 
played an important democratic role.

“We haven’t got people used to the idea that poll numbers are a part of social 
science and carry a margin of error,” Cayrol said. “You mustn’t look at each 
poll but at the curve of every poll in order to have an idea.

“Polls are useful in helping voters form their ideas. I don’t think people 
vote based on polls but I think more and more voters take polls into account in 
terms of the impact of their vote. It allows them to be strategic and that’s 
fits with my idea of democracy.”
 