
The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
 has said Jean-Claude Juncker needed no protection from awkward questions after 
a video blogger accused a staffer at YouTube of trying to censor her questions 
to the EU chief executive.

Juncker, 61, gave a series of live interviews on YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> last Thursday to young social 
media celebrities, including French vlogger Laetitia Birbes, aiming to counter 
an image of Brussels bureaucrats as stuffy and out of touch.

But Birbes accused a YouTube employee of threatening her career on Google’s 
online video platform if she asked tough questions.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7y-xS_EB3QI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7y-xS_EB3QI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7y-xS_EB3QI&media=>
 Laetitia Birbes included a video clip appearing to show a man in a YouTube 
T-shirt telling her she should not ‘alienate’ the commission and YouTube - 
‘unless you don’t plan on lasting long on YouTube’. 
“They expected me to put really easy questions,” she said in a video posted on 
Sunday. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7y-xS_EB3QI> “It was all meant as a 
big advert for Juncker.”

She included a video clip appearing to show a man in a YouTube T-shirt telling 
her before the interview that she should not “alienate” the commission and 
YouTube – “unless you don’t plan on lasting long on YouTube”.

However, Birbes did in the end ask Juncker whether, as a long-time premier of 
the “tax haven” Luxembourg, his campaign against corporate tax avoidance was 
like having a bank robber as chief of police.

The European commission president replied that “robbers and poachers” often 
made the best policemen.

Juncker questions Barroso's decision to join Goldman Sachs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/jean-claude-juncker-jose-manuel-barroso-decision-to-join-goldman-sachs>
The commission’s chief spokesman, Margaritis Schinas, told reporters on Monday 
that, after more than a quarter of century in politics, Juncker needed no 
protection from interviewers and would not let his staff try to water down 
questions.

“Frankly,” he said, “we are a bit annoyed that for some reason we are now 
becoming part of the story with which we have absolutely nothing to do.”

YouTube said its employee had been responding to an inquiry from Birbes about 
how to pitch her questions. “Our colleague encouraged her to be respectful 
rather than confrontational,” it said, noting that she had asked the questions 
she wanted to ask.
 