
When Bruce Springsteen’s memoir Born To Run was published last month, fans 
expecting the standard rock biography ticking off the milestones in the Boss’s 
life and analysing his albumsgot something of a shock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/21/born-to-run-by-bruce-springsteen-review>
. Threaded through the tale of how a blue-collar boy from New Jersey became a 
global rock star was a searing account of depression – both his father’s, which 
governed his childhood, and his own.

Admitting that he had struggled with depression for much of his adult life, 
Springsteen wrote hauntingly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/bruce-springsteen-depression-crushed-born-to-run>
: “You don’t know the illness’s parameters. Can I get sick enough to where I 
become a lot more like my father than I thought I might?”

He is not the only public figure opening up about the effect depression can 
have on your life. Boxer Tyson Furytold Rolling Stone magazine 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/sports/tyson-fury-boxing-champ-opens-up-about-drug-use-w443250>
 that he self-medicated with cocaine and alcohol. “I can’t deal with it and the 
only thing that helps me is when I get drunk out of my mind,” he said.

Novelist Matt Haig detailed his longstanding relationship with anxiety and 
depression in last year’sReasons to Stay Alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/31/reasons-to-stay-alive-matt-haig-review-depression>
, noting that “to be calm becomes almost a revolutionary act”, while American 
comedian Paul Gilmartin has run ahugely successful podcast 
<http://mentalpod.com/> on the subject, The Mental Illness Happy Hour, since 
March 2011.

Musicians Kendrick Lamar and Frank Ocean have also tackled the illness, in 
interviews and in their work. Oceantold the Guardian in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/21/frank-ocean-guardian-exclusive-interview>
: “My art [is] the one thing that I know will outlive me and outlive my 
feelings. It will outlive my depressive seasons.”

Meanwhile, Lamar tackles the illness on his latest album, To Pimp A Butterfly, 
singing: “I know your secrets … I know depression is restin’ on your heart for 
two reasons.” He later told MTV thathe saw To Pimp A Butterfly as a form of 
therapy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hu4Pz9PjolI>.

Scientists discover 17 genetic variations that raise risk of depression
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/01/scientists-discover-17-genetic-variations-that-raise-risk-of-depression>
Martin Daubney, the former editor of Loaded, now campaigns on issues affecting 
men and boys. “We’re definitely turning a corner at the moment where talking 
about men and depression is concerned, and I really do think that’s been 
facilitated by celebrities leading the way,” he says.

“When Professor Green made the documentary about his father’s suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/27/professor-green-men-suicide-documentary-bbc3>
 there was a huge response. When Bruce Springsteen, someone so macho that his 
nickname is the Boss, talks about depression it’s another leap forward. It 
gives ordinary average Joes like me the permission we need to be vulnerable. 
The message sticks.”

This sense that the conversation about male depression is changing intensified 
last Wednesday when US rapper Kid Cudi released a bleak and emotional letter 
noting that he waschecking himself into rehab for depression and suicidal 
thoughts 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/kid-cudi-checks-into-rehab-for-depression-suicidal-urges-w443470>
. “It’s been difficult for me to find the words to what I’m about to share with 
you because I feel so ashamed,” he wrote. “Ashamed to be a leader and hero to 
so many while admitting I’ve been living a lie … My anxiety and depression have 
ruled my life for as long as I can remember.” An outpouring of support 
culminated in a new Twitter hashtag,#YouGoodMan 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23YouGoodMan&src=tyah>.

“I’m shocked at the response to the hashtag, but it is a testament to how many 
black men are suffering in silence, isolated and feeling afraid,” says Dayna 
Lynn Nuckolls, a songwriter and artist from Chicago who started the hashtag 
with fellow Twitter user @TheCosby after reading Cudi’s letter. “It broke my 
heart that he was apologetic for being unwell … but I knew that his 
vulnerability and authenticity had the potential to open the door for other 
men.”

Alex Lewis, a 22-year-old digital marketing specialist and founder of the art 
projectCar Window Poetry <http://www.carwindowpoetry.com/about/>, was one of 
those to respond. “I felt it was a conversation that hasn’t happened much 
because black men aren’t open about their struggles with mental health,” he 
says. “As someone who wants to talk more about these things it was great to 
see.”

Yet what is striking about both these statements and the responses to them is 
the way in which they highlight how little previous conversation there has been 
around male depression.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fmen-depression-opening-up-kid-cudi-springsteen-fury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23f4e336d2960dbb07a9681167d004a1b868a6c9%2F492_422_869_1087%2F869.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Bruce%20Springsteen%20to%20Tyson%20Fury%2C%20men%20are%20opening%20up%20about%20depression&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fmen-depression-opening-up-kid-cudi-springsteen-fury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Bruce%20Springsteen%20to%20Tyson%20Fury%2C%20men%20are%20opening%20up%20about%20depression&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fmen-depression-opening-up-kid-cudi-springsteen-fury%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23f4e336d2960dbb07a9681167d004a1b868a6c9%2F492_422_869_1087%2F869.jpg>
 Tyson Fury says he self-medicates with cocaine and alcohol as the only way to 
cope with his illness. Photograph: Richard Heathcote/Getty Images 
In 2016 the charity Men’s Health Forum reported that 12.5% of men in the UK 
are affected by mental health disorders 
<https://www.menshealthforum.org.uk/key-data-mental-health> and men are nearly 
three times more likely to self-medicate with alcohol or drugs. They are also 
less likely to seek therapy than women, Men’s Health said, with fewer than one 
in five being prepared to see a doctor.

That failure to seek help can have terrible consequences. “Suicide is the 
single biggest killer of men under 45 in the UK – 76% of all suicides are men,” 
says Jane Powell, CEO of suicide prevention charity Calm (Campaign against 
Living Miserably). “It’s taken a long time to get the issue of male suicide 
talked about properly because we have some very fixed opinions of men. There’s 
an unspoken discomfort around male suicide, a sense that he clearly wasn’t up 
to it.”

Former rugby league player Paul Highton agrees. “When my career ended in rugby 
league I set up a business and it was doing well but I still felt low and 
underfulfilled,” he says. “I masked it by drinking more than I’d ever done 
before and taking painkillers, which I’d been prescribed for an old injury. It 
got to the point where I was on my knees, which is when I knew something had to 
change.”

Highton, who now works for the RFL as a transition mentor for players about to 
retire and for the charity Sporting Chance, says that men find it particularly 
hard to open up because of an unstated sense of machismo. “Especially in sport 
there’s a sense that because you’re physically strong you should be mentally 
strong too,” he says. “You don’t want the coach thinking that your head’s not 
in it so it becomes this stigma you can’t talk about.”

There is an unspoken taboo surrounding male depression, a feeling that if you 
were to admit that you felt anxious or blue you would be judged and found 
wanting. This is particularly exacerbated in certain sections of the black 
community. 

“Black men are stuck between the rock of toxic masculinity and the hard place 
of systematic racial bias that often prevents them from getting effective help 
even if they tried. It’s a vicious cycle,” says Nuckolls.

Last week BBC3 aired Being Black, Going Crazy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/proginfo/2016/39/being-black-going-crazy>, a 
documentary about black people’s experiences of mental health issues. Presenter 
Keith Dube has himself had depression and says the environment he grew up in 
exacerbated his illness. “If you showed weakness you’d get eaten alive,” he 
says. “I think men in general grow up being told that you have to be tough, 
that to show emotion is a sign of weakness.”

Dube adds that the feeling of shame is particularly pronounced in immigrant 
communities where people struggle with a sense of failure and of letting their 
families down. “Lots of us grow up with parents who just got on with things. 
They came over to the UK, worked crazy long hours and didn’t complain, so to 
say ‘I feel this way and I don’t know why’ just feels wrong.”

For Daubney, the key to breaking long-entrenched attitudes lies in 
acknowledging them. “There’s no point in trying to help by telling men to talk 
more like women,” he says. “You have to acknowledge that men will take longer 
to let their guard down. You have to challenge the generations of notions about 
having a stiff upper lip and promote the message that strong men talk, they 
don’t suffer in silence.”

In these circumstances the openness of those in the spotlight such as 
Springsteen and Cudi is a gift. “Absolutely,” says Lewis. “The more 
conversations that occur about this subject, both public and personal, the more 
it helps people to speak out.”

For help with male depression, go to:
■ Time To Change, www.time-to-change.org.uk <http://www.time-to-change.org.uk/>
■ Calm, www.thecalmzone.net.gridhosted.co.uk 
<http://www.thecalmzone.net.gridhosted.co.uk/>
■ The Samaritans, telephone 116 123
 