
Until this weekend, I had never seen Buffy the Vampire Slayer. As a 
millennial, this is kind of on a par with admitting you’ve never seen Dirty 
Dancing or West Side Story – there are particular cultural products that shape 
a generation, and Buffy has had a profound impact on mine.

So I decided to remedy the situation, and at 10:30pm on Saturday night, I 
lined up with 350 other people outside theSydney Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney-opera-house> Playhouse for 
my first-ever late-night Buffy binge.

The Buffy Binge-a-thon (six episodes in total, with snack and conversation 
breaks) was held as part of the inaugural Bingefest, aSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> Opera House festival that 
premiered over the weekend. Replete with cat videos, podcasts, memes, arcade 
games and cult content of all kinds, Bingefest was firmly targeted at 
web-literate under 40s.

'And in the end …' Shia LaBeouf's latest performance art project asks the big 
question
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/18/and-in-the-end-shia-labeoufs-latest-performance-art-project-asks-the-big-question>
The festival’s events were a combination of traditional panel discussions, 
screenings and participatory events, including dance classes and interactive 
art. Headliners included podcast gurus (Serial producer Julie Snyder, Radiolab 
host Jad Abumrad, and Community creator Dan Harmon) as well asperformance art 
from Shia LaBeouf and collaborators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/18/and-in-the-end-shia-labeoufs-latest-performance-art-project-asks-the-big-question>
 Nastja Säde Rönkkö and Luke Turner. The latter demanded not only time and 
commitment from the participant audience, but stamina too: the event took place 
between midnight and 6am, and required participants to queue on the stairs 
outside the Joan Sutherland Theatre for hours with no guarantee they would ever 
make it to the front of the line.

The Buffy Binge-a-thon required a similar level of commitment, albeit in the 
more comfortable surrounds of the Playhouse. Curated and interspersed with 
commentary by writers and editors of US entertainment site The AV Club, the 
Binge-a-thon was billed as both a celebration for “scoobies” (Buffy fans refer 
to the vampire-fighting team as the “Scooby Gang”) and a great intro for 
newbies – but standing in the queue of backpacks and Buffy tees, I felt like 
something of an outsider.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Ffrom-buffy-to-harambe-bingefest-celebrates-pop-culture-with-an-insider-vibe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cee061c30187988ae4d9b9eab2b3c827efffbc1%2F0_0_2880_1920%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Buffy%20to%20Harambe%2C%20Bingefest%20celebrates%20pop%20culture%20with%20an%20insider%20vibe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Ffrom-buffy-to-harambe-bingefest-celebrates-pop-culture-with-an-insider-vibe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Buffy%20to%20Harambe%2C%20Bingefest%20celebrates%20pop%20culture%20with%20an%20insider%20vibe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Ffrom-buffy-to-harambe-bingefest-celebrates-pop-culture-with-an-insider-vibe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cee061c30187988ae4d9b9eab2b3c827efffbc1%2F0_0_2880_1920%2F2880.jpg>
 A performer dressed as one of the villains from an episode of Buffy the 
Vampire Slayer appears in the crowd during the Buffy Binge-a-thon. Photograph: 
Prudence Upton 
That sense of otherness wasn’t helped once in the theatre itself, as effusive 
cheering accompanied the opening credits and the on-screen entrance of 
particular characters. The vibe was very much “sleepover with your best pals”, 
and I began having flashbacks to a midnight premiere of a Hayden 
Christensen-era Star Wars that I once attended, in which I nearly got myself 
impaled by a plastic lightsaber for laughing at an inappropriate moment, and 
wondered if this time I was going to fall foul of a replica stake.

The episode selection was somewhat puzzling. We were shown the second half of 
a two-part episode, but not the first. A recurring character met a dramatic 
end, which seemed very significant for Buffy – but none of the preceding 
episodes gave a sense of why this character was so important, so it was hard to 
care too much.

Still, Buffy is eminently binge-worthy television, and it didn’t take long to 
understand why. The characters range from kooky to creepy to charismatic and 
kick-arse; the dialogue is fast and sharp; there were some legitimate “boo!” 
moments, and I yelped aloud at least twice.

The insider vibe of the Buffy event could be considered emblematic of 
Bingefest as a whole: either a great attraction or a terrible turnoff, 
depending on which side of the fence you fell. If you were familiar with the 
way social media users hadappropriated the story of Harambe the gorilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/12/harambe-the-meme-that-refused-to-die>
, for example, attending an event titled the Harambe Memorial Service (not 
actually a memorial service, but a wide-ranging meme retrospective) might seem 
like a good time on a Saturday afternoon. On the other hand, it could seem 
arbitrary and a bit alienating, like an “in” joke you’d been left out of.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Ffrom-buffy-to-harambe-bingefest-celebrates-pop-culture-with-an-insider-vibe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd95175e31f38cdf9dcbff642ba70cf366b339eb8%2F0_0_2880_1920%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Buffy%20to%20Harambe%2C%20Bingefest%20celebrates%20pop%20culture%20with%20an%20insider%20vibe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Ffrom-buffy-to-harambe-bingefest-celebrates-pop-culture-with-an-insider-vibe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Buffy%20to%20Harambe%2C%20Bingefest%20celebrates%20pop%20culture%20with%20an%20insider%20vibe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Ffrom-buffy-to-harambe-bingefest-celebrates-pop-culture-with-an-insider-vibe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd95175e31f38cdf9dcbff642ba70cf366b339eb8%2F0_0_2880_1920%2F2880.jpg>
 Beyoncé vs Rihanna: part dance party, part workout, part body-image therapy. 
Photograph: Prudence Upton 
On Sunday, I decided to stick with the solo girl power theme and headed along 
to the Rihanna vs Beyoncé dance class, where Amrita Hepi, a Bundulung and 
Ngapuhi dancer, choreographer and activist, was teaching excerpts of the video 
clip choreography fromWork <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HL1UzIK-flA> and 
Sorry <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QxsmWxxouIM> respectively.


‘I wanted something to celebrate’: Indigenous playwright tackles tradition in 
The Season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/dec/14/i-wanted-something-to-celebrate-indigenous-playwright-tackles-tradition-in-the-season>
The class was part dance party, part workout, part body-image therapy: “This 
is a shame-free zone,” Hepi said at the beginning. Later: “This is your crotch. 
You can touch it. It’s yours forever.” As anyone familiar with the video clips 
in question will know, crotch-touching is kind of a necessity here; the 
choreography is all hips and butt.

It likely takes more than one dance class to truly throw off the shackles of 
self-consciousness, but Hepi is the kind of person you want around when you do: 
her openness and enthusiasm is infectious. “This is all about taking up space,” 
she said, as she urged us to throw all our weight into our legs and jiggle like 
our lives depended on it.

• This article was amended on 20 December to correctly note capacity of the 
Playhouse
 