On 18 August 1982, Liverpool city council named four streets in tribute to the 
Beatles. But what did they call those streets?  John Lennon Drive, Paul 
McCartney Way, George Harrison Close and Ringo Starr DriveWe await a road named 
for Jimmie Nicol, who briefly drummed for them in Australia in 1964.  Blue Jay 
Way, Flying Avenue, Get Back Close, Julia Lane  Cavern Close, Fabs Parade, Shea 
Street, Penny Lane Lane  Ringo Road, Paul Parade, George Green, John Lane Happy 
65th birthday John Deacon out of Queen, who celebrates on Friday. Last year 
Deacon was exposed in the Daily Mail for which heinous offence?  Reaching the 
top 20 in the official rankings of the World Professional Domino Association  
Buying video recordings of the entire run of Crossroads off Ebay  Going to the 
shop in a sensible anorak and grey trousersYou wouldn’t think “man wears 
unremarkable clothes” was a story, would you? Nor would we.  Enjoying eating a 
Twix not once but twice a week Betty Everett died 15 years ago on Friday. Her 
best-known hit, The Shoop Shoop Song (It’s in His Kiss), was a UK No 1 for Cher 
in 1991, after featuring in a movie she starred in. Which costars appeared in 
the video with her?  Nicolas Cage and Danny Aiello  Winona Ryder and Christina 
RicciThe film was Mermaids  Michelle Pfeiffer and Susan Sarandon  Eric Stoltz 
and Laura Dern This week in 2013, Beyoncé headlined V Festival. What did she 
reportedly do after her performance?  Perform an a cappella set of Motown 
classics to shocked travellers at Chelmsford Station  Visit the karaoke 
competition at The Ship pub on Broomfield Road, where she finished second, 
singing You Give Love a Bad Name  Go round the festival campsite delivering 
bottles of water to campers with sunstroke  Spend £1,500 at Chelmsford Nando’s 
She apparently bought 48 whole chickens, among other things, and paid in cash. 
Dave Brock out of Hawkwind turns 75 this week. Which Hawkwind album has spent 
the most weeks on the UK charts?  Space Ritual Alive  Hall of the Mountain Grill
 Doremi Fasol Latido  In Search of Space 19 weeks on the charts, though Space 
Ritual Alive is their only top 10 album, reaching No 9 on 1973. On 21 August 
2004, a man called Al Dvorin died, at the age of 81. He was not famous, but his 
words were. What stage announcement of his passed into history?  “Nationally 
and internationally known as the hardest working man in showbusiness!”  “Elvis 
has left the building”The phrase originally came about when Dvorin was asked to 
tell an audience there would be no encore  “The brown acid that is circulating 
around us isn't too good. It is suggested that you stay away from that.”  “You 
wanted the best, you got the best! The hottest band in the world, Kiss!" Keith 
Moon turned 21 on 23 August 1967, while on tour with the Who in the US. What 
did he inadvertently do at his birthday party at the band’s hotel?  Take 
delivery of a 12-foot wide cake, having made a Spinal Tap-esque error when 
trying to order a 12-inch wide cake  Drive a Lincoln Continental limousine into 
the hotel swimming pool while trying to avoid policeIt’s possibly the most 
mythologised party mishap in pop history.  Launch into a furious tirade against 
John Entwistle, not realising it was really his hero Brian Wilson  Pick up the 
wrong bag and give the band’s entire tour earnings – not just the previous 
night’s take – to the hotel management to pay for damage. This week in 1996, 
which single set a new record for the longest time on the Billboard chart?  
Missing by Everything But the GirlIt beat the previous record fof 54 weeks, 
held by the Four Seasons’ December 1963 (Oh What a Night).  Sittin’ Up in My 
Room by Brandy  Because You Loved Me by Celine Dion  One of Us by Joan Osborne 
It’s Green Man festival this weekend, with James Blake among the headliners. 
How many people attended the first Green Man in 2003?  73  300 The festival was 
founded by folktronica duo It’s Jo and Danny.  1,000  2,239 Another week, 
another George Michael scandal anniversary. Six years ago this week he pleaded 
guilty to driving under the influence of drugs. What had he driven into?  A 
branch of Snappy Snaps in HampsteadHe served a month in prison for his crime.  
A branch of Chicken Cottage in Hemel Hempstead  A branch of Boots in Hertford  
A branch of Starbucks in Hereford  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit 
answers  