
Whether it’s Sean Penn wearing Vans in Fast Times at Ridgemont High, the 
macabre imagery of Nas’s lyric “Woolrich, Carharrt, gun powder stains 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uBDmDmyQyZQ>”, or the many fetishised 
descriptions of shoes throughout hip-hop (“I sport New Balance sneakers to 
avoid a narrow path” and “my Adidas walk through concert doors and roam all 
over coliseum floors”), it’s clear that streetwear pervades our culture.

While streetwear is synonymous with cities such as New York – and “the 
streets” in general, wherever they may be – its origins can be traced back to 
early 80s surf culture. Shawn Stussy, founder of theeponymous clothing brand 
<http://www.stussy.co.uk/>, started his business selling surfboards and 
T-shirts on Long Beach, California in 1980. Stussy has since grown to be a 
figurehead for what is now seen as a predominantly urban genre.

By 2011, the global streetwear industry was valued at an eye-watering $60bn 
(£47bn) by Reuters 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-soletron-streetwear-idUSTRE7BL1XK20111223>. 
But just what is it about cities and their streets that makes them such 
effective bases for a successful brand?

By highlighting the subcultures and cities from which they have emerged, 
streetwear brands anchor their roots in authentic subcultures. This type of 
marketing targets millennials in particular, who, it issaid 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/karlmoore/2014/08/14/authenticity-the-way-to-the-millennials-heart/#2d86d27c444a>
, respond well to brand authenticity. In America, millennials constitute the 
majority of the voting age population and the workforce, and so are clearly an 
important demographic for streetwear labels to address.

“Perhaps the most sceptical group of consumers are the millennials,” says Dr 
Dimitrios Tsivrikos, a consumer psychologist at University College London. 
“From the number of field studies I have conducted and my work as a brand 
consultant, the number one parameter that seems to both entertain and engage 
millennials is the authenticity of certain brands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdr-martens-supreme-urban-brands-vans-stussy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b884bbe3c22bbea2b7304a1e5a55f092e9e3bd6%2F0_0_4956_3725%2F4956.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Dr%20Martens%20to%20Supreme%3A%20what%20makes%20urban%20brands%20so%20alluring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdr-martens-supreme-urban-brands-vans-stussy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Dr%20Martens%20to%20Supreme%3A%20what%20makes%20urban%20brands%20so%20alluring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdr-martens-supreme-urban-brands-vans-stussy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b884bbe3c22bbea2b7304a1e5a55f092e9e3bd6%2F0_0_4956_3725%2F4956.jpg>
 Preserving urban culture ... Long Live Southbank succesfully campaigned to 
keep the skate park along the river Thames in London for skaters like Biko 
Dadzie Issah. Photograph: Andy Hall for the Observer 
“While the word ‘authentic’ is perhaps the most popular and overused marketing 
term at the moment, in the eyes of the millennial, authenticity equates to edgy 
and upcoming cultural hubs. But this is not news to the marketing and branding 
audience,” Tsivrikos adds, “because these new hubs are simply a contemporary 
extension of the ‘made of’ factor that used to attract consumer attention. 
Think high fashion and Paris, or cars and Germany.”

It may be the belief that urban subcultures are founded on love, rather than 
money, that makes them seem authentic. While it is possible to find ways of 
making such activities lucrative (the Banksy filmExit Through the Gift Shop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/04/exit-through-the-gift-shop-review>
, for instance), on the whole they’re seen as coming from the grassroots, and 
unfunded.

In the eyes of the millennial, authenticity equates to edgy and upcoming 
cultural hubs
Dimitrios Tsivrikos 
Europe’s largest street art and graffiti festival, Upfest 
<http://www.upfest.co.uk/>, is still free, and according to its organiser, 
Stephen Hayles, “the ethos of the festival is all about inclusion,” he says. 
“We like to include as many artists as possible, and also make it as accessible 
as possible. With the art being on the street, the artist is giving up their 
work for the people to view and comment on. There’s a self-indulgence on the 
part of the artist, because they want to put their work out there, but also it 
is a gift that the artist is giving. To try to charge for that would go against 
the principles of graffiti and the ethos of the festival.”

While we have to pay to spend time in many parts of the city, with areas of 
free public space beingdiminished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/04/pops-privately-owned-public-space-cities-direct-action>
, many subcultural activities take place free of charge. Just think ofLong Live 
Southbank <http://www.llsb.com/>’s vehement campaign to keep the undercroft a 
public space, or that Grime music, which isnow in the limelight after the 
Mercury awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/skepta-mercury-win-vindication-grime-konnichiwa>
, was originally disseminated via pirate radio aerials on top of housing blocks 
just off Roman Road in east London’s Bow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdr-martens-supreme-urban-brands-vans-stussy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7966dc012a0332444d8e382265b2a7b01c7819b3%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Dr%20Martens%20to%20Supreme%3A%20what%20makes%20urban%20brands%20so%20alluring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdr-martens-supreme-urban-brands-vans-stussy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Dr%20Martens%20to%20Supreme%3A%20what%20makes%20urban%20brands%20so%20alluring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdr-martens-supreme-urban-brands-vans-stussy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7966dc012a0332444d8e382265b2a7b01c7819b3%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The largest street art festival in Europe is still a free event. Photograph: 
Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
These lifestyles are particularly relevant to millennials, many of whom work a 
part time job <http://time.com/money/4001805/part-time-workers-millennials/> to 
support an unpaid or low paid career in something that they are passionate 
about.

DIY culture, which is all about making things happen yourself regardless of 
money or job opportunities, has grown as a result of the cohort’s access to
technology 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/larryalton/2016/08/28/millennials-continue-to-buck-trends-by-building-careers-on-social-media/#fc740c7fb412>
. Amy Spencer, author of DIY: The Rise of Lo-fi Culture told me that it “has 
always existed ... DIY culture tends to increase at times when we have access 
to new technology. So, the rise in DIY culture at the moment is because now 
more people than ever are able to do it themselves. There are opportunities to 
reach audiences that we couldn’t reach before.”

If authenticity means doing things ourselves – for love, and not money (and 
interacting with the city on our own terms, without paying to be there) – it 
could be argued that brands can never be truly authentic when their ultimate 
aim is to capitalise on their roots in urban subcultures.

Indeed, the most successful brands can keep their consumers feeling grounded 
and authentic with faux rips in their jeans, as though they too participate in 
subcultural activities.

But this line of thought does not play into the prevalent narrative, which is 
so commonplace in contemporary rap music: that we can all start from the bottom 
and work our way up to the top. When hugely successful streetwear brands invoke 
their origins in cities and their subcultures, they reinforce this rags to 
riches narrative in the consumer’s mind, and present it as a tantalising 
possibility for them also.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdr-martens-supreme-urban-brands-vans-stussy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F801474989f2552af3c7e6d3a52be3b34cac8a722%2F0_0_3072_2048%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Dr%20Martens%20to%20Supreme%3A%20what%20makes%20urban%20brands%20so%20alluring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdr-martens-supreme-urban-brands-vans-stussy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Dr%20Martens%20to%20Supreme%3A%20what%20makes%20urban%20brands%20so%20alluring%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fdr-martens-supreme-urban-brands-vans-stussy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F801474989f2552af3c7e6d3a52be3b34cac8a722%2F0_0_3072_2048%2F3072.jpg>
 The House of Vans event space was an attempt by the company to reconnect with 
its urban roots. Photograph: Vans 


Supreme <http://www.supremenewyork.com/> provides a good example of how a 
brand can successfully capitalise on its origins in an urban subculture. In 
April 1994, James Jebbia (who had previously helped to open Stussy’s flagship 
store in New York) opened Supreme on Lafayette Street in downtown Manhattan. 
The spacious shop, which cost around $12,000 to open, stocked clothes for an 
older demographic, which skateboarding brands had previously neglected. The 
shop has since grown into a brand, and in 2012 James Jebbia’s net worth was 
estimated at $40m.

Although Supreme now has a global audience, it remains exclusive with only 10 
stores worldwide, six of which are in Japan. As well as having a large 
following in Japan, they boast an impressive online community of users that 
discuss, buy, and re-sell Supreme product. SupTalk, a popular Facebook page for 
Europe’s Supreme fans, has over 60,000 members.

 Vans, which is now owned by VF Corporation (and according to Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/forbes/welcome/?/sites/abrambrown/2015/11/23/how-vans-shoes-became-a-quiet-fashion-juggernaut/&toURL=http://www.forbes.com/sites/abrambrown/2015/11/23/how-vans-shoes-became-a-quiet-fashion-juggernaut/&refURL=https://www.google.co.uk/&referrer=https://www.google.co.uk/>
, in 2015 was expected to make $2.3bn in sales), created the House of Vans 
events space in an effort to remain engaged with its subcultural origins. The 
site in Brooklyn hosts live music, art shows, and skateboarding events.

Doug Palladini, Vans Global Brand President, says: “House of Vans can be a 
large, permanent space in London, or a pop-up, moveable space winding its way 
across Asia, as long as the brand comes to life at every stop. This allows us 
to strategically place ourselves, down to the right street corner, and stand 
out with a bespoke, ‘can’t miss’ experience.”

However, brands are not always successful in their engagements with cities and 
their subcultures. When Dr Martens commissioned apiece of art 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=30&v=j9qj3qP-5fU> to be painted in 
Stokes Croft, Bristol, many felt that the advert jarred with the spirit of the 
place. Tsivrikos commented, saying that:

From Berlin's warehouses to London's estates: how cities shape music scenes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/feb/03/music-scenes-berlin-london-seattle-new-york>
“Such acts are perceived by millennial customers to be too obvious, and very 
much against the ethos of graffiti culture, which still holds elements of the 
anti-establishment movement and believes in artistic expression. When brands 
engage in such ill-advised acts, they are putting themselves at risk of being 
perceived as too obvious, far too commercial, and disrespectful of the local 
rules. These are qualities that go very much against what a cool zeitgeist 
brand is perceived to be by their number one customer base: the millennials.”

Brands tread a fine line when they sell the rags to riches narrative, which 
hopeful millennials buy in to. Are high priced goods commendable, because both 
our success and the success of the brand is predicated on them, or simply a 
sign that the brand is out of touch with the lifestyles of its target audience?

Whichever way you look at it, many of these brands have genuine origins in 
urban subcultures, and appear to a lot of millennials as the last vestiges of a 
world in which there was such a thing as social mobility.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion

 