
If you demolish a historic building in Timbuktu you commit a war crime. If you 
demolish one in Britain you apply for retrospective planning permission. What 
is the difference?

The decision of the international court in The Hague this week to prosecute a 
former al-Qaida insurgent, Ahmad al-Mahdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/21/ahmad-al-mahdi-trial-the-hague-timbuktu-cultural-destruction>
, for destroying nine ancient tombs in Mali is deeply significant. For the 
first time, the concept of war criminality has been extended from killing 
people to trying to wipe out their cultural heritage.

In 2012 al-Mahdi led a band of jihadis in the systematic destruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/02/mali-islamists-attack-world-heritage-mosques-timbuktu>
 of relics of Mali’s ancient culture of pluralism, claiming it as an offence to 
Islamic fundamentalism. Timbuktu’s three mosques and its mausoleums were the 
great treasures of Saharan Africa, a culture that flourished at the time of 
Renaissance Florence. Despite the efforts of their custodians, manuscripts and 
books dating back to the 13th century were lost. Unesco’s director general,
Irina Bokova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/03/irina-bokova-un-unesco-world-heritage-palmyra-isis>
, called the attack part of “a genocidal project, an attempted annihilation of 
otherness”. The mayor of Timbuktu said the shrines “belong to the whole world”.

In theory, the definition of a war crime has long gone beyond killing. It 
embraces torture, rape, the use of certain weapons and the destruction of 
property. Conventions in 1954 and 1977 specifically extended the protection of 
international law to “cultural property”, including sites, monuments, museums 
and art works. A1999 protocol <https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/ihl/INTRO/590> 
set out criminal sanctions covering such matters.

Prosecutions were never brought. This was partly for fear of appearing to 
elevate objects above people, but also because few hands are clean in this 
matter. No action was taken over the 1993 demolition by Serbs of Bosnian 
mosques and other historic structures. No action was taken in 1999 over Nato’s 
senseless bombing of historic structures in Novi Sad in north Serbia. Britain 
itself has never even ratified the 1954 convention, despite promises as 
recently as in last May’s Queen’s speech. It is believed the RAF lobbied 
against doing so.

In other words, the Hague case could open a can of worms – and with luck will 
do so. One of the most depressing books I have read is Robert Bevan’sThe 
Destruction of Memory 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/351135/>. From Cortés 
in Mexico to Britain’s bombing of historic Lübeck and the retaliatory Baedeker 
raids in the second world war, Bevan records systematic attacks on heritage 
targets as integral to military conquest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Ftimbuktu-grimsby-heritage-restored-revered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2ab135b9f9cdcda0b23d453326e1d1b18efc8be%2F0_118_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Timbuktu%20to%20Grimsby%2C%20heritage%20deserves%20to%20be%20revered%20and%20restored%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Ftimbuktu-grimsby-heritage-restored-revered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Timbuktu%20to%20Grimsby%2C%20heritage%20deserves%20to%20be%20revered%20and%20restored%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Ftimbuktu-grimsby-heritage-restored-revered%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2ab135b9f9cdcda0b23d453326e1d1b18efc8be%2F0_118_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Ahmad al-Mahdi on trial at the international criminal court in The Hague. 
Photograph: POOL/Reuters 
In case after case - mostly recently the Taliban in Bamiyan and Isis in 
Palmyra - wiping out the culture of a hated people was a means of subjugating 
them. Even in peace, communist regimes knew that destroying old buildings 
played a part in countering the conservative enemy within.

The jihadis’ destruction of Islam’s past may have seemed appallingly 
systematic. But its effect on the ground was no more appalling than the 
reckless western, and now Russian, aerial bombardment of urban targets in Iraq 
and Syria. Some 50,000 bombs and missiles have fallen on these countries since 
2003. The tally of civilians killed by such bombs isalmost certainly greater 
than those killed by Islamic State 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/18/opinion/does-the-us-ignore-its-civilian-casualties-in-iraq-and-syria.html?_r=0>
. The cultural devastation cannot be computed. America standing by during the 
firing and looting of Baghdad’s library and museum during the 2003 invasion was 
in flagrant defiance of the Hague convention. It makes al-Mahdi’s crime seem 
almost petty.

Timbuktu’s assiduousness in pursuing its case reflects the complex 
relationship of all countries to their past. Old places are not simply relics 
for scholars. Millions visit historical sites because they see them as 
exemplars of continuity and stability amid change. As Bevan points out, that 
conquerors so crave their destruction is a measure of their significance.

Irina Bokova: the woman standing between Isis and world heritage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/03/irina-bokova-un-unesco-world-heritage-palmyra-isis>
I like old places not because I always find them beautiful – many are not 
beautiful while some new buildings are. Rather I prefer the display of the old 
as illuminating the new. It pleases the eye and stimulates memory. It is older 
quarters of towns that nowadays attract crowds. This applies even where they 
have been drastically rebuilt. If the 19th century had not restored so many 
gothic cathedrals and old towns, 21st-century Europe would be immeasurably the 
poorer.

Historic buildings possess the same cultural vitality as do great sculptures 
and paintings. We have international laws governing the restitution of art to 
its owners. The Hague prosecution suggests that we might treat destroyed old 
buildings the same, protecting them in time of war and restoring them to their 
cities if damaged afterwards.

Warsaw rebuilt its old square, Dresden its Frauenkirche and the National Trust 
its fire-damaged Uppark. It is to Unesco’s credit that it has already used 
local craftsmen to rebuild the shrines smashed by al-Mahdi, even if it cannot 
recover their books and contents. By prosecuting those who did the smashing, 
the court greatly strengthens the case for such rebuilding.

Yet a new fundamentalism is emerging, that of “historical authenticity”. 
Unesco still cannot make up its mind to restore theBamiyan buddhas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/10/rebuild-bamiyan-buddhas-taliban-afghanistan>
, even though parts of them were already copies. Argument is raging over 
whether thebombed temples of Palmyra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2015/oct/28/isis-palmyra-temple-baalshamin-three-captives-attack-violence-art-humanity>
 should be rebuilt – as conservationists stand ready to do -or left as piles of 
rubble as obscene monuments to Isis. The future of old Aleppo faces those 
caring for Syria’s past with a clear choice: to restore as in Warsaw, or to 
“modernise”.

If a vase is broken we do not leave it unrepaired. Why treat a building or a 
whole culture more harshly?

Our debt to the past is growing more complicated than either wiping it out or 
putting up fences and charging for entry. The challenge is constant. In Britain 
this week, Liverpool is demolishing its earliest cinema,the Futurist 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/demolition-historic-futurist-cinema-begins-11697085>
, andGrimsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/06/grimsby-kasbah-demolition-threat-fishing-industry-golden-ageregeneration>
 seeks to wipe out the legacy of its maritime dockside. The cause may be 
development value rather than war. The loss to communal memory is the same.

If a vase is broken or a picture slashed we do not leave them unrepaired. Why 
treat a building or a neighbourhood or a whole culture more harshly, when we 
now have the means and the skills to repair them? To retreat into some 
ideological “truth to materials” or “conserve as found” is elitist, 
obscurantist and, in the case of jihadi outrages, a glorification of terrorism.

The Hague trial honours the obligation of today’s generation to guard the 
evidence of the past, at least in times of conflict. In admitting his guilt, 
al-Mahdi’s lawyer says “he regrets all the acts he committed… and feels pain 
and a broken heart at what he has done”. Would that all who perpetrate similar 
destruction, in war or peace, might say the same.

Imprisoning al-Mahdi cannot do much good. Making amends by correcting his 
destruction is far better. If Timbuktu is any guide, the miseries lately 
inflicted on Iraq and Syria could yet be turned to recompense and renaissance. 
When peace returns, we cannot breathe life into dead bodies, but we can redress 
the murder of memories.
 