On 4 September 1965, the Who’s van, containing all their equipment, was stolen 
from outside Battersea Dogs’ Home. What was particularly notable about the 
theft?  It was performed by Keith Moon’s brother  It was a publicity stunt 
cooked up by the band’s managers, Kit Lambert and Chris Stamp  It was an 
insurance fraud, designed to recover some of the cost of all the equipment they 
had destroyed  Their roadie was inside the home at the time – buying a guard dog
Elton John got his dog Thomas from Battersea, canine rock fans Manic Street 
Preachers reached No 1 this week in 1998 with If You Tolerate This Your 
Children Will Be Next. Who had been the last Welsh act before them to reach No 
1?  Catatonia  Shakin’ Stevens Merry Christmas Everyone had been the festive No 
1 in 1985  Tom Jones  Bonnie Tyler Freddie Mercury would have turned 70 this 
week. On encountering Sid Vicious in a recording studio in 1977, how did he 
reputedly address him?  “Dear, dear Sidney!”  “Vicious is as vicious does, 
darling!”  “Ah, Mr Atrocious!” Sid Vicious had apparently begun the exchange by 
greeting “Freddie Platinum”  “And you are?” This week in 1997, the crowd at 
Wembley Stadium were asked to stand in silence while a pop single was played 
over the PA. What was that single?  The Drugs Don’t Work by the Verve  I’ll Be 
Missing You by Puff Daddy and Faith Evans  Honey by Mariah Carey  Candle in the 
Wind 97 by Elton John Elton had just rerecorded the song in tribute to the 
Princess of Wales John Parr went to No 1 in the UK with his theme song to St 
Elmo’s Fire in 1985. But which of the following brat pack stars did not appear 
in the movie?  James Spader Just treasure your memories of Pretty in Pink 
instead  Andew McCarthy  Ally Sheedy  Rob Lowe Which band released their first 
UK single this week in 1997?  B*Witched  Led Zeppelin They put out Whole Lotta 
Love to promote their back catalogue, having never released a UK single during 
their original lifespan  The Supernaturals  Northern Uproar Excitingly, Trevor 
Oakes of Showaddywaddy turns 70 this week. What did his son Scott grow up to be?
 The most successful British carp fisherman of all time  The founder of a rival 
group called Showaddywaddy Next Generation  The Labour mayor of Leiecester  A 
professional footballer for, among others, Luton TownShowaddywaddy once 
supported German noiseniks Einstürzende Neubaten in London, pop fans Happy 45th 
birthday, Richard Ashcroft! A sample from which record caused him and the Verve 
to have to surrender their royalties on Bittersweet Symphony?  The Last Time by 
the Rolling Stones  This May Be the Last Time by the Staple Singers  The Last 
Time by the Andrew Oldham OrchestraThe string theme in the Verve song is 
sampled from this version of the Jagger/Richards song  The Last Time by the Who 
Mark Ronson’s Uptown Funk became the fifth biggest-selling UK single of all 
time this week last year. How many individual writers are credited with 
composing the song?  Five  Seven  Nine  Eleven The song was initially credited 
with six writers, before the five writers of Oops Upside Your Head were added 
Happy 51st birthday, Moby! Every track on his album Play was licensed for use 
in adverts, but which product did not use the track Porcelain?  Bailey’s Irish 
Cream  Maxwell House coffee They had to settle for Honey  Hugo Boss Element  
Gaymers Cider  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  