
Today, Tokyo is the most populous city in the world; through most of the 20th 
century it was New York. A century earlier London was the world’s population 
centre, and Baghdad a millennium before that.


Over the course of human history, a great number of cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jun/27/rise-fall-great-world-cities-5700-years-urbanisation-mapped>
 have held this title. From Jericho in 7000BC to Tokyo in AD2000, this map 
plots 48 cities from history, each estimated to have been, at one time, the 
largest in the world.

It’s difficult enough to determining when a settlement becomes a city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/16/whats-the-oldest-city-in-the-world>
, where its true borders lie, and how to measure its population for modern 
cities, let alone for cities from thousands of years ago. This map is based on 
historicalpopulation estimates 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_largest_cities_throughout_history> from 
four different researchers, and is not a definitive list. That said, it does 
offer an overview of the world’s great cultural centres and how they have 
changed over time.

The world’s earliest population centres exhibit more geographic diversity than 
you might expect. Of the 10 oldest cities on the map, only three were in 
Mesopotamia, broadly considered the “cradle of civilisation”. The other seven 
cities were spread across present-day Ukraine, Egypt, Turkey and the West Bank. 
And that’s to say nothing of the Indus Valley civilisation in modern-day 
India/Pakistan, argued by some to be theworld’s oldest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/feb/16/whats-the-oldest-city-in-the-world>
.

Largest world cities table 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=187bmcgKWFnPDsfUePSZeeW1kStgQAs9UraAzE1uQnf0>
 Sources: Morris (2010), Modelski (2003), Chandler (1987), Chandler & Fox (1974)
Uber v yellow cab in New York City

Anecdotes abound regarding the meteoric rise of Uber and its devastation of 
the traditional taxi industry in cities around the world. However, the 
comparison is difficult to quantify since available data is limited for both 
taxis andUber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber>.

One exception is New York City, where information about for-hire vehicle rides 
is publicly available and goes back several years. Last year, developer Todd 
Schneider used this data, comprising over a billion vehicle rides, to produce an
extremely detailed analysis 
<http://toddwschneider.com/posts/analyzing-1-1-billion-nyc-taxi-and-uber-trips-with-a-vengeance/>
 described as “an open-source exploration of the city’s neighbourhoods, 
nightlife, airport traffic, and more, through the lens of publicly available 
taxi and Uber data.”

Schneider has since updated the analysis 
<http://toddwschneider.com/posts/analyzing-1-1-billion-nyc-taxi-and-uber-trips-with-a-vengeance/#update-2016>
 to include data for 2016, showing just how far Uber has come in a year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fworld-largest-cities-mapped-through-history-data-viz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbdda50feca872cd79bed170f53da713321f3355%2F0_0_1621_805%2F1621.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Jericho%20to%20Tokyo%3A%20the%20world's%20largest%20cities%20through%20history%20%E2%80%93%20mapped&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fworld-largest-cities-mapped-through-history-data-viz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Jericho%20to%20Tokyo%3A%20the%20world%27s%20largest%20cities%20through%20history%20%E2%80%93%20mapped&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fworld-largest-cities-mapped-through-history-data-viz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbdda50feca872cd79bed170f53da713321f3355%2F0_0_1621_805%2F1621.png>
 Pickups in Brooklyn and New York. Image: Todd Schneider/NYC Taxi and Limousine 
Commission 
When will Uber overtake taxis in New York City?

According to Schneider, Uber’s year-on-year growth rate was 90% as of June, 
2016. Over the same period, the number of taxis rides fell by 10%. If Uber 
manages to sustain an average annual growth rate of 40% and taxi ridership 
continues to decline by 8% a year, Uber will catch up to New York’s taxi 
industry by 2018.

How bad is the rush hour traffic from Midtown to JFK? Where does the Bridge 
and Tunnel crowd hang out on Saturday nights? What time do investment bankers 
get to work? And could Bruce Willis and Samuel L Jackson have made it from 72nd 
and Broadway to Wall Street in less than 30 minutes?

See Schneider’s full analysis 
<http://toddwschneider.com/posts/analyzing-1-1-billion-nyc-taxi-and-uber-trips-with-a-vengeance/>
 for the answers to these questions and more.

Using Kickstarter data to identify the US’ creative communities

Nashville is famous for its vibrant music scene; Los Angeles is home to 
America’s film industry – but what about other cities? What creative 
communities thrive in Seattle, Philadelphia or Cleveland?

Previous studies <http://www.nesta.org.uk/publications/geography-creativity-uk>
 have investigated this question by analysing employment data. However, as the 
visual storytelling publicationPolygraph <http://polygraph.cool/kickstarter/> 
points out, those results may not capture the full picture.

This interactive map lets you watch who commutes to your city every day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/02/this-interactive-map-lets-you-watch-who-commutes-to-your-city-every-day>
 Pretty much all existing attempts to map creative communities use census and 
jobs data. But creative efforts are often side hustles – they’re 
garage/basement/cottage industries that will not appear in a census.

Polygraph takes a novel approach to this question, teasing out America’s 
creative communities by analysing the full history of projects successfully 
crowdfunded viaKickstarter <https://www.kickstarter.com/>.

Polygraph’s results confirm most of the well-known cultural stereotypes. San 
Francisco is unsurprisingly heavy in technology projects, and Nashville’s
Kickstarter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/kickstarter> projects 
predominantly relate to music. But the analysis also points to many other 
creative communities that are not so well known.


A few highlights:

 * Indianapolis and tabletop games – 23% of Indianapolis’ Kickstarter projects 
are tabletop games, a greater share than any other US city 
 * Columbus and comics – Columbus’ proportion of comic projects is three times 
the national average 
 * Orlando and video games – with a population of only 250,000, Orlando ranks 
eighth nationally in video game projects. 
Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion




 