
1. Dami Im ‘robbed’ at Eurovision

In 2015 Australia entered the Eurovision song contest as a wild card and Guy 
Sebastian turned in a surprisingly decent Bruno Mars impersonation. Australia 
loves the song contest more than some of Europe does (I’ve never seen a Brit 
respond with anything other than contempt over the unjustness of political 
voting), so it was nice ofEurovision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/eurovision> to let us enter again.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5ymFX91HwM0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5ymFX91HwM0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5ymFX91HwM0&media=>
Dami Im performed a perfect Eurovision song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ymFX91HwM0> this year, showy and dramatic, 
and came a respectable second. Our response was atypical, however. We 
complained about beingrobbed 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/eurovision-2016-contestant-dami-im-brushes-off-claims-she-was-robbed-20160525-gp429i.html>
; wepored over the numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/18/australias-dami-im-would-have-won-eurovision-under-last-years-voting-system>
; we claimed that the winner had broken the rules. We turned into Brits, 
basically.

We’re entering again next year but hopefully we can keep some of the distance 
that let us enjoy Eurovision for the celebration of camp and key changes it is.

2. Changing the date of the Hottest 100

The timing of Triple J’s Hottest 100 countdown was called into question in a 
fairly big way this year, as many pointed out that the annual tradition of 
eating sausages and arguing about music on a day commemorating the invasion of 
Australia is a bit tasteless when you think about it.

Triple J executive on Hottest 100 date change: ‘Sometimes the majority has to 
stand up for the minority’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/16/triple-j-executive-on-hottest-100-date-change-sometimes-the-majority-has-to-stand-up-for-the-minority>
A change.org petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/triple-j-change-the-date-of-the-hottest-100> to alter 
the date received almost 5,000 signatures, and the conversation dominated the 
music and youth media. Plenty were against the idea, concerned their national 
identity was being taken from them because they might have to organise a 
listening party on a different day – which seemed a trivial complaint compared 
with that of a people whose national identity and actual country was taken from 
them.

Triple J has said it won’t change the date of the next countdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/16/triple-j-executive-on-hottest-100-date-change-sometimes-the-majority-has-to-stand-up-for-the-minority>
, but is open to doing so in the future. Asa campaign to vote 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/1790178691233537/> for AB Original’s political 
track, January 26, in the 2017 poll gathers steam, look forward to this being a 
talking point next year as well.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtZ9qeX4gUeo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtZ9qeX4gUeo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtZ9qeX4gUeo&media=>
3. The Avalanches return

Wildflower, the follow-up to the Avalanches’ 2000 album, Since I Left You, was 
so long in coming that it earned the status of legend. In 2007 it was said that 
the electronic act had 40 tracks in consideration and they were just paring 
them down. Studio time was booked from 2011 to 2013 and the equally arduous 
time for legally clearing samples began shortly afterwards.

‘We lost our minds’ – how the Avalanches spent the last 16 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/14/the-avalanches-wildflower-interview>
Contributing to a King Kong musical and an unreleased animated film slowed 
them down further, so when Wildflower appeared, it was hard to believe it was 
real and, months later, it still seems like a strange dream.

As for the music, well, it’s pretty good – so that’s nice, too.

4. Sticky Fingers break up

In July a show by the Sydney hardcore band Dispossessed became, according to 
band member Birrugan Dunn-Velasco 
<https://www.facebook.com/IslandOfSuchGreatComplexity/posts/1225641027498855>, 
“a circus of hyper-defensive white supremacy and self-entitled colonial 
privilege”.

The band, who sing about issues affecting Indigenous Australians, walked off 
stage after their set devolved into an argument with audience members, 
including “the lead singer of Sticky Fingers and many others”, as Dunn-Velasco 
wrote on Facebook. Sticky Fingersdenied allegations 
<http://themusic.com.au/news/all/2016/08/11/exclusive-sticky-fingers-deny-singer-made-racist-taunts-at-sydney-gig/>
 of racism.

Later in the year the singer Thelma Plum accused the Sticky Fingers frontman, 
Dylan Frost, of threatening, abusing and spitting at her and her boyfriend 
<http://www.abc.net.au/triplej/musicnews/s4587468.htm>. A few days later Sticky 
Fingers broke up, citing “internal issues”. Frost posted on Facebook that he 
had been “dealing with alcohol addiction and mental health issues”, startinga 
conversation about mental health – and whether or not it’s a justifiable excuse 
for bad behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/07/sticky-fingers-dylan-frost-may-have-a-mental-illness-but-thats-no-excuse-for-violence>
.

5. Keep Sydney Open

Sydney’s lockout laws have been controversial from day one and this month’s 
changes – includingpushing closing times back half an hour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/lockout-laws-mike-baird-announces-relaxation-of-alcohol-policy>
 – haven’t been quite enough to satisfy the critics.

Sydney's fun police have put out the light of the nightlife. The city's a 
global laughing stock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/05/sydneys-fun-police-have-put-out-the-light-of-the-nightlife-the-citys-a-global-laughing-stock>
In February a rally attracted thousands of protesters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/09/thousands-rally-against-lockout-laws-in-sydney>
 – whether you believe the organisers’ estimate of 15,000 attendees or the 
police’s count of 5,000 – and the rallying cry of “Keep Sydney Open” has become 
a defining civil liberties issue for a generation of Sydneysiders.

We live in a culture where “drinking” and “binge drinking” are almost 
synonymous, so nobody’s denying something needs to be done about 
alcohol-related violence. Still, punishing of venues, musicians and responsible 
drinkers, whileexempting 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/star-casino-may-be-the-most-violent-venue-but-exempt-from-restrictions-20150420-1morb6.html>
 the profitable Star casino, deserves the criticism it has received.

6. Camp Cope prove #ItTakesOne

The self-titled debut album by the Melbourne band Camp Cope would have been 
noteworthy on its own: a confident beginning for a band channelling the sound 
of Triple J in the 1990s.

The conversation the band started, though, has made it more significant than 
just another solid Australian rock release.

It began when the frontwoman, Georgia Maq, noticed a group of men in Camp 
Cope’s audience pushing around women, while blithely singing along to Jet Fuel 
Can’t Melt Steel Beams – a song that contains lyrics about sexism, such as: 
“Hearing catcalls from police cars, and they say what you gonna do about it 
dressed the way you are?”

Maq called out the men in the audience but it didn’t stop there. The band 
launchedthe #ItTakesOne campaign 
<https://www.facebook.com/campcopemusic/posts/1132323963499875> in 
collaboration with a host of other musicians and members of the industry as a 
way of encouraging people to speak out about harassment at concerts, an issue 
overdue to be addressed.

Unfortunately it wasn’t enough to get the band into Triple J listeners’ album 
poll this year <http://www.abc.net.au/triplej/musicnews/s4594536.htm> – there 
was not one female-fronted band among the top 10 and, in fact, only one female 
musician throughout.

7. Australian hip-hop’s killer year
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffrom-hottest-100-to-dami-im-australian-musics-biggest-talking-points-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642e8668242e7fcaf262e567c5ca4c65e5b62040%2F0_0_5206_3471%2F5206.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Hottest%20100%20to%20Dami%20Im%3A%20Australian%20music%E2%80%99s%2010%20biggest%20talking%20points%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffrom-hottest-100-to-dami-im-australian-musics-biggest-talking-points-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Hottest%20100%20to%20Dami%20Im%3A%20Australian%20music%E2%80%99s%2010%20biggest%20talking%20points%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffrom-hottest-100-to-dami-im-australian-musics-biggest-talking-points-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642e8668242e7fcaf262e567c5ca4c65e5b62040%2F0_0_5206_3471%2F5206.jpg>
 Hip-hop performer Tkay Maidza. Photograph: Daniel Dorsa 
AB Original on Reclaim Australia, the album: 'Being black, everything you do 
becomes a protest'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/24/ab-original-on-reclaim-australia-the-album-being-black-everything-you-do-becomes-a-protest>
It’s been a good year for Australian hip-hop. Tkay Maidza’s long-awaited 
album, Tkay, came out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/24/tkay-maidza-on-bringing-a-new-sound-to-australian-hip-hop-i-didnt-really-want-to-fit-in>
, and it’s as bouncy and energetic as her live shows. Remi released Divas & 
Demons, Omar Musa put together the Dead Centre EP, and Briggs and Trials came 
together to form AB Original – a collaboration proven greater than the sum of 
its parts withtheir album, Reclaim Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/24/ab-original-on-reclaim-australia-the-album-being-black-everything-you-do-becomes-a-protest>
.

Our local flavour of hip-hop moved beyond dudes rapping about beer and 
barbecues a while ago but the high quality of 2016’s releases reinforced its 
strength.

8. Late nights with Madonna

Madonna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> last toured here in 1993, 
so it’s fair to say Australian fans aren’t up to date with her current 
reputation for performance: she’ll come on stage late but it will usually be 
worth it.

When her first Brisbane show was two hours and 20 minutes late, it created 
problems for her increasingly middle-aged audience, who missed the last train 
back to the city from a venue 15km outside the CBD on a school night.

Madonna's three-hour delay in Brisbane labelled 'breathtakingly arrogant'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/17/madonnas-three-hour-delay-in-brisbane-labelled-breathtakingly-arrogant>
While her second Brisbane show was only 20 minutes late, the singer didn’t 
exactly cover herself in glory. Instead,she pulled down a 17-year-old audience 
member’s top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/18/madonna-fan-defends-pop-star-after-brisbane-stunt-has-girls-breast-exposed>
, exposing her breast on stage. (“Seriously, why would I sue Madonna for the 
best moment of my life?” the teenager told the Courier-Mail. “It was the best 
night.”)

The tabloids were more concerned with the fact that Madonna drank and swore 
during her Australian shows – the horror! – which she responded to by decrying
the sexism underlying these particular criticisms 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BC9d1GLGEQQ/> because it’s the kind of behaviour 
for which male musicians are valorised.

9. Nick Cave deals with loss in One More Time With Feeling
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffrom-hottest-100-to-dami-im-australian-musics-biggest-talking-points-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F803e235f99591d8d616bc7797c93b35e89903d2c%2F0_0_4824_3216%2F4824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Hottest%20100%20to%20Dami%20Im%3A%20Australian%20music%E2%80%99s%2010%20biggest%20talking%20points%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffrom-hottest-100-to-dami-im-australian-musics-biggest-talking-points-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Hottest%20100%20to%20Dami%20Im%3A%20Australian%20music%E2%80%99s%2010%20biggest%20talking%20points%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffrom-hottest-100-to-dami-im-australian-musics-biggest-talking-points-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F803e235f99591d8d616bc7797c93b35e89903d2c%2F0_0_4824_3216%2F4824.jpg>
 Nick Cave and Andrew Dominik. Photograph: One More Time With Feeling 
Musical explorations of grief aren’t exactly new territory for Nick Cave and 
the Bad Seeds; loss has been part of their music from the beginning. But with 
the death of Cave’s son Arthur during the recording oftheir latest album, 
Skeleton Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/nick-cave-and-the-bad-seeds-skeleton-tree-review-brilliant-music-on-the-verge-of-collapse>
, the subject became personal.

Nick Cave: One More Time With Feeling, Skeleton Tree and the power and 
language of grief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/19/nick-cave-one-more-time-with-feeling-skeleton-tree-and-the-power-and-language-of-grief>
The songs were already written – similarities between the lyrics and the 
circumstances of Arthur’s death are coincidental – but the tragedy hung over 
the recording process. Andrew Dominik’s documentary,One More Time With Feeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/05/one-more-time-with-feeling-review-film-nick-cave-andrew-dominik-venice>
, followed the grieving parents and the band, illuminating the difficulties 
they faced.

Art can help us find meaning after tragedy, and both the album and movie made 
it clear how important that is.

10. Channel Seven gave us the other kind of Molly
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffrom-hottest-100-to-dami-im-australian-musics-biggest-talking-points-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4362d499606671de82a1f3cef65d054cfc0552f9%2F0_0_2000_1335%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Hottest%20100%20to%20Dami%20Im%3A%20Australian%20music%E2%80%99s%2010%20biggest%20talking%20points%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffrom-hottest-100-to-dami-im-australian-musics-biggest-talking-points-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Hottest%20100%20to%20Dami%20Im%3A%20Australian%20music%E2%80%99s%2010%20biggest%20talking%20points%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Ffrom-hottest-100-to-dami-im-australian-musics-biggest-talking-points-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4362d499606671de82a1f3cef65d054cfc0552f9%2F0_0_2000_1335%2F2000.jpg>
 Samuel Johnson stars as Molly Meldrum in Channel Seven’s 2016 biopic. 
Photograph: Channel Seven 
Molly Meldrum miniseries review – a surprisingly affecting tribute to man 
behind the hat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/08/channel-sevens-molly-meldrum-miniseries-a-nostalgic-tribute-to-man-behind-the-hat>
Channel Seven’s two-episode love letter to Molly Meldrum and Countdown aired 
this year, earning more than 2 million viewers, sending the soundtrack album 
platinum andwinning Samuel Johnson an Aacta award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/07/aacta-awards-2016-mel-gibsons-hacksaw-ridge-wins-major-awards>
 for his title role.

Watching commercial TV celebrate taxpayer-funded TV was a strange experience, 
especially when it went off the rails in the second episode with hallucination 
sequences featuring John Lennon and Freddie Mercury.

The main thing to take away from Molly was that the 1970s were a pretty good 
time for Australian music and it’s a damn shame we don’t have music shows like 
Countdown any more.
 