
Is it something we said? If you are daydreaming about a summer holiday, you 
might get a less than warm welcome this year. This week, Barcelona became the 
latest tourist destination to hit back at British holidaymakers, blaming them 
for adding toa rise in complaints to police of almost a fifth last year 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/barcelona-tires-of-the-uncultured-british-d0vhr9tr3>
, according to news reports.

Offences included drinking in the streets, all-night parties and getting naked 
in public – and totalled 113,707 between July and September. UK visitors 
avoiding countries targeted by terrorists created a tourist boom inSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>. But money can’t buy you friends, it 
seems – with Brits regularly topping surveys of the nationality that locals 
least want to see propping up their bars. So where have we made ourselves 
unwelcome?

Spain


Aside from Barcelona, we are hardly more popular elsewhere in Spain – even the 
British hotspot of Majorca is cold-shouldering us. This summer,graffiti sprang 
up across the island’s historic capital, Palma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/14/gridlock-tourists-terrorism-spain-balearics>
, reading “Tourists go home” and “Tourist, you are the terrorist”. The harsh 
words were said to be a response to the huge number of Brits now flooding the 
island. In 2014, things were even worse after the island’s mayor insisted he 
would take action whena teenager was filmed performing oral sex on 24 men in 
Magaluf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/09/magalufs-new-drinking-laws-flouted-britons-punta-ballena-curfew-fines-police>
, sparking outrage. A year later,British police were sent to Magaluf and Ibiza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/06/british-police-to-patrol-magaluf-and-ibiza>
 to try to help local police with unruly tourists.

Greece


What’s the problem with British tourists? The mayor of Malia was clear 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/greece/2614273/Crete-mayor-asks-British-government-to-act-on-drunken-tourists.html>
: “They scream, they sing, they fall down, they take their clothes off, they 
cross-dress, they vomit,” he announced back in 2008. And, in case there was any 
question, he added: “It is only the British people – not the Germans or the 
French.” By 2013, the situation was bad enough for the mayor to suggest 
creating an “out-of-town” area for foreign holidaymakers, quickly dubbed a 
“tourist ghetto”.

Latvia


The city of Riga is equally fed up with Brits behaving badly. Unsurprisingly, 
many in Latvia took exception at tourists urinating on the city’sFreedom 
Monument <http://www.latvia.travel/en/sight/freedom-monument>, which honours 
soldiers killed while fighting for independence. “If we also had other 
tourists, then British visitors who piss about all the time would not be as 
noticeable. Let’s not be politically correct – unfortunately, this is their 
speciality,”the mayor said in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/05/british-tourists-riga-latvia>. 
One tourist information company said it hadstopped dealing with British 
tourists altogether 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/05/riga-brits-abroad-stag-parties>.

Malaysia


In 2015, a British tourist was accused of causing one of the country’s 
deadliest earthquakes. A British woman – one of 10 tourists who stripped off on 
the top of Mount Kinabalu for a dare, to show they could withstand freezing 
conditions – was accused of angering the mountain, which is considered sacred 
by indigenous people. Four of the tourists werearrested for “committing obscene 
acts in public” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/12/british-tourist-who-stripped-naked-on-malaysian-mountain-to-be-charged>
, but later released with a fine after apologising.

The good news


According to the Foreign Office’s British Behaviour Abroad report, we are 
getting better. Inthe latest data 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/british-behaviour-abroad-report-2014>
, from 2014, there was a slight decrease in the numbers of British people 
arrested abroad in 2013/14. Most cases were handled in Spain (1,389), followed 
by the US (1,153) and the United Arab Emirates (261). Drug arrests had slightly 
increased from the year before (by 7%) but “the number of cases remains low 
compared to recent years”.
 