
From Jakarta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/23/fata-square-unsubtle-gentrification-jakarta-old-town>
 toMontreal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/16/one-in-six-rule-can-montreal-canada-fight-gentrification-banning-restaurants>
, gentrification has become a trulyglobal phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/series/gentrified-world> – but it is mainly 
in the US where it has spawned a unique offshoot: the genre of gentrification 
parody shorts. From Saturday Night Live to Key & Peele and South Park, here are 
the funniest satirical videos about the urban issue everyone loves to hate.

The Settlers of Brooklyn (Above Average)

The irony of property markets treating communities as little more than pieces 
to be moved around a board has not been lost on the team at Above Average. 
Their one-minute mock advert for a board game called The Settlers of Brooklyn 
riffs on the hipster hit Settlers of Catan.

“In the early 2000s, the land of Brook-lahn was virtually uninhabited by young 
adults with wealthy parents,” the advert says in an excited tone, showing four 
young white people playing the game in an apartment. “Your goal is to become 
the first player to create a fully gentrified colony, with used record stores, 
food trucks and Urban Outfitters.”

Goals include upgrading your loft to a condo, or “building out your brunch”, 
and there are game cards including “Loan from Daddy”. In case there was any 
doubt where the parody’s sympathies lie, there is also a “realtor” gamepiece: 
“The realtor is used to move existing residents out of a neighbourhood to make 
room for more colonisation!”

The winner is crowned Girls <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/girls> 
star and ultimate young-adult-with-wealthy-parent-character-creatorLena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lena-dunham>.

Bushwick, Brooklyn: 2015 (Saturday Night Live)

SNL’s take on the gentrification of one-time New York gangland epicentre 
Bushwick puts three black friends on a corner, discussing what you might expect 
to be thuglife. Except, of course, it’s all about $8 artisanal mayonnaise and 
“unwinding”.

One of the friends describes how his “dog-walking business is bubbling right 
now” while another describes his last party as “off the chain, bro. It was 
drinkingwine, naw mean, it was painting landscapes …”

“You have any cheeses, though?”

The punchline, when it lands, has real impact.

Millennials of New York (Elite Daily)

Over the classic “important documentary” signifier of a low, sustained 
synthesiser note, the young white male star ofElite Daily’s video 
<http://elitedaily.com/humor/gentrification-williamsburg-millennials-new-york/1495652/>
 tells his sad story about displacement: “I’ve been living in Williamsburg for 
two years, and, as a native, I’m truly feeling the effects of gentrification 
now that the Wall Street crowd has moved in.”

Passing some black people and lowering his voice, he describes how life has 
become difficult for him “as a victim of gentrification”, and we see him 
working in a coffee shop where he hands out paper cups of latte with “yuppie 
scum” written on the side.

After all, he explains, “the cost of rent is soaring, which obviously my 
parents aren’t happy about,” and points out that he has a right to community 
like everybody else: “I grew up here, in some senses.”

Full House in Today’s San Francisco (AJ+)

The truly horrifying 2015 reboot of the already somewhat horrifying 1980s 
sitcom Full House has, at least, inspired something genuinely funny: this AJ+ 
video called Unaffordable House.

Set in San Francisco in 2015 and starring “Rising home prices”, “Renters” and 
“Gentrification”, the parody uses statistics to make its point: 70% of artists 
say they’ve been displaced, the African-American population went from 9% to 
5.8% in 25 years, and the city boasts the second biggest income gap in the US.

The show’s creators? “Bad housing policies, tech boom and $4 toast.”

Negrotown (Key & Peele)

Not really a parody on gentrification proper, Key & Peele’s musical 
extravaganza nonetheless deserves a shout for satirising the way many black 
people are treated as second-class citizens in their own cities.

When a young man is hassled by the police for no reason, a homeless man takes 
him through a gateway to a Technicolor dreamland called Negrotown, an urban 
utopia for black people, where there are “no trigger-happy cops or scared 
cashiers”.

Now in a jazzy suit and leading a choreographed dance routine, the homeless 
man sings the praises of this black Oz: “Every word that you say ain’t 
considered slang, no one trying to get in on the latest trend by making you 
their token black friend.” But when the pixie dust wears off, the reality seems 
harsher than ever. This is Key & Peele at their sharpest.

The Lofts at SoDoSoPa (South Park)

The greatest promotional lifestyle video award goes to Matt Parker and Trey 
Stone’s live-action ad for SoDoSoPa, the gentrified neighbourhood development 
at the centre of this little Colorado’s towns plans in 2015 to get ahead by 
attracting a branch of Whole Foods.

In a smooth, sexy baritone over scenes of young white couples eating, drinking 
and being massaged, the narrator intones: “There’s a certain quality to the 
vibe and energy that is So-Do-So-Pa” (short for “South of Downtown South Park”).

As well as “the rustic charm of a mixed-income crowd”, this new residential 
development combines edgy urban jungle with relaxing spa retreat, including a 
salve for your social conscience: “Where else can you let loose your wild side 
while still being a part of helping the local economy?”

The luxury development within this luxury development, called the Residences 
at the Lofts at SoDoSoPa, are finely appointed apartments that “all feature 
state-of-the-art finishes and balconies with views of historic Kenny’s House” – 
a little bit of salt without which no true gentrification scrub is complete.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 