
It must have been overwhelming for Steve Perry, frontman of one of the world's 
best-selling rock groups, Journey 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Best_selling_music_artists>, to step back on 
stage after a 19-year absence. The singer, 65, joined Eels for a three-song set 
in St Paul, Minnesota, on Sunday 25 May.

While Perry has struggled with health problems – first a bad hip and then 
arthritis – there are a multitude of other reasons why artists disappear or 
shun the glare of the media. Often, their music accrues a cult status in their 
absence.

Take Neutral Milk Hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/07/neutral-milk-hotel-return-for-uk-tour>
, whose selloutfive-star performances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/23/neutral-milk-hotel-jeff-mangum-roundhouse-review>
 in London last week were the first gigs they'd played in the capital since 
1998. The group have gained a devout following since frontman Jeff Magnum 
disbanded them before going on to have a rumoured breakdown.

 Whether troubled by mental-health problems, overwhelmed by drug addiction or 
generally uninterested in public exposure, here are some of music's most famous 
recluses.

Syd Barrett – born Roger Keith Barrett 

Band: Pink Floyd.

In 2006, Pink Floyd co-founder Syd Barrett died at the Cambridgeshire home he 
had retreated to. On the brink of the band's global notoriety in 1968, Barrett 
famously left and went to live in the basement of his mother's semi-detached 
house, with reports saying he was so intent on keeping out fans and the press 
that he boarded up its windows. Although he recorded two solo albums – The 
Madcap Laughs and Barrett – he channelled most of his creativity into painting, 
but neither exhibited nor sold any work. "Like many other questing spirits who 
came to age in the mid-60s, he was inspired by taking LSD to create truly 
daring, otherworldly music," wroteNick Kent for the Guardian  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/jul/12/popandrock.sydbarrett3>following 
Barrett's death. "But the drug ended up fatally fracturing his psyche and 
turning him into a solitary recluse unable to function within the music 
industry and society in general."

Meg White – born Megan Martha White

Band: the White Stripes.

It's been over seven years since the White Stripes last performed on stage. 
Meg White, the pale-faced drummer from Detroit, Michigan, married Jack in 2000 
and went on to release six albums with him under the White Stripe moniker. 
Their official split – "mostly" attributable to their desire to "preserve what 
is beautiful and special about the band" – followed a succession of scrapped 
gigs. The duo cancelled their entire 2007 tour dates due to Meg White's acute 
anxiety, and although she appeared during an encore set at a show with the 
Raconteurs in June 2008, there's since been no sign of rejuvenation in the 
White Stripes camp, with Jack recently telling Rolling Stone: "I don't think 
anyone talks to Meg. She's always been a hermit. When we lived in Detroit, I'd 
have to drive over to her house if I wanted to talk to her, so now it's almost 
never."

Sly Stone – born Sylvester Stewart

Band: Sly and the Family Stone.

Frontman of one of the greatest funk bands of all time, Stone struggled with 
drugs throughout much of the 1970s (he missed 27 out of 80 shows during this 
decade) before vanishing from public view in the early 80s (apart fromwhen he 
was arrested for cocaine possession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/17/sly-stone-drugs-charges>). Since 
then, he's appeared sporadically in public – turning up at Sly and the Family 
Stone's Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction in 1993 and appearing at 
performances by bands featuring former Family Stone members, or at the 48th 
Grammy awards (he left the stage before the song had finished 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6mtuKDmA3C4> – perhaps something to do with 
Joss Stone's presence). And then there was the bizarre 2010 Coachella  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sM4RPG_QF9I>set, which involved an ill-looking 
Stone lying on stage and ranting about his ex-manager, which followed reports 
he was living in a camper van in east LA. Facetime with Sly is not easily 
obtained, as Alexis Petridis found out last year, when he spent the best part 
of his summer holiday in Newquay trying to get through to the musician: "Have I 
talked to you enough now?” Stone asked at the end of their interview. “I've got 
to go to the bathroom. You asked me about regrets. If I don't take a big shit 
now, I'll regret that."

Reading on mobile? Click here to view 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Ptrc2cWRxU>

Madlib – born Otis Jackson Jr

Performing under: Madlib, Quasimoto, Yesterdays New Quintet, Beat Konducta and 
more.

The pioneering DJ, rapper and hip-hop producer Madlib is perhaps best-known 
for the critically acclaimedMadvillainy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rpaonSDPw7Y>, an album that features a 
contender for the crown of most secretive character in hip-hop: MF Doom. Since 
the 90s, Madlib has spent a varied career working with the likes of J Dilla and 
Erykah Badu and inspiring everyone from Thom Yorke to Odd Future with his 
jazz-inflected production and veil of mystery. Rather than disappear 
completely, the California-bred musician operates in a state of anonymity, 
rarely giving interviews despite having releasedroughly 50 records now via 
different guises."Some people think I’m crazy, but I’m just a normal dude that 
loves music,” he told Dazed and Confused 
<http://www.dazeddigital.com/music/article/18062/1/a-rare-encounter-with-madlib>
. "I’m quiet, so people might think I’m a mute. I’m a hermit. People rarely see 
me. People can rarely get in contact with me. I barely answer my phone. I’m not 
tweeting much. I’m not hashtagging and all that. I don’t do selfies. J Dilla 
and Common called me an alien. We used to call each other aliens because we’re 
weird.”

Kate Bush

The internet ground to a halt in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/21/kate-bush-announces-first-series-of-shows-since-1979>
 when Kate Bush announced that she would be performing her first live shows in 
35 years. “I hope you will be able to join us and I look forward to seeing you 
there,” she wrote modestly – before tickets to her shows sold out quicker than 
you could say WAA-AAGGHBabooshka <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ot3cVY1JESQ>. 
Despite releasing new material, she hasn't performed since a six-week tour 
around Britain and Europe in 1979. So what happened? People have pegged her 
dismissal of the live scene on a fear of flying, on grief following the death 
of her lighting director, Bill Duffield, and on a disregard for celebrity. “By 
the end,”she once recalled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2011/nov/20/observer-profile-kate-bush>
, “I felt a terrific need to retreat as a person, because I felt that my 
sexuality – which in a way I hadn’t really had a chance to explore myself – was 
being given to the world in a way which I found impersonal.” A wild show 
combining music, dance, poetry, mime, burlesque, magic and theatre, the tour 
was certainly a spectacle – something, she admitted in an interview with Mojo 
magazine in 2011, that may simply have tired her out. “It was enormously 
enjoyable. But physically it was absolutely exhausting,” she said.

There are many more mysteries in music, so let us know who you think are the 
world's most elusive artists in the comments below.
 