
Home to second-hand shops, street food, live music and all things punk and 
goth, Camden Market has long been one of London’s most iconic alternative 
culture centres – and a mecca for tourists. (Camden may also have been called 
the“drug epicentre of London” 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/camden-police-blocking-sale-of-bongs>, but 
locals are trying to do a thing or two about that.)

The first Camden Lock market opened in 1974, and other markets soon followed 
suit, resulting in the six-part complex there is today. But over the decades, 
different music scenes, growing numbers of tourists and a changing local 
demographic have meant that its offerings – and fashionability – have evolved.

As the area now looks ahead to a major redevelopment project, we’re keen to 
hear your stories and memories – and see your old photos – of Camden Market. 
How has it changed over the years? What do you love – or hate – about it? What 
tales do you have from going there?

From punk to pop-ups, from epic nights out to much-loved market stalls, share 
your stories, memories and photos of Camden Market with GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5829f5c6e4b05c05c52f4ee5> (by 
clicking on the blue “contribute” button) and we’ll publish a selection on
Guardian Cities <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>. 

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed 
prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on 
the Guardian site. 
 * Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join in the discussion  