
When the White Stripes <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/thewhitestripes> 
conquered Britain in 2001, in a campaign that took all of a week, the novelty 
of seeing a two-piece band was countered by scepticism from the chin-strokers. 
"No bass player?" they mused. "How will that work if they play longer sets and 
bigger stages?" Countless headline festival slots answered that question, but 
Jack and his "little sister" Meg were still considered unique; the Musicians 
Union wouldn't have foreseen what happened next. While the myth of four guys 
who shook the world has served us well from the Beatles to the Roses, in 2012, 
two-piece bands are now the industry-standard shape of cool rock.

Recessionary factors are undoubtedly at play: for the acts, it's cheaper and 
easier to pack the gear, travel, get gigs and make ends meet; for the labels, 
two egos are easier to deal with than four, and often more artistically 
simpatico. The recent success ofSleigh Bells 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/sleigh-bells>, Beach House, Crystal Castles 
and Summer Camp has shown that a partnership can produce a more tightly focused 
project.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTRVCtbfuDqw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTRVCtbfuDqw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTRVCtbfuDqw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Reading this on mobile? Click here to view 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/TRVCtbfuDqw>

All those acts, like the Kills before them, are happy to embellish their live 
sound with loops, synths and samples, but those two-pieces who make a virtue of 
their restricted means are arguably more interesting. Trailblazers in this 
respect wereDeath From Above 1979 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2005/jun/17/1>, who didn't let their 
minimalist drums'n'bass set-up stop them from going full-on disco-punk. 
Brighton'sBlood Red Shoes <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/blood-red-shoes>, 
too, manage to channel every early-90s US college rock band, despite the 
absence of a bassist, second guitarist and plaid shirts. Here to save us from 
the Mumfords/Marling axis of niceness are doughty folk-grunge pairingTwo 
Gallants <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2007/nov/16/folk.popandrock>; while 
in the not-entirely-crowded field of post-Black Keys blues-rock duos you might 
want to listen to, theHot Soles <http://www.hot-soles.com/> deserve kudos for 
sounding like Solomon Burke fronting a 60s power trio (without the bassist, 
naturally).

This year has seen an unexpected Black Keys-style breakthrough for Vancouver's 
Japandroids 
<http://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/16564-japandroids-celebration-rock/>, 
who've blossomed from a noise-rock duo into blue-collar anthemicists, acclaimed 
by the NY Times as having "by far the most exuberant, affirming live show" of 
any two-piece they've seen (that's including the White Stripes). The US public 
agrees: the band's Celebration Rock album went top 40.

In February, a Philadelphia festival dedicated solely to two-pieces showcased 
no less than 40, from turbo thrashers+HIRS+ <http://hirs.bandcamp.com/> (who've 
just released a 100-track album) to intense feminist punks Trophy Wife (not to 
be confused with the Oxford band of the same name who have three members, the 
hippies). "I thought it'd be cool to see what two-pieces were out there," Two 
Piece Fest organiser Craig Woods told the Philadelphia Weekly. "Apparently 
there's a shit ton."

There's undoubtedly purity in a pairing: you can't contemplate the White 
Stripes re-forming without Meg; it would be every bit as forlorn as when one 
London boozer listed a knees-up in the Guide featuring "Chas & Dave (not 
original Dave)". With Two Piece Fest inspiring a copycat event in Wellington, 
New Zealand this year – headlined by Aussie thrash-pop scampsDZ Deathrays 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/bands-in-transit/band/details/40> – and 
festivals having a tough time of it, will UK promoters be next to see the 
benefit of binary bands? They could save 50% on riders alone.



 <>Listen on Spotify

Reading this on mobile? Click here to listen 
<https://embed.spotify.com/?uri=spotify:user:thehorse1:playlist:2RcfBdbApgrHbFELwAvO31>
 