
Welcome back, the Singles soundtrack! News arrives that the music that 
accompanied Cameron Crowe’s 1992 grunge romcom – all of the plaid, none of the 
heroin! – is to be reissued in the mandatory 25th-anniversary deluxe edition, 
with 31 tracks of down-tuned goodness, including Matt Dillon’s cover of 
Mudhoney’s Touch Me I’m Sick, retitled Touch Me I’m Dick. The movie was a 
moderate hit, but the soundtrack – a handy primer to a fast emerging scene – 
was a smash, going double platinum in the US and reaching the Top 10. So, while 
rock histories tend not to dwell on it as key moment in grunge history, that’s 
what it was. And there is, in fact, a rich history of soundtracks capturing a 
moment and preserving it. Here are some more …

Pulp Fiction
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do5qXCzknxn8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do5qXCzknxn8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do5qXCzknxn8&media=>
When? 1994.

How popular? Like Singles, it sold more than 2m copies, and went Top 10 in the 
States.

What moment did it capture? The point where pop culture’s arbiters realised 
they could steal from everything simultaneously. Quentin Tarantino did just 
that in his films, and he carried it over to his soundtracks. This was 
streaming shuffle culture, two decades early – with Al Green, Urge Overkill, 
Dick Dale and Dusty Springfield nestling next to each other in an explosion of 
great pop and postmodernism.

What legacy did it leave? For a while, you couldn’t turn on the TV without 
hearing a surf instrumental used as a signifier of edgy cool – in ads, TV shows 
or movies – thanks to the impact Misirlou by Dick Dale and the Del-Tones inPulp 
Fiction <https://www.theguardian.com/film/pulp-fiction>. Urge Overkill’s 
version of Girl, You’ll Be a Woman Soon briefly took them into the major 
leagues, and You Never Can Tell suddenly overtook Johnny B Goode as Chuck 
Berry’s most popular song.

O Brother, Where Art Thou?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D82_bhD0_Trw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D82_bhD0_Trw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D82_bhD0_Trw&media=>
When? 2000.

How popular? Eight times platinum. Sales of almost 8m. Multiple Grammy awards. 
The Country Music Associations’s album of the year. Big enough, in short, to be 
a big album full stop, not just a big soundtrack.

What moment did it capture? The rise of Americana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/americana>, in which the folk music of the 
American south was snatched back from Nashville. This had been gathering pace 
for several years, thanks to the rise of alt country, but the O Brother 
soundtrack took it right into the mainstream.

What legacy did it leave? T Bone Burnett’s soundtrack featured legends such as 
Ralph Stanley and Emmylou Harris, but also propelled younger artists such as 
Alison Krauss and Gillian Welch before a much bigger audience, taking them out 
of the box marked “country” and into millions of CD collections. At the same 
time, scores of other artists exploring the music of old, weird America began 
to find fans whose curiosity had been piqued by O Brother.

Judgment Night
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpfFD709OtFM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpfFD709OtFM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpfFD709OtFM&media=>
When? 1993.

How popular? Not so big, this one, peaking at No 17 on the Billboard chart.

What moment did it capture? The ascension of rap-metal. It had already been a 
thing, but largely through one-off partnerships such as Public Enemy teaming 
with Anthrax for a version of Bring the Noise. The Judgment Night soundtrack 
was an entire album of rappers collaborating with rock bands, bands drawn 
usually – though not entirely – from the heavier end of the spectrum.

What legacy did it leave? Judgment Night did not invent rap metal, or its 
offspring nu metal. But it did come out just as rap metal was becoming a thing, 
rather than a number of isolated things: Rage Against the Machine formed in 
1991, Korn in 93, Limp Bizkit two years later, with Linkin Park following in 96.

Trainspotting
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjQvUBf5l7Vw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjQvUBf5l7Vw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjQvUBf5l7Vw&media=>
When? 1996.

How popular? Popular enough that it spawned a second volume from the same 
film, popular enough that it has spent 268 weeks on the UK soundtracks chart 
(No 15 this week). Popular enough that its two volumes gave Iggy Pop his 
second- and third-biggest hit singles (The Passenger reached No 22 and Lust for 
Life peaked at No 26).

What moment did it capture? Cool Britannia. The first volume stuck Britpop 
favourites (Sleeper, Blur, Elastica, Pulp) alongside stars of the UK dance 
scene (Leftfield, Underworld) and some venerated legends (Iggy, Brian Eno, New 
Order, Lou Reed). This was bright, confident unabashedly British music at its 
zenith, before it became all Northern Uproar and Shed Seven.

What legacy did it leave? Britpop itself faded away fairly briskly, a victim 
of its own success, and Trainspotting – both film and soundtrack – became very 
much a period piece. But by putting Underworld’s Born Slippy .NUXX in front of 
a mass audience, it gave groups of city centre drunks the opportunity to shout 
“Lagerlagerlagerlager!” for years afterwards.

American Graffiti
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyYf_nyjvxlI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyYf_nyjvxlI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyYf_nyjvxlI&media=>
When? 1973.

How popular? Another Top 10 US album, which went triple platinum, giving rise 
to two sequel albums of oldies.

What moment did it capture? US nostalgia for pre-Vietnam innocence. Goerge 
Lucas’s movie is the tale of one night in the lives of a group of Californian 
kids at the end of summer 1962. But, really, it was a reverie for simpler 
times, when cars and girls mattered more than body bags and booby traps. The 
soundtrack – 41 hits from 1954 to 1964 – was that innocence captured in song. 
No protests songs here, just Love Potion No 9 and Get a Job and Green Onions 
and All Summer Long and the like.

What legacy did it leave? Not a lot, really. American Graffiti inspired Happy 
Days, and was part of the same wave of nostalgia that also gave the world the 
stage musical Grease. And though 50s-set teen films would pop up occasionally 
for years afterwards, it was hard to see the influence of theAmerican Graffiti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-graffiti> soundtrack in any of the 
periodic revivals of rock’n’roll on either side of the Atlantic.

Garden State
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtM95nMyufXo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtM95nMyufXo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtM95nMyufXo&media=>
When? 2004.


How popular? A platinum seller in the US, which also earned the film’s 
director and star, Zach Braff – who put the soundtrack together as “a mix CD 
with all of the music that I felt was scoring my life” – a Grammy for best 
compilation soundtrack album.

What moment did it capture? Whey-faced American indie at its moment of 
apotheosis, the very point at which the words “Pitchfork approved” could 
convince young people with backpacks and crumpled shirts to buy any old tat – 
bin liners, cat litter, slippers with headlights, even Clap Your Hands Say Yeah 
albums.

What legacy did it leave? “You gotta hear this one song,” Natalie Portman’s 
character said to Braff’s. “It’ll change your life, I swear.” The song was New 
Slang by the Shins, and it launched them as a significant band – not that they 
realised it when they let the song be used. “I got a call from Stuart, my A&R 
person at Sub Pop, and the idea was that there was this indie film that was 
going to be made. And we had said yes to a couple of things already – small 
films, you know, it was just kinda let them use it, maybe we’ll get a free 
video out of it,” James Mercer told me in 2013. “And so there was an indie film 
being made, the guy who was going to direct it was in a comedy on TV, which 
wasn’t very well known at the time. I didn’t know what it was. And so we said 
yes to it and we forgot about it.”

Saturday Night Fever
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfy0rYUvn7To&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfy0rYUvn7To>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfy0rYUvn7To&media=>
When? 1977.


How popular? The daddy of them all. The seventh best selling album of all time 
(The Bodyguard soundtrack has sold more, but it doesn’t capture any sort of 
moment in the same way), with an estimated 40m copies shifted. It has been 
added to the National Recording Registry in the Library of Congress for its 
cultural significance.

What moment did it capture? Disco, in all its pomp. By 1977, there had been 
scores of disco hits, butSaturday Night Fever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/saturday-night-fever> was where it moved from 
being popular to absolutely unavoidable.

What legacy did it leave? Some of its legacy is stylistic – the caricature of 
the disco dude in the wide lapelled white suit. Some is unfortunate – the Bee 
Gees, whose songs were the backbone of the double album, were unfairly 
stereotyped as medallion-sporting disco lotharios, and nothing more, to the 
detriment of their record sales in the 1980s. But that’s the effect of a 
massive hit movie and a massive hit album: Saturday Night Fever, for better or 
worse, codified disco for a huge international audience, both as a style of 
music and a way of dancing. And in proving that it need not be just the music 
of the metropolitan clubbers, sent scores of major stars out to record their 
own disco hits – Rod Stewart, Blondie, ELO, Barbra Streisand …
 