
The Vunipola boys were never meant to become rugby players. Their father, 
Fe’ao, played the game all his young life, as his father and grandfather had 
before him. But Fe’ao and his wife, Singa, wanted Mako and Billy to become 
professionals, “doctors, lawyers, teachers, anything which would last”. Rugby, 
Fe’ao says, “is a hard life and a short one”. He recalls one night in Pontypool 
when he was brooding on just how hard and short it can be. He had been to 
training thinking he would be playing that weekend but was told he had been 
dropped from the squad. Which meant no match fee and no win bonus, so no money 
that week. He went home, and when he walked in he found his two boys in front 
of the TV, wrestling with each other on the rug. “Mako was on top of Billy, 
squeezing his neck.”

They were supposed to be studying. “We had this timetable. After school the 
boys come home, do chores, play or watch TV, shower, tea, then homework for two 
hours, then bed. Every night.” Fe’ao stood over them. “I told you to focus on 
your study, and here you are,” he said. “Playing when you are supposed to be 
doing your homework.” He told them to get changed. “We are going training.” 
Outside a storm was blowing and freezing sleet was falling on the icy streets. 
“The boys cried: ‘Oh no!’ and even Singa tried to stop me. But I said: ‘No, 
they have to focus, if they want to play this is what they have to do.’” Five 
minutes later they were all out the door.

Eddie Jones to reshuffle backline for England Test against Fiji
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/15/eddie-jones-england-test-fiji> 
“I’ll never forget it, it was snowing, and it was so cold, and I thought: 
‘What have I done?’”

There was a small church at the end of their road, and beyond it a large hill. 
“How many, Dad?” Mako asked. “You do 10, I will do 20.” So they started running 
up and down, pausing to rest in the lee of a big fence between each circuit. 
When it was over, Fe’ao pulled the boys in close and said: “‘If you want to be 
a professional, this is what life will be like. It will be hard. Harder than 
this.’ And I thought: ‘This will stop them from deciding to play rugby.’” He 
smiles. Singa cuts in: “And from that day onwards they were determined to play 
rugby.” Fe’ao laughs. “After that they changed. They became more focused on 
both their studies and their rugby.”

He never tried to discourage them again.

Years later, Billy, 24, is England’s vice-captain and a man, says Eddie Jones, 
“who can become the best No8 in the world”. His elder brother, Mako, 25, has 
finally become England’s first-choice loosehead prop after four years on the 
substitutes’ bench. His form this season has been so good that he too has now 
been singled out as one of the world’s very best players in his position. So 
the foundations of England’s pack were laid down by one Tongan family, who only 
moved to Great Britain in 1999. Their story is a timely reminder of the 
contribution migrants make to this country. “More than anything,” Singa says, 
“we are so happy that they have given England something to be proud of, because 
England has been so good to them.”

Fe’ao’s father, Sione, used to dream that one of his grandchildren would play 
for England. He persuaded the family to move here when the agent Phil Kingsley 
Jones offered to help fix Fe’ao a two‑year contract at Pontypool.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb109e338a9884dab0879248f505ea132a3bcf57%2F0_274_1506_1881%2F1506.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb109e338a9884dab0879248f505ea132a3bcf57%2F0_274_1506_1881%2F1506.jpg>
 The boys’ father Fe’ao Vunipola in 1994, the captain of the Tonga side, before 
they played Wales. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
“In Tonga our perception of the United Kingdom is that it is a land of milk 
and honey,” says Singa. “When you get to Great Britain, you get to the world.”

“My father Sione was very old‑fashioned,” Fe’ao says. “He looked at Great 
Britain as the best.”

Many Tongans move to New Zealand or Australia, and the Vunipolas spent time 
living, working and studying in both countries – with Mako born in Wellington 
and Billy in Sydney. “But he still thought of them as colonies,” Fe’ao 
explains. “And he said why go to the colony when you could go to the 
superpower?”

In Pontypool, Fe’ao lived in a small flat that had no central heating. He used 
to sleep in his trousers and coat. It didn’t matter. “For me, it was the first 
place I had been, so it was the best place I had been. It was my dream.”

Singa was still back in Tonga with the children. She was working at the 
customs office and thinking of entering the church. But Sione persuaded her 
that the family should travel over to live with Fe’ao. When his contract was 
over, they all came home again. And Sione called his son a coward for quitting 
the UK. “He said: ‘I want you to take your family to Britain,’” Singa 
remembers,“‘and don’t come back here until you are citizens.’” So Fe’ao signed 
another contract, this time with Pontypridd.

In Wales, the Vunipolas built a life around two poles, the rugby club and the 
church. “I think it could be different if we weren’t involved with rugby,” says 
Fe’ao. “Being a rugby player people approach you and accept you more easily.” 
There was an expectation that because Fe’ao played rugby, Mako and Billy would 
do, too. They had the build for it. Always had done.

Mako was a 12lb baby, Billy a little lighter but taller, longer-limbed. “I 
will never forget the day I took them shopping for school uniforms,” Singa 
says. “The lady at the school store said: ‘How old are they?’ and I said: ‘One 
is six and one is eight.’ And she went to pick up the six and the eight sizes.” 
When the sales assistant brought over the clothes Singa said “sorry” and sent 
her away again. She ended up buying two teenage sets and shortening the sleeves 
and legs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F557526d9b31f73bc616f69abde8fa740a05180e6%2F0_96_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F557526d9b31f73bc616f69abde8fa740a05180e6%2F0_96_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Mako Vunipola, far right in the back row, and Billy, fourth right, played for 
East Wales schools alongside Wales’s Taulupe Faletau, third right in the back 
row. Photograph: John Rees 
The boys had the build but not the natural talent. During his first match 
Billy just stood in the middle of the field watching the ball while it whizzed 
around him. “I stood on the side shouting: ‘Catch the ball, Billy! Catch the 
ball!’” He soon improved.

“We had no toys for them,” says Fe’ao. “The rugby ball was their only toy. So 
that’s all they would play with. I had to stop them from playing rugby inside 
the house.”

By the time the family moved to Bristol so that Singa could work as a minister 
the boys were so devoted to the game that the first thing they wanted to do was 
go to the local rugby club.

It was pre-season and there was only one player there, practising his kicks. 
He told them to come back another time. But instead Billy and Mako spent the 
afternoon catching the ball and fetching it back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecf583d716726221c0f1d5b6e3ef0bdd08ed980f%2F0_0_1407_2118%2F1407.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecf583d716726221c0f1d5b6e3ef0bdd08ed980f%2F0_0_1407_2118%2F1407.jpg>
 Billy Vunipola in action for England Under-18s in Cape Town in 2009. 
Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
In Bristol the boys played for Castle school. Mako’s performances there earned 
him an invitation to apply for a scholarship at Millfield. Their director of 
rugby, John Mallett, remembers Mako as “a bundle of talent”. He was big, but 
“very little of what he did was about his size. He wanted to sidestep, he 
wanted to run, he wanted to kick the ball.” His party trick, Mallett says, was 
to kick drop goals while blindfolded by a coat draped over his head. “Mako was 
hugely competitive,” he says, “but the biggest thing he gave was his sense of 
fun, the enjoyment he took in what he was doing.” It took Mako two months to 
settle in, Mallett says, but once he did he became a “pied piper” for the other 
kids. “He was just a great kid to have around, because of his energy and sense 
of humour.” Mako repaid his debt to the school by paying for his younger sister 
to study there.

Billy ended up on a bursary at Harrow. He wanted to go to Millfield, too, but 
Fe’ao and Singa thought he needed to get out from his brother’s shadow.

When he talks about Billy, Harrow’s head of rugby, Jesse Coulson, sounds 
similar to Mallett. “People talk a lot about Billy’s size but actually that’s a 
tiny element of the player that he is. He has fantastic skills, a good pass, 
good vision, great feet, and he’s a thinker of the game,” Coulson says. “Rather 
than looking for contact, which many larger boys do at schoolboy level, he 
would always be the one who wanted to get the ball into space, and because of 
his vision, and his ability to read the game, he sort of stayed out of the 
contact area.”

Coulson isn’t surprised that Jones chose Billy to be one of his England 
vice-captains. At first Billy was a like “a little boy in an adult’s body” but 
he grew to be a leader in the team. “He isn’t the most vocal, he is not one of 
those players that will shout from the rooftops, but he is a player people will 
rally around. They see what he does on the field and they want to follow him. 
Billy is one of those people who will say the right thing at the right time, 
and then he will go out on the field and do it.” He remembers taking a team of 
forwards down to Richmond to play in the Surrey sevens. “Billy took all of our 
conversions and he just couldn’t miss. It didn’t matter where it was from, he 
was slotting them from the corners. And after each one he would just look at me 
and smile quietly, in his very humble way. And then he would just crack on with 
his job.”

During their first few years in the professional game, the brothers were on 
separate paths, Mako atSaracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>, 
Billy at Wasps. It was Singa who brought them together again. She couldn’t 
stand to watch them play against each other and, worse, was worried that the 
competition between the teams would drive the family apart. It broke Billy’s 
heart to leave Wasps. But now they all agree it was the best decision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22a10004928e69a717dfb6c622f5b0ab98e06177%2F135_496_5201_3121%2F5201.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22a10004928e69a717dfb6c622f5b0ab98e06177%2F135_496_5201_3121%2F5201.jpg>
 Mako, left, and Billy Vunipola celebrate winning the 2016 European Rugby 
Champions Cup final for Saracens against Racing 92 in May, Saracens’ first 
European triumph. Photograph: David Rogers/Getty Images 
“They’ve grown at Saracens,” says Fe’ao, “not just as rugby players, but as 
men.” Grown in the figurative sense, that is. A lot of Mako’s recent 
improvement is down to the fact he has learned to watch his weight. He has had 
to plead with Singa to stop cooking home meals for them every time they come 
around to say hello. “He always worries he will disappoint me if he doesn’t eat 
what I provide,” she laughs, “so now he just asks me not to cook at all.”

Fe’ao wanted the boys to play for Wales. But they chose England. And now he 
says he gets emotional when he sees them sing the national anthem before their 
matches.

“Sometimes I wish my late father was still alive to see it,” he says, “and I 
try hard not to cry.”

Eddie Jones shuns confetti caps to ensure Fiji will feel England’s full force
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/eddie-jones-england-south-africa-fiji>
He and Singa reel off a list of all the people they wish to thank, from their 
first days at Pontypool, through school, club, and junior rugby, all the men 
and women who helped Billy and Mako realise the dream their grandfather had.

“After all the help the boys have had,” Singa says, “we are just so proud of 
the fact that they are doing something good for themselves and their country. 
And they do think of England as their country, regardless of what anyone else 
thinks.” For them, she says, Britain still feels like the land of milk and 
honey.

• The picture caption of the East Wales schools lineup was amended on 16 
November 2016 to correct the location of Billy Vunipola and change “Toby 
Faletau” to Taulupe Faletau
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5aac10ad93258d91d8d4bc4722c15c6fb4d6f32%2F10_141_4050_2430%2F4050.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Tonga%20to%20Twickenham%3A%20Mako%20and%20Billy%20Vunipola%E2%80%99s%20incredible%20journey%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftonga-twickenham-billy-mako-vunipola-england-saracens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5aac10ad93258d91d8d4bc4722c15c6fb4d6f32%2F10_141_4050_2430%2F4050.jpg>
 The brothers playing together for England against Ireland in the 2015 Six 
Nations. Photograph: Matthew Impey/Rex/Shutterstock  