
I think it was while waiting for our boat to plummet over the precipice of Le 
Grand Splatch, a colossal water ride at Parc Astérix, that I started to wonder 
how wise it is to share cherished illustrated books from your childhood with 
your kids.

UK's first major Moomin exhibition set to open in London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/15/uks-first-major-moomins-exhibition-open-london-tove-jansson>
Asterix <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asterix> was always a favourite of 
mine and my daughter was very young when she was introduced to the plucky Gaul 
and his immense friend Obelix. It took. When given the choice between visiting 
Eurodisney and its French nationalist rival there was no contest. We even met 
the bard Cacofonix. Mercifully, he did not sing.

It may not quite be on the scale of Parc Astérix, but a new Southbank Centre 
exhibition about artist Tove Jansson’s creations the Moomins has a bit of a 
theme park feel. It is calledAdventures in Moominland 
<https://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/119314-southbank-centres-adventures-moominland-explore-moomins-through-life-201617>
 and, like the same venue’s previous Roald Dahl show, is an immersive 
exhibition that makes the world of these cuddly characters – half hippo, half 
hippy – accessible to all ages. It is not the only forthcoming celebration of 
Moominland. Later next year there will be an exhibition of Jansson’s artat 
Dulwich Picture Gallery 
<http://www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/2017/october/tove-jansson/>
, which will present her as an important modern Finnish painter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmoomins-asterix-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad3796397dc8b9efdc9a8bf37c4100519c9e0d1a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20Moomins%20to%20Asterix%2C%20picture%20books%20help%20build%20a%20better%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmoomins-asterix-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20Moomins%20to%20Asterix%2C%20picture%20books%20help%20build%20a%20better%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmoomins-asterix-picture-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad3796397dc8b9efdc9a8bf37c4100519c9e0d1a%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Inside Southbank Centre’s Adventures in Moominland. Photograph: Victor 
Frankowski / Southbank Centre 
What makes a picture book a classic, and why can’t we let go of our childhood 
favourites? Picture book art exists in a curious cultural space halfway between 
the worlds of adults and children. It is made for children, but adults tend to 
select books for young children so it is adult ideas and preferences that shape 
the genre and define its classics. The spate of Moomin art exhibitions does not 
reflect what children are talking about in the playground, but rather the 
enthusiasm of adults – including curators – who grew up with Moomin books in 
the 1970s and 80s. If Jansson is a favourite, and you haven’t got the excuse of 
parenthood to visit Adventures in Moominland, there are adults-only sessions at 
this exhibition on Thursday and Friday evenings.

I did not not encounter the Moomins as a child. Instead, my absolute favourite 
picture book wasThe Great Pie Robbery 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Richard-Scarrys-Great-Robbery-Mysteries/dp/1402758235>
 by Richard Scarry. Did I inflict it on my own child? You betcha.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmoomins-asterix-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9406bebd4aaff05bc58de5d48a92b2361d7160e%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20Moomins%20to%20Asterix%2C%20picture%20books%20help%20build%20a%20better%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmoomins-asterix-picture-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20Moomins%20to%20Asterix%2C%20picture%20books%20help%20build%20a%20better%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fmoomins-asterix-picture-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9406bebd4aaff05bc58de5d48a92b2361d7160e%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Splatch! A pair of Asterix books. Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
Yet it is not just our own fondly remembered picture books that we give our 
children. We try to choose books that are beautiful and stimulating, that are, 
in short, not just visual pap but proper art. Looking through reams of samey 
picture books, often with incredibly bland designs and even blander stories, I 
was drawn when my daughter was very young to the genius ofMaurice Sendak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/oct/02/maurice-sendak-interview>. Among 
so much cynical pulp art for young kids, here was something remarkable. I ended 
up collecting Sendak’s books, not only to read to my daughter but also out of 
pure artistic admiration.

So is it just adult self-indulgence that makes us give “classy” picture books 
to children, from the Moomins to Maurice Sendak? Are we trying to relive our 
own infancy, or worse, to create some perfect, snobbish idyll of childhood? 
Maybe, but it is a price worth paying for helping a child to learn. As with any 
reading, there may not be any such thing as a bad picture book – the more the 
merrier. But there is an additional gain from looking at the truly excellent 
ones.

The Beano and Tintin, John Tenniel 
<http://www.alice-in-wonderland.net/resources/background/tenniel-and-his-illustrations/>
 and the best of Disney – let’s hear it for the great art of childhood that 
makes a better world by making better adults. Oh, and Le Grand Splatch was 
amazing, by the way.
 