
With oil prices rising again, transport groups came under pressure on worries 
about their fuel costs, but not enough to stop the FTSE 100 edging higher.

Brent crude is up 2.5% at $66.68 a barrel amid signs that a global oil glut 
may be ending, with US inventories dropping for a third week, while fighting in 
Iraq raised concerns about security of supply.

So BP was 5.9p better at 458p and Royal Dutch Shell B shares rose 18.5p to 
£20.21.

But British Airways owner International Airlines Group was down 13p at 554p and
easyJetdropped 39p to £16.10. Cruise company Carnival, whose shares also went 
ex-dividend, lost 60p to £31.41.

Overall the FTSE 100 closed up 6.21 points at 7013.47 in a rather 
directionless day. On the economic front, eurozone PMIs were mixed, UK retail 
sales were better than expected and pushed the pound higher, but US consumer 
confidence and housing figures disappointed. On top of that, there were 
conflicting reports about whether the eurozone would give Greece another four 
months grace, as EU leaders met in Riga with the country’s financial crisis 
expected to be discussed once more.

Marks & Spencer added 10p to 593.5p in the wake of Wednesday’s well-received 
results, andVodafone added 3.65p to 242.50p after Nomura moved its 
recommendation from reduce to neutral and its target price from 185p to 235p. 
After comments from Liberty Global boss John Malone thatVodafone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vodafonegroup> would be “a great fit”, 
Nomura said:

Vodafone has openly coveted Liberty Global’s assets, but the valuation gap 
between the two companies remains too wide for Vodafone to bridge through 
paying an equity-based deal premium. Following Malone confirming his interest 
in an asset combination, we think the market will now contemplate Liberty 
Global taking the senior role in deal scenarios.

Mining shares moved higher on hopes for more Chinese stimulus to boost the 
country’s economy, withRio Tinto rising 6.5p to 2873.5p and BHP Billiton 9p 
better at 1404.5p.

Hargreaves Lansdown was 21p higher at £12.77 as JP Morgan Cazenove raised its 
price target from £10.50 to £11 whileSmith & Nephew was 6p better at £11.40 
after Numis moved from hold to add, saying the recent weakness as bid 
speculation faded provided a good entry point to the shares.

Among the mid caps, Booker bounced 18p to 170p as its results and £40m 
acquisition of Londis and Budgens pleased investors. But a cautious outlook from
Dairy Crestsent its shares 30.9p lower to 487.1p.
 