
Milk producers are lapping it up at the moment as prices soar, particularly 
for cream.

Dairy Crest, the spreads company behind Clover, Country Life and Cathedral 
City, said it had recently had to raise the prices it paid to farmers by 12%. 
Chief executive Mark Allen said:

Recently we have seen inflation across all dairy markets. To date we have 
announced increases amounting to 12% in the milk price we pay to farmers. Cream 
prices have been particularly affected, doubling over a very short period. This 
sudden cost inflation is likely to have an impact on butter volumes and margins 
in the second half.

But as “a strongly branded and added value business”, he said Dairy Crest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dairycrestgroup> was well placed to deal 
with inflationary pressures and so its outlook for the full year remained 
unchanged.

The comments came as Dairy Crest - now a pure food producer having sold its 
loss-making dairies division - said first half sales volumes of its four key 
brands would be ahead of last year.

But pitching Cathedral City as a premium product and relaunching its branding 
and packaging , it discounted prices by less than competitors, leading to a 
small volume decline in the first half. However it said margins had improved 
and customers had responded positively to the new packaging and marketing 
campaign.

On the price rises, Peel Hunt analyst Charles Hall said:

Dairy prices are recovering sharply due to the improving global market, weaker 
sterling and lower UK milk production. This is resulting in a sharp price 
appreciation in raw milk and associated products. For instance spot milk has 
risen in recent weeks from 15p to 37p per litre with cream prices doubling from 
80p to 160p.

The industry is responding to this by increasing prices to farmers. For 
instance Dairy Crest increased its raw milk price by 1ppl to 22.7p in September 
and announced on Friday a further 1.5p increase spread over October and 
November. Other producers are seeing a similar trajectory, with some having to 
increase at a faster rate in order to hold onto their milk producers. We expect 
the price increases to be recovered in the market, with own label cheese 
suppliers, in particular, needing to recover higher prices in the short term. 
From Dairy Crest’s point of view this should be helpful for margins given the 
timing of milk purchases and maturation period for cheese.

In the spreads division, the main impact is on butter where Dairy Crest sells 
around 14,000t. Again the price increases will need to be passed on to 
customers by the industry, though Dairy Crest is relatively protected by its 
supply agreement. The company has highlighted that the price increases are 
likely to impact butter volumes and margins in the short term, which is not a 
surprise. This should be offset by higher cheese margins.

Dairy Crest shares have dropped 2% to 654.5p following the news.

Overall the market is moving higher as oil prices recover and investors await 
key interest rate meetings this week from both the Bank of Japan and the US 
Federal Reserve. Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at Interactive Investor, 
said:

 After a torrid last week, investors will be pleased to see markets rebound 
this morning, with European equities on the rise ahead of the Bank of Japan and 
Federal Reserve decisions on Wednesday. With the expectation of no action in 
the US until at least December, the major market moving news is likely to be 
from Governor Haruhiko Kuroda - with investors hoping for significant 
intervention and forward guidance, including a further cut to rates.

The dollar has weakened as investors bet the Fed will keep rates on hold, 
helping push commodity prices higher and lifting mining shares.

Overall the FTSE 100 is 101.25 points better at 6811.53, with seven of the top 
ten risers being commodity companies.

Anglo American is up 37.8p at 852.2p, Glencore has climbed 6.95p to 191.95p and
Royal Dutch Shell A shares rising 45.5p to £18.44.

Satellite broadcaster Sky has climbed 21.5p to 861.5p as Morgan Stanley moved 
from overweight to equal weight but cut its target price from £10.25 to £10. 
The bank said the company’s shares were oversold:

Structural fears have driven Sky shares down 25% year to date so that it now 
trades at a around 9% 2018 estimated free cash flow yield and near its 
decade-low PE relative. Management’s new targets and incentives though imply 
around 10% per annum earnings per share growth and 100p of earnings per share 
by 2021.

Among the couple of FTS 100 fallers is outsource Capita, down 1.5p at 970p 
aftera profit warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/mitie-profit-warning-brexit-vote-spending-eu-referendum>
 from smaller riserMitie, down 25% at 200.9p.

miners recover, dollar down on no Fed move
 