
Leading shares are edging lower as investors decide to cash in some of their 
recent profits, despite the lack of much of a return elsewhere. UK gilts, for 
example, continue to fall in the wake of the Bank of England’s bond buying 
setback on Tuesday.

Among the fallers is medical group Smith & Nephew, down 13p at £12.65 as 
analysts at Barclays reduced their recommendation from overweight to 
equalweight. Barclays, which raised its target price marginally from £12.30 to 
£12.40, said:

We are constructive on S&N because we believe its transition to higher growth 
platforms is underappreciated by the market and that there is still upside 
optionality from bolt-on M&A, cost efficiency opportunities and potential 
industry consolidation. However, with results continuing to disappoint and an 
upcoming management team transition we see a lower probability of upside 
optionality crystallising within the next year.

With oil prices still weak ahead of an Opec report and the latest US stocks 
numbers - Brent crude is currently down 1.2% at $44.44 -Royal Dutch Shell B 
shares have slipped 21p to £19.74 andBP is down 3.15p at 422.05p.

Overall the FTSE 100 has dipped 2.15 points to 6849.15. Rebecca O’Keeffe, head 
of investment at stockbroker Interactive Investor, said:

 European equity markets are slightly subdued in early trading as investors 
bank some profits after markets hit recent highs and the German index entered a 
bull market yesterday, rising 22% since February. However, with volatility 
almost non-existent, the bond market at historic lows and investors maintaining 
their dovish view of the Fed, investors have struggled to find alternatives to 
equities and they remain the asset class of choice.

Insurers are among the risers, with Legal & General recovering 5.4p to 211.4p 
after Tuesday’s falls andPrudential putting on 42p to £14.34 as it reported 6% 
rise in half year operating profit to £2.059bn.

Rolls-Royce has been lifted 17p to 780.5p after a positive note from Morgan 
Stanley, which raised its price target from 655p to 780p and said:

We upgrade from underweight to equal weight due to increased confidence on 
cash. Shares likely to remain volatile.

Among the mid-caps outsourcing group G4S has climbed 30.1p to 225.7p following 
a better than expected 8.2% rise in half year earnings. The company also held 
its dividend despite some fears of a cut. New contracts worth £1.4bn are also 
higher than expected, and it said the Brexit vote had had no impact on its 
relationship with government. In a hold note Stifel said:

At first glance this looks like a good set of interim numbers with good 
organic growth and operating margin improvement. The interim dividend has been 
maintained - there had been concerns in some quarters that this may not be the 
case. Cash generation is much improved but leverage remains high. Plans remain 
in place to reduce this through internal initiatives.

Peppa Pig owner Entertainment One is up 11.3p to 228.8p as it rejected a £1bn 
takeover offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/peppa-pig-owner-entertainment-one-rejects-itv-1bn-takeover-approach>
 fromITV, up 0.5p at 199.2p.
 