
Leading shares are heading lower but the bulk of the fall is due to a host of 
companies going ex-dividend.

Oil companies are lower as crude prices continue to slide, following an 
unexpected rise in US stocks on Wednesday, a rise in Saudi Arabian production 
and few hopes of any agreement to cut output at the next Opec meeting. SoBP is 
down 2.2p at 420.80p andRoyal Dutch Shell A shares have slipped 56.5p to £18.60 
as its shares went ex-dividend.

With a downbeat housing survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/11/uk-house-prices-brexit-vote-bond-yields-business-live?page=with:block-57ac20ebe4b024cdec3d677d#block-57ac20ebe4b024cdec3d677d>
, builders are also under pressure.Taylor Wimpey is down 4.4p at 149.4p, 
Persimmon is 45p lower at £16.50 and Berkeley Group has falllen 166p to £24.47.

Indeed Berkeley <https://www.theguardian.com/business/berkeleygroupholdings> 
is leading the FTSE 100 fallers, but that is also because it is another one of 
the companies seeing its shares quoted without the benefit of the dividend.

Others include BT, down 16.35p at 392.05p, HSBC, 4.2p lower at 540.1p, Diageo, 
down 23p at 2168.5p andGlaxoSmithKline, 2p lower at 1695.5p.

In all ex-dividends have knocked around 37 points off the FTSE 100. At the 
moment the leading index is down 40.02 points at 6826.40. Andy McLevey, head of 
dealing at stockbroker Interactive Investor, said:

The FTSE 100 index has opened in the red this morning as a number of stocks go 
ex-dividend and the latest drop in the price of oil drags on energy stocks. We 
may see some profit taking following recent gains but with a dearth of major 
economic releases the to-ing and fro-ing of late looks set to continue as 
investors look to corporate earnings as the key driver.

Among the gainers Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling is up 94p at £16.65 after it 
reported a better than expected 4.8% rise in first half earnings to €229.6m and 
forecast modest sales growth for the full year. But Shore Capital kept its sell 
rating on the business, with analyst Phil Carroll saying:

Overall, a profit beat but visibility remains very challenging and whilst 
management expect a stronger second half and adverse foreign exchange guidance 
retained rather than deteriorated, we retain the view that there still could be 
further pressure on forecasts and the lack of visibility is not reflected in 
the valuation.

Meanwhile Tui has climbed 42p to £10.54 as the travel group said it would meet 
its profit forecast for the year despite worries that terrorism would dampen 
consumer enthusiasm. The company is also less exposed than rivals to troubled 
areas like Turkey.

Among the mid-caps there is a contrasting response to a couple of retailers. 
DFS has jumped 12.5% to 252p as the furniture group forecast full year results 
at the top end of expectations, butCard Factory has fallen 24.1p to 296.1p 
after disappointing first half results showed like for like sales growth of 
just 0.2%. On Card Factory, Liberum said:

Overall, a disappointing update with store like for likes entering negative 
territory and online, primarily Getting Personal, flat. Some reassurance from 
roll-out and commentary on special returns, but we will need to see improved 
growth moving into the second half to give greater confidence on full year 
estimates.

Lower down the market life sciences group ValiRx is up nearlyi 10% at 8o.5p 
after it received regulatory approval to proceed with a phase IIb clinical 
trial for its VAL401 drug to treat lung cancer. Analysts at Northland Capital 
Partners said:

This is a significant step and a major milestone in the process for the VAL401 
project.
 