
An immediate rally after the US presidential debates has run out of steam, 
with the FTSE 100 now off its best levels.

The index is currently down 3.80 points at 6814.24 having earlier climbed as 
high as 6865, albeit nowhere near recovering Monday’s losses.

Although most pundits feel Hillary Clinton got the best of Donald Trump in the 
first head-to-head debate, it is early days yet. Mike van Dulken and Henry 
Croft at Accendo Markets said Trump should not be discounted yet:

Markets suggest victory for Clinton in the first of three US Presidential 
Debates. Not so much for her own performance, more because rival Trump failed 
to keep his cool and/or appear more presidential as many had expected. It’s 
still early days. Trump could be setting the bar low for the remaining 
face-offs. And he does have a bouncebackability that has already helped his 
campaign get within touching distance of the oval office.

The US election is not the only concern for the market. Investors are awaiting 
any news from the oil producers’ meeting in Algeria, although there is little 
real expectation of a deal this week to help halt the slide in the crude price.

Meanwhile the banking sector is still jittery after the slump in Deutsche 
Bank’s shares on concerns about its ability to pay huge fines demanded by the 
US Department of Justice. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/26/deutsche-bank-share-price-lowest-mid-1980s>
Amid the nerves in the sector Royal Bank of Scotland has slipped 1.7p to 175.8p 
whileBarclays is down 0.45p at 167.65p.

Among the fallers is budget airline easyJet, down 15p at £10.01 as UBS cut its 
price target from £11.50 to £10.70. The bank’s analysts said:

We think after two profit warnings over the last 3 months or so the risk to 
2016 consensus earnings expectations are broadly neutral with 2016 estimated 
pretax profit consensus forecasts in the range of £475m to £596m. Nevertheless, 
we have slightly reduced our estimates for 2016 (previous £541m) on the back of 
currency movements and are now on 2016 pretax profit of £524m compared to 
consensus £530m. Looking into 2017 visibility unsurprisingly remains poor with 
uncertainties around winter pricing. Nevertheless, we see risk on the downside 
given industry capacity indications.

British Airways owner International Airlines Group is also lower, down 6.9p at 
387.6p.

Elsewhere in the travel sector, Thomas Cook has dropped 1% to 69.3p after it 
reported a 4% drop in summer bookings, due toa slump in demand for holidays in 
Turkey. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/27/thomas-cook-hit-by-slump-in-holidays-to-turkey>

Rival Tui, less exposed to Turkey, is up 9p to £10.79 while Carnival has 
climbed 101p to £36.56 in the wake of Monday’s better than expected results. In 
a hold note, Numis said:

We believe that today’s update is reassuring, given concerns about weak demand 
for European sailings from the core US market and also concerns about what the 
Zika virus might do to demand for Caribbean sailings (about 33% of 2016’s 
capacity is expected to be in the Caribbean). We have increased our earnings 
per share forecast from $3.30 to $3.35, in line with guidance.

But Saga is down 8.3p to 210.4p as Canaccord Genuity cut its rating on the 
travel and insurance group from buy to hold.

The biggest FTSE 100 faller so far is building materials group Wolseley, down 
146p to £41.54 after disappointing results and news of 800 job cuts. The 
cautious outlook has also hitTravis Perkins, down 35p at £14.83.

Lower down the market Redx is up nearly 15% to 58.5p The drug discovery 
business had seen its shares fall by 50% in the last twelve months but they 
have been lifted by news it had discovered a series of compounds which could 
create the first novel class of antibiotics for 30 years. Cantor Fitzgerald 
analysts said:

Redx has announced this morning that in vivo testing has confirmed that its 
novel antibiotic programme targeting bacterial topoisomerase has delivered 
preclinical results that confirm its activity against drug resistant Gram 
negative bacteria when compared to a current broad spectrum antibiotic.

Gram negative bacteria such as E Coli and Pseudomonas are particularly 
difficult to eliminate (compared to Gram positive bacteria such asStaph Aureus) 
indicating the importance of developing novel treatments, particularly for more 
insidious drug resistant infections. We believe these data once again 
demonstrate the broad capability that Redx possesses to deliver potentially 
first-in-class as well as best-in-class therapies.

Meanwhile life science group ValiRx was steady at 6.75p as it issued a 
positive update. Half year losses increased from £1.37m to £2.12m as it 
increased its research expenditure, but it said it was making good progress in 
clinical trials. Northland Capital Partners said:

ValiRx is close to dosing patients in its VAL401 programme, which will be a 
major milestone for the group, as it will move a second programme into the 
clinic. Moreover, the kick-off of a new programme, VAL301, further expands the 
group’s pipeline.
 