
It may well be a dead cat bounce rather than a convincing recovery from the 
recent rout, but leading shares have moved sharply higher for the first time 
since the shock Brexit vote.

The FTSE 100 has added 132.41 points or 2.22% to 6114.61 while the mid-cap 
FTSE 250 index - far more exposed to the domestic UK economy - is up 2.74%. 
Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior market analyst at London Capital Group, said:

Although the FTSE opened upbeat in London this morning, investors should keep 
in mind that Moody’s, S&P and Fitch have downgraded the UK’s credit rating. And 
even if the UK banks are better bid at the early hours of trading in London, 
the market is now pricing in the possibility of a rate cut from the Bank of 
England (BoE) in an effort to temper potential economic damages as the UK 
prepares to quit the European Union.

We warn that the credit rating downgrades and a lower rate outlook are 
important red flags that investors should consider before blindly jumping on 
the back of a bull. We restate that the volatility is a sign of stress on both 
sides. Rapid gains are as dangerous as wild sell-offs.

Retailers have risen despite downgrades from Citigroup, with Next up 415p to 
£47.99 andMarks & Spencer 15.9p higher at 301.1p. Online grocer Ocado has 
climbed 20.6p to 228.7p afterits latest update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/28/ocado-warns-brexit-supermarket-prices-sales-rise>
, despite no further news on an international deal. Analyst Clive Black at 
Shore Capital kept his sell recommendation but said:

All in all, Ocado <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> delivered good 
sales growth of nearly 14% in a tough market, growth similar to Aldi and Lidl 
it should be said. However, despite its pure-play online model, it is not 
immune from market conditions. Amazon Fresh steps up the competitive intensity 
a good deal in a core market to our minds. Those tough conditions can be 
expected to weigh upon the group’s margins, as will the P&L catching up with 
capital expenditure and software amortisation.

In its present form Ocado stock appears still to be overvalued to us. Key 
near-term developments are what happens with Morrisons [warehouse discussions], 
which may yet lead us to be more neutral on the stock if a mutually beneficial 
outcome ensues, and the materiality of any international expansion.

Legal & General is up 14.2p to 179.2p after reassuring on its balance sheet  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/28/referendum-fallout-rolls-royce-and-legal-general-business-as-usual-brexit>
whileRolls-Royce has risen 13.5p to 665.5p following an update saying it was on 
track to meet forecasts.

Among the banks, Barclays is 7.6p better at 134.80p and Lloyds Banking Group 
has added 3.13p to 54.28p.

But after recent surges as investors sought havens, there has been some profit 
taking in gold and silver miners, with Fresnillo falling 62p to £14.21 and 
Randgold Resources down 225p at £78.10.


G4S has climbed 15p to 179p as analysts at Credit Suisse raised their 
recommendation from neutral to outperform and their target price from 200p to 
210p. They said there were four reasons for the upgrade:

1) G4S is a significant beneficiary of sterling weakness, which we assume 
falls 10% across the board from its pre-referendum levels. 2)G4S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/g4s> has had more than its share of 
issues in recent years but the vast majority of its underlying business is 
stable and defensive. 3) We expect asset sales over the next 18 months, which 
combined with improved working capital management should lead to de-leveraging 
and free cash flow coverage of the dividend. 4) At 9.6 times 2017 estimated PE 
with a (covered) 5.4% dividend yield we view the valuation as attractive.

But Credit Suisse downgraded Capita, up 34.5p to 883p, saying:

We lower our recommendation to neutral (from outperform) and target price to 
900p (from 1250p) to reflect the impact we believe Brexit will have on big 
ticket contract and ‘transactional’ driven revenue growth in the foreseeable 
future. Our earnings per share estimates fall by 3% for 2016 but a much more 
significant 10%-11% for 2017 and 2018.

Lower down the market Ceres Power Holdings has climbed 2.6% to 8.75p as 
finalised an agreement with Nissan to develop a solid oxide fuel cell to extend 
the range of electric vehicles.
 