
Hints of interest rate rises in both the UK and US helped take the shine off 
shares, but better than expected results from Goldman Sachs lifted the banking 
sector.

The US group reported a 5% rise in second quarter profits, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/15/goldman-sachs-jp-morgan-banks-earnings>
 and with good figures from JP Morgan as well, the positivity spilled over to 
UK banks.Royal Bank of Scotland rose 7.8p to 327.3p while Barclays was 1.05p 
better at 210.65p.

But with UK inflation hitting a higher than forecast 1.9%, there was growing 
talk of an interest rate rise perhaps coming earlier than expected. This lifted 
the pound but pushed theFTSE 100 down 35.69 points to 6710.45.

Housebuilders came under particular pressure on the prospect of dearer 
borrowing costs, withBarratt Developments down 8p at 360.3p, Persimmon dipping 
19p to £12.30 whileTaylor Wimpey was 3.3p lower at 109.8p and Redrow fell 9.2p 
to 242.3p.

Retailers also fell back as investors worried about the effect of rate rises 
on consumer confidence.Marks & Spencer fell 8.3p to 427.1p and Sports Direct 
International lost some of Monday's gains, down 18.5p to 704.5p, while Primark 
ownerAssociated British Foods was hit by a Goldman Sachs sell note and was down 
53p at £28.97.

Over in the US, Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen repeated rates would rise 
when the economic data improved, but comments from the central bank that some 
social media and biotech stocks were substantially overvalued hit shares in 
those sectors.Facebook fell nearly 2% by mid morning while Twitter was more 
than 1% lower.

Elsewhere mining shares moved higher after positive bank lending data from 
China, withAnglo American adding 12.5p to £15.14 and Rio Tinto rising 2.5p to 
3244.5p.

Vodafone rose 1.9p to 194p as its Indian business added 1.6m mobile 
subscribers in June

But Imperial Tobacco fell 101p to £26.38 as it agreed to pay $7.1bn for 
various assets from Reynolds and Lorillard, which finally announced their 
agreement to merge.British American Tobacco, down 63.5p to £35.32, said it 
would invest $4.7bn to maintain its 42% stake in the enlarged 
Reynolds-Lorillard group, and would suspend its £1.5bn share buyback programme.

Among the mid-caps Telecom Plus rose 100p to £13.38 after a well received 
trading update, and recruitment groupMichael Page International put on 10.1p to 
438p as second quarter profits climbed 8.9%.

But Dairy Crest dipped 5.8p to 432.5p despite confirming its outlook for 2014, 
andProvident Financial fell 35p to £21.30 as JP Morgan Cazenove cut from 
overweight to neutral. RBC Capital Markets issued an underperform rating, but 
said an announcement by the Financial Conduct Authority about capping the 
amount high cost lenders can charge should not affect Provident.
 