
The post-Brexit bounce is continuing in stock markets as investors continue to 
snap up what they see as bargain-basement shares.

With the UK unlikely to trigger Article 50 - which sets the clock ticking on 
the country’s departure from the European Union - in the immediate future, 
markets are taking stock of the situation. But despite a calmer tone at the 
moment, volatile moves are still likely for some while, even if they are 
upwards rather than falling. Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at 
stockbroker Interactive Investor, said:

Investors, who are still trying to work out whether current market levels pose 
and opportunity or a threat, are coming down firmly on the side of opportunity 
with equities across the UK and Europe up strongly for a second day. With 
global central banks all trying to reassure markets, prices are stabilising and 
volatility is falling. However, it is still very early in the process and 
significant political and market risks remain, so we may start to see some 
investors start to sell the rally, which could see markets pare back some of 
the gains.

At the moment the FTSE 100 is up 104.37 points or 1.7% at 6244.76, within 100 
points of where it stood before the referendum result unleashed chaos. The FTSE 
250, which is more closely aligned with the UK domestic market, is up 1.52% 
after its near 14% decline immediately after the vote.

Financial shares, which have borne the brunt of recent selling, are among the 
main risers despite downgrades from Moody’s ratings agency.Barclays is 4.3p 
better at 135.8p while Prudential has put on 60.5p to £12.51.

Housebuilders are also in demand, with Taylor Wimpey up 4p at 126p.

Merlin Entertainments, operator of Alton Towers and Legoland, is 2.6% higher 
at 425.8p after analysts at JP Morgan moved from underweight to neutral and 
raised their price target to 464p. The bank said:

We forecast a full year 2015 to 2018 estimated earnings per share compound 
annual growth rate of 17.4% (but only 9.3% adjusting for the Alton Towers base 
effect). This is driven by4.3% like for like sales growth and 7 new Midway 
sites per year, as well as Legoland Japan and Legoland Korea (due to open by 
2018) and accommodation rollout across the estate. Merlin’s 2017 estimated 
valuation has come down to 16 times/4.7% free cashflow yield, compared to 
European hotel stocks on 14.9 times/2.3% and Whitbread on 13 times / -1.5%.

If Merlin were to accelerate the Midway rollout, open a new owned/leased 
Legoland or conduct further bolt-on M&A, there could be upside to our 
forecasts. But this looks unlikely, in our view, before our 2017 estimated 
“peak” capex forecast of £271m (17% of sales, 1.9 times depreciation)

But tourism-related shares have fallen after the attacks at Istanbul airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/turkey-airport-explosions-ataturak-istanbul>
, withTui down 33p at 845p and British Airways owner International Airlines 
Group10.9p lower at 346.3p.

Dixons Carphone is down 9.5p at 332.5p on uncertainty on the outlook 
post-Brexit despitea 17% rise in full year profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/dixons-carphone-annual-profits-rise-telecoms-industry>
.

Among the mid-caps Electrocomponents has fallen 13.4p to 247.8p after Credit 
Suisse cut from neutral to underperform with a 220p target price, down from 
265p. It said:

Following the UK referendum result and Datwyler’s acquisition of Premier 
Farnell we re-visit our estimates for organic growth and margin improvement. 
With Credit Suisse economists forecasting a shallow recession in the UK in the 
second half of 2016 and a Euro area slowdown we moderate our organic growth 
forecasts which now average 2.1% across 2017 to 2021 (from 2.9%). The foreign 
exchange movements which have followed the Brexit vote provide revenue 
benefits, however as a net buyer of dollar denominated COGS [cost of goods 
sold],Electrocomponents <https://www.theguardian.com/business/electrocomponents>
 are exposed at the gross margin level by a weakening in the pound.

Consolidation in the market place not involving Electrocomponents was 
highlighted as a risk to our recommendation in our April 2016 note and 
following Datwyler’s 165p cash offer for Premier Farnell we believe 
Electrocomponents is likely to experience incremental competitive pricing 
pressures, especially in Europe where operations overlap. We reduce our EBITA 
estimates by around 60 basis points per annum across the forecast period with 
the gross profit margin decreasing from prior estimated by 90 basis points to 
2021. The company continues to execute well its business improvement strategy, 
increasing the growth of own label products and over-delivering against cost 
reduction targets. However, the stock currently trades at a 50% premium to its 
2009 two year forward PE multiple and whilst we are not forecasting a global 
recession and recognise current management’s positive impact, in our view there 
is room for a pronounced de-rating.

Elsewhere technology group Qinetiq is down 9.7p to 213.4p after a downgrade 
from JP Morgan and news that finance director David Mellors was stepping down 
at the end of December to joinCobham, up 6.3p at 156.7p. 

Distribution group Brammer has slumped 54% to 65.75p after warning half year 
profits would be below expectations at around £5m and said it would be close to 
its net debt/earnings bank covenant at the end of the period.
 