
The strong dollar, boosted by US Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen’s hints on 
Thursday of a December rate rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/17/ed-balls-bank-of-england-independence-bank-reforms-retail-sales-janet-yellen-business-live?page=with:block-582daaf3e4b090fc81281ead#block-582daaf3e4b090fc81281ead>
, has hit commodity companies, particularly gold and silver.

So precious metal miners are leading the market lower, with gold down more 
than 1%. The metal is priced in the US currency so is sensitive to dollar 
movements, and at the same time investors are turning away from its haven 
status, believing Donald Trump’s expansionary plans could boost corporate 
profits and equities.

Randgold Resoures is the biggest falling in the FTSE 100, down 380p at £57.05 
despite unveiling a joint venture with Newcrest in the Cote d’Ivoire. Mexican 
precious metal minerFresnillo has fallen 64p to £13.24, while among the 
mid-caps gold minerCentamin has lost 7.2p to 132.7p.

It is not just precious metal miners. Antofagasta has fallen 24.5p to 663p and 
Rio Tinto is down 77.5p at 2943.5p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently down 47.05 points at 6747.66. Connor 
Campbell, financial analyst at Spreadex, said

The UK index wasn’t helped by a sluggish commodity sector; the greenback’s 
surge has pushed Brent Crude under $46 per barrel and gold back towards $1200 
per ounce, in the process dragging the FTSE’s oil and mining stocks in the red.

Rolls-Royce continues to slide in the wake of its update this week, down 
another 21p at 678p as Emirates Airline said it was having technical issues 
with new engines for the A380.

Among the risers Intertek is up 54p at £32.42 ahead of the testing equipment 
group’s next update, despite Deutsche Bank cutting its target price from £35 to 
£34. The bank did raise its earnings per share forecast thanks to benefits from 
a weaker pound, saying:

We are cutting our full year organic growth forecast from 1.0% to 0.4%. This 
implies ~0.4% in the second half versus. 0.5% in the first. We cut our view of 
a potential recovery next year from 2.5% growth to 1.4% growth due to ongoing 
weakness in Oil & Gas related activity. Due to weakness in Oil & Gas we are 
also nudging down our operating margin forecasts by 10bps in both years, 
despite some benefit from acquisitions. Our forecasts imply a full year EBITA 
margin decline of 10bps versus guidance of a broadly stable margin. Due to 
further significant foreign exchange changes since we last updated our 
forecasts our earnings per share forecast for 2017 now rises by 10% to 178p. We 
are now broadly in line with consensus.

Software specialist Sage is up 6.5p at 681.5p as Goldman Sachs raised its 
target price from 850p to 870p.

Among the mid-caps Electrocomponents has jumped 10% to a 14 year high of 
408.1p, after the electronic component distributor raised its full year cost 
saving target from £25m to £30m and said its half year profits were up 76%. 
Liberum analysts said:

These results should provide investors with a great deal of comfort and 
provide clear evidence of the upside potential of the group’s self-help 
strategy...Management have also provided a positive outlook for both revenues 
and margins and we would expect upgrades to consensus of 8-10% for the full 
year 2017.
 