
Ahead of a number of key events - including the UK budget and the US Federal 
Reserve interest rate decision - markets are edging higher once more.

An exception is Hikma Pharmaceuticals, down 97p or nearly 6% to £16.24 after 
the group reported in-line 2015 results but forecast lower than expected 
revenues for the current year.

The company, which recently bought US business Roxane, said revenues slipped 
3% to $1.44bn last year and operating profits were down 4% at $409m. But a 
forecast of revenues of $2bn to $2.1bn in 2016 was shy of expectations. 
Analysts kept their buy recommendations, however. Stifel said:

Hikma has announced a strong end to 2015. Whilst sales of $1.44bn... were in 
line with expectations, adjusted earnings per share of $1.44 (Stifel estimate 
$1.27), were well ahead of consensus. Guidance for 2016 is for sales of 
$2.0-$2.1bn, slightly below our forecasts, and margin guidance in the generics 
business, which now includes Roxane, of low double-digits is significantly 
below our estimates. We continue to believe the long-term benefits of the 
Roxane acquisition will drive strong earnings growth beyond 2016 and we 
reiterate our buy rating.

Meanwhile Jefferies said:

Hikma’s 2015 was ahead of the market but 2016 guidance is light versus 
Jefferies estimates and consensus,in particular for US generics but also 
injectables.

Other pharmaceutical groups were also weaker, with Shire down 158p at £36.09, 
GlaxoSmithKline 21.5p lower at 1394.5p and AstraZeneca slipping 51.5p to 
3970.5p.

Overall though the FTSE 100 has added 18.47 points to 6158.44, with commodity 
companies among the risers as oil edged up again and metal prices were lifted 
by hopes of further Chinese stimulus measures to boost its economy. Investors 
remain cautious however ahead of the budget, and the Fed meeting, even though 
no rate change is expected at the moment. Tony Cross, market analyst at 
Trustnet Direct, said:

There should be few headline surprises from Chancellor George Osborne whose 
hands are largely tied by the uncertainty over whether the UK will still be 
part of the European Union by the end of June. So, it’s unlikely he’ll announce 
anything that is likely to lose votes or place the UK in dire straits should 
the country vote to leave the union. Focus again will fall on the need to cut 
public spending. Most of the main policies are already known, but some expect 
him to punish drivers by raising fuel duty, and there could be tax breaks for 
middle to higher income earners.

There should be few surprises in the US too with many expecting the Fed to 
hold off until June at least before raising interest rates again. Investors 
instead will study comments on growth and inflation for clues as to when the 
next rate rise may occur.

BP is 7p better at 349p as Brent crude added 1.47% to $39.31 a barrel, while 
among the mining companies, Anglo American is up 6.65p at 494.1p and Fresnillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/fresnillo> is 16p better at 931p.

Tui has fallen 53.5p to 992.5p and Thomas Cook is down 6.35p to 95.25p as 
Citigroup cut both tour operators from hold to sell. Citi pointed to weaker UK 
demand as well as cost pressure from tighter demand from hotels.
 