
On Sunday night, Kanye West ruined Taylor Swift's acceptance speech at the MTV 
VMA awards. And on Monday, he woke up as the most hated man in showbusiness. 
Even after issuing a second formal apology, everyone from Michael Jackson's 
father toDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, is 
spitting righteous indignation.

At this rate, West isn't helping himself. His initial apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/14/kanye-west-taylor-swift-vmas>, 
posted hours after he rushed the stage and told Swift that Beyoncé should have 
won, offered a peculiar mix of contrition, veiled sarcasm and just plain 
not-getting-it. "I'm soooooo sorry to Taylor Swift," he wrote. "I like the 
lyrics about being a cheerleader and she's in the bleachers! I'm in the wrong 
for going on stage and taking away from her moment! Beyoncé's video was the 
best of this decade!"

Though this post was later taken down, the replacement isn't much better. "I 
feel like Ben Stiller in Meet the Parents when he messed up everything and 
Robert De Niro asked him to leave,"he wrote yesterday 
<http://www.kanyeuniversecity.com/blog/?em3106=239462_-1__0_~0_-1_9_2009_0_0&em3298=&em3282=&em3281=&em3161=&entry=239462>
. "That was Taylor's moment and I had no right in any way to take it from her. 
I am truly sorry."

West's jokey tone suggests he doesn't understand the fury of his peers. On top 
of early comments by Katy Perry ("Fuck Kanye") and Pink ("Kanye West is the 
biggest piece of shit on earth"), celebrities are queuing to give reporters a 
piece of their mind.

"The worst haircut since 1984, tries to steal the spotlight from lovely Taylor 
Swift," Kings of Leon's Nathan Followill posted on Twitter. Donald Trump called 
for a boycott, branding West's behaviour "disgusting". "He couldn't care less 
about Beyoncé," he said. "It was grandstanding to get attention."
Sleater-Kinney's Carrie Brownstein 
<http://www.npr.org/blogs/monitormix/2009/09/is_that_all_there_is_the_video.html>
 offered a longer view: "Watching West's solipsistic outburst at the expense of 
Swift seemed to split the show apart at the seams. The moment revealed a gross 
(though not surprising) underbelly of ego, power, sexism and stupidity."

Even Michael Jackson's father, Joe Jackson – who is not exactly renowned for 
good behaviour – got on the bandwagon. "They should blackball him out of 
showbusiness for that," he said.

But it was singer Kelly Clarkson who wrote the most articulate, vitriolic 
take-down of the rapper. "What happened to you as a child? Did you not get 
hugged enough?"she wrote on her blog <http://iamkelly.wordpress.com/>. "I think 
we're all just curious as to what would make a grown man go on national 
television and make a talented artist, let alone [a] teenager, feel like shit."

She added: "I mean, I've seen you do some pretty shitty things, but you just 
keep amazing me with your tactless, asshole ways. It's absolutely fascinating 
how much I don't like you. I like everyone. I even like my asshole ex that 
cheated on me [more than I like] you ... which is pretty odd since I don't even 
personally know you ... Is winning [a VMA] moon man that much of a life goal? 
You can have mine if it will shut you up."

West does have a few defenders, including the awards ceremony's host, Russell 
Brand <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/russell-brand>. "I know Kanye, and I 
know he's a nice bloke," he said. "We all make mistakes in life." Even so, 
Brand admitted, "You can't make a pretty girl cry."
 