
A prominent opponent of Muammar Gaddafi, the Libyan dictator, has said that he 
was jailed, and later subjected to a strict control order, on the basis of 
information extracted from a leading dissident who wastortured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/05/abdul-hakim-belhaj-libya-mi6-torture>
 after being seized in an MI6 operation.

Ziad Hashem, a Libyan granted asylum in 2004, was arrested and jailed for 18 
months without trial after Libyan secret police were given his name and those 
of other Gaddafi opponents living in Britain.

Hashem and other Libyan dissidents were named by Abdel Hakim Belhaj, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/abdel-hakim-belhaj> who was secretly 
rendered in 2004 to the Libyan capital, Tripoli, in a joint MI6/CIA operation, 
Belhajtells al-Jazeera TV's People & Power programme 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/peopleandpower/2013/12/Libya-Renditions-20131217135659830443.html>
 to be broadcast on Wednesday.

"Sometimes they [interrogators] would come to me with questions and answers 
already done and force me to sign it", Belhaj says. "They would mention names 
to me and say that these people supported armed activities".

He adds: "These were people who had nothing to do with Islamic or any other 
groups. They were just businessmen or people who were opposed to Gaddafi's 
regime. I also remember many names from the fighting group [Libyan Islamic 
Fighting Group, LFIG] or its non-member sympathisers like Ismail Kamoka, Ziad 
Hashem".

After 18 months in Long Lartin prison, in Worcestershire, Hashem was released 
without charge but for the next three years was electronically tagged and 
confined to his home.

Hashem tells the programme: "Many times during the questioning in Paddington 
Green [police] station in London they would try and accuse me of terrorism, so 
they brought all the documents they had, many of which they left out in the 
open and it was clear what was from Libya".

Documents discovered in Tripoli after the Nato bombing of the Libyan capital 
in 2011 revealed that MI5 and MI6 provided Gaddafi's intelligence officials 
with scores of questions to put to Belhaj and Sami al-Saadi. Saadi was also 
rendered to Tripoli in 2004 in a joint MI6/CIA operation.

MI6's role in the capture and interrogation of Libyan dissidents has been 
previouslyreported 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2133276/MI5-betrayed-Libya-dissidents-Gaddafi-spies-London-sting-Secret-documents-exposed-MoS-trigger-political-storm.html>
. It has also been reported that MI5 subsequently accommodated two Libyan 
intelligence officers, named as Colonel Najmuddin Ajeli and Ahmed Abdanabi, in 
luxury flats in a visit to London in 2006.

But this is believed to be the first time a target of the joint Libyan/British 
intelligence operations has spoken about his experience.

Whitehall officials close to the security and intelligence agencies argue that 
MI5 had a legitimate interest in pursuing members of the LIFG because it had 
close links with al-Qaida. Belhaj has strongly denied this.

Whitehall officials also say MI6's rendition operations were authorised by 
ministers and that Gaddafi's intelligence officials gave MI6 assurances that 
Belhaj and al-Saadi would not be ill-treated.

Hashem tells al-Jazeera; "When the [Libyan] revolution started on 17 February 
[2011] things changed in Britain. Their way of speaking to me and treating me 
was different, and they tried as much as possible to help me. They offered to 
give me benefits, even indefinite leave to remain or citizenship. I told them: 
'I do not want to be in Britain. I'd rather be anywhere else'."

He and other Libyans held in Britain are planning to sue the British 
government. Al-Saadi has settled out of court for £2.2m. Belhaj, and his wife, 
Fatima, have refused a settlement and are asking for an official apology, and 
symbolic damages of £1.

The al-Jazeera programme contains Fatima's first filmed interview in which she 
describesher treatment in Tripoli in 2004 when she was pregnant. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/08/special-report-britain-rendition-libya>
 "They took me into a small room which had hooks in the wall. They tied my 
hands with chains and hung me from them. I stayed there for about two days". 
They then injected her and punched her in the stomach, she says.
 