
Gareth Steenson believes it is too early to judge whether Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bristolrugby> are on course for an immediate 
return to the Championship after the newly promoted side conceded 70 points to 
Wasps on Sunday.

Obituaries were written for Bristol after the thrashing at Wasps  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/18/wasps-bristol-premiership-rugby-union-match-report>
followed a demolition at home by Northampton and they go into Friday night’s 
game with Steenson’s Exeter at Ashton Gate bottom of the table, the only side 
to have lost all of their first three fixtures.

Saracens’ Chris Ashton banned for 13 weeks by RFU for biting offence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/20/chris-ashton-saracens-england-biting>
“I am not reading too much into what happened at Wasps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-wasps>,” said the Exeter outside-half 
who helped his side into the Premiership in 2010 at the expense of Bristol in 
the two-leg play-off final. “Wasps are the sort of side that can hurt anyone if 
they take an early lead and force you to play catch-up.

“It is far too early to judge anyone in the Premiership. We lost our opening 
two games and it remains a competition in which anyone can beat any side on 
their day. When we first came up we did not target matches we felt we had to 
win but approached things on a weekly basis, focusing on who was up next.

“We took some beatings on the way but we learned and improved. Bristol showed 
what they are capable of on the opening weekend against Harlequins and we are 
expecting a difficult game there.”

Exeter’s bonus-point victory over Quins  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/17/exeter-harlequins-premiership-match-report>
last weekend kick-started their campaign as they look to build on last season 
when they finished second in the Premiership,losing to Saracens in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/28/saracens-v-exeter-premiership-final-live>
 at Twickenham, and reached the knockout stage of the European Champions Cup.

It marked the return of Steenson at outside-half. He started every Premiership 
match for the Chiefs last season and was a key part of their success, but he 
was on the bench for the opening two matches, against Wasps and Saracens, with 
Henry Slade given the 10 jersey.

“I do not feel I had a point to prove against Harlequins” said Steenson. “It 
was just an opportunity to play and help the team. I enjoy every chance I get 
but as a player, selection is out of your hands: you can play well and not be 
in the side the following week.

“Henry is a talented player who can fill a number of positions. It was always 
going to be a tough opening to the season with Wasps and Saracens, the clubs 
who were in the top three with us last season. We felt we should have beaten 
Wasps having been in control of the game at one point but Saracens were very 
impressive and gave us a lot to think about.”

Exeter have two away matches, at Bristol and Northampton, before returning to 
Sandy Park to face Gloucester. “The target we have set ourselves this season is 
to keep improving,” said the 32-year-old. “We want to get into the top four 
again and give ourselves the chance of making another final. That means working 
even harder because the Premiership is a tournament that gets tougher every 
year.”
 